# [111704](111704engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](111704engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
| 
- 
M1
20
5 
- 9
805
 -
 2
2,
00
 
F 
JO
AN
N 
ILA
 
Progress 
endl 
y Mi 
dake 
isk and res onsi bi 
8 § : . | & } : 
  
 
 
ty 
‘ 
- 
      
A 
i; 
A 
® 
Ha
k 
T
R
 
L
E
 
C
T

## [Page 2](111704engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

THE uNesco Courier Nifcon INTERNATIONAL PHOTO COMPETITION 
PEACE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
A selection of photos entered in the competition will be featured on this page in forthcoming issues. 
         
  
  
     
 
  
            
  
  © 
Lo
rr
y 
Sa
lc
ed
o-
Mi
tr
an
i,
 
Ne
w 
Yo
rk
 
The Leap. Sao Paulo (Brazil). 
Photo by Lorry Salcedo-Mitrani (Peru). 
Presumed by his family to have been killed in the war, 
Papa is greeted by his younger brother as he returns to his new home (Liberia). 
Photo by Rip Hopkins (United Kingdom). 
\ 
© 
Ri
p 
Ho
pk
in
s 
Pa
ri
s 

## [Page 3](111704engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO ((OURIER JUL ILC] ILS 
MAY 1998 
Progress, risk and responsibility 
| t 
 
Science and social responsibility... ..................... 4 
by Georges B. Kutukdjian 
   
  
: Energy: afairdeal forall... 8 
s by Jean Audouze 
: Therighttoknow ................... ll... 14 
2 by Nicholas A. Ashford 
INTERVIEW The ethics of conservation 
47 1. Thenaturalworld............. 0... 18 
2. The cultural heritage ................................................... 21 
nl i Marcel Marceau by Gordon Bennett and Nikita Lopoukhine 
padding fh How predictable is nature?...............ooooviiiveieriiiiiiieieieinn. 23 
by Jens Erik Fenstad 
Genetic testing and discrimination. ...................................... 29 
by Michael Kirby   
Fact file... 34 
The Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights 
  
2 Consultant: Georges B. Kutukdjian 
i 
HERITAGE 
The Monastery of Haghpat (Armenia) Commentary Federico Mayor 36 
A centre of Armenian Christianity and an 
GREENWATCH Renewable energy: winds of change by France Bequette 38 
LISTENING Dizzy Gillespie, a jazz giant by Isabelle Leymarie 45 
© cover 
Oil painting by the American artist Theo Rudnak. painting by AUTHORS 50 
© Theo Rudnak/SIS Pans 
THE UNESCO Gouwer EH MAY 1908

## [Page 4](111704engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 111705: Science and social responsibility

2 Science and social 
respPonSIDIItY  eceoncess wr 
The ethical implications of scientific progress concern everyone 
© 
Ne
t 
Co
op
er
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
Today theres a certain degree of disil- 
lusionment about science, especially in 
the industrially developed countries. Science 
and scientific progress are indeed raising urgent 
questions, for example in the field of genetics. 
Who should determine the priorities and 
choices of science and technologies and on the 
basis of which social goals? How can we define 
democratically the risks which can be consid- 
ered as “acceptable”? What is the level of 
responsibility and solidarity which can be 
expected from individuals and groups in rela- 
tion to both present and future generations? 
The answers to these questions go beyond 
the narrow confines of professional practice 
and national borders. In a multipolar world 
characterized by an unprecedented splinter- 
ing of perceptions, it is more than ever neces- 
sary to strive for the emergence of values which 
will make our common existence technologi- 
cally, ecologically and socially viable. 
   
- v: . 
ie 
Ha 
Ap ul pyr Easel   
THE UNESCO Gourier B MAY 19908 
Such ethical reflection calls for a free and 
open exchange of experience and ideas among 
decision-makers, specialists and representa- 
tives of the civil society, in all its diversity, in 
order to identify the issues, set points of ref- 
erence and advocate a range of forward -look- 
ing alternatives. 
The development of science must hence- 
forth be examined in a new framework. At 
the end of the twentieth century, the “battle- 
field” has become primarily one of economic 
warfare, and economies are increasingly being 
dominated by scientific knowledge, tech- 
nologies and information. What has to be 
done is to develop new forms of knowledge 
and share them. Sharing knowledge goes 
together with sharing responsibilities. Science 
needs to be perceived as a liberating force, 
At the same time, we cannot overlook the 
gap between the state of science in the developed 
and developing countries. Some of the devel-   
This model at a research 
centre in Faridpur 
(Bangladesh) is used to study 
flood pattems. The results will 
be helpful in designing and 
building flood-control 
barrages,

## [Page 5](111704engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 111705: Science and social responsibility

oping countries are facing crucial choices. Should 
the State devote its resources to science or should 
it tackle more urgent problems such as access to 
drinking water, for example? It should be 
recalled that industrial research is non-existent in 
the developing countries and that some of them 
do not allocate even one per cent of their gross 
national product (GNP) to science. For cxam- 
ple, there is no research centre for industrial 
chemistry in any developing country. Mean- 
while, the industrially developed countries seem 
to be suffering the consequences of the lack of 
flexibility that characterizes their unwieldy 
research institutions. Itis as if the ability of sci- 
ence to create wealth were a burden on its own 
organization. These cumbersome and adminis- 
tration-oriented structures are discouraging 
investment by the industrial sector. 
Digital composite image 
showing a biochemist using a 
virtual reality system to 
investigate molecular 
interactions. 
This is why there is a need to work out 
new strategies of scientific development. It is 
necessary to establish flexible structures of 
international co-operation and to turn science 
into an “international undertaking”, for exam- 
ple through partnership programmes and by 
tightening the links between research work in 
all countries through conferences, publica- 
tions, networks, the use of new information 
and communication technologies. 
It can be seen today that there isa profound 
failure of understanding between laboratory 
science and the general public. This failure often 
stems from a lack of knowledge and is based on 
mistrust and fear: research workers sometimes 
have a dehumanizing and reductionist view of 
the public and, at the same time, the public is 
becoming increasingly wary of science. 
THE UNESCO Gurr BH MAY 1998 
© 
Ge
of
f 
Th
om
ps
on
 
/S
ci
en
ce
 
Ph
ot
o 
Li
br
ar
y/
Co
sm
os
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 6](111704engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 111705: Science and social responsibility

> 
Scarcity of resources forces 
some developing countries to 
make the painful choice 
between investing in research 
and tackling more pressing 
problems. Right, a genetics- 
microbiology laboratory in 
Harare (Zimbabwe). 
© 
Da
vi
d 
Re
ed
/P
an
as
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
La
nd
on
 
The public increasingly expects that major 
engineering works, in particular those involv- 
ing technological hazards, should be preceded 
by comprehensive, stringent and independent 
technology assessment studies. These studies 
should take into account unavoidable tech- 
nological risks, which cannot be altogether 
climinated but must be reduced to a mini- 
mum, and should also address the question of 
hazard management. Their results should be 
made public in accessible form. 
Transparency, truth and trust 
The three Ts in this exercise are: transparency, 
truth and trust. Of course, transparency is 
time-consuming, but it is an essential ingre- 
dient of trust. This is also the case of truth. 
Misinformation or half-truths fuel rumours, 
induce fears and discredit those responsible 
for public information. 
Accumulated experience illustrates that 
information provided in an impartial way is 
generally rewarded by responsible behaviour 
by the population concerned. This is particu- 
larly true in the case of the prevention and 
management of natural disasters, where 
UNESCO has acquired some expertise. 
Surveys show that this is also true in the 
medical field, in particular in genetics. In fact, 
such a trustful relationship can stimulate the 
creativity of a population in response to anew 
and unexpected situation. Of course, a number 
of international guidelines and directives 
mz unesco (COURIER B MAY 1940 
 
adopted by intergovernmental bodies, address- 
ing these issues, exist; for instance in experi- 
mentation on human subjects or clinical tri- 
als, not to mention national Parliamentary 
legislation. 
The safety issue is closely linked to the 
principle of precaution. (See article page 23.) 
More specifically, there is a felt need for edu- 
cation and information of the public at large, 
starting with the populations directly con- 
cerned. Mechanisms that guarantee the 
informed participation of the public should be 
devised. To be effective, these mechanisms 
must rely on the local authorities and involve 
leading figures of the civil society, as well as 
associations, consumer groups and other non- 
governmental organizations which have akey 
role to play in this area provided they are 
involved from the inception of the project. 
Public debate can only enhance a democra- 
tic process very much needed in this area. The 
road lies before us, and if there is still a long 
way to go, we know the indispensable provi- 
sions needed for the journey. One such pro- 
vision is a strategy of communication, in order 
to ascertain comprehensive information and a 
sense of solidarity. 
Appropriate communication can only be 
based on accurate information, including that 
concerning uncertainties when these exist. Nev- 
ertheless, it would be illusory to think that 
irrationality can be completely climinated; it 
can only be reduced. As a matter of fact, irra- 
tionality, nurtured by ill-understanding, can

## [Page 7](111704engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Mi
ch
ae
l 
Ha
rv
ey
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
Training farmers in Togo. 
be built into a rational argument. This is an cle- 
ment which has often been overlooked. 
The most topical example of the need for 
ethical safeguards in regard to scientific 
progress lies in the ficld of genetics. This cxam- 
ple reminds us of the ambiguity of science, 
which is one of the most powerful ingredients 
of socicties. Today we can no longer close our 
eyes to the ethical issues implicit in science. It 
is no longer possible to envisage an cthical neu- 
trality of knowledge that would be indepen- 
dent of its subsequent applications. Thus, the 
General Conference of UNESCO, on 11 
November 1997, adopted a Universal Decla- 
ration on the Human Genome and Human 
Rights. This Universal Declaration provides a 
NASA scientists set up 
equipment to measure gases 
that will be given off during 
the burning of a deforested 
area in the Amazon (Brazil). 
 
 
consistent and comprehensive set of cthical 
principles which should guide both research 
and applications of research findings in biol- 
ogy and medicine. (See page 34.) 
We also need to be able to think out the 
conditions of ethical control over discovery. 
Scientific institutions have a responsibility 


### 111705: Science and social responsibility

with regard to the environment of research 
workers and must censure that rescarch is gov- 
erncd not solely by the lure of gain but also by 
the desire to protect life and cater to the wel- 
farc of human beings. 
Finally, science can no longer be regarded as 
the repository of truth. Science does notstate 
mere certainties. It constantly challenges itself. 
It is in the balance between doubt and cer- 
tainty that the ethics of science places its role. 
Scientific knowledge no longer depends on 
the genius of human beings, it calls for gigan- 
tic resources, both human and technological. 
Hence scientists themselves recognize the 
importance of the social acceptability of their 
undertakings. The level of acceptability relies 
heavily upon a balance of incasured risks and 
unwarranted risks. And presentsocicties have 
aclear perception of the need to establish pri- 
oritics, even when the alternatives are not 
always clearly defined. 
This situation places new responsibilities 
upon the scientist, the engineer, private and pub- 
lic decision-makers (in particular in the indus- 
trial sector) and the citizen. These responsibili- 
tics can only be assumed through discussion 
and the construction of common values. HW 
THe unesco (Courier @ mar 1008 
@F
 
No
ci
ve
li
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 8](111704engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

® J. Guichard/Sygma, Paris 


### 111706: Energy: a fair deal for all

J Energy: a fair deal for all 
BY JEAN AUDOUZE 
te unesco (COURIER m may 1908 
Both the supply of energy and the 
demand for it have spiralled in modern 
societies, where everyday life and changes to the 
environment, global as well as local, are con- 
ditioned by energy production and use. At 
the same time, there are more than a billion 
people in the world with an income of less 
than a dollar a day, and more than two bil- 
lion rely on firewood as their sole source—if 
any—of energy. There is a crying need for a 
fairer share-out of material goods, energy and 
economic resources. 
Energy comes in three forms: so-called 
“fossil” fuels (coal, oil and natural gas); nuclear 
power; and “renewable” energies (hydroelec- 
tric power, thermal or photovoltaic solar 
energy, wind and tide power, wood, etc.). Each 
of these has its own undeniable advantages 
and drawbacks. 
Fossil fuels 
Fossil fuels are abundant and very simple to 
use. O1l, for example, can be very easily trans- 
ported and processed, and is relatively cheap. 
The technology for producing its many deriv- 
atives is highly developed. What’s more, it is 
particularly well suited for use in all forms of 
land, sea and air transport. Its handy fluid 
form and its price make it appropriate to the 
of
 
S
h
e
y
 
F
o
a
l
,
 
o
y
 
: 
. 
. 
- 
. 
a
 
A 
pb 
| 
4 

## [Page 9](111704engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 111706: Energy: a fair deal for all

  
Above, White Cliffs solar 
power plant, New South Wales 
(Australia). 
Right, gathering firewood near 
Lake Abaya in southwestern 
Ethiopia. 
  
1 TOE or “tonne oil 
equivalent” is the energy 
supplied by the combustion 
of one tonne of oil. G stands 
for giga = one billion, 109. 
World energy resources are inequitably distributed. 
The author of a UNESCO report on the ethics of energy suggests 
needs of poor communities or those that are 
unable to invest in capital goods. 
Fossil fuels account at present for 77 per 
cent of all the energy produced and will, 
according to the most realistic projections, 
still account for 73 per cent in 2020. Worldwide 
annual consumption of coal, natural gas and 
oil stands, respectively, at 2.3, 1.7 and 2.7 
GTOE.I Proven reserves at 1990 consumption 
levels stand at 200 years for coal, 40 for oil and 
60 for natural gas. Thesc figures nay be mul- 
tiplied by between two and five if improve- 
ments in productivity and efficiency and the 
exploitation of the last remaining deposits, 
such as those of oil shales, are taken into 
account. The resources will be strictly limited 
geographically as well as in duration, being 
restricted to certain regions such as the Gulf 
and the Caspian Sea. This state of affairs is 
fraught with the risk of tensions and even 
conflicts, owing to the strategic importance 
of energy supplies. 
ways of righting the balance. 
Fossil fuels are, furthermore, responsible 
for the man-made increase in the carbon diox- 
ide content of the earth’s atmosphere, with the 
associated danger of an increase in the green- 
house effect and, as a direct result, global warm- 
ing of the order of 19t0 4° Cin the next twenty 
years, which would adversely affect the climate 
and the environment. Though much uncer- 
tainty remains as to the scale of these effects, the 
risk 1s great enough to mean that every effort 
should be made to slow down the increasing 
“carbonization” of the atmosphere due to the 
intensive use of fossil fuels. 
Nuclear power 
The main advantage of nuclear power is that it 
has no effect on the carbon dioxide content of 
the atmosphere. As it is also cheaper (per 
energy unit) than hydroelectric or thermal 
energy, some countries, France for instance, 
have opted strongly for this way of produc- 
ing electricity. 
  
  
 
trie unesco (OuRiEr m may 1998 
@© 
Ed
ga
r 
Cl
ey
ne
/L
in
ea
ir
 
Ar
nh
em

## [Page 10](111704engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 111706: Energy: a fair deal for all

> 
©F
. 
Pi
tc
ha
l/
Sy
gm
a 
Pa
ns
 
Nuclear power is, however, far from being 
unanimously accepted. Public opinion is very 
conscious of the lack of candid information 
and of the safety of nuclear plants, two aspects 
that have not always been treated, in some coun- 
tries, with all the necessary care and clarity by 
the authorities and the operators. The public is 
also worried about the disposal of long-lasting 
radioactive wastes, an acute problem to which 
the experts seem confident that a long-term 
solution can be found. It would also be a mis- 
take to underestimate the danger of the spread 
of nuclear arms, even though the main powers 
arc now significantly reducing their arsenals of 
these weapons. A final point is that only those 
countries which can afford to make the huge 
investments required can put nuclear plants 
into operation. The investments offset by the 
low cost of the fuel but is recouped only in 
the medium and long term. 
Renewable energy sources 
The ecological movements, which are worrted 
both by global warming and by the real or imag- 
ined dangers of nuclear power, would like renew- 
able energy sources to be developed faster than 
 
THE UNESCO Gourier 8 MAY 1908 
Making batteries for electric 
cars in Bordeaux (France). 
is now the case. These forms of energy at present 
supply some 18 per cent of total demand, which 
puts them well ahead of nuclear power. 
Technology is moving rapidly forward in 
this field. Thanks to technical improvements, 
the price of energy produced by photovoltaic 
cells, for instance, is due to fall from $5 per 
kilowatt-hour in 1990 to $0.5-0.8 by 2010. 
These forms of energy arc capable of meet- 
ing the needs of communities that it would be 
too expensive to connect to a central grid sup- 
ply, but despite improved productivity and 
falling costs, they remain on the whole dearer 
than the two previous forms. It will be a long 
time before they can constitute the main 
source of supply. Other problems that remain 
to be solved include the major investments 
required for hydroelectric power stations and 
the environmental damage caused by the build- 
ing of dams and wind farms. 
We must face the fact that as of now there 
is no “miracle” energy that ts risk-free for 
humans and their environment and is also 
cheap and inexhaustible. There is no such thing 
as absolute security as regards power generation 
and use, and it will not be possible in the 
future to do without any of the above-men-

## [Page 11](111704engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 111706: Energy: a fair deal for all

tioned sources. Energy demand will continue 
to grow as a result of irreversible technologi- 
cal advances, of the justified demands of the 
non-industrialized countries, and of popula- 
tion growth thats in any case set to continue 
for at least the next fifty years. 
Some ethical principles 
A number of imperatives must thus be borne 
in mind by every individual, every nation and, 
in particular, the citizens of the industrialized 
countries. These are: the right of cach indi- 
vidual to sufficient sources of energy; our 
responsibility towards our children and our 
children’s children; protection of the envi- 
ronment; prevention of the potential major 
risks from the production of energy on a mas- 
sive scale; the control of costs and the need to 
carry on with research in all these fields. 
Some of these obligations—those relating to 
population growth, climate change or the dis- 
posal of nuclear wastes, for example—are of a 
very long-term nature, while others—efforts to 
deal with pollution caused by road transport or 
chemical waste disposal—are short-term. These 
Demonstrators protest 
against the shipment of 
nuclear waste to Gorleben 
(Germany) in 1997. 
differences of time-scale and the various possi- 
ble interactions between the quantitative and 
qualitative aspects of the question have to be 
taken into account in observations of an ethi- 
cal character such as the following: 
« The present situation, whereby nearly one 
person in four in the world is without access 
to the energy resources he or she requires, can- 
not be accepted with resignation. Those with 
an active role in world energy policy—deci- 
sion-makers, industrialists, rescarch workers 
and so forth—must ultimately ensure that 
there exist, and continue to exist, sufficient 
resources of sufficiently cheap energy for all 
countries to have access to them, regardless of 
their geographical or economic situation. tis 
accordingly essential that genuine co-opera- 
tion in energy matters be established on a 
sound basis between the countries of North 
and South. 
« There should be no pretext for unnecessar- 
ily keeping the countries of the South, which 
urgently need proper infrastructures, on short 
commons as regards energy usec. This is one 
areca where, more than in any other, people 
THE UNESCO Gunn HN MAY 1998 
®
R
 
Bo
ss
u/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
[8

## [Page 12](111704engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 111706: Energy: a fair deal for all

© 
Br
uc
e 
Pa
to
n/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
    
  
need to be informed, so that they can take part 
in discussion and decision-making on subjects 
where scientific and technological knowledge is 
essential. 
« Our duty to future generations enjoins us 
to usc energy resources as sparingly and ratio- 
nally as possible, especially as we know that a 
major part of these resources may be exhausted 
ina century or two. We inust also take collec- 
tive action to avoid creating irreversible situ- 
ations with regard to the environment and 
energy management. We must take particular 
care to apply the “precautionary principle” so 
as to avoid causing too great an increase in 
atmospheric carbon dioxide, to be careful and 
cconomical in our output and use of energy, 
and to do all we can to prevent any event with 
irreparable consequences from occurring. 
« Eventhough rapid progress is being made in 
the exploration of space, we must acknowledge 
the obvious fact that we have only one Earth and 
must therefore preserve and protect it. Since 
cnergy production and use may jeopardize our 
environment, there is an urgent need for appro- 
priate measures to be taken as rapidly and as 
effectively as possible. The management of 
nuclear waste and campaigns to combatall forms 
THL UNESCO Courier HB MAY 1998 
~ \ : » 4 
NEN Ty a A RON N) Xd! DAREN TES 
) 
of pollution arising from cnergy usc constitute 
unconditional obligations in this connection. 
« Whenever massive quantities of nuclear or 
other forms of energy are produced or trans- 
ported, c.g. when oil is transported by sea or 
big dams are built, major risks to life and 
health ensue. Absolute safety is unattainable, 
but the various energy authorities are never- 
theless under an obligation to issue and enforce 
appropriate safety regulations. These precau- 
trons should be applied to the two risk situ- 
ations just mentioned and should also cover 
everyone working in the power-generating 
industry, especially those employed at nuclear 
and major hydroelectric plants. 
« Unit cost will continue to be the main fac- 
tor influencing the choice between different 
forms of energy. Production costs must be 
controlled and savings constantly sought if 
cnergy supplies are to be available to all. In the 
case of nuclear power, the costs arising from 
safety procedures and the decommissioning 
of plants should be taken into account. 
® Research sometimes seems to have been 
neglected in work on energy production and 
consumption, but itis an indispensable duty. 
Efforts to find new sources of energy and 
- a 13 
Th ~~ 
or afl ay > WE I ARI 5 
4 iy ATs “FX — : et 
7 "h $ eo SE a tn Nak = » Lf 74 ah ra : 
Th (a, 4 / a. Fat | 4 33 ATR 
. HN ): ’ 4 pom ORS ") 
ny IAPS ban DREN 
AN Ci A -_— oF CNY TS alae NN Pl el A ST RNSOER x \ A a  . \ ah - 3 LRT - oS Ng LN 
yf ho i A SE 
 
  
I, G4 "° My 
oy 
oo eg NN AR a ™ - Na i ty ; 
~ 
A solar dryer in Ghana. 
   
 

## [Page 13](111704engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 111706: Energy: a fair deal for all

more cconomical ways of using it must con- 
tinue. One example 1s the use of natural gas, 
which isin itself a vast field for research. Other 
priority areas for research include technolo- 
gies for producing nuclear power—fast breeder 
reactors, cnergy-boosting systems, ther- 
monuclear plants, ctc.—and waste disposal 
systems. Efforts must also be made to reduce 
the cost of renewables. The industrialized 
countries must give effective support to 
research in the developing countries and show 
them how to maintain their energy facilities. 
Further recommendations 
We must keep our eyes open for the carly 
warning signs of potentially dangerous or irre- 
versible situations, and react quickly to them. 
Application of the “precautionary princi- 
ple” remains an unconditional obligation. We 
must take economic and fiscal measures 
designed to avert the risks of tension between 
producers and consumers and to encourage 
proper control of the resource in question. 
The tax instrument should be used to redis- 
Indigenous people of the 
Amazon at the 1992 United 
Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development 
in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). 
  
tribute resources between privileged and less 
privileged groups of the population. 
The man and woman in the street and their 
clected representatives must be informed about 
everything relating to the production and con- 
sumption of every kind of energy. Parliaments 
should have their own scientific and techno- 
logical evaluation services, as is the case in certain 
countries such as France. Projections made on the 
basis of different economic and demographic 
hypotheses ought to be regularly updated. 
Last but not least, systems must be created 
to enable internationally enforceable measures to 
be taken. The environmental balance sheet drawn 
up by the United Nations five years after the Rio 
Summit was, inevitably, an admission of failure 
and reflected the deep disappointment aroused 
by governments’ inability to engage in dialogue 
and undertake joint action. 
Now it is realized that no form of energy 
can replace any other form, we must endeav- 
our to preserve the balance between producers 
and consumers, between rich and poor coun- 
tries, and between those that are spendthrift 
and those that are thrifty. Nn 
. 
bt 8 
EN Yor 
— : 
ALS a . 
¥ 
! s . 
Lo Lo IP 
a Ro 
THE UNESCO Gourien #3 MAY 1098 
© 
Da
vi
d 
Da
hm
en
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on

## [Page 14](111704engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

© 
JL 
At
la
n/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ni
s 


### 111707: The Right to know

  
2 The right to know 
THE UNESCO Gouner HW MAY 1°98 
What are the legal and ethical responsi- 
bilities of industrial enterprises when 
communities and workers arc at risk from the 
sudden and accidental releases of toxic and/or 
radioactive substances into the atmosphere? 
Well-known cxamples of such incidents 
occurred at Seveso (Italy) in 1973, at Bhopal in 
India in 1984, at the Three Mile Island (Penn- 
sylvania) nuclear power plantin 1979, at Cher- 
nobyl in Ukraine in 1985, off Alaska in 1989 
and the French coast in 1978 due to oil spills 
from the supertankers Exxon Valdez and 
Amoco Cadiz, as well as a large number of 
chemical production and petroleum refining 
catastrophes. 
Such events sometimes engender legislative 
BY NICHOLAS A. ASHFORD 
responses. The passage of the U.S. Emergency 
Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act (1986) and the so-called first and second 
Scveso Directives of the European Union 
(1982) are examples. In the United States, the 
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 require 
increased attention to the risks of sudden and 
accidental releases, placing obligations on both 
government and on industrial firms. 
Democratic risk management 
Right-to-know, the mandatory sharing of 
information between management, workers, 
and the community, embodies a democrati- 
zation of risk management decisions. 
Early right-to-know legislation in the

## [Page 15](111704engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 111707: The Right to know

The public’s right to be informed about risks of Me . 
i Cl LJ L} [J LJ] [] 
; industrial accidents and man-made catastrophes is still 
far from fully recognized 
= retain a record of certain facility-based events 
such as near misses or system failures. 
« The right of access (and the corresponding 
duty to disclose upon request), i.c. the right of 
a worker, union, community member or 
agency to request information and access to 
information held by a manufacturer or 
employer. 
& The duty to inform, i.e.the firm’s obligation 
to disclose, without request, information 
needed by government, workers, and com- 
munities to understand the potential risks of 
sudden and accidental releases; to assess the 
adequacy of in-place technology and human 
resources that can prevent, minimize or address 
Alaska (U.S.A.), May 1989: the the consequences of those risks; and to iden- 
battle against the oil slick 
discharged after the 
supertanker Exxon Valdezran 
aground. 
tify the technological options that could have 
been adopted but were not.   
Conflict analysis 
United States and elsewhere addressed workers’ 
and communities’ right to know scientific 
information about the ingredients in chemicals 
and materials used in production, waste con- 
tent, actual chemical releases to the environ- 
ment, and information about exposure to grad- 
ual, expected pollution. But technological 
The law establishes legal rights and provides 
remedies to correct their violation. But it also 
recognizes that conflicts of legitimate interests, 
conflicts of legal duties, and differences in per- 
ception of what is right or wrong, fair or unfair, 
require an appropriate balancing in the fash- 
ioning of remedies. Indeed, thereare both legal » 
information about potential system failures, Hydraulic engineering class in 
a Chinese university. unexpected chemical reactions and releases, and 
ameliorative control technology is also needed, 
and here, right-to-know legislation is more 
recent and less adequate. While risk manage- 
ment plans requiring “worst case scenarios” to 
be explored by firms are increasingly common, 
obligations to identify supcrior, inherently 
safer technologics are notably absent. In addi- 
tion, much of the important information is 
held closely by industrial firms and is not 
shared with either workers or the community. 
The relevant rights and obligations under 
right-to-know fall into three categories. 
« The duty to generate and/or retain infor- 
mation, i.c.afirm’s obligation to compile and 
a 
C_ 
- 
  
oT & 4 al 
  
ee [] 
  
THE UNLSCO Gourier EH MAY 1998 
© 
Tr
yg
ve
 
Bo
ls
ta
d/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
 
Lo
nd
on

## [Page 16](111704engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

© 
M
a
r
k
 
E
d
w
a
r
d
s
 
/S
tl
l 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
> 
Ey ¥ ’ 2 % 
\ FEE ) 
  


### 111707: The Right to know

remedics (usually of statutory origin) and equi- 
table remedies that give great discretionary 
power to the courts or adjudicating institu- 
tions. In examining questions of conflict, the 
law views behaviour in the context of relation- 
ships, and will sometimes find a duty when 
none was intended by original legal arrange- 
ments, because it was reasonable that workers 
or the community expected certain behaviour 
on the part of an industrial enterprise. 
The law does not, however, always serve 
the cthical interests of society so nobly. Leg- 
islation and legal institutions can be compro- 
mised by powerful special interests. In addi- 
tion, if thereis a lack of societal consensus or 
interest about a moral issue, the law may either 
not address that issuc or fail to give helpful 
guidance concerning the boundaries of fair or 
cquitable behaviour. Thus, it is important to 
engage in both a legal and ethical enquiry con- 
cerning human and institutional behaviour. 
THE UNESCO Counier EH MAY (008 
: Nik: Bt 2 
wo 
-) x 2 
Shige he 
Chemical spillage training 
(Malaysia). 
In the context of the risk management of 
low probability, high catastrophic events, legal 
and cthical norms are in a state of consider- 
able flux. Conflicts of interest and conflicts of 
duty (for example, for the corporate or gov- 
ernment official in charge of protecting the 
community and workers) abound. Just how 
much should workers and the community be 
told? Given the arguable scientific uncertainty 
of constructing worst-case scenarios for sud- 
den and accidental releases, questions of what 
risk communication activities and preventive 
actions to take or not to take may reflect dif- 
ferences in perceptions of fairness and 
risk-averseness. In possible contrast, a duty 
on the part of industrial firms to identify and 
implement superior, inherently safer tech- 
nology that would both reduce the risks of 
sudden and accidental releases and bestow cost 
savings on the firms themselves, would seem 
to be morally irrefutable.

## [Page 17](111704engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Fr
ed
 
Ho
og
er
vo
or
st
/P
an
cs
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
 
  
Students in Zanzibar are 
taught how to dispose of 
agricultural chemicals as part 
of a Netherlands Council of 
World Development project. 
III 47 
Internal conflicts among the duties of var- 
ious stakeholders (firm and government offi- 
cials, workers, community residents) can lead 
to psychological distress and sometimes to 
unethical behaviour. Community residents 
may feel torn between a duty to be well 
informed (so as to anticipate and respond 


### 111707: The Right to know

appropriately to danger) and a duty to main- 
tain their own peace of mind (which is con- 
ducive to rational thought) and presenta calm 
exterior for the benefit of their families. 
Environmental and public health profes- 
sionals have experienced conflicts between their 
duties to prevent panic in the community and 
to inform the public of potential danger, as 
well as between the duties associated with their 
roles as scientists, wage earners, public servants 
and employees of a particular branch of gov- 
ernment. Other individuals who work for 
governmental agencics have experienced con- 
flicts as a result of their multiple roles as pro- 
moters and regulators of a particular industry, 
such as nuclear energy. 
Conflicts arise from the relative significance 
of “subjective” versus “objective” informa- 
tion and from the naturc and degree of uncer- 
tainty, error, and/or risk that is tolerable. 
Community residents, workers, and agency 
professionals may disagree about priorities: 
residents and workers worry about experts’ 
ability to assess and control risk, while 
“experts” fret about citizens” and workers’ 
“unreasonable demands” for certainty. All the 
members of a group will not necessarily share 
the same views on these matters. Conflicts 
occur between those trained and socialized in 
   iy 
a technical field and those who identify more 
closely with humanistic traditions. 
Anxiety and stress affect key figures who 
are faced with unprecedented situations, scien- 
tific uncertainty, and a need to make decisions 
quickly. Since the catastrophic incidents men- 
tioned above, professionals have acquired expe- 
rience and received specialized training. Never- 
theless, in the political controversies that 
develop and the continuing scientific uncer- 
tainty surrounding sudden and accidental 
releases of toxic substances, government officials 
and professionals still find their personal moral 
integrity threatened. Workers or residents of 
communities where a dramatic accident has 
recently occurred, are generally not well pre- 
pared to cope and can be expected to respond 
emotionally and with confusion. They need 
to be treated in a non-patronizing way like any 
other victims of natural disasters, with under- 
standing, patience and counselling. 
As risks become more uncertain and seri- 
ous, the case for fuller partnerships between 
industrial firms and their workers or commu- 
nities concerning risk management options 
becomes stronger and more cthically imperative. 
Shared decision making 
Participation by members of the affected com- 
munities is an essential element in construct- 
ing ethically-sound risk management deci- 
sions. This can be facilitated in a number of 
ways, notably including the utilization of 
advisory panels. 
A variety of possible technical and legal 
interventions is available, from minor to major 
changes to plant and production, from train- 
ing existing personnel to hiring new profes- 
sionals, from adopting specific legal require- 
ments to suggesting administrative processes. 
Both new laws and institutions and informal 
ad hoc mechanisms are needed to involve the 
affected public and other key actors more fully 
in risk management involving sudden and acci- 
dental releases of toxic and radioactive sub- 
stances. In general, the earlier that people are 
involved, the more effectively adverse effects 
and loss of trust are likely to be avoided or 
minimized. Firms, government, communities 
and workers have begun to explore ways to 
address the problems. Law provides little 
structure at this time, but the ethical and moral 
imperatives remain. | 
THE UNESCO Courier oH MAY 1998

## [Page 18](111704engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ya
nn
 
Ar
th
us
 
Be
rt
ra
nd
/ 
Ea
rt
h 
fr
om
 
A
b
o
v
e
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 


### 111708: The Ethics of conservation, 1: The natural world

1. The natural world 
BY GORDON BENNETT AND NIKITA LOPOUKRINE 
The creation of protected natural areas raises a host of dilemmas 
Nature is in a state of constant flux. It 
is shaped over time by dynamic natural 
processes such as flooding, fire, wind, volca- 
noes and climate, and in response to these 
forces some physiographic features, species 
and ecosystems have disappeared and others 
have evolved. People, of course, have also 
played an integral part in this process, and in 
recent times modern technology has dramat- 
ically increased the scope of human influence. 
Change is inevitable, but how should we 
respond to it? There are generally three 
options. First, a “laissez-faire” or natural reg- 
ulation approach to the management of natural 
resources. A more commonly exercised option 
is to channel or even arrest change by “active 
management”, an option frequently associ- 
ated with wildlife, water and forest managers 
THE UNESCO Courier B MAY 1908 
who arechiefly concerned with the extraction 
of resources, although it may also be used to 
compensate for damage to natural processes 
or for extirpated species. A third option, also 
a form of active management, is to try to 
restore conditions which once existed or even 
create new assemblages of plants, animals and 
physiographic features, c.g. creating wetlands 
where none previously existed. The ethical 
choices facing managers of protected arcas are 
intricately linked with all three options. 
Systems of protected arcasare usually estab- 
lished to embody a country’s varied landscape 
in accordance with a bioregional framework. 
For various reasons representation of a biore- 
gion’s full varicty is not always a realistic objec- 
tive within a protected arca. The size of pro- 
tected arcas, their configuration, and the lack of 
 
© 
Ya
nn
 
Ar
th
us
-B
er
tr
an
d/
Ea
rt
h 
fr
om
 
Ab
ov
e/
UN
ES
CO
 
  
 
Air view of a tourist complex 
in Lanzarote, one of the 
Canary Islands (Spain). 
Lanzarote has been the site of 
a Unesco biosphere reserve 
since 1993.

## [Page 19](111704engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
7 
E
E
 


### 111708: The Ethics of conservation, 1: The natural world

  
linkage to other protected areas all add to the dif- 
ficulty of maintaining representation over time. 
Nevertheless, it is often possible to approach 
representation by choosing sites that are rela- 
tively undisturbed or that have the necessary 
potential. An important aspect of this approach 
is to write a goal or purpose statement that 
declares the level of desired representation. 
Islands in an unfriendly 
environment 
Most of the world’s protected arcas are sur- 
rounded by land thatis used in ways inimical to 
them and are subject to long-range as well as 
local influences. The trajectory of a protected 
arca’s ecosystems is likely to be deflected away 
from the originally defined representation val- 
ues, and in response the park manager is faced 
Hinchinbrook Island National 
Park (Australia). 
 
with choosing cither to ignore the changes or to 
address them through one of the options noted 
above. The “laissez-faire” option—abandoning 
the arca to the vagaries of influences within and 
outside it—is, in effect, an acceptance of change. 
The ethical dimension of a “laissez-faire” 
approach is to determine whether the original 
intention to achieve bioregional representation 
and the biodiversity associated with this goal 
are placed in jeopardy and whether the outcome 
1s appropriate. For example, to permit a forest or 
prairie fire to burn or to have ungulates prolif- 
erate unchecked has significant consequences on 
the biodiversity of a protected arca. 
It is not our intention here to judge 
whether the consequences are good or bad but 
to point out that change will occur even when 
the decision not to intervene is made. Ethics 
here require the manager to be forthright in » 
THE UNESCO Gu RIER W MAY 1998

## [Page 20](111704engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

» providing information on the consequences of 
a decision, even a “laissez-fatre” decision. The 


### 111708: The Ethics of conservation, 1: The natural world

notion that natural regulation will manage the 
protected area does not absolve the manager 
from the responsibility of setting objectives. It 
1s impossible to determine the success of a par- 
ticular management regime unless the changes 
are forecast in advance, debated, agreed upon 
by stakeholders and finally set as objectives. 
The second option—attempting to mini- 
mize change by setting fires, culling, mowing, 
girdling, or modifying water flow regimes— 
raises more fundamental ethical questions: 
what right do we have to alter nature to meet 
our objectives? Does the manager of a pro- 
tected area, of all places, have the right to dom- 
inate nature? Are the objectives of conserving 
the genetic values, structures and functions of 
ecosystems a good enough reason to inter- 
vene? Even if one answers in the affirmative, 
the question immediately arises of deciding 
which genetic values, structure and functions 
are appropriate. The matter becomes a debate 
between biocentric and anthropocentric val- 
ues—Dbetween what might be called “deep ccol- 
ogy” and utilitarianism. 
Open discussions 
In the past century, the rationale for estab- 
lishing protected areas has moved steadily away 
from the unlitarian to the biocentric. The ini- 
tial motivation was to create places which peo- 
ple could enjoy. Later, protected areas grew in 
number as societies wished to absolve them- 
sclves from guilt over destroying the envi- 
ronment while also responding to economic 
opportunities. Today, the ideas of ccological 
integrity, biodiversity conservation and biore- 
gional representation are the driving forces 
behind the establishment of protected areas. 
These goals provide a framework within which 
appropriate ecosystem structures and func- 
tions can be defined. Nevertheless, to be assured 
of continued support, open discussions on 
management objectives must take place. In 
these discussions, it may very well be that the 
best way of defending proposed objectives 
and goals is to present the alternatives to them. 
In simple terms, would it be acceptable to con- 
sciously decide to have biodiversity values 
decline, lose ecological integrity, and witness 
the decline of ecosystem health? 
The third option for managing protected 
THE UNESCO Courier 0 MAY 1098 
A ranger in Kluane National 
Park, southwest Yukon 
(Canada), a Unesco World 
Heritage site. 
areas, centred on restoration, raises another eth- 
ical issue. Restored sites are seldom, if ever, repli- 
cas of the targeted state. Extirpated species and 
genetic stock, modified natural processes and 
landscapes, and altered physiographic condi- 
tions make it impossible to recreate what may 
have once existed. Substituting close represen- 
tatives is not the real thing. 
A more fruitful debate arises from the ques- 
tion of whether it is appropriate to reconstitute 
the functions and structure of an ecosystem, 
particularly in a protected area. If the protected 
arca contains degraded sites and altered natural 
processes, and species have been extirpated from 
it, should these be restored? The debate over 
biocentric and utilitarian objectives is to be” 
expected in this context as well. 
A fundamental question which arises in all 
restoration projects is that of the historical 
model which the project seeks to reconstitute. 
A wilderness model (prior to European set- 
tlement) is commonly put forward as the 
appropriate target in many North American 
sites. This is a questionable objective if the 
model rejects human influences. Clear evidence 
exists that humans have played a significant 
role in influencing ecosystems within North 
America for thousands of years, as they have 
elsewhere in the world. To be ethical, then, 
exclusion of human influences is inappropri- 
ate. Instead, the objective should focus on the 
restoration of a social fabric where the prac- 
tices of humans sustain the ecosystem and vice 
versa. Hn 
 © 
S 
Fa
ut
re
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 21](111704engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Louisbourg (above), on the 
Saint Lawrence River (Nova 
Scotia), was a key French 
fortress in Canada and a 
major trading centre. Part of 
this historic landmark is being 
rebuilt following the original 
plans. 
    
: A Canadian 
approach to 
cultural resource 
management 
© 
Jo
e 
Vi
es
ti
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
 
Pa
ns
 


### 111709: The Ethics of conservation, 2: The cultural heritage

2. The cultural heritage 
BY GORDON BENNETT AND NIKITA LOPOUKHINE 
In the late 1980s, Parks Canada, the agency 
responsible for the conservation of 
Canada’s cultural and natural heritage, began to 
develop a cultural resource management policy, 
partly to synthesize good work that had been 
done elsewhere, but also to help to cope with 
apparently conflicting expressions of conserva- 
tion ethics. The Parks Canada Cultural Resource 
Management (CRM) policy drew upon a wide 
range of policy and ethical formulations devel- 
oped by other national and international con- 
servation organizations, and in 1994, after scv- 
cral years of development and public 
consultation, it was approved by the Minister of 
Canadian Heritage, who tabled it in the Canadian 
Parliament. 
The CRM policy takes into account that 
ethical issues operate at at least three levels: 
@ ethics of intent or purpose (why?); 
« ethics of means (how? and often who?); 
& cthics of results (what?). 
The levels or categories are not mutually 
exclusive, but neither are they necessarily 
mutually reinforcing. Ethical means may not 
always lead to the desired cthical result, and an 
ethical result may be achieved by means that 
might not have been the first choice in terms 
of the second category. The CRM policy 
attempts to ensure an alignment of all three. 
The policy consists of three parts: principles, 
practice and activities. A training programme 
designed to facilitate its implementation empha- 
sizes that ethical decision-making requires that 
all parts of the policy be used. In other words, 
the policy is not a menu from which you pick 
and choose. One of its key features is that it 
docs not distinguish between various types of 
cultural resources and establish different man- 
agement approaches for each, as is the case with 
most other cultural resource management poli- 
cies and international charters. Another is that 
it does not focus only on conservation. 
Three Canadian examples may help to 
demonstrate how the cthic inherent in CRM » 
THE UNESCO Courier H MAY 1998

## [Page 22](111704engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

> has led to better decision-making and to 


### 111709: The Ethics of conservation, 2: The cultural heritage

enhanced respect for cultural resources. Two of 
the examples call into question some practices 
of professional conservationists, whereas the 
third deals with a site facing serious financial 
challenges and a series of development pro- 
posals that divided people into pro-develop- 
ment and pro-conservation camps. 
Critical to all three was the application of a 
concept developed by Parks Canada called com- 
memorative integrity, which is used to describe 
the health and wholeness of a national historic 
site. A site possesses commemorative integrity 
when: 
« the resources (including the place) that 
symbolize or represent its importance are not 
impaired or under threag; 
« the reasons for the site’s national historic 
significance are cffectively communicated to 
the public; 
« the site’s heritage values (including those 
not related to national significance) are respected 
by all whose decisions or actions affect the site. 
Lower Fort Garry Walls 
(Manitoba) 
Lower Fort Garry National Historic Site, which 
is located north of Winnipeg, Manitoba, was 
an important 18th-century fur trade establish- 
ment operated by the Hudsons Bay Company. 
Technical experts advised that if action were not 
taken, the then 130-year-old perimeter stone 
agement Policy, this approach was called into 
question on the grounds that the action did 
not respect the historic value of the walls and vio- 
lated the commemorative integrity of the site. 
The reconstruction approach was abandoned 
and the surviving walls have been stabilized. 
Fire protection for wooden 
buildings 
This illustrates a case of conservation cthics gone 
awry. For at least a generation many conserva- 
tionists were opposed to the opening of certain 
historic wooden buildings to the public on the 
grounds that a requirement to provide fire sup- 
pression facilities for buildings accessible to the 
public was incompatible with the preservation 
of the buildings’ authenticity. Professional con- 
servationists should have recognized that in the 
case of wooden buildings, fire suppression was 
not a threat to conservation, but rather an indis- 
pensable instruinent in its attainment. 
Fort Henry, Kingston (Ontario) 
Confronted with significant reductions in gov- 
ernment funding, the agency responsible for 
operating Fort Henry, a site located in Kingston, 
Ontario, developed a business plan that pro- 
posed several initiatives to raise revenues. The 
proposals divided the community, various stake- 
holders, and agency staff into pro-development 
and pro-conscrvation camps. A decision was 
made to develop a Commemorative Integrity walls would collapse. Consequently, anapproach Garry, north of Winnipeg 
was developed that led to the reconstruction of (Manitoba), below left, was a 
major 18th-century Hudson 
Bay Company fur trading post. 
Statement for the site with the participation of 
two of the walls. The action was highly con- the various competing interests. The statement 
troversial, but procecded with the blessing of led the persons who had initially advocated con- 
Below right, re-enactment of 
18th-century daily life in the 
development of the Cultural Resource Man- fort. 
senior conservation specialists. Following the troversial development proposals to conclude 
that the proposals were inappropriate. || 
  © 
M 
De
ni
s 
H
u
o
l
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i 
Pa
ri
s 
@
M
 
D
e
n
m
i
s
-
H
u
o
t
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
THE UNESCO Gourier HW MAY (~08

## [Page 23](111704engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 111710: How predictable is nature?

2 How predictable is nature? 
BY JENS ERIK FENSTAD 
  
Ee TRE aE fords fs PER Oop RS yp ef SC BIE 
In spite of 
progress in 
mathematical 
modeling, natural 
phenomena still 
defy precise 
forecasting 
Above, a man outside his 
home in flood-ravaged Grand 
Forks, North Dakota (U.5.A.) 
in April 1997. 
  
The future of science is not what it used 
to be. The optimistic public perception 
that scientific insights and technological advances 
would provide a better future has suffered a 
severe setback. Such “benefits” of scientific 
progress as atomic power, new chemical com- 
pounds and foodstuffs produced by genetic 
manipulation now generate uncertainty, even 
fear, as to what the future holds in store for 
man and nature. 
The post-war period was a good time for 
modern science-driven technology: it had 
played adecisive part in the allied victory and 
now it was to be harnessed to the tasks of 
post-war reconstruction, promoting increased 
welfare, better health and improved security. 
Few were troubled if at times scientists and 
engineers showed little concern for the preser- 
vation of nature—after all, the aim of tech- 
nology has always been to transform nature 
for the benefit of humanity. There may, how- 
ever, be limits to what nature can tolerate. 
ss Ll Sl Gl Se BR il El li RET FY 48 A000 TE FT] 
Relatively few doubts were raised until the 
United Nations World Commission on Envi- 
ronment and Development issued its report, 
Our Common Future, in 1987. By that time 
there was growing concern about the environ- 
mental problems progress was bringing in its 
wake: the fossil fuels used in industrial devel- 
opment were increasing the carbon dioxide con- 
tent in the atmosphere, threatening to create a 
greenhouse effect; urbanization was cating into 
agricultural land and woodlands; industrial 
expansion was causing increased pollution and 
loss of fresh water resources. Further ahead 
loomed the threat of the loss of biodiversity. 
Addressing these problems, the Commission's 
report, often referred to as the Brundtland 
Report, advocated a policy of sustainable devel- 
opment, whereby current demands could be 
met without prejudice to the legitimate demands 
of future generations. 
The Brundtland Report became the charter 
THE UNESCO Gourier | MAY 1998 
© 
St
 
Pa
ul
 
Pi
on
ee
r 
Pr
es
s 
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 24](111704engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 111710: How predictable is nature?

© 
Da
ni
el
 
O 
Le
ar
y/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
cl
ur
es
 
Lo
nd
on
 
   
    
  
    
 
document for the “Earth Summit”, the United 
Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. 
One of the most important things to come 
out of this conference was the Rio Declaration, 
which set forth guidelines for the future envi- 
ronmental policy of United Nations Member 
States. One key element in this was the recom- 
mendation that, in order to protect the envi- 
ronment, nations should apply the “precau- 
tionary principle”, which may be summarized 
as follows: Whenever there is a threat of seri- 
ous or irreversible damage, lack of absolute sci- 
entific certainty shall not be used as an arg u- 
ment for delaying cost-effective measures to 
prevent the destruction or degradation of the 
environment. Never precisely defined, this prin- 
ciple is open to different legal interpretations 
and raises problems about uncertainty and 
actual risks. 
The Brent Spar controversy 
The story of the Brent Spar oil rig provides an 
object lesson in the complexities of applying 
the precautionary principle in practice. The 
THE UNESCO Courier B MAY 1998 
  
BANDARBARU 
Te Heartbeat Of fib ki aM 
TANAH RATA 
0 NHIGHLANDS 
  
otveL GRIRS LICENCE HO 
oe Dene, LAN APPROVAL MO. MOCH 2% 
VENTING A SMES MRMIT NO SSIATI 9A 
“ee wl LAND TENURE LEASE MOLD 
    
      
   
   
B- 
 INDAH 
Shell otl company wanted to get rid of this 
platform, which had served its useful life in the 
North Sea oilfields, by sinking it at a suitable 
spot in the Atlantic. The environmentalist 
movement Greenpeace successfully campaigned 
to persuade the public—and hence the politi- 
cians—that this would present an unaccept- 
able environmental risk. Shell claimed the 
opposite but was not believed, and the plat- 
form was towed to a Norwegian fjord, where 
it still awaits its fate. 
With the benefit of hindsight, it seems that 
the risk analysis carried out by Shell was cor- 
rect and that the Greenpeace assessment was 
based on inaccurate data. This does not neces- 
sarily mean, however, that the platform can 
safely be disposed of at sea. Scientific risk analy- 
sis is only part of the story: thereare strongly 
held emotional convictions about the purity 
of the sea and opposition to its becoming a 
rubbish dump. As a basis for action, risk 
analysis needs to take account of all aspects of 
acase. 
In the Brent Spar case, the decisive issue 
was whether sinking the platform at sca would 
lead to serious or irreversible environmental 
  
PROECT FINANCED BY 
PUBLIC BANK BHD 
'BUDAVA KITA 
oi BRL A 
pes a a 
Ge 4 
Destruction of rain forest for 
housing development (shown 
on hoarding in foreground) 
east of Ipoh, Malaysia. 
0’ 
    
      

## [Page 25](111704engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

The blue and green circles are 
computer-generated 
theoretical models of how the 
distribution of galaxies 
evolved. Gold circle at bottom 
shows the real distribution as 
observed from Earth. 
damage. As in many environmental conflicts, 
the debate was adversarial in form, which is 
usual in normative and legal contexts but has 
hitherto been unusual in scientificarguments 
over issues of “scientificcertainty”. Does this 
mean that in environmental issues we are con- 
fusing questions of fact with matters of opin- 
ion? Should Shell and Greenpeace have got 
together to conduct a dispassionate enquiry 
about scientific laws and facts before embark- 
ing, if necessary, on a discussion of the pros 
and cons of possible action? Can factual 
knowledge be separated from the question of 
how that knowledge is used? 
A positive answer to the latter question 
presupposes that scientific laws exist and that 
scientific certainty can be established, at least 
within acceptable error limits, which has been 
the received view of science and technology. 
From Newton’s classical mechanics to Ein- 
stein’s relativity and up to the time of Bohr’s 
quantum mechanics, the laws of nature were 
expressed in the language of linear mathemat- 
ics, and the future was computable. 
The relationship between mathematics and 
the laws of nature has, however, become more 
complex, and in a way that has implications for 
  © 
Dr
 
Ge
or
ge
 
Ef
st
at
hi
ou
/S
ci
en
ce
 
Ph
et
o 
Li
br
ar
y/
Co
sm
ao
s.
 
Lo
nd
on
 
our understanding of the precautionary prin- 
ciple. The fact that those laws are still written 


### 111710: How predictable is nature?

in the language of mathematics no longer 
means that the future is necessarily predictable. 
To explain this issue, let us sce how the math- 
ematical modelling of nature works. 
Models of nature 
Therecare three stages in mathematical model- 
ling: first, the specific scientific and/or tech- 
nological problein is analysed; next, a mathe- 
matical model is created and analysed; and 
lastly, efficient algorithms—problem-solving 
procedures which canbe run on a computer— 
are developed for use, in the scientific context, 
in making predictions and, in the industrial 
context, in construction tasks. With the rapid 
development of computer technology, the 
range of applications is vast, testifying to the 
central role of mathematics in today’s 
edge society”. 
Successful application depends, however, 
on the “correct” choice of mathematical model. 
One class of models is particularly relevant to 
a proper understanding of the precautionary 
principle. We often need to understand the 
behaviour of a system or a population of indi- 
knowl- 
viduals over a certain period of time, c.g. the 
flow of oil and gas in the North Sea fields, or 
plant and animal populations in arcas with a 
high concentration of acid precipitation. The 
models used for this purpose can be divided 
into three main classes, according to the 
dynamics that governs their behaviour. 
Nature as a machine 
Models of nature as a machine represent our 
inheritance from Newton and Descartes. They 
aredefined by the forces acting upon the body 
or bodies involved in the system, and the laws 
that determine the system are expressed by a 
linear equation. To take as a typical example the 
laws governing the trajectories of planets, once 
the proper parameter values—in this case the 
position in space and time and the initial acting 
force—have been established, the future devel- 
opment of the system is completely deter- 
mined. To usc mathematicians’ terminology, 
the system is defined by a “unitary group”, 
with time as the independent variable. 
This is the kind of mathematics used in 
numerical calculations and industrial applica- 
tions. Assuming that our equations faithfully 
describe a slice of reality, we extract algorithms 
from them, and the computer then goes to » 
THE UNESCO Courier B MAY 1998

## [Page 26](111704engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 111710: How predictable is nature?

» work, either to predict the future state of a 
physical system or to produce a set of speci- 
fications for an industrial task. Our confidence 
in the equation is sometimes so great that the 
results of the corresponding calculations are 
presented as true facts of nature 
Computer simulations can be used for 
many purposes. In science, measurements can 
be extended to values beyond those obtainable 
froin experiments and observations, e.g. to 
study systems under extreme temperature con- 
ditions, and the development of a physical 
system can be speeded up, e.g. in studies of 
the early universe. In industry, simulation can 
replace the use of prototypes—itis faster and 
cheaper to simulate collisions on a computer 
than to crash real cars—and can be used in the 
design of new pharmaceutical products. The 
presupposition underlying all this is that our 
models correspond with reality—and that the 
future is determined by our equations. 
Chance and uncertainties 
So far we have assumed that the law is deter- 
ministic and that, in principle, the results of 
experiments and observations can be measured 
with absolute precision, but this is in most 
cases too much to ask: we may be in a situation 
characterized by chance and uncertainties. 
Children, the elderly and 
people with heart and lung 
disorders are particularly 
vulnerable to the effects of air 
pollution. © 
Ok
o 
Fr
ei
bu
rg
 
Pa
ne
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
THL UNESCO Gounier BH MAY i998 
Mathematical modelling knows, however, how 
to deal with such situations. 
Where parameter values cannot be precisely 
measured for technical reasons, there are estab- 
lished theories for measurement techniques and 
many statistical methods are available for con- 
trolling errors. Where uncertainty is inherent in 
the fundamental theory, however, new issues 
arise, especially in the case of quantum mechan- 
ics, where the development of a system is gov- 
erned by a probability distribution. In this case 
too, the process is nevertheless still determined 
by a unitary group. The new feature is the use 
of a transformation of probability distribu- 
tions where the Newtonians used point trans- 
formations. The latter allow us to follow 
closely the planets in their trajectories, but not 
quantum particles. 
Another form of uncertainty arises when 
the dynamical law is no longer deterministic 
but may include a stochastic or random element. 
This marks a shift from ordinary to stochastic 
equations, which are now widely used in math- 
ematical modelling. The applications are some- 
times opportunistic: in the absence of complete 
knowledge, a random term is added in the hope 
of obtaining a better fit with nature. In most 
cases, however, our knowledge of nature and 
observed fluctuations is sufficiently precise to 
  
ra 
a or | 
"4 
” 
al 
| 
| 
v — 
md 
ME Ly 2a 

## [Page 27](111704engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 111710: How predictable is nature?

The Brent Spar oil rig is 
prepared for towing into the 
Atlantic, June 1995. provide “faithful” models for phenomena rang- 
ing all the way from the flow of oiland water in 
porous geological structures to speculation on 
the stock exchange. 
Common to the models examined so far is 
a belief in numbers and measurements. There 
has been a strong tradition in physics accord- 
ing to which theory is driven by measurc- 
ments, 1.¢. by exact numbers. It has been held 
that good theories yield numbers, explain 
numbers, help design good apparatus, and 
allow us to control and manipulate the objects 
they describe. But are all theories of nature 
equally amenable to numbers and control? 
Chaos and catastrophes 
The unitary group thus encapsulates the 
notion of linearity and the associated possi- 
bility of exact prediction, but despite several 
hundred years of progress in physics and tech- 
nology we must conclude that only a few of 
nature’s phenomena can be modelled in this 
way. One solution to the problem is to intro- 
duce chance and uncertainties, as described 
above. Another is to keep to deterministic 
cquations but to proceed beyond the well- 
known domain of lincar equations into the 
new and largely unexplored territory of non- 
lincar phenomena. 
Physical theory has always acknowledged 
the existence of non-linearity, which typically 
occurs where small variations may have large 
effects on the future evolution of a system, 
but only now is the outline of a reasonably 
complete science of non-linear dynamic 
processes beginning to emerge. The first really 
convincing application of non-linear theory to 
anatural phenomenon came in 1963, when the 
meteorologist E. Lorenz published a paper 
entitled “Deterministic nonperiodic flow”, 
which had basically all the “correct” mathe- 
matics. His equations were a simplified form 
of those used in modern numerical weather 
forccasting, but they were sufficiently complex 
to capture the unpredictable—even chaotic— 
behaviour inherent in the long-term develop- 
ment of the weather. 
THE UNLSCO Gounier HW MAY 1998 
© 
Gr
ee
np
ea
ce
/R
eu
te
rs
/M
AX
PP
P,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 28](111704engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 111710: How predictable is nature?

> 
© 
Gr
eg
or
y 
Sa
ms
/S
 
P 
L 
/C
os
mo
s.
 
Pa
ns
 
“Chaos” and “non-linear science” have 
become fashionable terms but, unlike many 
other fashions, there is substance behind them. 
The transition to non-linearity marks a change 
of paradigm in the modelling of natural phe- 
nomena, but with non-linearity there is no 
longer a guarantee for long-term prediction. 
This is the lesson we learned from Lorenz in 
1963. 
Instead of computing a single given future, 
we can, however, simulate various possible 
future scenarios. The computer can be taught 
to serve another master: there has been a 
change-over from “hard” science based on 
computable predictions to a broader perspec- 
tive with greater emphasis on insight and a 
critical attitude. Hence, though we cannot pre- 
dict the occurrence of the next avalanche, we 
can usc our models to gain a better insight 
into such phenomena and to develop strategies 
for warding off their adverse effccts. 
Earthquakes arc also impossible to “pre- 
dict”, in the sense of giving the time, place and 
strength of a future occurrence within accept- 
able error limits. Such an operation presup- 
poses a system governed by a unitary group, 
but the earth as a geophysical system is far inore 
complex than Earth as a planet. Planets are pre- 
dictable in their trajectories; they form a dcter- 
THE UNESCO Courier ® MAY 1998 
ministic system. The earth as a geological system 
is in what the experts call “a state of critical self- 
organization”, where there is a positive prob- 
ability of even the smallest earthquake devel- 
oping into a major disaster. Many attempts 
have been made to devise a warning system for 
earthquakes, but they have all failed. 
The global processes that drive carthquakes 
are typical of the very many global processes 
in nature. These processes need to be seen in 
conjunction with a social and economic systein 
committed to a high per capita consumption 
of natural resources. It is in this context that 
the precautionary principle becomes urgent: we 
are dealing with natural processes that we 
know to be non-lincar, where the dynamics of 
the system is poorly understood and where 
our interference may have irreversible conse- 
quences. Unlike a standard industrial process, 
nature is not a mechanical system that can be 
controlled by ingenuity and engineering skills 
alone. Instead of relying on our ability to fix 
and restore, we must therefore adopt a strat- 
egy of prevention. In these circumstances, the 
precautionary principle is more than politi- 
cal rhetoric. It is the best advice that science 
can offer. || 
1 See the UnEsco Courier, October 1997: Natural 
disasters: Be Prepared. Editor 
 
“Spiralunar 3D", a fractal 
landscape based on the 
mathematics of chaos theory, 
which is used to analyse 
turbulent (non-linear) dynamic 
systems.

## [Page 29](111704engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
BY MICHAEL KIRBY 
Above, symbol of the Human 
Genome Project. The baby's 
silhouette stands out against 
a karyotype (chromosome set). 
     
    
The development 
1%
 
2 
—
—
E
N
G
 
- 


### 111711: Genetic testing and discrimination

SN of genetic testing 
SC Bl confronts 
n | }- humanity with 
| BN urgent challenges 
a
r
g
 
3 
3. 
X
o
 
  
  
  
At the heart of adverse discrimination 
lies difference. Many people only feel 
comfortable with others who appear exactly 
the same as themselves. Inject an clement of 
differentiation and such people may feel enti- 
tled to act in prejudicial and even cruel ways. 
Sometimes making distinctions may be 
justified. A person with a highly contagious 
disease may need to be isolated for the pro- 
tection of society and the proper treatment 
of the individual. But the history of the cen- 
© 
Pe
te
r 
Me
nz
el
 
/C
os
mo
s 
Pa
ns
 
discrimination 
tury now drawing to its close has been one 
of irrational and unwarranted discrimination. 
[tis still going on. The grounds have included 
the victim’s race, skin colour, gender, disabil- 
ity and sexual orientation. All of these are 
wholly or partly genetic in origin. 
For some people, the fact that an individ- 
ual did not choose to be different does not 
matter. Even if the difference is completely 
irrelevant, it can sometimes affect most seri- 
ously the individual and the socicty concerned. » 
THE UNESCO Gourirr N MAY 1998

## [Page 30](111704engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

> 
@ 
Ja
me
s 
Ho
lm
es
 
/C
el
lm
ar
k 
Di
ag
no
st
ic
s 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
proclaimed fifty years ago, has offered the 
world a beacon of hope to guide us away from 
irrational and irrelevant acts of adverse dis- 
crimination. But whilst much progress has 
been made, the abiding challenge of discrimi- 
nation, grounded in the fear of the unknown 
and the unfamiliar, remains. Now, at the end 


### 111711: Genetic testing and discrimination

of the century, new potentialities for dis- 
crimination are presented. They arise from the 
rapid development of genetic testing which 
promises to identify more indelible elements 
of human differentiation upon which adverse 
discrimination could be based. 
Genetic testing 
Testing human beings for genetic conditions 
1s not entirely new. Pregnant women in many 
countries have for years been able to undergo 
amniocentesis to detect the presence in the foe- 
tus of genetic abnormalities such as Down’s 
Syndrome. For years, physicians have been able 
to test patients for Tay Sachs disease (an inher- 
ited and ordinarily fatal nerve disorder), sickle 
Ld 
THE UNESCO Courier HE MAY 1008 
This British researcher 
belongs to a team that has 
engineered a molecule which 
“switches off” a gene causing 
leukaemia. 
  
 
cell anaemia and other inherited conditions. 
But the progress made over the past decade in 
the Human Genome Project will ultimately 
ensure that genetic causes of human differences 
arc identified. Many that are responsible for 
inherited cancers and other serious diseases have 
already been isolated. Amongst those discovered 
are the genes causing several late onset disor- 
ders such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, 
Huntington’s disease and, most widespread of 
all, Alzheimer’s disease. 
Mistakes can occur in the performance of 
tests to identify the presence of genetic dis- 
orders. As with the well-known tests for HIV 
(human immunodeficiency virus), there can 
be false positives and false negatives. But apart 
from this problem, current tests cannot pre-, 
dict, with accuracy, precisely when a genetic 
condition will manifest itself. The genetic test 
for Huntington's disease (an inherited con- 
dition which manifests abnormal movements 
and mental deterioration, generally occurring 
in middle age) has a 99 per cent accuracy rate. 
But there is enormous variation in the age of 
onset and in the range of symptoms that will 
appear in a given individual. In the past, fam- 
ily members would often know generally 
about inherited conditions which might man- 
ifest themselves in succeeding generations. 
Now there is the potential to remove the 
uncertainty and to diagnosc with near perfect 
accuracy the presence of the gene which, in 
due course, will manifest itself and, in some 
conditions, lead on to profound disabilities or 
certain death. Here, clearly, are new founda- 
tions for differentiation between individuals 
by reference to a wider category of distinc- 
tions that mark them off from most people in 
society. Is this a problem? In these enlight- 
ened and scientific times, need we really be 
worried about threats of discrimination on 
genetic grounds? 
Foundations of discrimination 
Unfortunately, despite progress in education 
and in domestic and international human 
rights law, the past teaches us that we should 
be concerned. Millions of people this century 
have lost their lives, or have suffered pro- 
foundly, because of obvious genetic distine- 
tions. When new distinctions, previously hid- 
den, are added to the list, we should be alert to 
provide effective social responses. 
As a result of learning the outcome of a 
genetic test, an individuals life may be pro- 
foundly changed. A patient learning of the pres- 
ence of a fatal and untreatable disorder may 
undergo profound psychological disturbance. 
Some may choose not to submit to the test

## [Page 31](111704engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
»> 
- 
  
because of the effect which knowledge of a neg- 
ative result could have for the subject’s well- 
being and that of the immediate family. 
The greatest dangers from adverse discrim- 
ination lie principally in the context of social 


### 111711: Genetic testing and discrimination

arrangements which may be affected by knowl- 
edge, or access to knowledge, about an indi- 
vidual’s genetic makeup. Take insurance. Inthe 
past, the availability of insurance, and the rates 
of premiums, were ordinarily fixed by reference 
to a sharing of the risks of the onset of a mul- 
titude of genetic disorders amongst all members 
of the insuring public. Now that itis possible 
to subject a proponent for insurance to genetic 
A scientist points out a defect 
on a human karyotype: an 
extra copy of chromosome 8 
which is commonly found in 
some forms of leukaemia. 
@ 
Ki
ng
 
Ho
lm
es
 
/I
CR
F/
SP
L/
Co
sm
os
, 
Pa
ri
s 
tests, the sharing of risks may disappear or be 
substantially reduced. If the presence of inher- 
ited disorders canbeascertained with near per- 
fectaccuracy, the cards may be stacked in favour 
of the insurance company. There may be no 
risk of the onsct of defined disorders. Or it 
may be absolutely certain. 
Insurers arguc that they are merely substi- 
tuting the latest scientific information for the 
old-fashioned medical check-ups and replacing 
generalized data of life expectancy with accu- 
rate predictive data of genetic disorders. If 
insurers can offer policies at lower premiums 
to non-smokers, should they not be able to 
THE UNLSCO Gourier WB MAY 1998

## [Page 32](111704engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 111711: Genetic testing and discrimination

Some scientists believe that sexual orienta- 
tion is, at least partly, genetically deterinined. 
If this were scientifically established, would it 
help or hinder the world-wide efforts to reduce 
discrimination against people on the ground of 
their sexuality? It might help by proving that 
something so innate is determined naturally 
and is not defiantly chosen to flout society’s 
moral rules. But out of fear or hatred of differ- 
ence, it might lead to demands for destruction 
of foetuses showing this propensity. 
The diversity of the human gene pool has 
been one of the principal causes of humanity’s 
strength and survival. The ultimate threat of 
discrimination would arise from demands to 
cradicate all inherited conditions conceived of 
as “intolerable”. The advance of genetic testing 
will therefore present fundamental challenges 
to humanity. How do we alleviate unnecessary 
suffering and eradicate the scourge of prema- 
ture death from inherited disorders whilst at 
the same time retaining the precious variety of 
humanity and the diversity of its gene pool? 
Social management 
On 11 November 1997, the UNESCO General 
Conference unanimously adopted the Uni- 
versal Declaration on the Human Genome and 
Human Rights (see page 34). This path-break- 
ing charter proclaims, in its first article, that the 
human genome underlies the fundamental 
unity of all members of the human family as   ® 
Ja
me
s 
Ho
lm
es
,/
Ce
ll
ma
rk
 
Di
ag
no
st
ic
s 
DNA fingerprinting in a British 
laboratory. Fragments 
extracted from an individual's » do so to those who, genetic testing reveals, © 
. . . tissue are processed to 
are unlikely to manifest a range of life-threat- 5 auc 2 kind of genetic 
cning inherited conditions? These arc some “identity card”. DNA 
of the dilemmas we face. fingerprints are used to prove 
Employers may wish to subject certain bea om i 
employees to genetic testing. They may argue tissues left at the scene of a 
that training, the provision of disability bene- crime. 
fits and the costs of sick leave and replacement 
justify having access to genetic information con- 
cerning members of their workforce. The prob- 
lem with this is the same as with insurance. Will 
the individual with “negative” genetic results be 
refused employment? In the relationship 
between the individual proponent for insur- 
ance or the individual applicant for employ- 
ment and the potential insurer or employer, 
will the former be sufficiently empowered to 
refuse access to his or her genetic data? 
Unless the law intervenes to prevent threats 
of adverse discrimination, will the practical 
consequence be that insurers, employers and 
possibly the State itself will be empowered to 
require individuals to discover the range of 
long-term genetic disabilities which, left alone, 
the individual might prefer not to know? 
              
  
  © 
Ma
tt
he
w 
Po
ll
ak
 
/S
yg
ma
 
Pa
ns
 
THE UNESCO Gourier B MAY 10908

## [Page 33](111704engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 111711: Genetic testing and discrimination

well as the recognition of their inherent dig- 
nity and diversity. The Declaration addresses 
itself to the problem of adverse discrimina- 
tion and says: “No one shall be subjected to 
discrimination based on genetic characteris- 
tics that is intended to infringe or has the 
cffect of infringing human rights, fundamental 
freedoms and human dignity”. 
Translating these principles into effective 
protection of vulnerable people against threats 
of adverse discrimination is a major challenge 
which now faces the international commu- 
nity, the nation states and the professional 
and commercial organizations that are involved 
In genetic testing. 
The international community is to estab- 
lish machines for monitoring the implemen- 
tation of UNESCO’s Universal Declaration. 
Already an ad hoc group has met in Paris to 
consider the ways in which the principles of 
the Declaration can be implemented. 
Nation states must introduce laws and poli- 
cies to give effect to the principle of non-dis- 
crimination. Several countries have already 
enacted laws to govern the use of genetic test- 
ing in particular fields. But so far, comprehen- 
sive laws dealing with the threats of discrimi- 
nation have been slow in coming. The Council 
of Europe in 1997 adopted a Convention for 
the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity 
of the Human Being with regard to the appli- 
cation of biology and medicine. But in most 
  
 
vg, 
“The diversity of the human 
gene pool has been one of the 
principal causes of humanity's 
strength and survival.” Above, 
Silhouettes in the Sun by the 
American artist Katherine 
Arion. 
British researchers cloned a 
lamb, Dolly (right), from a 
single cell of a ewe in 1997. 
o 
societies, the advances in genetic testing have 
outstripped the lawmaking process. Protection 
of vulnerable individuals, and society, against 
the threats of discrimination are mostly left 
to depend, if on anything, upon the ethics of 
the healthcare professions and such general laws 
and policies forbidding unwarranted discrim- 
ination on health grounds as were adopted years 
before genetic testing became possible. 
Professional bodies such as the Human 
Genome Organization, supported by its 
Ethics Committee, devise guidelines which 
are recommended to scientists in the field for 
their guidance. Industry bodies, such as those 
representing insurers and employers, may 
adopt rules of self-regulation to limit demands 
for genetic test results to circumstances where 
they can clearly be justified. But the hard work 
of preparing enforceable laws and policies to 
address a multitude of issues presented by 
genetic testing, lies ahead. 
Education in the risks and dangers will have 
a part to play. So will the development of 
enforceable laws which balance the demands of 
those who claim that knowledge of genetic data 
is relevant to their decisions against the demand 
of the individual to maintain the privacy of 
such data and control over its use. In every coun- 
try, lawmakers should have the assistance of 
expert and multi-disciplinary bodies to give 
guidance on the way in which the right balance 
is to be struck. To refrain from providing pro- 
tection against discrimination is to condone the 
dangers of the discrimination which will fol- 
low. To do nothing is to make a decision. MW 
THE UNESCO Courier B MAY [908 
© 
Ka
th
er
in
e 
Ar
io
n/
S!
$,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 34](111704engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
FACTFILE 
  
A
 
o
y
 
r
e
 
T
S
 
E
S
 
N
A
R
 
I 
Tr
 
N
R
E
 
E
R
 THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION ON THE HUMAN 
GENOME AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
PREFACE 
The Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, which was adopted unan- 
imously and by acclamation by the General Conference of UNESCO at its 29th session on 11 Novem- 
ber 1997, is the first universal instrument in the field of biology. The uncontested merit of this text resides 
in the balance it strikes between safeguarding respect for human rights and fundainental freedoms 
and the need to ensure freedom of rescarch. 
Together with the Declaration, UNESCO’s General Conference adopted a resolution for its imple- 
mentation, which commits States to taking appropriate measures to promote the principles set out in 
the Declaration and encourage their implementation. 
The moral commitment entered into by States in adopting the Universal Declaration on the Human 
Genome and Human Rights is a starting point, the beginning of international awareness of the need 
for cthical issues to be addressed in science and technology. It is now up to States, through the measures 
they decide to adopt, to put the Declaration into practice and thus ensure its continued existence. 
FEDERICO MAYOR 
3 December 1997 


### 111712: The Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights

THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION 
ON THE HUMAN GENOME 
AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
A. HUMAN DIGNITY AND THE HUMAN 
GENOME 
Article 1 
The human genome underlies the fundamental unity of all 
members of the human family, as well as the recognition of their 
inherent dignity and diversity. In a symbolic sense, itis the heritage of 
humanity. 
Article? 
a) Everyone has a right to respect for their dignity and for their 
rights regardless of their genetic characteristics. 
b) That dignity makes it imperative not to reduce individuals to their 
genctic characteristics and to respect their uniqueness and diversity. 
Article 3 
The human genome, which by its nature evolves, is subject to 
mutations. It contains potentialities that are expressed differently 
according to cach individual’s natural and social environment includ- 
ing the individuals state of health, living conditions, nutrition and 
cducation. 
Article 4 
The human genome in its natural state shall not give rise to finan- 
cial gains. 
B. RIGHTS OF THE PERSONS 
CONCERNED 
Article 5 
a) Research, treatment or diagnosis affecting an individual’s genome 
shall be undertaken only after rigorous and prior assessment of the 
potential risks and benefits pertaining thereto and in accordance with 
any other requirement of national law. 
b) In all cases, the prior, frec and informed consent of the person 
concerned shall be obtained. If the latter is not in a position to con- 
sent, consent or authorization shall be obtained in the manner pre- 
scribed by law, guided by the person’s best interest. 
THE UNESCO Courier BH MAY 1998 
  
¢) The right of cach individual to decide whether or not to be 
informed of the results of genetic examination and the resulting con- 
sequences should be respected. 
d) In the case of research, protocols shall, in addition, be submit- 
ted for prior review in accordance with relevant national and interna- 
tional research standards or guidelines. 
¢) If according to the law a person does not have the capacity to con- 
sent, research affecting his or her genome may only be carried out for 
his or her direct health benefit, subject to the authorization and the pro- 
tective conditions prescribed by law. Research which docs not have an 
expected direct health benefit may only be undertaken by way of 
exception, with the utmost restraint, exposing the person only to a 
minimal risk and minimal burden and if the research is intended to con- 
tribute to the health benefit of other persons in the same age category 
or with the same genetic condition, subject to the conditions pre- 
scribed by law, and provided such rescarch is compatible with the 
protection of the individual’s human rights. 
Article 6 
No one shall be subjected to discrimination based on genctic char- 
acteristics that Is intended to infringe or has the cffect of infringing 
human rights, fundamental freedoms and human dignity. 
Article 7 
Genetic data associated with an identifiable person and stored or 
processed for the purposes of rescarch or any other purpose must be 
held confidential in the conditions set by law. 
Article 8 
Every individual shall have the right, according to international and 
national law, to just reparation for any damage sustained as a direct and 
determining result of an intervention affecting his or her genome. 
Article 9 
In order to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, lim- 
itations to the principles of consent and confidentiality may only be 
prescribed by law, for compelling reasons within the bounds of pub- 
lic international law and the international law of human rights.

## [Page 35](111704engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 111712: The Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights

C. RESEARCH ON THE HUMAN GENOME 
Article 10 
No research or research applications concerning the human genome, 
in particular in the fields of biology, genetics and medicine, should pre- 
vail over respect for the human rights, fundamental freedoms and human 
dignity of individuals or, where applicable, of groups of people. 
Article 11 
Practices which are contrary to human dignity, such as reproduc- 
uve cloning of human beings, shall not be permitted. States and com- 
petent international organizations are invited to co-operate in iden- 
tifying such practices and in taking, at national or international level, 
the measures necessary to ensure that the principles set out in this 
Declaration are respected. 
Article 12 
a) Benefits from advances in biology, genetics and medicine, con- 
cerning the human genome, shall be nade available to all, with due 
regard for the dignity and human rights of cach individual. 
b) Freedom of research, which is necessary for the progress of 
knowledge, is part of freedom of thought. The applications of rescarch, 
including applications in biology, genetics and medicine, concerning 
the human genome, shall seck to offer relief from suffering and 
improve the health of individuals and humankind as a whole. 
D. CONDITIONS FOR THE EXERCISE 
OF SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITY 
Article 13 
The responsibilities inherent in the activities of researchers, includ- 
ing meticulousness, caution, intellectual honesty and integrity in car- 
rying out their research as well as in the presentation and utilization 
of their findings, should be the subject of particular attention in the 
framework of research on the human genome, because of its ethical and 
social implications. Public and private science policy-makers also have 
particular responsibilities in this respect. 
Article 14 
States should take appropriate measures to foster the intellectual 
and material conditions favourable to freedom in the conduct of 
rescarch on the human genome and to consider the ethical, legal, social 
and cconomic implications of such research, on the basis of the prin- 
ciples set out in this Declaration. 
Article 15 
States should take appropriate steps to provide the framework 
for the free exercise of research on the human genome with due regard 
for the principles set out tn this Declaration, in order to safeguard 
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and human dignity 
and to protect public health. They should seek to ensure that research 
results are not used for non-peaceful purposes. 
Article 16 
States should recognize the value of promoting, at various levels, 
as appropriate, the establishment of independent, multidisciplinary 
and pluralist ethics committees to assess the ethical, legal and social 
issues raised by research on the human genome and its applications. 
E. SOLIDARITY AND INTERNATIONAL 
CO-OPERATION 
Article 17 
States should respect and promote the practice of solidarity towards 
individuals, families and population groups who are particularly vul- 
nerable to or affected by disease or disability of a genetic character. 
They should foster, inter alia, rescarch on the identification, preven- 
tion and treatment of genetically-based and genetically-influenced 
discases, in particular rare as well as endemic discases which affect large 
numbers of the world’s population. 
Article 18 
States should make every effort, with duc and appropriate regard 
for the principles set out in this Declaration, to continue fostering the 
international dissemination of scientific knowledge concerning the   
human genome, human diversity and genetic research and, in that 
regard, to foster scientific and cultural co-operation, particularly 
between industrialized and developing countries. 
Article 19 
a) In the framework of international co-operation with develop- 
ing countries, States should seck to encourage measures enabling: 
i) assessment of the risks and benefits pertaining to rescarch on the 
human genome to be carried out and abuse to be prevented; 
ii) the capacity of developing countries to carry out rescarch on 
human biology and genetics, taking into consideration their specific 
problems, to be developed and strengthened; 
iii) developing countries to benefit from the achievements of scientific 
and technological research so that their usc in favour of economic and 
social progress can be to the benefit of all; 
iv) the free exchange of scientific knowledge and information in the 
arcas of biology, genetics and medicine to be promoted. 
b) Relevant international organizations should support and promote 
the initiatives taken by States for the above-mentioned purposes. 
F. PROMOTION OF THE PRINCIPLES SET 
OUT IN THE DECLARATION 
Article 20 
States should take appropriate measures to promote the principles 
set out in the Declaration, through education and relevant means, 
inter alia through the conduct of research and training in interdisci- 
plinary fields and through the promotion of education in bioethics, 
atall levels, in particular for those responsible for science policies. 
Article 21 
States should take appropriate measures to encourage other forms 
of research, training and information dissemination conducive to rais- 
ing the awareness of society and all of its members of their responsibilities 
regarding the fundamental issues relating to the defence of human dig- 
nity which may be raised by research in biology, in genetics and in med- 
icine, and its applications. They should also undertake to facilitate on 
this subject an open international discussion, ensuring the free expres- 
sion of various socio-cultural, religious and philosophical opinions. 
G. IMPLEMENTATION 
OF THE DECLARATION 
Article 22 
States should make every effort to promote the principles set out 
in this Declaration and should, by means of all appropriate measures, 
promote their implementation. 
Article 23 
States should take appropriate measures to promote, through 
education, training and information dissemination, respect for the 
above-mentioned principles and to foster their recognition and effec- 
tive application. States should also encourage exchanges and networks 
among independent ethics committees, as they are established, to fos- 
ter full collaboration. 
Article 24 
The International Bioethics Committee of UNLSCO should con- 
tribute to the dissemination of the principles set out in this Declara- 
tion and to the further examination of issues raised by their applica- 
tions and by the evolution of the technologies in question. It should 
organize appropriate consultations with parties concerned, such as 
vulnerable groups. It should make recommendations, in accordance 
with UNESCO's statutory procedures, addressed to the General Con- 
ference and give advice concerning the follow-up of this Declaration, 
in particular regarding the identification of practices that could be 
contrary to human dignity, such as germ-line interventions. 
Article 25 
Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any 
State, group or person any claim to engage in any activity or to per- 
form any act contrary to human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
including the principles set out in this Declaration. n 
THE UNLSCO Gouritr EH MAY 1998

## [Page 36](111704engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 111713: A Shared future, or no future

  
Us
is
co
/G
1 
Ja
cq
ue
s.
 
Mo
nt
ré
a 
Day by day our planet is shrinking. Today it 
is smaller and more [ragile than yesterday. 
And yet arc we really any “closer” to each other? 
The interdependence of the peoples and nations 
making up our world has become self-evident. No 
country, however powerful in terms of its economy 
or population, can any longer get by completely on 
its own. Transuational problems—whether they 
be environmental, cultural or economic—can no 
longer be solved at the national level. It is through 
international strategies, through concerted action 
between states and between regions that such 
problems can be addressed. Poverty, Aids, pol- 
lution, elimate change, drugs and violence know 
no boundaries, whether national, cthnic, natural 
or political. 
Globalization also means that the issues are 
interconnected. The sectoral, specialized, disci- 
pline-specific approach has shown its limitations, 
and these are becoming more and more of a eon- 
COMMENTARY Fed - MN CO Mayor 
i eR 
straint as real life, or at least onr awareness ol it, 
grows in complexity. Bioethics is an obvious exam- 
ple of a domain that “cuts aeross” several disci- 
plines. If we wish to influenee reality, we must 
adopt atransdisciplinary approach that makes use 
of all available expertise and skills, 
This awarcness of the interdependence of 
lluman beings and of the interconneetedness of 
the issues they face has become clearly apparent 
in recent years at the highest levels of politieal 
action and in global forums. Within the United 
Nations system, a series of major conferences has 
highlighted the connections between the various 
challenges we must take up—Dbetwecen environ- 
ment and development, for example, and between 
education and population. Jomtien, New Delhi, 
Vienna, Cairo, Copenhagen and Beijing are among 
the cities that have hosted these global summits. 
Too long overlooked or neglected, the human 
dimension is once again compelling recognition as 
‘Compare the hundreds of billions of dollars siphoned off 
by the arms or drug trade with national education budgets. 
y 
THE UNESCO Gouritr H MAY 1998 
What a shameful disparity!’

## [Page 37](111704engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

‘We must multiply our bonds of allegiance, build more bridges 
between the individual and communities of various kinds and sizes, 
strengthen “community citizenship” while at the same time 
promoting the idea of “world citizenship”.’ 
i 
» 
i a {«W 
the measure of all things. In the United Nations sys- 
tem, the approach to social development, to human 
development has become broader, more diverse 
and more {lexihle. Human beings, with all their 
unfathomable qualities, their strengths and weak- 
nesses, are again moving to the centre of the eco- 
nomic stage. 
And yet. . . eompare the hundreds of billions 
of dollars siphoned off by thie arms or drug trade 
with national education budgets! What a shameful 
disparity! Is not education a fundamental human 
right? 
“Ecce homo. Behold the man!” exclaimed Pope 
John Paul II at UNESCO’s Paris Head quarters eigh- 
teen years ago in an address that left its mark on all 
of us. “Behold the man! . . . the rich creativity of 
the human mind” which makes “untiring efforts 
to fathom and affirm the identity of man . . . always 
present in every form of culture”. 
For human beings to be worthy of the name, 
they must “belong” to the human species and expe- 
rience that sense of belonging. If they know and 
feel themselves to be members of the human fam- 
ily, they will have no difficulty in assisting their fel- 
low beings without ranking people close to them 
any higher than those who are far away. We must 
multiply our bonds of allegiance, that is to say, 
build more bridges between the individual and 
communities of different kinds and sizes, strengthen 
“community citizenship” while at the same time 
promoting the idea of “world citizenship”, and 
think globally while acting locally, so that human 
solidarity may flourish. 
The “intelleetual and moral solidarity of 
mankind”, seen by UNESCO’s Constitution as the 
basis of lasting peace, is a form of solidarity targeted 
at social disparities, onc which strives against intol- 
erance, jolts indifference and builds bridges 
between haves and have-nots, between Muslim and 
Jew, between prince and pauper. It is an active 
kind of solidarity between individuals who may be 
poles apart in many ways, a sense of community in 
diversity. And it is that solidarity, which grows up 
between different languages and cultures, beliefs 
and customs, ways of being and of thinking, and 
soon becomes indestruetible, that makes people 
accept the idea of sharing, and indeed want to share. 
Share their riches, resources and knowledge, 
and also their doubts. It is this universal impera- 
tive which must underpin our individual and col- 
lective thoughts and actions. Though we now 
know—and have known for several decades—that 
we, as civilizations, are mortal, itis only right that 
we should also know, as human beings, that the 


### 111713: A Shared future, or no future

future will be one of sharing or there will be no 
future at all. | 
| 2 | 
HE UNESCO Gourier BW MAY 1998

## [Page 38](111704engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ki
m 
Ha
rt
/R
ap
ho
, 
Pa
ns
 
BY FRANCE 
Svartsengi 
geothermal plant, 
which supplies 
Reykjavik {Iceland) 
with hot water. 


### 111714: Renewable energy: winds of change

GREENWATCH Renewable 
energy: 
winds of change 
BEQUETTE 
While the planet is being sti- 
fled by atmospherie pollution 
from the gases given off by fossil 
fuels such as oil—64 million barrels 
of which are consumed every day— 
and coal, alternative sourees of 
“clean”, renewable energy ave there 
for the using. But looking around 
the world, even those places where 
sources such as water, sun, wind, 
plant residues or volcanoes are plen- 
tifully available, we see how little 
use is actually being made of them. 
The reason lies botl in the cost of 
the necessary eapital goods, which 
remains high because they cannot 
he mass-produced, and in the lack of 
information and training. 
UNESCO vecognized that renew- 
able energies are one of the Leys to 
sustainable development as long ago 
as the 1950s, when they were still 
seen as a beein the honnet of woolly- 
minded conservationists. A number 
of lactors—growing environmental 
awarcness, the realization of the 
impact of the greenhouse effect on 
world elimate, the eatastroplhic acci- 
dents that have occurredin the very 
nuclear plants that promised elean 
power, and the progress made con- 
od a SS "i 
  
THE UNESCO Gourier EH MAY 1908 
currently in the technology of renew- 
able energy use—have, however, 
drawn increasing attention to the 
potential they represent. 
Rocketing oil priees in the early 
1970s reinforced this interest still 
further, but when prices fell, fifteen 
years later or thereabouts, interest 
again waned and research pro- 
grammes went onto the back burner. 
Today’s very low oil prices ($16 a 
barrel) are no inducement to econ- 
omy, nor do they encourage invest- 
ment in new energy technologies, 
espeeially sinee they are mainly 
intended [or the developing eoun- 
tries, which are either insolvent or 
getting on that way. They are, [ur- 
thermore, complicated to put into 
operation, requiring an interdisci- 
plinary approach, which is why 
UNESCO's Engineering and Technol- 
ogy Division eo-operates with other 
institutions of the United Nations 
system, with many non-governmen- 
tal organizations and with bilateral 
and multilateral aid ageneies. 
AN URGENT NEED 
In 1993, UNESCO hosted the World 
Solar Summit, at which, for the first 
time, the international community 
examined the problem of renewable 
energy sources. As explained by Elie 
Absit, a member of the seeretariat 
ol the World Solar Commission 
which was set up in 1993, the 
generic term “solar” is used heeause 
all sourees of energy, with the excep- 
tion of nuclear and geothermal 
energy, are linked with the sun. The 
choice of the most suitable of these 
energy sources depends on local eir- 
cumstances, available resources and 
level of consumption, 
© 
Jo
hn
 
W 
Wa
rd
en
/A
sk
, 
Pa
ns
  
Demographie pressure is making 
the use of renewables a matter of 
even greater urgency. The planets 
population is now increasing at the 
rate of nearly 250,000 a day. Agri- 
culture is incapable of feeding the 
developing countries’ four-and-a-half 
billion rural inhabitants (700 mil- 
lion houscholds) scattered abont the 
relatively isolated regions of Africa, 
Latin America, India and China. 
To keep these people on the land 
and restrict migration both [rom 
countryside to towns and from one 
country to another, it is essential to 
launch cost-elfective craft, indus- 
trial or agro-food activities, on 
however modest a scale, and this 
cannot be achieved without energy 
supplies. 
Output of electricity by conven- 
tional means has increased by leaps 
and bounds over the last thirty years 
but the main consumers have been 
city-dwellers. The World Bank 
spends $3.3 billion a year in the 
energy sector but only 7% of this 
goes to renewable energy in the 
developing countries. Out of the 
total of $8 billion similarly provided 
by multilateral aid agencies, only 
$1.5 billion is spent on rural elec- 
trification, Electricity supplies to 
the rural population are no better 
than thirty years ago. The reason is 
that maintenance and repairs are

## [Page 39](111704engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 111714: Renewable energy: winds of change

  
difficult, connection to the mains 
supply is costly, human settlements 
are widely scattered, access to iso- 
lated arcas is difficult and con- 
sumption is often low (less than one 
kWh a day). 
BIOGAS, GEOTHERMAL ENERGY 
AND WIND POWER 
A few examples will suffice to show 
wliat can be done with renewable 
energy sources, In Guatemala, for 
instance, there is an ongoing short- 
age of oil and gas, and only 36% of 
the population, mainly in the towns, 
are connected to the electricity snp- 
ply. This being the case, the main 
source of energy is firewood, leading 
to 900 sq.knt. of woodland being 
deforested yearly—far exceeding the 
forest’s regeneration capacity. The 
national agency responsible for the 
management of renewable energy, set 
np in 1983, employs locally-hased 
technicians throughout the country. 
With the assistanee of an anthropol- 
ogist whe helps persnade the local 
inhabitants to accept the new tech- 
nologies, these technicians have the 
job of promoting and monitoring the 
nse of solar installations (biodigesters 
and photovoltaic systems). 
A geothermal unit and two small- 
scale hydroelectric power stations 
are planned. Backed by $2 million 
from the United Nations Industrial 
Wind turbines in 
the Mojave desert, 
California (U.S.A.) 
Inside the hub of a 
100-metre tall 
wind turbine, 
Brusbuttel 
{Germany) 
Development Organization (UNIDO), 
a three-year (1996-1999) plan will 
provide dispensaries, schools and 
food shops with photovoltaic instal- 
lations. In the village of Xetzé, for 
example, where one of these systems 
has been installed, eleetrie ight now 
enables the womenfolk to earry on 
with their weaving in the evenings 
and, as their output of cloth has 
thus been put on a more regular 
basis, they have been able to set up 
long-term deals with foreign buyers. 
Biogas is one of the ¢heapest 
sources of renewable energy, 
obtained by fermenting animal or 
vegetable waste produets in a special 
container, the hiodigester. Rieh in 
methane and carbon dioxide, it is 
used for lighting, cooking and other 
purposes (sce “A waste-free farm”, 
Unesco Courier, September 1997). 
Geothermal energy makes use of 
underground heat, which increases 
with depth (a drill ean go down to a 
maximum of 5,000 metres), allow- 
ing a turbine to he driven hy water or 
steam and produce electricity. 
Another technique consists in inject- 
ing water into fissures in rock, and 
retrieving it when it has been natu- 
rally heated. lleating for 85% of 
the population in Iceland comes 
from geothermal sonrces. A score of 
countries, mostly developing, nse 
geothermal energy, and there are 
250 geothermal power stations in 
operation in varions parts of the 
world, bul cost restricts their fur- 
ther development. 
Wind power is the most promising 
of all the renewable energies and the 
one that has undergone the most spee- 
tacular development. Gernrany, India 
and Denmark ave the three countries 
best equipped in this respect. Spain, 
which comes fourth, is the first conn- 
try in the Enropean Union to enact   
legislation incorporating the recom- 
mendations made in the European 
Conuuission’s White Paper on renew- 
able energy sources; wind generators 
are in wide nse in the Canaries, for 
sca-waler desalination among other 
purposes. Over a hundred wind pumps 
are already operating in Mauritania, 
where a non-governmental organiza- 
tion, the Groupement de recherches 
et d’échanges technologiques (Tech- 
nological Research and Exchanges 
Group), working in partnership with 
the Mauritanian energy authority, has 
installed wind-powered battery-charg- 
ing stations in fifteen villages in the 
Tzarza region, a south-castern area 
where there is plenty of wind. These 
batteries supply eleetricity to liouses 
or nomads’ tents. A $5-a-month sub- 
scription buys the use of an individual 
battery that can be recharged when 
flat by the wind generator. Wind gen- 
erators power pumps supplying vil- 
lages with drinking water in the 
remotest regions of the Adrar. 
THE WORLD SOLAR 
PROGRAMME 
The sun is an immense renewable 
energy source equivalent to abont 
10,000 times the total world 
demand for power. It is ever-pre- 
sent—albeit varying in intensity— 
throughout the world. It can be har- 
nessed diveetly, in the form of heat, 
or converted into electricity. In the 
former ease, all that is needed in the 
developing countries is a blaek- 
backed sheet of glass or plastic to 
make a cheap drying raek for fruit, 
vegetables or fish, The latter 
method—the photovoltaie system— 
requires panels, a battery and a 
device for converting direct enrrent 
to alternating but also needs an oper- 
ator who has to be trained to use 
and maintain it. 
THE UNLSCO Courier 8 MAY 1998 
© 
Re
gi
s 
Bo
ss
u/
Sy
gm
a 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 40](111704engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 111714: Renewable energy: winds of change

© 
Wi
m 
va
n 
Ca
pp
el
le
n/
Li
ne
ar
r,
 
Am
he
m 
  
“Solar technology”, explains 
I'rench researcher Michel Rodot, 
“represents a major potential, but 
development runs up against real 
financial problems, firstly because 
installation costs are fairly high but 
mainly because village people and 
rural extension workers need to be 
eommitted to the tdea of solar 
power. It also requires political will 
on the part of the State and support 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: 
World Solar Programme: 
Internet: 
http://www. /unesco.org/general /fre /pro- 
grammes/science /wssp 
Summer school: 
Mr 0. Benchikh, Unesco 
Tel: {33)(0)1 4568 39 16 
Fax: (33) (0)1 4568 58 20 
Books: 
v' Renewable Energy. Sources for Fuels and 
Electricity, Earthscan Publications, London, 
1993 (an excellent collective work of over 
1,000 pages) 
v Le solaire thermique au service du 
développement durable, Guide de I'énergie 
solaire, a guide to the application of solar 
energy to sustainable development, 
published by the Réseau international 
énergie solaire, Canada, and containing some 
remarkable case studies 
v Energie et environnement en Méditerranée, 
Enjeux et prospectives (Energy and 
environment in the Mediterranean, Issues 
and prospects), by Michel Grenon et al., 
Economica, Pans, 1993 
CD-ROM: 
Unesco/ISEEK Energy Database, 3rd edition, 
1997 (Database of the International System 
of Energy Expertise and Knowledge) 
On sale from Unesco Publishing, 1 rue Miollis, 
75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Tel: (33) (0}1 45684300 
Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 57 41 
Internet: http:/ /ww.unesco.org./publishing 
ar 
THE UNESCO Courier HN MAY 1998 
from the banks. Consumers will have 
to learn that the supply of solar elee- 
tricity is a service they must pay for, 
however modest the price.” 
Conscious of the part renewable 
energies ean play, UNESCO has 
devised a ten-year (1996-2005) 
World Solar Programme, which aims 
“to develop and implement 300-odd 
top-priority renewahle energy pro- 
national value. . . in order to demon- 
strate the technical feasibility, eco- 
nomie viability and social and polit- 
ical acceptability of solar energy.” 
The Organization is also offering an 
extremely well-stocked database, 
available hoth in printed form and on 
computer, and a summer school for 
French-speaking engineers, instrue- 
tors, academies, researchers and 
A house in Nepal. 
Left, the 
fermentation tank, 
or biodigester, 
used for producing 
biogas. Right, 
cooking with 
biogas. 
jeets of national, regional and inter- 
  
economists. [| 
initiatives 
‘ENERGIES FOR THE WORLD’ 
On the initiative of the French renewable energy body Observatoire francais des éner- 
gies renouvelables, twelve publie and private partners, ministries and major companies, 
came together to set up, in Paris, the Fondation Energies pour le monde (Energies for 
the World Foundation). Established and granted State-approved status in 1990, it car- 
ries out renewable-energy-hased electrification projects to help the development of the 
local economy and improve living conditions in impoverished rural areas. 
Its activities, international in scope, include: 
Africa: electrification of ten or so youth elubs (Mandé region, Mali) and thirty dis- 
pensaries (Casamance, south Senegal); practical and theoretical instruction in the tech- 
nology and maintenance of photovoltaic pumps at a school for rural enginecrs in 
Ougadougon (Burkina Faso); installation of a solar generator for recharging ten batter- 
ies a day in the douar (nomad encampment) of lgoudar Jebel (Atlas Mountains, Morocco). 
Asia: in Bangladesh, the Foundation is advising the Rural Eleetricity Develop- 
ment Board on the electrification of isolated villages. In Viet Nam, in the Mekong Delta 
and many southern islands, it has electrified some forty community centres, which now 
have television sets, video players and battery chargers. In Cambodia, ten or so dispen- 
saries have electric light and refrigerators for vaccines. 
The Pacific: in Vanuatu, nearly twenty schools now have a power supply. 
The Foundation’s activities extend to many other countries, ineluding Georgia, Togo, 
Madagascar, the United Republie of Tanzania, India, Nepal, 11aiti and China. 
In addition to its own small staff, it has a network of field officers who carry out its pro- 
jects in liaison with the local authorities. It works in partnership with UNEsco, the World 
Health Organization and the United Nations Development Programme. The Foundation pub- 
lishes many simple, practical documents on renewable energy sources, and a bimonthly review, 
Systemes solaires, Energies-Environnement-Développement, 146 rue de I’Université, 
75007 Paris. Tel: (33) (0)1 44 18 00 88; Fax: (33) (0)1 44 18 00 36. |  

## [Page 41](111704engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

© 
En
c 
Dr
ag
es
co
/J
ac
an
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
CAULERPA: 
DOING WELL—AND DOING DAMAGE 
Caulerpa taxifolia algae, which appeared 
twelve years ago in the Mediterranean, pose 
a threat to the beds of Posidonia (a marine 
plant similar to the eelgrass) and to the fauna 
that lives in them. Three thousand hectares 
of the coastal waters of France and Italy are 
already infested with this “green plague”. 
It reproduces at a great rate by putting out 
suckers, and its proliferation has been fur- 
ther speeded by the anchors of pleasure 
craft, fishing nets and the dumping of the 
contents of ballast tanks. The French Acad- 
emy of Sciences has recommended that 
pleasure-boat owners and fishermen be given 
more information about the danger it pre- 
sents and, in particular, that in-depth 
research should be carried out into its 
method of propagation and ways of halting 
the invasion. = 
AWORLD COMMISSION 
ON DAMS 
Establishment of this new body was 
announced in February 1998 by Kader 
Asmal, South Africa's Minister of Water 
Affairs and Forestry, who chairs the Com- 
mission. He will be assisted by ten commis- 
sioners, drawn from widely varying back- 
grounds—academics, industrialists or 
ecologists. The Commission's aim will be to 
bring about a more reponsible approach to 
the building of large dams by conducting a 
global review of their costs and benefits. = 
UNITED STATES INVADED 
BY CANADA (GEESE) 
When an animal species has been too well 
protected, as has happened with the resi- 
  
© 
Ku
rt
 
Am
sl
er
/J
ac
an
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
  
        
    
   
Nr 
5 
ny 
! 
   
. 
- 
an 
eh TN 
dent population of Canada geese (Branta 
canadensis) introduced into the eastern 
United States by wildlife managers in the 
1960s, drastic measures may be called for. 
These birds, about a million of them, gobble 
up grass, foul reservoirs, and present a 
safety hazard for airports. After an attempt 
had been made to relocate them, shortage 
of space made it necessary to cull several 
thousand before the arrival of the 300,000 
migratory geese, who have priority! ™ 
PLASTICS 
MAKE GOOD FUEL 
Barely 4% of the three million tonnes of plas- 
tics thrown away every year in France is recy- 
cled. The Association of Plastics Manufac- 
turers in Europe has demonstrated that 1.4 
tonnes of coal would be saved for every tonne 
of plastic waste products burned as fuel in an 
energy-guzzling cement works. If this prac- 
tice was generally applied in Europe, which 
accounts for 25% of the world’s cement out- 
put, 3.8 million tonnes of coal could be 
saved, an especially environment-friendly 
outcome since coal pollutes the atmosphere 
but plastics leave no solid residues or ash 
and burning them would not lead to any 
increase in atmospheric emissions. x 
THREAT FROM OBSOLETE 
PESTICIDE STOCKS 
The United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) has drawn attention to 
the fact that over 100,000 tonnes of obsolete 
and unused pesticides continue to pose a 
threat to health and the environment in the 
developing countries. In town and country- 
side alike, thousands of barrels are rusting 
away and leaking their toxic contents, some- 
times contaminating irrigation and drinking 
water. The best way to get rid of them would 
be high-temperature incineration, but most 
of the countries concerned lack the neces- 
sary installations. In Africa alone, the dis- 
posal cost is reckoned at $80 million, but 
the agro-chemical industry is proposing to 
put up only 30% of the disposal costs. 
ETHNO-DEVELOPMENT 
IN ECUADOR 
The World Bank has approved an “ethno- 
development” project in Ecuador. Backed by 
a $25 million Bank loan, it aims to develop, 
in indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorian commu- 
nities and villages, activities such as improv- 
Ing schools, managing community forestry, 
farming activities, fisheries or water ser- 
vices. There are 2,500,000 hectares of {and 
yet to be titled in Ecuador and, against this 
background, the project helps the indigenous 
peoples to obtain title to their ancestral 
lands. . 
BORNEO: 
THE ORANGUTAN IN RETREAT 
Seventy orangutans have been taken into 
care at the Wanariset research centre, a 
sanctuary in the forests of East Kalimantan, 
the Indonesian part of the island of Borneo. 
Most of them are young orphans whose 
mothers have fled to escape the forest fires 
or have been killed or kidnapped by poach- 
ers. Though protected as one of the world’s 
most endangered species, these great apes 
are hunted for their meat or sold into cap- 
tivity. Their numbers have declined by 50% in 
the last ten years in Borneo and Sumatra, 
and there are now thought to be less than 
20,000 left. 
 
THE UNESCO Courier | MAY | 998 
© 
in
go
 
Ar
nd
t 
/J
ac
an
a 
Pa
ni
s

## [Page 42](111704engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 111715: The Monastery of Haghpat

HERITAGE 
The monastery of 
m Eh | 
Fix - 
  
A masterpiece of religious 
architecture and a major 
centre of learning in the 
Middle Ages, Armenia’s 
Haghpat Monastery was 
placed on UNesco’s World 
Heritage List in 1996. 
 
THE UNESCO Courier BH MAY 1998 
3 : H 4 1] iY 
» L 
aE BER FF BE 
Tradition has it that two of 
Christ’ apostles, St. Thad- 
deus and St. Bartholomew, intro- 
duced Christianity into Armenia 
at a very early date. Later, at the 
beginning of the fourth century, 
Armenia became the first country 
to adopt Christianity as an official 
religion. Against a backdrop of the- 
ological disputes, bot above all 
motivated by political reasons, the 
Armenian church soon began to 
clect its own archbishop. Since it 
rejected the dogma of the two 
natures of Christ (human and 
divine), the church came into con- 
flict with Byzantium. But this the- 
ologieal dispute masked a politieal 
concern: Arinenia wanted to set 
itself apart from both Byzantium 
and Persta, two rival empires which 
often clashed on its territory. The 
break with Byzantiom was com- 
pleted in 609. 
The determination to be inde- 
pendent also resulted in the cre- 
ation of an Armenian alphabet in 
about 405. Written Armenian 
replaced liturgical Greek and 
became one of the church’s main 
instruments for unifying the Armen- 
ian people. Drawing strength from 
their specific religious and linguis- 
tic identity, the Armenians man- 
aged lo survive in a hostile environ- 
ment and thwart repeated attempts 
by other nations to assimilate them. 
Towards the middle of the sev- 
enth century, the Arabs conquered 
Byzantine Armenia. People con- 
verted in inereasing numbers to 
Islam, especially among the nobil- © 
K 
Hi
bb
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
ity. Only two princely families on 
the outer reaches of Armenia 
remained Christian: the Bagratids 
in the north, and tle Artsrunis in 
the south. But in 862 the Caliph 
appointed  Ashot 
“Prince of Princes”, and made him 
Bagratuni 
“King of Armenia” twenty years 
later. Armenia regained its inde- 
pendence shortly thereafter. 
THE RENAISSANCE OF ARMENIAN ART 
Ashot, who had become Ashot 1 
after being crowned by the 
Catholicos (the spiritual head of 
the church), ushered in a period 
of peace and prosperity that was 
gt’ i 
Bas-relief on the east 
gable of Surb Nshan 
church, below, shows 
Princes Smbat and 
Kurike, sons of the 
church's founder, 
holding a model of 
the building. 
   
' + Be A Ww a { ’ + : ; ) 
7 i “aN H {1S rhs " - 8 Re

## [Page 43](111704engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 111715: The Monastery of Haghpat

  
The monastery roofs. 
Left, Surb Nshan 
{Holy Cross) church. 
—
—
 
  X N ’ « y . . - ¥ 
: “ol hn . . . ee > 
: Sob BR .- 
© 
Br
un
o 
Mo
ra
nd
i/
DI
AF
, 
Pa
ri
s 
v
r
 
A 
. - - SAN Sa 
: ) ~~ 
pe 1 STIR RG ob Sa 
  
to last 120 years. Armenian art 
enjoyed a renaissance. In about 
961, the Bagratid family fonnded 
a new capital at Ani, now part of 
Turkey. At that time a mere for- 
tified village, Ani was transformed 
into a wondrous city “with forty 
gates, 100 palaces and 1,000 
churches”, aceording to ¢hroni- 
clers of the time. 
Armenian architecture blos- 
somed with the constrnetion of 
the ehurch of the Holy Cross, on 
Aghtamar Island, and of Ani 
cathedral. Philosophy, theology 
and literature faculties were set 
up within the precincts of monas- 
teries. The neighbouring monas- 
teries of Haghpat and Sanabin 
were restored and enlarged and 
became eultural and educational 
centres by the end of the tenth 
century. The period’s leading 
architect, Trdat, restored llagia 
Sophia cathedral in Constantino- 
ple, built Ani cathedral and was 
responsible for the expansion of 
HHaghpat monastery. 
The Haghpat monastery com- 
plex overlooks the Pambak River 
innorthern Armenia’s Lori region. 
It was built, not on a peak, but 
hallway up a hillside on a site cho- 
sen Lo afford protection and eon- 
cealment from prying eyes and 
also in response to a kind ol monas- 
tic humility. It is built on a ver- 
dant promontory located in the 
middle of a mountain eirque, 
whichis often wreathed in clouds. 
A peak on the opposite side of the 
riveris over 2,500 metres high. 
The monastery seen 
from the northeast. 
At left, the 13th- 
century bell tower. 
  
b re aaa, PRE anti 
ATTEN ARIES ER TO kd ES 
The monasteries of northern 
Armenia are not isolated, unlike 
their counterparts in the coun- 
try’s arid regions. They were built 
ina village environment. Haghpat, 
for example, is surrounded by 
many hamlets, and Sanahin’s 
domes rise [rom the centre of a 
village. 
THE ORIGINAL CHURCH 
The little ehurch of Surh Nshan 
(the Holy Cross) is Haghpat’s car- 
liest building. Begun in 966-67, 
it was later enlarged and embell- 
ished by the architect Trdat and 
his team. Like many other 
churches and monasteries, it was 
endowed by prominent feudal 
families. A typical example of 
tenth-century Armenian archi- 
tecture, its central dome rests on 
the fonr imposing pillars of the 
lateral walls. The outside walls 
dotted with triangular 
recesses. A fresco in the apse 
depicts Christ Pantoerator. Its 
donor, the Armenian Prince 
Khutolukhaga, is depicted in the 
south transept (a transversal nave 
interseeting the main nave). The 
sons of the chureh’s founder, 
Princes Smbat and Kurike, are 
shown with Queen Khosravannehe 
in a bas-relief on the east gable. 
Apart {rom one or two minor 
restorations carried out in the 
cleventh and twelfth centuries, 
the eliurch has retained its origi- 
nal character. 
are 
i 
he unesco (COURIER w MAY 1998 
© 
Bu
ss
 
Wo
jt
ek
 
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 44](111704engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 111715: The Monastery of Haghpat

  
> A local noble family, the 
Kiurikians, made the church their 
spiritual centre and the monastery 
grew spectacularly. Two new build- 
ings were added to it—St. Gre- 
gory’s chureh (1005-25) and the 
chapel of the Virgin Mary—along 
with several cirenlar defence walls 
with two fortified gates. 
Armenia’s golden age came to 
an end in the mid-eleventh ecn- 
tury. Ani was taken by the Byzan- 
tines. The last Bagratid king ahdi- 
cated. At the end of the century, 
Turkish-Mongol Seljuks com- 
pleted their conquest of Armne- 
nia. In abeut 1130, an earthquake 
damaged ITaghpat, which was not 
restored until fifty years later. But 
those eventful years did not in any 
way impair the monastery’s spiri- 
tual influence. 
A WIDENING SPHERE 
OF INFLUENCE 
Atthe beginning of the thirteenth 
century, the monastery acquired 
agavit, a large construction resem- 
bling a narthex (an entrance hall 
between the porch and nave of a 
church) which shows this featnre 
of ecelesiastical architecture in its 
most fully developed form. The 
gavit was uscd for meetings, teach- 
ing and funerals. In line with the 
prineiples of vernacular wooden 
architectnre, its roof rests on four 
central pillars. Ahove the arches 
of the square central area, inter- 
secting arches divide the building 
into nine parts. Light streams into 
the building through a lantern 
crowning the highest central sec- 
tion (the yerdik). The {loor is partly 
THE UNESCO Gounrr B MAY 1998 
@
K
 
Hi
bb
s 
Pa
ns
 
A khatchkar, a stone 
slab engraved with a 
cross and intricate 
designs, 
A khatchkarset in 
the monastery wall. 
paved by tombstones of the 
Kiurikan family. 
At that time, several hundred 
monks lived in Haghpat monastery. 
They could eat in a refectory, but 
there was no dormitory because 
they had formed the habit of lodg- 
ing in villages in the valley. They 
produced the Hlaghpat Gospels 
(1211), an illuminated manuscript 
renowned for miniatures in which 
secular features blend into reli- 
gious scenes. One illumination 
shows a man and a woman in 
Armenian dress welcoming Jesus 
before the gates of Jerusalem. 
The fortress of Kaian was built 
nearby in 1233 to protect Hagh- 
pat and Sanahin from invading 
Mongols. Although the monastery 
was captured and destroyed a few 
years later, its life did not come to 
a halt. 
In the mid-thirteenth century, 
three important buildings were 
added to the site. One of them was 
the campanile, or zangakatun, 
which stands apart from the 
chureh at the highest point of the 
site. An elongated construetion 
topped by a short octagonal spire, 
it has three floors, each contain- 
ing recesses and apses with one or 
more altars. The library, or mate- 
nadaran (1258-68), is a square, 
compact building direetly con- 
nected to the ehurch by what is 
known as the “Saviour’s Passage”. 
  
  
The great jamatun or chapter- 
house which the monks used for 
assemblies is also connected to the 
church by a vaulted arcade. Built 
in the same style as the gavit, it is 
the work of the father superior, 
Hamazasp. Outside the monastery 
walls, the monks also built the 
Holy Zion chapel (1268) in a vil- 
lage farther down the hill. 
But the Mongol incursions 
resumed. Tamerlane’s invasions 
(1387-1405) put an end to fur- 
ther attempts to reconstitute a 
Greater Armenia. Between the 
fourteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies, Haghpat was frequently 
damaged, and on two occasions, 
in 1651 and 1677, the Armenian 
apostolic church undertook 
restoration work. 
On the eve of the Second 
World War, the Soviet Socialist 
Republic of Armenia’s Commit- 
tee for the Preservation of Monu- 
ments made plans for a compre- 
hensive restoration of the site. At 
the end of 1991, Armenia again 
became independent. The town 
couneil of Tumanian is now respon- 
sible for the upkeep of Haghpat, 
which still belongs to the church 
of Armenia, while the eulture min- 
istry is responsible for its restora- 
tion. A long-term approach to the 
preservation of Armenia’s historic 
and spiritual heritage can finally 
be adopted. n 
NINE CENTURIES OF INFLUENCE 
w= Sa > 966-991: 
2 
ot Construction of Surb Nshan church 
> : I w= 1105: 
oa il Destruction of the church by the Seljuks FSA ae 
BR — ol et] “Sg 
Ee — 3 13th century: HE 1 Si 
3 : % 4 ~ AR Northern Armenia's main spiritual and educational centre; 
I 8 rE “vv = construction of new buildings 
is | we, I. os Mid-17th century: 
; HER = Reta Ror ~ NE: Restoration of the site 
C- » 1% 4 - (nn D 
ly eT = 1688: 
pee RE 3 AR A destructive earthquake BRR JT FA x 
a ’ Sx Es ” = - “a 
SAE ARDY a Cd 1940-1960-1980: 
a ¥ Nag ~~ ~~ 2 pr : Plans for restoring the site during the Soviet period 
)\ 1. . = Na Jo J 
oe : : og 3 —.. 2 1996: 
ba ~ RENEE d Inclusion on the World Heritage List 
£ 
s 

## [Page 45](111704engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 111716: Dizzy Gillespie, a jazz giant

LISTENING 
DIZZY GILLESPIE, » JAZ” 
  
  
  
: ~ John Birks Gillespie was born in Cheraw, 
~~ asmall town in Seuth Carolina. Neither 
his father, a builder who led a dance-hand at 
weekends, nor his mother took much interest in 
his education. But young John was bright and 
curious about everything, espeeially musie. 
Unbeknown to his father, he practised on the 
various band instruments stored in the house 
and learned to play the trumpet with a neigh- 
bour’s son. 
As a teenager, he worked for a time on one of 
the public-works projects set up hy the Roo- 
sevelt Administration under the New Deal. But 
manual labour was not to his liking, and he soon 
obtaincd a scholarship to the Laurinburg Teeh- 
nical Institute, an agricultural college for Blacks 
in North Carolina. Ile played trombone and then 
trumpet in the college band, and started stndy- 
ing musical theory and trying his hand at the 
piano. At weekends he performed with a small 
croup of teenage musicians, The cornetist King 
Oliver, who was giving a concert locally, heard 
him play and offered him a job, but Dizzy pre- 
ferred to stay with his friends. 
In 1935, he left high school to move with his 
mother to Philadelphia, where he satin on innu- 
merable jam sessions and, at eighteen, joined the 
Frankie Fairfax band. lis first role model was 
©P
 
Re
na
ul
t/
Ga
mm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
Pioneer of bebop, Afro-Cuban and Brazilian jazz, 
Dizzy Gillespie (1917-1993) was a colourful figure 
and, with Louis Armstrong and Miles Davis, one of 
jazz's trinity of great trumpet-players. 
Roy Eldridge, six years lis senior, who was 
regarded as the fastest and most innovative trum- 
peter then playing and who was at that time with 
Teddy ilPs band. When not rehearsing or per- 
forming, Dizzy spent all his time studying har- 
mony on the piano, a grounding to which he later 
attributed his ability to play in any key. It was 
about this time that his fellow trumpeter Palmer 
Davis, impressed both by his virtuosity and his 
non-stop fooling about, nicknamed him “Dizzy”. 
The birth of bebop 
In 1937, Dizzy moved in with his brother in 
Itarlem, where he hung areund the Savoy Ball- 
room and jammed with the Savoy Sultans, Fess 
Williams, Claude Hopkins, Willie Bryant and 
Chick Webb. Webb, who had just discovered a 
young singer named Ella Fitzgerald, realized 
that his was an exceptional talent and often 
called him in as replacement solo trumpet. When 
Dizzy started his first big band in 1946, he 
toured the southern states with Ella and encour- 
aged her to take up scat-singing. 
Dizzy became friendly with Mario Bauza, one 
of WebD’s trumpeters, and, at the Cotton Club, 
with the flautist Alberto Socarris, who between 
them introduced him to Cuban music. A few 
months later, he met the sax and elarinet player 
Teddy 1K, who was just about to set off on a 
European tour and was looking for a trumpeter. 
Dizzy talked him into giviug him a break and, in 
a career move that went beyond his wildest 
dreams, took over from his mentor Roy Eldridge 
in the band. He impressed audiences with his 
embouchure and perfected his high-register play- 
ing, his soaring riffs and a harmonic concept that 
was far ahead of its time (so far that the singer Cal 
Calloway, who hired him in 1939, forbade him to » 
me unesco (Courier @ Mav 199s

## [Page 46](111704engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 111716: Dizzy Gillespie, a jazz giant

» play what—unable to understand it—he called his 
“Chinese” music). 
After the commercially-oriented swing era 
with its mainly White big bands (Benny Good- 
man, Jimmy and Tommy Dorsey), Black jazzmen 
were gripped by a fever ol ereativity. The most 
innovative of them, guitarist Charlie Christian, 
Thelonious Monk, drummer Kenny Clarke and 
Charlie Parker, the latter fresh from Kansas 
City, met for jam sessions in the elubs of Harlem, 
including the famons Minton’s Playhouse. That 
was where, according to Miles Davis, musicians 
really cut their teeth; they had to have played at 
Minton’s to earn a reputation among jazzmen. 
Dizzy and his friends experimented there with 
unfamiliar harmonies and frenzied tempo, and 
created numbers with jokey titles. It was from 
these experiments that bebop was to emerge, 
soon to take definite shape in the clubs of Filty- 
second Street, jazz's new centre of gravity. 
The elder statesman of jazz 
In 1941, Dizzy was accused by Cab Calloway of 
throwing a spithall at him during a gig and was 
thrown out of the band. Ile played with various 
groups, including the one led by pianist Earl 
[lines for whieh he wrote Night in Tunisia, and 
then formed a revolutionary little group with 
bass-player Oscar Pettiford, performing at the 
Onyx Club on Fifty-sccond Street, As he tells it, 
they played lots of untitled original numbers, 
with Dizzy chanting “Dee-ba-pa-n-bebop” as the 
lead-in. When the fans wanted to hear one of 
these unnamed pieces they would call out [or 
“bebop”. The press soon got hold of the term 
and started to call their music bebop. 
Dizzy next joined Billy Eckstine’s big band, 
the first to he inspired by bebop, at the same 
time pursuing a earcer as an arranger. In 1945, a 
year that was to be decisive for him, he teamed 
up with Charlie Parker, his musical alter ego, and 
recorded the historie bebop tracks Groovin’ 
high, All the Things You Are, Salt Peanuts and 
Hot House with various groups of musicians. It 
was at this time that he began to blow ont his 
cheeks like a hamster when playing and to sport 
a beret, a goatee and wire-framed glasses, a look 
that all his fans hastened to copy. 
In 1946, Dizzy formed a big band that was 
joined, the following year, by the remarkable 
Cuban conga player Chano Pozo, who could speak 
no English. When asked how they managed to 
communicate, Pozo would reply: “Dechee no peck 
THE UNESCO Courier B MAY 1908 
pani, me no peck Angli, bo peek African”. This 
was the first time drums played with the hands 
rather than with denmsticks entered the jazz 
world—in the slavery period, Whites had sys- 
tematically destroyed African-style drums. 
Together, Dizzy and Pozo wrote Manteca, Tin 
Tin Deo and Cubana Be Cubana Bop, composi- 
tions that led the way for “Latin jazz”. A concert 
they gave at the Salle Pleyel, Paris, in 1948 had 
a stunning ellect on all French jazzmen, coming as 
a revelation both of bebop and of the red-hot 
rhythms of Afro-Cuban music. On 2 December 
that same year, at the age of thirty-three, Pozo 
was murdered in a Harlem bar. 
On 6 January 1953, at a party in a club, an 
actor accidentally fell on Dizzy’s trumpet, bend- 
ing the mouth and giving it the famous upturned 
shape. “My instrument, when you hit a note, Bam! 
You hear it right then, instead of waiting,” Le 
said. In 1950, Dizzy, then at the height of his 
powers, was sponsored by the State Department 
to tour the Middle East and Latin America with 
his new big band. Refusing to aet as an official 
spokesman for the United States, he made [riends 
among the loeals in the various countries he visited 
and gave free invitations to his concerts to children 
and peor people. In Brazil, he discovered the 
samba and the bossa nova, whieh he popularized 
in the United States, and in Buenos Aires he met 
the young pianist Lalo Schifrin, signing him up 
for his band a few years later. 
In 1964, he ran for the presidency of the 
United States on a platform of abolishing racism 
and uniting all the peoples of the world. He sng- 
vested that the White House be renamed the 
Blues House, and that Miles Davis be appointed 
head of the CIA and Max Roach Minister of 
Defense. In the late 1960s, he converted to 
Baha’ism, a faith of Persian origin that preaches 
toleranec and universallove. 
Dizzy performed until the end of his life in 
many different venues, including the White 
louse, where, with President Jimmy Carter, he 
played Salt Peanuts, the anthem of bebop. “I 
like playing. 1 like people. 1 love making people 
laugh, and 1 do just as I please”, he said. Deco- 
rated by the American and French Governments, 
proclaimed bashere (a Yoruba princely title) of 
Iperu, Nigeria, he became towards the end of his 
days an elder statesman of jazz. 
Somebody once asked Dizzy what legaey he 
would like to leave behind. “I would like people 
to know how to pronounce my name: Dizzy, D-I- 
7-7-Y'", he answered. |_| 
Q
W
 
Co
up
on
/G
am
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
E
a
.
 
  
 

## [Page 47](111704engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 111717: Interview with Marcel Marceau: the art of silence

INTERVIEW 
BR You have been appearing on stage all over the 
world for more than fifty years. Why is it that you are 
more popular abroad than at home in France? 
Marcel Marceau: I have performed a great deal 
in France. It was here, in 1947, that I created the 
character of Bip, the dreamy little poet who 
appears in all my shows. After performing in 
Jean Louis-Barrault’s troupe, I set up my own 
company in 1948, and between then and 1964 
I staged twenty-six mime plays, or “mimod- 
ramas” as I prefer to call them. Since pure 
mimodrama was not recognized as a theatrical 
art form I received no subsidy, so I had to 
raisc the funds for my productions by inter- 
national tours. I have given performances on all 
five continents, with particular success in the 
United States and Japan, and appeared many 
times on television. But my financial difficul- 
ties, particularly after the only partial success 
of Don Juan, a mimodrama adapted from the 
play by Tirso de Molina, produced in 1964, 
forced me to disband my troupe that year and 
begin appearing alone on stage. 
I became a solo mime, but unlike singers, 
who can be listened to at any time on records 
or on the radio, mimes arc masters of silence, 
soon forgotten if they don’t appear on stage 
regularly. 
RB Mime is a universal language that doesn’t 
require translation. Perhaps that is another 
explanation of your success? 
M.M.: Yes, that’s true, but French audiences 
scem to me rather conservative, despite the 
fact that France has a great tradition of mime 
and has produced many famous exponents of 
the art. UNESCO asked me to be onc of its 
goodwill ambassadors but unfortunately, as I 
am always on tour, I didn’t think I could be 
very cffective in that role, though I did work 
with that splendid Organization on a film 
defending copyright and authors’ rights. 
Eventually I asked the French authorities to 
help me prevent the art of mime from disap- 
  
The world-famous 
French mime Marcel 
Marceau breaks his 
silence and talks 
about the secrets of 
his craft and the 
highlights of a career 
spanning five 
decades. Interview by 
Michel Fargeon. 
Marcel Marceau 
 
pearing. Asa result Iwas able to set up the Mar- 
cel Marccau International School of Mimo- 
drama in Paris, which receives a subsidy from the 
City of Paris. It provides courses of training in 
several subjects (dance, fencing, acrobatics, 
drama) and is attended by students from all 
over the world. Some former students are work- 
ing with me on the preparation of ashow, The 
Bowler Hat, a tribute to Chaplin that will be 
performed internationally in several theatres. 
BW Do you feel when you are on stage that you are 
delivering a text, even though you don’t say a word? 
M.M.: Yes indeed, I feel that I am both an 
author and an actor at the same time. Although 
my performance is silent, I am not acting by 
means of gesture alone. I am using the power 
of thought. I communicate with the audience 
by means of the thought that goes into every 
movement and every pose. Writers make con- 
tact with their readers by means of words and 
THE UNESCO Courier B MAY 1998 
© 
He
rv
é 
St
 
He
li
er
/H
PS
H/
Sy
gm
a 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 48](111704engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 111717: Interview with Marcel Marceau: the art of silence

> 
© 
F 
Da
rm
gn
y/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
the way they give form to words through a 
story. Mimes are always, by definition, word- 
less, but they present the fable of human life 
on stage by means of an art that transcends 
words. I often make use of themes that tran- 
scend language, suchas The Heart Eater, The 
Cage, or The Mask-Maker, which are the 
titles of some of my sketches. They are actu- 
ally parables that express deep thoughts. 
Dancers do this by movement, but the mime 
does it by remaining motionless, by simply 
being there. 
HM Could it be said that the spectators recreate 
within themselves what you are doing on stage? 
M.M.: Yes, exactly. Unless the audience is 
drawn into the action, the mime has failed to 
get his message across the footlights, his per- 
formance is closer to mimesis than to the true 
art of mime. He has not succeeded in radiating 
the poetical aura that evokes in the spectator 
what I would describe as a “zen” identifica- 
tion with the character portrayed. Laughter 
is aroused by what appear to us as distortions 
or discrepancies in relation to what is “nor- 
mal”, but the laughing stops when the out- 
come 1s tragic, when death intervenes. The great 
Charlie Chaplin’s films illustrate this very well. 
Although the cinema audience go along to 
laugh at Chaplin’s antics, at some point they 
stop laughing, they succumb to emotion and 
suddenly sce the character he plays in a differ- 
ent light. Comedy and tragedy disrupt the 
rules established by society. 
HM What influence have Chaplin's films had on your 
work? 
M.M.: The character of Bip was entirely inspired 
by Chaplin. He was very popular when I was a 
child, and by the age of ten I was already imi- 
tating his funny walk. He and my teacher, Eti- 
enne Decroux, who invented the grammar of 
mime, its rigorous control of the body, inspired 
me to opt for the art of silence. I also studied 
© 
Je
an
 
Pi
er
re
 
Am
et
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
 
under Charles Dullin, who taught me about 
lyrical rhythm and the inspiring power of the 
spoken word. Chaplin in fact started out by 
performing in music halls, as a singer, dancer 
and acrobat. His performance in silent films was 
pure mime and he was so affected by that expe- 
rience that, long after the talkies had comein, he 
was still turning down speaking roles. 
HB You could have been a dancer... 
M.M.: No, I might have had a talent for move- 
ment, but dancing involves pirouettes and leaps 
whereas mime, an art of bodily expression, of 
what my mentor Etienne Ducroux called 
“moving statuary”, borrows its postures from 
Graeco-Roman statues, giving it scope for 
beauty and virtuosity. Immobility is a very 
important part of it, but so areacrobatics and 
the visual element. Since it can be abstract, sur- 
realist or melodramatic at will, it has an explo- 
sive impact on the feelings. There is in the the- 
atre of mime a kind of inner respiration that 
renders visible the invisible, sculpts forms out 
 
a8 
THE UNESCO Courier W MAY 1998

## [Page 49](111704engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 111717: Interview with Marcel Marceau: the art of silence

   
of space and lends wings to the characters’ 
thoughts. Whereas the dancer is more ethereal 
and tends to fly away like a balloon, the mime 
artist is held down by his body movements. 
HB Do you also find inspiration in art forms like 
Japanese kabuki, nd or butho, or African dances? 
M.M.: Yes, mime naturally borrows from the 
other arts: the Japanese theatre, as you rightly 
say, including bunraku, the traditional puppet 
theatre, from which I learned a great deal— 
I've toured Japan twenty or so times—and 
the Italian commedia dell’arte, the British 
music-hall, Indian and Cambodian dancing 
and contemporary Western dance. Not need- 
ing words to express itself, mime is in touch 
with all cultures 
HB You both design and perform your own pieces, 
and recreate and reinvent them with every 
performance. Do you have a favourite audience, one 
that is more receptive, more knowledgeable than 
others? 
M.M.: Mime has a grammar of its own that 
needs to be respected, an insistence upon clas- 
sical perfection that has to be constantly 
upheld and renewed. As to spectators, chil- 
dren are the most receptive; they make a mar- 
vellous audience. In the silent ceremony of 
mime, which demands intense concentration, 
they are in perfect communication with the 
performer. They are totally responsive; unbe- 
known to themselves, they are telling the 
story. When I play an angel, for instance, they 
identify so fully with the character that they 
become that angel themselves, thanks to a 
power of imagination that no adult possesses 
to the same degree. Like fairy stories, mime 
reinstates that imaginative faculty of theirs. 
Even though they sometimes become fidgety, 
they are spellbound. They think they are magi- 
cians, and so do I. 
HB Why are there so few female mimes? 
M.M.: That was true a few years ago, but more 
and more women now want to take it up. In 
nineteenth-century mime theatre, women 
played frivolous creatures or great men’s 
muses, seductresses or unfaithful wives. They 
were always a foil to the male characters. In 
her mime play La mémoire des femmes, Anne 
Sicco, my former wife, gave women a more 
important role than they had in my produc- 
tions, where they only played so-called female 
parts, as flower-sellers for instance. There are 
more and more parts now for women. Dozens 
of them are studying mime in my school. 
HB Why doesn’t the cinema show much interest in 
mime? 
M.M.: Charlie Chaplin and Harry Langdon 
were brilliant mimes. Films like Modern Times 
(1936), which Chaplin directed and in which 
he showed his incomparable inime artistry, 
have kept the world laughing for generations, 
but it is true that mime does not interest mod- 
ern directors. I am sure film-makers in the next 
century will take an interest in it. 
BM How do you manage to stay so young? 
M.M.: Although I am over seventy, I still find 
time to enjoy life. I also stick to a healthy diet, 
not eating much and not drinking alcohol. I 
have several projects on the go. As an illustra- 
tor I am working on a book for bibliophiles 
entitled La ballade de Paris et du monde. As 
an author, I have written a book about Bip 
that has becn translated into five languages, 
and another, entitled Pimporello, a poetical 
story about an Italian mime and a young 
orphan girl that I would like to adapt for the 
screen. Age means different things to different 
people, that’s all there is to it! (He mimes an 
old man who suddenly becomes a child.) W 
 
wit unisco (COuriik m may 1993 
©F
 
Da
rm
ig
ny
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 50](111704engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

At the crossroads of 
science and ethics 
Introducing a new UNESCO book series 
Ata time when the consequences of rapid developments in science and technology 
are increasingly difficult for non-specialists to grasp, citizens require tools to help 
them make informed choices in a wide range of fields. To meet this need UNESCO Pub- 
lishing has launched a series of books, entitled “Ethics”, aimed at a wide public and 
designed to present some complex issues facing modern societies within a global 
context and to stimulate reflexion on their ethical dimensions. 
: The first book in the series, The ethics of life, consists of contributions by noted 
scientists, philosophers, jurists and theologians from a variety of cultural, linguis- 
tic and religious backgrounds to a mecting on “Physiology and the Respect for 
Life” organized by the International Union of Physiological Sciences (IUPS) and 
UNESCO. It examines such questions as respect for life and the founding of bioethics, 
animal testing, the legal aspects of experimentation on the living, and respect for 
human life in research and medicine. 
Forthcoming titles in the Ethics series will focus on the ethics of women’s 
health, the ethics of energy consumption, ethics committees and the ethics of the 
Human Genome Project. [| 
The ethics of life 
edited by Denis Noble and Jean-Didier Vincent. 1998, 238 pp. 135 French francs. 
AUTHORS 
GEORGES B. KUTUKDIJIAN, a philosopher and anthropologist, 1s director of Unesco's Bioethics Unit. He is the author of several 
published works, and was co-editor, with Antonio Papisca, of a collective work on the nights of peoples published by CEDAM, 
Padua, 1291. 
JEAN AUDOUZE, a French astrophysicist, is a research supervisor at his country's National Centre of Scientific Research (CNRS). 
He has written several science books intended for the general public, including Regards sur fe visible (“Looking at the Visible”, with 
Jean-Claude Carnére, Plon publishers, Paris, 1996) and L'Univers (“The Universe”, “Que-sais je?” sertes, Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1997). He is the author of a report for Unesco preparatory to the creation of a World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific 
Knowledge and Technology. 
NICHOLAS A. ASHFORD, of the United States, 1s professor of technology and policy at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), where he teaches environmental law and policy. He 1s the author of Crisis in the Workplace: Occupational Disease 
and injury (MIT Press, 1976) and co-author of Chemical Exposures: Low Levels and High Stakes (John Wiley Press, second edition, 
1398). 
THEUNESCO 
COURIER 
51st YEAR 
Published monthly in 27 languages and in 
Braille by Unesco, The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 
75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax: {33) (0) 1 45 68.57.45 
e-mail unesco couner@unesco org 
Internet http //www unesce org 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition. Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edivon Aracel Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production Georges Servat 
lllustrations: Anane Bailey (Tel (33) (0) 
1.45 68 46 90) 
Documentation* José Banaag 
(Tel {33){0)1 45 68. 45 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and 
press. Solange Belin 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68 46 87) 
Film duphcation: Daniel Meister 
Secretanat: Annie Brachet 
(Tel {33){0)1 4568 47 15), 
Administrative Assistant Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish 
and Korean. (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68.45.69) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Inna Utkina (Moscow) 
German Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic Fawzi Abdel Zaher {Cairo) 
Italian. Gianluca Formichi (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal {Delhi} 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa {Madras) 
Persian Jalil Shaht (Teheran) 
Portuguese Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de 
Janeiro) 
Urdu: Mirza Muhammad Mushir {Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras 1» Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay" Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Swahili, Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese Feng Mingxia (Bejing) 
Bulgarian Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Smhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finmsh: Ritta Saarinen (Helsinki) 
Basque Juxto Egafia (Donostia) 
Thar Duangtip Sunntatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese Ho Tien Nghi (Hanoi) 
Bengali: Kafll uddin Ahmad (Dhaka) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev} 
Galician: Xaber Senin Fernandez (Santiago de 
Composteta) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax: (33) (0) 1.45.68 57 45 
Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése Hardy 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68.45.65), Jacqueline 
Louise-Julie, Manichan Ngonekeo, Mohamed 
Salah El Din (Tel. {33){0) 1 45 68 49,19) 
Customer service: Miche! Ravassard, 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68.45.91) 
Accounts: {Tel {33) (0) 1 45 68 45 65) 
Shipping’ Daniel Meister 
(Tel (33)(0)1 45.68 47 50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel: (33){0)1 45 68 45.65 
1 year 211 French francs 2 years: 396 FF 
Students. 1 year 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues 72 FF 
Developing countries, 
1 year: 132 French francs 2 years: 211 FF, 
Payment can be made with any convertible 
currency to the order of Unesco or by Visa, 
Eurocard or Mastercard 
individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit ine reads “Reprinted from the 
Unesco Courier”, plus date of Issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor Signed articles reprinted must 
bear author's name Non-copynght photos will be supplied 
on request Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon cov 
enng postage Signed articles express the opinions of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent the opinions of 
Unesco or those of the editors of the Unesco Couner Photo 
captions and headlines are written by the UNEsco Courier 
staff The boundanes on maps published in the magazine 
do not imply official endorsement or acceplance by Unesco 
or the United Nations The Unesco Courier 1s produced in 
microform (mweroflm and/or microfiche) by (1) Unesco, 7 
Plage de Fontenoy, 75700 Pans, (2) University Microfiling 
{Xerox}, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 US A, (3)N CR Micro- 
card Edition, indian Head Inc , 111 West 40th Street, New 
York, U.S A, (4) Bell and Howell Co, Old Mansfield Road, 
Wooster, Ohio 44691, US A 
GORDON BENNETT, a Canadian public servant, 1s chief of policy and strategic planning at the National Historic Sites Directorate, 
Parks Canada. He is the author of Yukon Transportation: A History (1978) and of many articles on cuftural heritage policy. 
NIKITA LOPOUCHKINE, a Canadian public servant, 1s acting director of his country's Natural Resources Branch at the National 
Parks Directorate. He is the author of many works on ecology and the restoration of ecosystems, 
JENS ERIK FENSTAD, of Norway, is professor of mathematical logic at the University of Oslo and a member of the Norwegjan 
Academy of Letters and Sciences. He 1s chairman of the Standing Committee for the Physical and Engineering Sciences of the 
European Science Foundation, 
MICHAEL KIRBY, an Australian High Court justice, is a member of Unesco’s International Bioethics Committee and of the Ethics, 
Law and Social Issues Committee of the Human Genome Organization. 
FRANCE BEQUETTE 1s a Franco-Amenican Journalist specializing in environmental questions. . 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL C1 - MAY 1998 i 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE 
PARLESN MPP. 
Photocomposition, photogravure: 
Le Courner de | Unesco 
Impression. Maulde & Renou 
ISSN 0041-5278 N° 5-1998-0P)-98-571 A 
ELISABETH BAUDOURIAN, an Armenian-born French journalist, 1s general co-ordinator of Nouvelles d'Arménie magazine. 
MICHEL FARGEON is a French journalist specializing in the performing arts. 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco-American musicologist, has recently published La musique sud-américaine, Rythmes et danses d'un 
continent (“South American Music: A Continents Rhythms and Dances”, Gallimard, Panis, 1997). 
THE UNESCO Courier B MAY 1998

## [Page 51](111704engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO's World Reports -— 
topical and engaging references 
| 
i ____Communication 
Teo hers 
wid aching 
mwa 
  
  
  
5 He Repo wT Er + 
Repo rt The organization and conduct of science 
The media and the challenge and technology around the world and 
of the new technologies the role played by science in resolving 
I'he digital revolution and the major issues facing human society such 
convergence of technologies have as food security, water resources and 
radically altered the world’s media disease. 
landscapes, giving rise to a number (approx. 300 pp., available in May 1998) 
of concerns, from disparities 
between regions to risks stemmin ctw en reg on 5 ons § te n ng World Culture Report 
from the globalization of media and 
the standardization of contents. 1998 : 
(298 pp.) First edition of an intercultural report 
that analyses the multiple links between 
culture, development and identity, 
backed up by a wealth of indicators. 
(approx. 350 pp., available in June 1998) 
I ee” rT ET Bt or PR Ro i p———— i ECF f= 
n 
| 
k 
IIARND AYA, 16 ¥ ' 4 i f ' NH is | Cd y 
abLL LA yyy wh oo 
b 
; 
i 
: 
iy 
m , Lhe & Eo hs. © TREAT me eT TERE AE BRE 
World Education 
Report 1998 
Teachers and Teaching in a 
Changing World 
Lack of resources, lack of support, 
lack of training, poorly equipped 
schools and overcrowded 
classrooms: this new edition of the 
World Education Report focuses 
on the world’s 57 million teachers. 
(178 pp.) 
World Communication 
 
  
  
World Information Report 
1997/98 
A comprehensive picture of library and 
information services on the five 
continents and an analysis of the 
challenges facing this field, from the 
future of books and copyright to the 
information highways and economic 
intelligence. 
(390 pp.) 
World Science Report 
1998 
 
UNESCO Publishing 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75732 Paris O7 SP 
Fax: +33 1 45 68 57 41 
Internet: 
http://www.unesco.org/ 
publishing 
   

## [Page 52](111704engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

   
“THEME OF NEXT MONTH'S ISSUE: 
    
vi 
E 
Bh 40. atin 
WATER: WILL THERE 13 ENOUGH? 
 
A ¥ 4 3 - 
# # v 4 * 
: Ny . . ’ i 4 : : ’ 
¥ ¥ 3 » “a ) 3 # 
z » J y ' 
: - 
oh J 
ol . . » Ap : 
- r 
» ' : ‘ " : " 
+ 1 . . } . . } » 
4 r . oy j i ’ : 
' | \ . 3 4 ' » J 
- al 
¥ 
y 3 “ : ‘ Wi i 1 
$ . - - » B I U § - 
i : . : 
wu ' ot i ih a; : | 
» 4 4 No) ; 
o EB $ 
4 a w ‘ 
iv x 4 R , 
4 of * ’ r , * fF " i " 
: : p F's 
' » 
: 
] 3 - 3 1 
3  L fo : a Fes . 
i. J A : : J } 
i v : : , pa 
 
vor ao a 
  