# [073809](073809engo.pdf) 16

## [Page 1](073809engo.pdf#page=1) 3

### IGNORE

  
  
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume I..—No 7. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 20 Francs. 
al 
AUGUST 1948. 
KEY 
 
CATORS 
  
 


### 73810: Executive Board hears UNESCO progress report

Executive Board Hears 
Unesco Progress Re, port 
T its eighth session, held July 12- 17, the Unesco Executive Board 
heard progress reports on efforts being made to mobilize the.resour- 
ces of education, science and the arts throughout the world in the 
cause of peace and international understanding. Activities to be 
carried out during the remainder of this year and a draft world 
programme and budget for 1949 were also under consideration. 
The -eighteen-man Board, 
under the chairmanship of Dr. E. 
Ronald Walker, first studied a 
report of developments since its 
sixth session (February 12-15, 
1948) presented by Dr. Julian 
Huxley. This reviewed progress 
in the various fields of the orga- 
_nhisation's activity, ranging from 
‘Pilot Projects’ in Fundamental 
Education for under-privileged 
people and reconstruction aid to 
educational institutions in war- 
wrecked regions to the sponsor- 
ship of study-grants and fellow- 
ships and assistance in the crea- 
tion of an International Theatre 
Institute. 
Huxley Reports Advances 
Dr. Huxley reported that mn 
1948 grants-in-aid to internation- 
al ‘scientific societies engaged 
on work in furtherance of 
Unesco’'s activities would total 
$231,174. These funds would ne 
used for the travel expenses of 
scientific workers to conferences 
and symposia, for publications 
and for assistance to internatioi- 
al laboratories and stockrooms. 
The four Field Science Cooper- 
ation Offices Unesco has estab- 
lished——in Latin America, the 
Middle East, East Asia and 
South  Asia—are engaged in 
collecting, exchanging and dissem- 
inating scientific information 
between those regions and other 
areas of the world. 
Wherever the facilities permit, 
Dr. Huxley said, questions are 
met locally by the Unesco field 
officers, but there is a continual 
flow of enquiries reaching the 
Paris headquarters which are 
handled with the help of pro- 
gramme specialists. 
The report pointed out, for 
example, that a “List of Scien- 
tific Works published in the 
Middle East” has been produced 
and distributed by the Cairo 
Field Science Office. “This is the 
beginning of a flow of general 
information”, Dr. Huxley said 
“which should be of use to other 
parts of the world as well as to 
the region itself”. 
Dr. Huxley referred to the work 
of Unesco in assistance to inter- 
national voluntary work camps 
- at present operating in most 
countries in Turope. Libraries. 
each consisting of several hundred 
books and pamphlets on interna- 
tional subjects in English, French 
® Lin Yutang Joins Unes- 
co. Page 2, 
® Unesco’s Role 
Science. Page 3. 
® Press, Film, Radio for 
Peace. Center Page. 
in 
¢ Exchange of Persons 
Programme Advan- 
ces. Page 6. 
¢ World Symposium on 
Human Rights. P. 8.     
and German, had been assembled 
and distributed to thirty such 
camps during July. 
In the field of Fundamental 
Education, Dr. Huxley spoke of 
significant progress in the “Pilot 
Projects” sponsored jointly by 
Unesco and the governments con- 
cerned. These projects —exper- 
iments in testing the latest tech- 
niques and materials in bring- 
ing a basic education to under- 
privileged people—are under way 
or in advaneed stages of prepar- 
ation in China, East Africa, 
Haiti and Peru. 
The U.S. Commission for Inter-! 
national! Educational Reconstruc- 
tion, Dr. Huxley further reported 
has announced the distribution 
of more than eighty million 
dollars in materials during 1947- 
48 to countries whose education- 
al facilities were damagec¢ dur- 
ing the war. These distributions 
consisted of various types of 
school supplies, books and perio- 
dicals, of the granting of fellow- 
ships and study grants and of 
technical advisory missions. 
The Executive Board then con- 
sidered Unesco’s cooperation with 
the United Nations." its Special- 
ized Agencies and other interna- 
tional organizations. It instruc- 
ted the Secretariat to develop 
further Unesco’s representation 'n 
the main cultural regions of the 
world in order to make more 
effective its programr.e of action. 
{Cont. page 2, col. 4-5.) 
  
  
 
aT FOUR SE 
    
Study Teaching 
For a World Society 
OUR world-wide educational seminars are in progress this month, 
three of them sponsored by Unesco and the fourth by the Pane 
American Union with Unesco's cooperatien. In the kroades; interna 
tional effort tc date in bringing leading educators from all parts of 
the globe together for study and exchange of views, the seminars are 
  
  
Ci T i a 
re gt ae 
dey 9 
Lh | 2 
- } a 
Educators from many nations at Adelphi College, New York, study 
teaching techniques for developing a One-World consciousness 
among youth everywhere as a basis for peace and understanding. 


### 73811: New international agency to help war orphans

  
New International Agency 
To Help War Orphans 
Important steps forward towards the care of children handicapped 
by the war were taken last month with the creation of an International 
Federation of Children’s Communities at Trogen, Switzerland. The 
new agency was formed during a conference of Directors of Children's 
Villages which had been called by Unesco, July 4 to 1i, 
Some forty experts from twelve 
nations attended the week-long 
conference which decided to or- 
ganize children’s communities 
into an international group. The 
resulting Federation will co- 
ordinate community activities 


### 73812: University leaders meet at Utrecht Conference

  
University Leaders Meet 
At Utrecht Conference 
World leaders in higher educa- 
tion met early this month at a 
Preparatory Conference ot Repre- 
sentatives of Universities mn 
Utrecht, the Netherlands. The 
Unesco - sponsored conference— 
first of its kind since 1937—provid- 
ed an opportunity for top-level 
educators to discuss common prob- 
lems and to provide mutual assis- 
tance in their solution. 
Some three ‘hundred university 
representatives from thirty-two 
countries are attending the twelve- 
day meetings, August 2-13, which 
were presided over by Dr HL 
Kruyt, Chairman of the Nether- 
lands National Commission for 
Unesco. 
In his opening address to the 
conference, held in the old audi- 
torium of the University of 
Utrecht, Dr. Kruyt expressed the 
hope that the meetings “with the 
firm will to promote higher edu- 
cation all over the world will give 
results which will be beneficial to 
us all and which will promote that 
mutual understanding that always 
leads to mutual respect”. 
Mr. Walter H.C. Laves, Deputy 
Director-General of Unesco. creat- 
ed a considerable stir on the open- 
ing day by asserting that in his 
opinion the world’s institutions of 
higher learning had not yet learn- 
ed how to form the citizens of a 
world community. He called on 
universities to grasp the leader- 
ship which can give the world an 
understanding of interdependence 
ol nations and a One-World way 
of living. 
Stress 
conference, he pointed out its 
purpose as that of promoting in- 
ternational understanding through 
providing an opportunity o: repre- 
sentatives of universities through- 
out the world to discuss their 
common problems and to arrive 
at common solutions. 
Mr. Laves emphasized that such 
discussions would be useless unless 
they were practical enough to en- 
compass the realities of the pre- 
sent-day world. “Research alone”, 
he said, “is not enough. Positive 
steps are required... to ensure that 
understanding is made widespread 
and that the necessary trained 
leadership is available to conduct 
the affairs of this one world”. 
(Cont. page 2, col. 4.) 
ing the importance of the: 
  
at Trogen. 
throughout the world, sponsor 
psychological research, train per- 
sonnel, raise funds for the main- 
tenance of such villages and will 
work closely with United Nations 
agencies interested in the prob- 
lems of war-handicapped youth. 
Studying the problems which 
face organizers and sponsors of 
children’s communities, the con- 
ference found the most urgent 
to be that of equipment and 
other material aid. Many com- 
munities are struggling to func- 
tion without government aid of 
any kind and are entirely 
dependent on gifts and subscrip- 
tions for their maintenance. 
A second major problem—one 
of high importance to Unesco— 
was how educational and psycho- 
Ingical methods may best be 
adapted and developed so as to 
assist this tyoe of child to become 
a useful and happy citizen. 
It was evident, therefore, that 
only by linking up children’s vil- 
lages throughout the world could 
the most effective work be carried 
out for the war’s most tragic vic- 
tims. Unesco was asked bv a 
conference resolution to gssist the 
new Federation in this way by 
organizing two meetings a year 
for village directors, by making 
available a technical service for 
information and psycho-pedago- 
gical consultation and by extend- 
ing its reconstruction programme 
to include the children’s com- 
munities. 
Two important resolutions were 
also adopted regarding interna- 
tional action for the protection 
of children. The first of these 
declared: 
(Cont. page 2, col. 1.)   
keyed to the theme of “Educa~ 
tion for a World Society”. 
At Adelphi College, Garden 
City, New York, ‘thirty-two key 
educators from twenty-three na- 
tions are studying methods of 
“Teaching about the United Na- 
tions and its Specialized Agen- 
cies”. 
In Podebrady, thirty miles east 
of Prague, Czechoslovakia, twenty- 
eight participants from thirtean 
countries are examining problems 
of “Childhood Education between 
the ages of 3 and 13". 
A third group of international 
seminarists, forty in number and 
representative of eighteen dif- 
ferent countries, are studying 
methods of “The Education and 
Training of Teachers”. This study 
centre is located at Ashridge, 
Berkhampstead, Herts, in England. 
Far distant, in Caracas, Vene- 
zuela, a fourth seminar is being 
sponsored by the Pan-American 
Union with the close cooperation 
of Unesco to work out regional 
problems of giueaiion in Latin 
America. 
Each of the seminars piays an 
important role in the educational 
programme of Unesco, for through 
them the Organization seeks not 
only to raise general educational 
levels in its Member States, but 
to strengthen the concept of a 
World Society through schools 
among the youth of all countries. 
They are a follow-up to the first 
Unesco seminar held in 1947 at 
Sévres, France, which was attend. 
ed by nearly one hundred leading 
educators from all parts of the 
world. 
. The seminar in New York ie 
under the direction of Dr. Y.R, 
Chao, prominent Chinese edu- 
cator. It was begun on July 7 and 
is continuing through August 18. 
Close liaison is being maintained 
with the United Nations which 
has supplied several eminent, lec= 
. turers. 
Hear Eisenhower Address 
Received by the President of 
Columbia University in New York, 
the student -educators heard 
Dwight D. Eisenhower, former 
Commander-in-Chief of Allied 
Forces in Western Europe, declare 
that were the efforts of Unesco 
successful in establishing amity 
among nations “there would be 
no more need ‘or _eople t« carry 
on activities in which I have been 
busily engaged for the past forty 
years. 
“I am certain that in the long 
run”, he said, “no matter how 
discouraging it may sometimes be, 
this 1s the only sound approach 
to the whole question—the only 
permanent approach. If we can 
gain a sufficient understanding of 
each other cnd an appreciation of 
decency among peoples as between 
ourselves at home, I think we will 
have made real progress”. 
During six weeks, the.educators 
will exchange teaching experience 
and techniques and will develop 
effective methods of bringing the 
work and the purposes of the 
United Nations to the attention of 
youth throughout the world. By 
the close of the seminar, each will 
have begun a special development 
project in his own field. 
(Cont. page 6, col. 5.)

## [Page 2](073809engo.pdf#page=2) 4

### 73810: Executive Board hears UNESCO progress report

UNESCO COURIER Vol. I.—No 7. 
 


### 73813: New international agency

### 73811: New international agency to help war orphans

New International Agency 
(Padre Antonio Rivolla, founder of the first “Children’s Village” 
in Italy, was one of five Italian delegates to the Conference of Directors 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
“That whereas this meceling of 
Directors of Children’s Commun- 
ities regards the methods of oc 
cupation employed in the last 
war, the kidnapping and exter 
mination of children, as crimes 
against humanity, be it resolved. 
“That Unesco be requested to 
appeal, through the Economic 
and Social Council... to the Se- 
curity Council of the United Na- 
tions, for insertion and endor- 
sement within international le: 
gislation of provisions which 
would outlaw crimes of aggression 
against the welfare and happiness 
of the child and agains! the vital 
biological sirengh of any nation.” 
The second proposal, which 
followed closely the theme of 
several resolutions adopted dur- 
ing the second session of the 
Unesco General Conference at 
Mexico last November, declared: 
“That all children should be 
given adequate care, regardless o} 
religion, race, or the political 
opinions of their parenl!s’” 
In setting up the Federation 
of Children’s Communities, the 
Trogen conference made clear its 
purpose would be primarily to 
permit an exchange of views and 
experiences between communities, 
an exchange of personnel and 
children, the ° coordination of 
research, and the raising of 
funds and other assistance. 
The Pestalozzi Village Associa- 
tion, which supports one of the 
most. successful such commun- 
ities and site of the conference, 
made a gift of ten thousand 
Swiss francs towards the cost of 
maintaining a Secretariat for the 
Federation. Headquarters for the 
Federation will be at Trogen, 
and Dr. Robert Préaut, Director 
  
  
of Children’s Villages at Trogen, Switzerland, from July 4-11, His 
village, situated at Santa Marinella-Civilavecchia, oulside Rome, has 
been in operation for the pasi three years and is regarded as one of 
the most successful such experiments. In 'he following article, Don 
Rivolta tells something of how the experiment was nade to work.) 
Despite the 
passage of time, 
children in 
many countries 
are still suffer- 
ing from physi-   
Padre Antonio RIVOLTA 
Founder Children’s Village, 
Rome, 
tions which are 
not freely reco- 
gnized as neces- 
sary and accept- 
ed. There are no 
enclosures in 
  
cal poverty and 
spiritual distress. The picture of 
many children buried under the 
wreckage of houses destroyed by 
bombardment is but a symbol of 
the other, more serious and pa- 
thetic damage to the delicate fibre 
of the spirit, in the hidden, vital 
realm of developing psychology. 
From the wreckage of war, ra- 
gamuffins have emerged, adoles- 
cents quite alone in the world, 
orphans, cripples, homeless chil- 
dren, physically and morally 
abandoned. 
Sceptics and- pessimists have 
raised the objection: “These boys 
who have been used to unrestric- 
ted freedom, an adventurous life 
"and easy money can never be 
persuaded to leave the streets.” 
‘The pessimists have been pro- 
ved. wrong. 
We have been persuading the 
boys to leave the streets for three 
years at the children’s village 
near Santa Marinella-Civitavec- 
chia, the first such village to be 
established in Italy. 
As soon as ithe Allied armies 
reached Rome in August, 1944, 
efforts were made—as & first step 
—to give such chiidren a bowl 
of soup and a piece of bread (dif- 
ficult as it was then to obtain) 
and some opportunity for play. 
That was the beginning of the 
  
A workshop for children at the Pestalozzi Village. 
of the Hameau Ecole, Ile-de- 
France, was elected Chairman of 
the Pederation’s Coordinating 
Committee. 
At a press conference following 
the conference, Dr. Préaut ap- 
pealed for world-wide support for 
the villages so that the many 
thousands of war orphans may 
be restored to physical and 
mental health. The new agency, 
he said, is setting up centres in 
Europe and America 10 receive 
funds and much-needed equip- 
ment. : 
«(Information about the rece:v- 
ing centres may be obtained from 
Unesco’s Reconstruction Depart- 
ment, 19 Avenue Kléber, Paris, 
16; or from the Commission for 
Iniernational Educational Re- 
construction, 744 Jackson Place, 
N.W., Washingten, D.C. 6.) 
ther members of the Fede- 
ration’s Coordinating Committee, 
Dr. Préaut announced, include 
Professor Ernesto Codignola, Di- 
rector of the Scuola-Citta Pesta- 
lozzi, Florence, Italy. Mr. Arthur 
Bill, Educational Director of the 
Pestalozzi Village, Trogen, Swit- 
zerland; M. René de Cooman, 
President of the Marcinelle 
Children’s Village, Charleroi, 
Belgium; and M. Henri Julien, 
Director of the République d’En- 
fants, Moulin-Vieux, France, Two 
places have been left open for 
village directors from Eastern 
European countries. 
Delegates and observers to ithe 
Trogen conference agreed that 
the meetings were marked above 
all by an atmosphere of good- 
will, sincerity and mutual respect. 
Deeply-felt interest in the prob- 
lems on hand was everywhere vi- 
sible. And at the conclusion of 
the meetings it was clear that a 
significant step forward—and a 
much needed one—had been 
taken towards practical help for 
the youthful viciims of total war. 
first assistance centres in Rome 
and out of them there developed 
the “Children’s Village”, which 
aims at taking in and re-edu- 
cating street children between the 
ages of ten and seventeen. 
The keystone of life in the Vil- 
lage is freedom; freedom from 
external restrictions and also 
from any internal restric- 
"the others. 
"School. 
to establish an 
the Village, no 
bars, no fences, but only the psy- 
chological boundaries established 
by the comraunity as a whole. 
Each boy's personal freedom 1s 
limited only by the freedom of 
The principle of 
freedom is also applied with ve- 
gard to religion. 
The head and director of the 
administration is the *“Maycr” 
who is the highest authority in 
the community. The mayor is 
elected every month, by secret 
ballot and an absolute majority 
by all the citizens. The newly 
elected mayor submits a list of 
his colleagues to a general as- 
sembly for approval—i.e. his_ad- 
visers on health, school affairs, 
public works and finance. Each of 
them in turn is made responsible 
for one of those specific branches 
of the community's every day life. 
One of the most striking featu- 
res of the Village is that a spe- 
cial currency called ‘Merits’ has 
been established for it. It is the 
most influential factor in the pe- 
dagogic system on which the 
. boys’ re-education is based. Self- 
interest was the only incentive 
known to the street-boys in their 
disorderly, dangerous and not al- 
ways clearly directed activities. 
All the reformed boys in the 
Village are given elementary edu- 
cation in the State Primary 
This is a part of our 
work which. although it is so im- 
portant and so delicate. has not 
yet been fitted completely into 
our educational system because 
we are obliged to follow the offi- 
cial instructions, principles and 
standards of judgment. 
We are therefore taking steps 
experimental 
school which we hope will be 
approved by the central authori 
ties. 
At the present time, our 
greatest difficulty is in the 
training of educators free from 
the traditional passive attitude. 
The educator must be an artist 
but at the same time he mus! 
understand fully the individual 
he is’ to teach; to teach suc- 
cessfully he must be thoroughly 
familar with the methods of ins- 
truction. 
We should like to see Children’s 
Villages set up in every couniry 
in an atmosphere of close co- 
operation, which will ensure for 
the new post-war generations a 
healthier and better-balanced 
life, both physically and spiri- 
tually, for the greater happiness 
of the individual and society. 
  
Dr. -Lin Yutang, world-re- 
nowned Chinese author, has 
joined the Unesco Secretariat as 
Head of the Arts and Letters 
Division. 
Dr. Lin is the author of a 
dozen books, some of which been 
translated into fourteen langua- 
ges. He was also the founder and 
editor of three Chinese literary 
magazines, 
Lin Yutang Joins Unesco 
peration (League of Nations) at 
Geneva. 
Since 1934, he has published 
no fewer than ten novels and 
non-fiction works in the United 
States, including “My country 
and my People”, “Importance oi 
  
He is credited 
with having in- 
vented the Chinese 
typewriter. 
A student at 
Harvard and the 
Universities of Jena 
and Leipzig, Dr. 
Lin received his 
Masters Degree a 
Harvard and his 
Doctorate at Leip- § 
zig. Following his 
studies, he became 
8 Professor of En- 
glish at Peking National Uni- 
versity, 
Later, he was the English 
editor-in-chief of the Academia 
Sinica, the highest Chinese aca- 
demy for research. In 1931, 
Dr. Lin was a member of the 
Committee on Intellectual Coo- 
  
  
 
Living”, “Moment in Peking”, 
“A Leaf in the Storm”, “With 
Love and Irony”, “Wisdom of 
China and India”, “Wisdom of 
: Confucius”, "“Be- 
1 tween Tears and 
Laughter”, “Vigil 
of a Nation”, “His- 
tory of the Press 
and Public Opinion 
in China”. 
Two further books 
are scheduled for 
publication this au- 
tumn: “Chinatown 
Family”, a novel, 
and “Wisdom of 
Laotse”, for the 
Modern Library. 
Dr. Lin is mar- 
ried and has three daughters. 
His appointment to the Unesco 
Secretariat was announced by 
the Unesco Executive Board 
during its eighth session last 
July. Dr. Lin took up his duties 
on August 1 as Head of an 
increasingly important division of 
the organization. 


### 73812: University leaders meet at Utrecht Conference

  
University Leaders 
{Continued from Page 1.) 
Dr. Clarence E. Beeby, Assistant 
Director-General of Unesco, then 
spoke on the “Purpose and Scope 
of the Conference” in which he 
called on the delegates to assume 
the leading role rather than have 
Unesco as the most active parti- 
cipant. 
University problems throughout 
    
the world, Dr. Beeby declared, 
were very similar. The universities 
of today are overcrowded, lack 
trained personnel and equipment 
and, more important, sufficient 
funds are not made available by 
governments. 
Regarding the scope of the con- 
ference, Dr. Beeby pointed out 
five main fields of study which 
would be covered: the changing 
role of the university, better aca- 
demic standards, the financing of 
higher education, university teach 
ing of international understand-  
Dr. HR. Kruyt, Chairman of the Uirecht Conference, addresses 
delegates to the meeti ng of university leaders. 
Post-War 
Student Film 
A documentary film, spon- 
sored by Unesco and the World 
Student Service Fund, portraying 
student life and reconstruction 
in the war-devastated universities 
of Europe and Asia, is being 
prepared for screening this au- 
tumn before American student 
groups. 
Entitled “Letter from a 
Student”, the film is being made 
by “The World Today”, New 
York documentary film produ- 
cers. Information about its 
availability can be obtained 
from the World Student Service 
Fund, 20 West 40th Street, New 
York, 18, or from Unesco (New 
York Office) at 405 E. 42nd 
Street, New York, 17. 
The film opens with scenes 
of an American college campus, 
where students are meeting to 
raise funds for education re- 
construction. The camera then 
moves to war-torn centres of 
learning overseas, while voices 
of students in war-devastated 
countries describe their way of 
life, their need- for aid, and 
their own efforts af reconstruac- 
tion. Scenes of reconstruction 
work being carried out by 
Unesco and the World Student 
Relief are also included. Runn- 
ing time of the film is 20 minu-   tes. 
ing, and methods of cont‘nuing 
international cooperation among 
universities. 
M. André Allix, French d. legate 
and Rector of the University of 
Lyons, and Sir Chandreshwar 
Prasad Narayan Singh, Indian . 
Union delegate and Vice Chan- 
cellor of Patna University were 
elected Vice-Presidents of the con- 
ference. 
Four general sessions of the con- 
ference are being held, Dr. Geor- 
ges Scelles, of the Faculty of Law 
of Paris, addressed the delegates 
on relations betweer. higher edu- 
cation and the state and Dr, 
George Stoddard, President of the 
University of - Illinois, spoke on 
“New Horizons in University 
Development”. Dr. Julian Huxley 
spoke on the role of Unesco in the 
field of higher education. 
In addition to the general ses- 
sions, regular meetings of partici- 
pants and observers are held, as 
well as sectional meetings to study 
current problems vital to univer- 
sities throughout the world. 
Jnesco had invited all govern- 
ments to send delegates to the 
conference, and paid the expenses 
of a limited number of partiei- 
pants from its forty-one member 
states. 
The Netherlands government, 
through its National Commission 
for Unesco and a local committee 
of the University of Utrecht, 
handled the details of accom- 
modation and entertainment for 
the university leaders who at- 
tended. 
 
The Executive Board studies Unesco's report on progress. 
   Executive Board 
(Continued from page 1.) 
A study is now under way, it was 
reported, of possibilities of esta- 
blishing such a cultural centre 
for the Middle East. 
After considering an appeal 
from the Royal Greek Govern- 
ment concerning the deportation 
of children from Greece, the 
Board unanimously voted that 
Unesco should study the report 
of the special United Nations 
Commission now investigating 
the Balkan situation and 
should “offer its services within 
the field of its competence to 
these children consistently with 
the recommendations of the Com- 
mission”. 
The question of the admission 
0 membership of ‘dimunitive 
states’ was discussed following a 
request from Monaco to join 
Unesco. Final decision was defer- 
red to the next session. of the 
General Conference which will 
also hear a report of various solu- 
tions including an alternative to 
full membership. 
Proposals for the world pro-- 
gramme and the budget for 
Unesco’s work during 1949 will be 
forwarded to Member States for 
their consideration prior to the 
next session of the General Con- 
ference. A draft programme, as 
prepared by the Board's Pro- 
gramme Committee, was adopted 
for recommendation to the Gene 
ral Conference, subject to various 
changes t0 be made by the Secre- 
tariat.

## [Page 3](073809engo.pdf#page=3) 3

### IGNORE

Vol. I.—No 7. UNESCO COURIER 


### 73814: UNESCO's role in science, a catalysis for progress

Unesco’s Role in Science 
A Catalysis for Progress 
CIENTISTS have always formed a world brotherhood. Their 
 ) problems, and the solutions they sometimes find, are truly 
human and therefore international. What wonderful scope for 
the development of collaboration and brotherhood between the 
different countries of the world! The only spade-work needed for 
mutual understanding between scientists is the mere understanding 
of the same language: if they have this. two botanists or two 
physicists from the most distant continents are immediately drawn 
  
together oy strong common interests. * 
The task of the 
~ Unesco Science De- 
partment is to cul- 
tivate this favourable 
soil, to extend it 
beyond purely learned 
or scientific circles, to 
throw ‘t open to all 
types of technicians, 
those who apply science 
at all levels, those 
who are interested in 
following its progress 
and those who receive 
its benefits—to every- 
one, in fact. 
How can Unesco ac- 
complish this immense 
task which holds out 
such hope for the fu- 
ture of peace? It has 
a very small staff and 
funds in comparison 
with certain national 
or even international 
bodies also devoted to 
  
EY 
science. But Unesco the French Ministry of National Educa- 
has one unique ad- tion. An eminent French physicist, Dr. Au- 
vantage, due to its ger is the author of many scientific works, 
regarding x-rays, neuirons and cosmic situation at the very 
hub of world interest 
and to its prestige as 
the only cultural orga- 
nization with an au- 
thority which is re- 
cognized and upheld 
by the great majority 
of nations. This pri- 
vileged position should 
enable the Science 
Division. even with li- 
mited means, to achie- 
ve important results, 
thanks to ‘*catalysis” 
if I may use that 
technical word. 
Catalysis is a physico-chemi- 
cal phenomenon, enabling certain 
bodies, called catalysts, to bring 
about important chemical trans- 
formations in their surroundings 
without themselves undergoing 
any noticeable change. Actually, 
catalysts do no concrete work; 
but they “guide” the chemical 
evolution of their surroundings. 
If they are placed in a medium, 
which possesses the necessary 
“potential” for transformation, 
but is prevented by various 
frictions, barriers and deviations 
from following the desired path, 
the catalyst, by its presence and 
by action. so subtle that it is not 
used up in the process, causes 
the barriers to be overcome, the 
deviations avoided, and success- 
fully completes the evolution. 
The final result is often better 
than could ever have been 
achieved if the system had been 
left to itself, even for a long 
time. For example, in its 
unguided evolution, the system 
would have strayed into some 
by-path, which would have led 
it in quite another direction. 
I think that the work of 
Unesco can be described largely 
on the analogy of this catalysis. 
For example, one of the tasks 
in which the Science Depart- 
ment has already had conside- 
rable success, is in bringing 
about by “catalysis” the i.rma- 
tion of new international orga- 
nizations. These organizations 
may be in the form of scientific 
unions, which group the world’s 
specialists in a certain field, 
through their common interests. 
8& There is also the crealion of 
international resear.1 institutes, 
where scientists, working in 
specialized laboratories, can mee: 
and make a strong, concerted 
effort in certain fixed directions: 
detailed studies of the resources 
of certain territories or parts of 
the world with a specific charac- 
ter (Hylear Amazon, and later, 
perhaps, some arid or desert 
zone), studies of certain vital 
problems for humanity, such as 
contagious diseases, telegraph 
and telephone transmissions by 
electric waves, etc. 
rays 
  
In all these cases, it is neces- 
sary to guide and co-ordinate 
i) 
Protessor Pierre Auger, 
Natural 
to Unesco Director 
Born in Paris in 1899, Dr. 
ded the Ecole Normale Superieure and be- 
came do Professor of Physics at the Sor. 
bonne uhere he obtained his Doctorate of 
Science During ihe war years, 
“in the United States and Canada on atomic 
research. Following 
member of the French Atomic Commission. 
Dr. Auger was a member of the French 
Delegation to the Unesco General Confe- 
rence in Mexico and, until his appoiniment 
to the Secretariat, 
Executive Board of Unesco and its 
President. 
     
the Director of 
Unesco, 
wag from April, 1945, until his appointment 
Sciences Department of 
of Higher Education of 
Auger atten- 
he worked 
the war, he was a 
was a member of the 
Vice-     
the forces of eo-operatio.. and 
understanding throughout the 
world, which cannot by themsel- 
ves find the logical or the admi- 
nistrative means of action. 
For example, 
world, 
in the medical 
it had been realized for 
a long time that numerous me-| 
dical congresses were being held 
haphazardly in different 
of the world without any co-|: 
ordinating authority. By 
for these congresses, order can 
immediately be brought into all}: 
this activity, and the work both}: 
of organizers and participants be? 
made far more effective. 
I take this opportunity of 
showing the necessity of colla- 
boration between the different 
specialized agencies of the United 
Nations, Unesco, WHO, 
and the Social and Economic 
Council: the activity I have ‘us: 
outlined is one 
Unesco and the World 
Organizations. 
wealth 
But the Unesco Science Depart- 
ment has not only to supply an 
immediate remedy for problems 
which, as everyone knows, can 
and must ne solved. It must look 
further, and make plans for the 
future which :t may take years 
to carry out. These clans must oe 
studied with the experts, review- 
ed and examined by authorities 
throughout the world. so that an 
atmosphere and a favourable opi- 
nion may be created, in order 
that they may finally be realized 
without too much effort. 
I could perhaps give as an 
instance of this long-range work 
the organizaion of the immense 
labour of editing, publishing ana 
classifying abstracts of original 
articles. People are coming to 
realize the need for such an or- 
ganization on a world scale and 
it must be extended later to the 
publication of original, scientific 
literature itself. 
It will readily be seen that the). 
type of activity described here as 
catalysis can be carried out by a 
fairly small number of neople, pro- 
vided they are sufficiently quali- 
fied, and need not cost a great]. 
deal. It must be added, however, 
that Unesco cannot abandon the 
"tance, at least unti, 
By - 
Prof. Pierre AUGER 
Director, Natural Sciences 
Department.     
bodies and institutions which al- 
ready existed or which have been 
formed through its organizing ac- 
tivity. It must ‘continue to give 
them material and financial assis- 
they have 
attained ful. maturity. In certain 
cases permanent aid must be 
given, owing to the universal cha- 
racter of the institutions :n 
question. 
Generosity sometimes consists 
in accepting aid. The Secretariat 
of Unesco must consider its rela- 
tions .with the national and in- 
ternational institutions it sup- 
por:s, as being reciprocal. For 
instance, certain existing institu- 
tions and organizations may help 
to solve many special problems 
met with by the Science Division. 
and this applies especially to the 
offices of scientific co-operation. 
Arrangements and contracts con- 
cerning these problems enable 
Unesco to take swift action and 
at the same time encourage these 
institutions in their useful work 
In this article, I have tried 
only to point out some of the gen- 
eral features which seem to me 
to characterize the work c? Unes- 
co Science Division. The Depart- 
ment must inform, aid and guide 
international scientific cctivity. 
It must disseminate the results of 
this activity. For that purpose il 
must both help and be helped py 
existing national and interna- 
tional institutions. It must create 
new ones when the need arises. 
Through its own outside services, 
its offices of scientific co-opera- 
tion, Unesco must bring the same 
benefits to the most remate areas. 
It will then haye contributed 
lacgely towards creating in the 
world an atmosphere of confi- 
dence and peaceful collaboration.   


### 74504: Pacific Science Congress given UNESCO grant

PACIFIC SCIENGE CONGRESS 
GIVEN UNESCO GRANT 
Unesco has granted twenty 
thousand dollars to the Seventh 
Pacific Science Congress to ena- 
ble seven scientists from war- 
devastated counlries in Asia 
and two from Holland and 
Scandinavia to participate in its 
meetings at Auckland and 
Christchurch, New Zealand, Fe- 
bruary 2-23, 1949. 
Thus far, this constitutes the 
largest single financial assistance 
Unesco has given to a scientific 
congress. The funds will be taken 
from the reserve fund > the 
1948 budget, in order that the 
financial aid be available in 
time. This is tangible evidence 
of Unesco’s interest in the im- 
portant scientific congress. 
Though regional in name, the 
Pacific Science Congress i. inter- 
national in fact. The first 
congress’ was held at Honolulu 
in 1920. The forthcoming con: 
gress is the seventh and 1» being 
organized by the Royal Society 
of New Zealand with the assist- 
ance of the Government of that 
country. 
Invitations have been sent to 
three countries in North America. 
six in Central America, ten in 
South America, four in Asia, one 
in Australasia and seven in Eu- 
rope. Denmark, Norway and Swe- 
den are included in the seven Eu- 
ropean countries because of the 
important work in oceanography, 
both physical and biological. 
which Scandinavian scientists 
have carried out in the Pacific. 
In addition to the thirty-two 
countries (thirty-one invited and 
the host), seventeen dependent 
territories in Asia and Oceania 
have also been asked to be 
represented. 
The congress has ten divitions: 
Geophysics and Geology, Meteoro 
logy, Oceanography and Mari 
ne Biology, Zoology. Botany, Soil 
Resources and Agriculture, An- 
thropology.. Public Health and 
Nutrition, Soeial Sciences, and 
Organization of Research. 
The programme for the con- 
pacts 
he 
formation ©! a permanent office]! 
FAO 
common 0]   
  
   
  
N
Y
 
A high altitude research sta. 
tion overlooked by the towering 
Jungfraujoch in Switzerland. 
| 45-Nation Scientists Invited to 
Study High Altitude Problems 
Representatives of forty-five 
nations, seven international 
scientific bodies and the United 
Nations with four of its specia- 
lized agencies have been invited 
to a Unesce conference ot. High 
Altitude Research Stations at 
Interlaken, Switzerland, August 
31-Septembe 3, 1948. 
Delegates will review scientific 
problems of high altitude 
research and will survey existing 
high altitude stations. Studies 
will also be made of how 
best to coordinate research pro- 
grammes of existing stations and 
of the possible need for new 
stations. 
The physical, astronomical 
and biological aspects of high 
altitude research may appear 
purely academic to some. Yet, as 
Profesor Carlos Monge pointed 
out at the Unesco General Con- 
ference, there are today more 
than a hundred million people 
of the world’s population living 
at ‘high altitude’. 
Unesco has organized the con- 
ference with the cooperation and 
assistance of the Swiss au- 
thorities and “the International 
High Altitude Research Station 
at Jungfraujoch. Attendance 
expenses of the expert delegates 
will be met, however, cutside 
Unesco funds. 
Invitations have been senf{ to 
all Unesco Member States, to 
three non-nambers (Argentine, 
Chili and the U.SS.R.), and wo 
the following internationa. orga- 
nizations: International Council 
of Scientific Unions, Internatio- 
nal Union of Geodesy and Geo- 
physics, Internatir -' Union of 
Biological Sciences, Internatio- 
nal High Altitude Station at 
Jungfraujoch and the Interna- 
tional Meteorological Organiza- 
tion. The United Nations, ILO, 
FAO, WHO and ICAO have also 
been invited to be represented. 
gress is a comprehensive one. Of 
especial interest to Unesco on 
the agenda is a symposium on 
the protection of nature and 
another on the social implica- 
tions of science. 
The Secretary-General of the 
congress is Dr. Gilbert Archey, 
Director of the Aucklanc Ins- 
titute and Museum. Dr. Archey 
asked Unesco in February for 
financial assistance for the 
transportation expenses of a 
number of invited participants 
tc the congress from war-devag- 
tated countries. 
Approval for such assistance 
was given by the Eighth Session 
of the Unesco Executive Board. 
— 


### 74505: Emergency Credits Plan studied

“Emergency Credits” 
Plan Studied 
Last year Unesco spent nearly 
a quarter of a million dollars on 
the purchase and shipping of 
scientific equipment for the re- 
habilitation of scientific educa- 
tion and research in tu war- 
damaged countries of Europe and 
Asia. From the experience gain- 
ed, a new system of allocations— 
known as the * Emergency 
Science Credits Scheme "—is to- 
day under preparation by Unesco 
to improve and at the same time 
to simplify its operation in this 
field. 
The scheme is one of allocating 
financial credits to scieatific ins- 
titutions in the war-devastated 
countries for the purchase of 
equipment. The institutions 
would be invited to select and 
order through Unes:> the mate- 
rials they feel are most urgently 
needed up to the limit of the 
funds allocated them. 
The institutions requiring as- 
sistance would then. receive the 
needed equipment directly from 
the science mstrument manufac- 
turers who would be reimbursed 
from Unesco funds. 
Details of the scheme, and of 
the broader picture of scientific 
reconstruction needs throughout 
the world, were studied in June 
at Unesco House by a panel of 
science instrument experts from 
eight countries. . 'so considered 
was the present supply of export- 
able scientific equipment, prob- 
lems of finance and currency ex- 
change, ar... the shipping and 
safe delivery of the goods. 
The representatives passed a 
unanimous resolution calling at- 
tention to the importance of re- 
habilitating scientific and tech- 
nological education and research 
in the war-wrecked countries. 
Urgent consideration, they agreed, 
should be given to the needs of 
science in any scheme for the 
lasting restoration of the econo- 
mic life of those countries. 
It was noted that there exists 
today a world scarcity of scienti- 
fic equipment for education and 
research. Before Worl. War II, 
the principal scientific supplies 
came from Germany, the U.S.A. 
and the United Kingdom. During 
the war. British and American 
production facilities were direct- 
ed to highly-specialized war-ins- 
truments. After the war, German 
industrial potential was greatly 
decreased and the industries of 
the United States and United 
Kingdom were faced with tre- 
mendous arrears of production in 
civilian equipment. 
At the present time, the 
demand for scientific apparatus 
IS 50 much greater than the sup- 
ply that delivery delays from 
twelve to eighteen months are 
quite common. The basic needs 
are everywhere the same: la- 
boratory glassware and porce- 
lain, microscopes, analytical 
balances, consumable chemicals, 
electrical instruments, etc. 
The scheme now under prepa- 
ration by Unesco, it is hoped, will 
assist in systematizing and co- 
ordinating at least a measure of 
the orders for equipment from 
the war-torn regions.  

## [Page 4](073809engo.pdf#page=4) 3

### 73816: Ideas Group formed to spur production

“IDEAS GROUP” FORMED 
TO SPUR PRODUCTION 
\ two months of active life the Projects Division is getting 
into its stride. Its basic structure was completed last month by 
the addition of a Press Unit composed, for the present, of a 
nucleus of three members only. but capable of expansion as its pro- 
gramme develops and its productive needs become clearly defined. 
The Radio Unit, whose work was given initial priority, and the Film   
Unit, after a period of preliminary organisation, are entering the pro- : 
ductive stage. 
These three units, together with 
the “ideas group” of four mem- 
bers, each of whom is eminent in 
his own sphere, make up the “pro- 
duction unit based on an iaterna- 
tional ideas bureau” which the 
Director-General was instructed to 
establish by resolution of the 
Mexico General! Conference per- 
sonnel. The teams are a living 
example of the spirit of interna- 
tional co-operation for which the 
UN and Unesco stand. 
The ideas group, composed of W. 
E Williams, Roger Caillois, Ed- 
mond Taylor and George Vosko- 
vec, is drawn from Grea! Britain, 
France, the United States and 
Czechoslovakia. 
. . Wide Range of Interests 
~The wide range of interests and 
qualifications covered by t ne 
membership of the ideas group 
provides the three other ieams 
with the basis of their activities. 
As Director of the (British) Bu- 
reau of Current Affairs and a 
member of the editorial board of 
.the well-known Penguin Editions, 
Mr. William brings to the leader- 
ship of this group the specialised 
knowledge of a publisher as well 
as a wide and varied experience 
of world affairs and the problems 
involved in making the fruit of 
such experience available to a 
world-wide audience. 
M. Caillois, the French mem- 
per, is a teacher and writer who 
has made a special study of the 
cultural influences of the world’s 
great religious bodies and whose 
experience ranges from publica- 
tion of a literary review (Letlres 
Francaises) in Argentina to cul 
tural missions undertaken at the 
request of the French Government 
in the United States and Mexico. 
Mr. Taylor, a writer of note on 
problems of international psycho- 
logy. speat 3 years in India dur- 
ing the war and is the author of 
" “Richer by Asia,” a remarkable 
study of Indian life and culture. 
M. Voskovec, the Czech mem- 
ber of the group, h.s behind him 
a career which for variety and 
enterprise accords well with the 
recent history of 1is native land. 
A writer and poet by choice, he 
was for twelve years before the 
Munich disaster the director of a 
satirical theatre in Prague for 
which he wrote his own plays in 
collaboration with his friend Jan 
Werith. Their combined initials 
gave the “V. & W. Theatre,” its 
name. The theatre was closed 
after the Munich surrender, and 
Mr. Voskovee went to the United 
States, where he worked for the 
B.B.C. and later for the American 
0O.W.1. during the war. 
In addition to these outstand- 
ing members of the ideas group, 
the three working teams are staff- 
ed by men and women exception- 
ally qualified to propagate the 
ideals and purposes of Unesco 
through the several channels of 
mass communication of which 
they have special knowledge and 
experience. 
With such a variety of talent at 
its disposal, the Projects Division 
should be well fitted to carry out 
the tasks assigned to it by its 
working plan. Its basic motive is 
to initiate activities which foster 
those values of international peace 
and of common welfare of man- 
kind which Unesco is pledged to 
advance, and make Unesco’s mis- 
sion more apparent and attractiv 
to the public. : 
e 1 
! 
Study Current Events 
To do this, the Projects Division 
makes a constant study of cur- 
rent events and items of interna- 
tienal news, ideas emanating from 
general conferences, national com- 
missions and panels of experts, 
- . Keeping these guiding principles 
experimental and subject to! 
cnange in the light of the ex- 
perience gained during the first 
few months, the Projects Division 
was guided by four main themes. 
(1) Peace and human progress 
depend upon the free flow of ideas 
and information; 
12) Peace and human progress 
are produced and maintained by 
international co-operation; 
(3) Peace and human progress 
require that each generation exert 
its best efforts in educating the 
next generations 
(4) Peace and human progress 
—and human survival itself—are 
challenges to the goodwill. courage 
and energy of every human being. 
in view, Lhe ideas group has fram- 
ed a programme for the working 
groups which they are now en- 
gaged in bringing to the stage of 
practical realisation. 
The aim of this programme is 
to translate the principles for- 
mulated by the ideas group into 
material for direct communication 
to the masses—always the most; 
difficult step in a proces. of cul- 
tural indoctrination. Between the 
realm of thought and that of 
action there is an invisible barrier. 
something like the * sonic barrier” 
that confronts the high-speed 
flyer as his jet-plane approaches 
the speed of sound. 
To make his ideas effective, the 
world-teacher must break through 
this barrier, even at the risk of! 
wrecking the delicate structure] 
his imagination has created. N 
If that structure passes the test. 
then his ideas are sound, and all 
is well. If not, he must think 
again. 
Some or.all of the themes laid 
down by the ideas group are inter- 
changeable for purposes of mass 
communication : that -is, they can 
be presented equally well through 
the medium of the Press, radio or 
films. 
It is up to the expert members 
of the working teams to advise 
the Projects Division wha. are the 
best media for use. in each case, 
and thereafter to translate the 
themes allotted to them into ma- 
terial for direct contact with the 
masses and to sez to it that avail- 
able channels of distribution and 
propagation are used to the best 
advantage. 
 
At the Second Session of the 
Unesco General Conference 
{Mexico City, November.Decem. 
ber, 1947), the following resolu- 
tions were passed in plenary meet- 
ing : 
“Positive Action... The Director- 
General is instructed to create at 
once within the framework of the 
organization a production un 
based on an International Idcas 
Burzau, capable of initiating and 
influencing production on Unesco 
subjects in press, film and ra- 
dio... 
“The persons forming the pro 
duction unit should be thoroughly 
experienced in their fields and 
should have access to radio pro 
gramme controllers, and radio 
feature producers, to panels of 
writers likely to attract attention 
to Unesco subjects in the press 
and to directors and script wrilers 
not only in documentary but also 
in feature film production. 
“It may be necessary lo employ 
highly paid people for short 
periods and it is essential that 
the administrative arrangements 
should be sufficiently flexible tc 
make this possible. While (he 
headquarters of the production 
unit will be in Paris, it may be 
necessary for purposes of tech- 
nical convenience to arrange for 
sections of the production unit to 
be based elsewhere. 
“The work of the production 
aftention on the necessity 
for cooperation, the Unesco 
Mass Communications Projects 
Division has evolved several spe- 
cific activities which are today in 
the process of implementation. 
Each is designed to show con- 
cretely and dramatically how peo- 
ple may work together across na- 
tional frontiers, how true advan- 
cement has been achieved only 
through such collaboration and 
now full a future lies ahead if we 
approach it on a One-World basis. 
The projecis will be brought to 
fulfilment not by the Unesco Se- 
cretariat alone, working in isola- 
tion within its headquarters in 
Paris, but by the cooperation of 
the National Commissions and 
governments, through the mass 
media of the film, press and radio 
industries, and by the close parti- 
cipation of the most essential 
the pecple 
] O focus world interest and 
members of Unesco: 
everywhere. 
Unesco itself will carry out little 
of the ‘production’. It will act 
rather—as Professor Auger has 


### 73817: Mass Media Projects Division to dramatize world cooperation

 
Mass Media Projects Division 
to Dramatize World Gooperation 
described on another page—as a 
“catalyst”. The established instru- 
ments of communication, the 
powerful media of reaching the 
public through word and sound 
and image, will be called upon :o 
carry the message that coopera- 
tion is both practical and neces- 
sary. 
World Affairs Calendar 
Among the jnitial projects now 
jn preparation there is the “Ca- 
lendar of World Affairs”. This 
publication would include an al- 
manac of centenaries, jubilees or 
other anniversaries of events, dis- 
coveries or occurrences throughout 
the world which have made some 
constribution to the advance of 
civilisation and to understanding 
»h
 
LR)
 
. 
é 
—
 
B 
. 
h
o
 
gE 
A
E
H
 
T
R
C
,
 
S
O
N
 
YH
 
OR
S 
R
T
H
 3 
2 
T
A
 
> 
NF] : 
Three members of the “Ideas Group”. L. to R.: George Voskovec 
(Czechoslovakia), 
5 


### 73818: Need for teamwork to be stressed

NEED FOR TEAMWORK 
E STRESSED TO 
  
Edmond Taylor (United States) 
Caillois (France). 
and Roger 
HE long-range programme of the Mass Communications Projects 
Division, intended as a framework within which specific radio, 
film and press projects will be developed, is based upon the 
four major themes mentioned in column two. 
It consists of the elaboration of these major themes and their 
application to specitic topics in the fields of science, education, 
culture and world co-operation. 
Among the subsidiary themes 
selected for special emphasis in 
the field of science are the follow- 
ing: 
The tangible results of modern 
science are the fruit of certain 
intellectual qualities that are as 
essential in civic and private life 
as they are in science: common 
sense, clear reasoning, accurate 
observation, painstaking verifica- 
tion of conclusions. 
Certain ethical ideals—honesty, 
humanitarian motivation, respect 
for freedom of thought, co-opera- 
tion, lack of prejudice in social 
reiationg—have played an equally 
great role in the development of 
science, and the cultivation of 
these virtues is essential to its 
continued progress. 
Important discoveries in any 
branch of science often spring 
from advances in other branches, 
and sometimes the most importany 
concrete results are made possible 
by abstract and seemingly imprac- 
tical research. 
Every important scientific ad- 
vance, while it solves some human 
problems. raises new ones, an 
thus requires on the part of every 
one a constant effort of self- 
education and mental adjustment 
to changed conditions. 
In education considerabie em- 
phasis is naturally placed on sup- 
porting Unesco activities in the 
field of Fundamental Education, 
making clear that this does not 
only mean the fight against illi- 
teracy, but the task of training 
both children and adults to face 
the problems of the modern world. 
Among the cultural themes 
selected for particular emphasis 
single isolated culture. The mod- 
ern cultural world has no terri 
torial boundaries and every cul- 
ture in it is subject to the in- 
fluence of other cultures. 
It is the duty of modern man 
to become fuily conscious of the 
treasures which history has hand- 
ed down to him and to co-operate 
with his fellows in all parts of 
the world to enrich the heritage 
of the next generation. 
_In developing specific culturai 
programmes based on the fore- 
. going themes a particular effort 
will be made to include, along 
with the major arts and philo- 
sophy, material dealing with the 
arts of daily life as they have 
been developed in various cultures. 
Ir the field of international co- 
operation the programme lays 
down a number of significant 
themes. On the one hand it seeks 
whenever possible to develop or 
intensify the realisation that in- 
ternational co-operation is the 
only answer to many of the social, 
economic and other problems 
which beset the modern world. 
On the other hand it aims to 
protect the morale of believers 1n 
international co-operation fregm 
disappointments arising out of 
over-optimism and impatience by 
calling attention to the psycholo- 
gical, social, cultural and other 
problems which international or- 
ganisations encounter in their 
work. 
Finally, the programme aims at 
presenting a balanced picture of 
man for or acainst himself, by: g 
showing on the one hand the 
disastrous consequences of con. : : 
  
  
  
between the peoples. The doéu- 
ment would also highlight future 
events of interest to Unesco's alms 
with a calendar of day-to-day 
coming events. 
It is well-known that cultural 
news presented to the public has 
for its pretexts occasions such as 
the re-issue of a book. the opening 
of a gallery or exhibition. Such! 
occasions are a means of brealh- 
ing new life into masterpieces or 
of refreshing memories of events 
of importance for the human 
mind. oo 
Unesco preposes, therefore, to 
present newspaper editors, radio 
‘and film directors with a docu- 
mentation on little-known histo- 
rical achievements and personal 
ities in the fields of education, 
science and culture, which have 
advanced human welfare and 
understanding between peoples. 
The first issue of the Calendar 1 
planned for 1949, and National 
Commissions in each Unescd 
Member State will be asked 10 
contribute ‘data from their own 
countries. 
A second project under prepa. 
ration is a radio series entitled 
“The Masters Meet”. Its object i8 
that eminent personalities in each 
country should take advantage of 
their reputations to introduce the 
work of writers, artists or scientists 
whose position in their own cour 
tries is analogous to theirs. 
Such an exchange of apprecia- 
tions between the great’ names of 
literature, arts, sciences and edu 
cation will be of itself a clea 
instance of international solidar 
ity in these fields. Unesco, through 
its National Commissions, will 
request prominent personalities iq 
each country to write a few pages 
on the work of one of their foreiZa 
colleagues for whom they have & 
particular admiration or with 
whom they feel a special sympa 
_ thy. ! 
The writings thus commissione 
and translated through Unesc 
will be made available to thy 
various national broadcasting or 
ganisations to ensure they securd 
the widest possible dissemination 
as part of a reguiar series of 
broadcasts sponsored by Unesco. 
Additionally, Unesco will encou 
rage the publication of the texi§ 
in each country. 
Dividing the Stars 
Astronomy, as the science whicl 
has inspired perhaps the closes 
cooperation among the nations 
figures 1n the third project entitle, 
“Dividing the Stars”. The aim o 
this film will be to reveal moder 
astronomy as perhaps the oul 
standing example of intelligent] 
planned scientific cooperation ol 
an international basis. The fil 
would show the historic facter 
which have impelled astronomer 
to apportion specialized tasks an 
to pool results among themselve 
and above all it would emphasiz 
the spectacular resulls achieve 
by such cooperation. . 
Another project in the makin 
is an international radio featur 
series, “The Lost Echoes” aime 
to counteract cultural isolatiot 
People who are well-informe 
about the literature of their ow 
country are often vague and ur 
certain about that of even the 
closest neighbours. 
Such a series, by bringing to th 
attention and interest of the pet 
ple of each country the mod 
representative literature of thel 
neighbours, is designed to foste 
international appreciation of art 
    
    
unit should include the collection 
and disseminiation of informalion 
designed to stimulate production.” 
flict, and on the other hand the 
almost limitless possibilities of 
human progress in a peaceful and 
co-operative world. 
and ideas produced b> tae Unesco 
Secretariat. 
In framing its first practical 
programme, which is necessarily 
are those which help to bring 
home the idea that man has 
reached a point in his evolution 
where he no longer belongs to a 
| I— —————s 
_— 
  
    

## [Page 5](073809engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 73819: Press, film, radio to be mobilized for peace

"Press, Film, Radio To Be Mohilized for Peace    vl 
A Czech film studio is destroyed by fire. More than three-quarters of 
mass media facilities were disrupted in many war-torn countries. 
Unesco’s field surveys dis- 
closed startling disparities in 
the availability of technical 
equipment. It was learned, for 
example, (hat while Uruguay 
has one radio receiving set for 
each seven members of its po- 
pulation, Burma has only one 
for each 3,400, and India one 
for each 1,490 of its people. 
Denmark has one receiving set   
‘for virtually each of its fami- 
lies, while Haiti has but one set 
for each two hundred families 
Canada has nearly thirty 
times more newsprint per ca- 
pita than Yugoslavia, and 
Sweden has at least twenty 
times as much as China. Swit- 
zerland has five times more 
seating capacity in its cinemas 
than Venezuela.   
and letters and so to promote an 
understanding between peoples. It 
is predicated on the fact that 
understanding and respect can 
spring only from mutual know- 
ledge, and that conversely there 
are today vast blanks of ignorance 
of the ways and achievements of 
our fellow men. 
Hopes of Tomorrow 
“Hopes of Tomorrow” is another 
of the projects in preparation. This 
is a radio and press series on 
selected current activities in 
science and other fields which 
seem to promise hope of future 
solutions to basic human preu- 
lems of the present. 
In the field of science, for 
example, the programmes would 
offer a soberly presented disclis- 
sion of the possibilities of further 
scientific advances in such 
domains as the harnessing of 
atomic energy to industrial use, 
the prolongation™of human life, 
treatment of mental diseases, 
development of alternative sources 
of energy to replace exhaustible 
resources, synthetic foods aid new 
food processes, etc. we 
For users interested in a more 
, general programme, the same 
“* treatment might be applied to 
basic social and economic preo- 
lems of the present day and ihe 
possible future applications of the 
fine arts to the problem of enrich- 
ing home and community life. 
In all fields, whelher educa- 
tional, scientific or cultural, the 
programmes would emphasize the 
need for cooperation, particularly 
international cooperation, in order 
to solve the problems or achieve 
the advances in question. 
To mention but one further of 
~ the several projects being develop- 
ed: that of the “World Books”, a 
radio series—to be broadcast 
weekly or monthly—designed to 
stimulate cultural exchanges and 
the free flow of ideas ky inform- 
ing listeners about new, -non- 
specialist books in all languages 
likely to further Unesco's aims in 
education, science and the arts. 
Such a series, as its sister-projects. 
will serve both in an educative 
capacity and will develop under- 
standing by dramatizing the 
achievements of our neighbours. 
ORE and more peopie realise to-day that peace and progress 
M depend to a considerable extent upon the amount and Kind of 
information fed to the minds of men throughout the world. 
There was a time when press and information were considered merely 
from the commercial and industrial angle. Today, the complex prob- 
lems relating to the social role of the information apparatus are 
being systematically studied especially from the decisive point of view 
of the public's right to be objectively and reliably infcrmed. 
With the end of World War il 
the war-devastated countries four.d 
themselves faced with the prob- 
lem of rehabilitating their press. 
The ranks of competent jour- 
nalists had been thinned through 
enemy suppression or subsequent 
purges. Normal professional coa- 
tacts with the rest of the world 
had been interrupted for years. 
As a result, the problem of how 
to train more and better jour- 
nalists and to safeguard certain 
professional standards was forced 
upon the urgent attention nol 
only of professicnals but also of 
responsible sections of the public. 
Unesco, in its aim to encourage 
and facilitate the “free flow of 
information by world and image” 
in the post-war world, associated 
itself from the outset with these 
endeavours. 
Thanks to its worid-wide links 
and authority Unesco was clearly 
called upon to encourage and 
guide efforts likely to improve in- 
activities and efforts 
formation, as well as the technical 
conditions for its dissemination. 
To achieve such necessary im- 
provements Unesco concentrated 
its efforts on the international 
professional sphere. From contacts 
and discussions with experts and 
professionals everywhere it became . 
clear that to improve {raining 
facilities, to raise professional 
standards among journalists 
would be one of the best ways to 
improve the actual information 
which daily reaches the world 
public and so greatly influences 
the chances of mutual under- 
standing and peace. 
Press Institute Planned ™ 
At an early stage, the plan for 
the creation of an International 
Institute of Press and Information 
was conceived. It was hoped to co- 
ordinate, on an international and 
non-political basis, the numerous 
likely to 
bring about gradual improvements 
—
—
_
—
 
       
  
ry 
ro 
F p— 
Crs ir a 
halt PC 4 AD spac 7 
\ 1 /Y -’ ) _ 
oy 7 ’ son . 
Soe SLLOA 
FEOCAAT VOM { 
A oF MACATA - 
7 
/ 
Rh —- 
| UNESCO TECHNICAL 
—
~
—
 
—————— 
NEEDS SURVEY 
1948     
unesco Exchange of information 
  
  
0 experf{s from five countries meet | 
*chnical Needs committee hearing. 


### 73820: Technical Needs Commission studies field reports

TECHNICAL NEEDS COMMISSION 
“STUDIES FIELD REPORTS 
Unesco House early this month to study the results of a com- 
| EADING world personalities in press, film and radio met at 
prehensive survey of the needs and deficiencies of mass com- 
munication in seventeen countries and to recommend practical 
measures towards their alleviation. The delegates, members of the 
Technical Needs Commission, were continuing a vital Unesco projec: 
begun last year to mobilize the resources of information apparatus 
in the cause of peace. 
Reports laid before the dele- 
gates had been prepared from de- 
tailed. on-the-spot research ay ten 
Unesco field workers who have 
spent the past three months in- 
vestigating the technical and pro- 
fessional status of press, film and 
radio across more than a quarter 
of the earth's surface. A total of 
more than one hundred thousand 
miles’ travel was covered by the 
reporters who sought some two 
thousand answers to their aues- 
tionnaires. 
These ranged from the availa- 
bility of raw materials, profes 
sional training. copyright legisla- 
tion, political censorship and the 
financing of news-agencies to the 
supply of typesetting. broadcast- 
ing and filming equipment and 
the distribution and circulation 
facilities for information. The 
questionnaire is the most compre- 
hensive ever undertaken on an 
international basis. 
The surveys, begun in 1947 when 
Unesco field workers covered 
twelve war-devastated countries, 
have proved of great value to 
students of mass communication 
and professionals throughout the 
world. Their double purpose has 
peen to disclose—for the first 
time on an accurate, detailed ba- 
sis—the actual position of the 
instruments for informing the 
people, and at the same time to 
serve as a guide to governments, 
international agencies and organi- 
sations engaged in meetin the 
needs and deficiencies. 
At the first meeting of the 
Technical Needs Commission in 
August 1947 the experts found 
there existed two over-riding world 
shortages: that of newsprin: and 
that of “hard currency” for the 
purchase of equipment. Having 
presented to the United Nations a 
detailed study of the newsprint 
shortage. Unesco has recently 
brought forward a test plan of 
urgent voluntary aid designed to 
supply some fifty thousand tons 
of newsprint to France, China and 
the Netherlands. 
The United Nations Conference 
on Freedom of Information con- 
vened this spring in Geneva com- 
mended Unesco for its detailed 
report on the newsprint situation 
and recommended that Member 
States—particularly the United 
States and Canada—co-operate 
  
with Unesco in order to make its 
test plan a success. . 
Concerning the currency pro 
lem, a project is now under pre- 
paration by Unesco to arrang= 2 
barter system between ‘hard’ and 
‘soft-currency’ nations, whereby 
the former might supply necessary 
funds in exchange for cultural 
and professional service from the 
latter. 
The seventeen nations surveyed 
this year by Unesco field workers 
included: Austria, Hungary; and 
Italy in Europe; Cuba, the Domi- 
nican Republic, Haiti® Honduras. 
Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Vene- 
zuela in Latin America; and 
Burma, the Federation of Malaya, 
India, Pakistan and Singapore in 
the Far East. 
The Technical Needs Commis- 
sion, which met from August 2 
through 11, was under the Chair- 
manship of Jean Letourneau. 
former Minister of France, who 
had been head of the French 
delegation to the UN Freedom of 
Information Gonference. 
Following the Commission's 
meetings. Unesco will publish a 
book containing the results of the 
field surveys and the recommen- 
dations of the experts. A first 
volume. covering the first twelve 
countries surveyed during 1947 
proved highly successful both for 
its informational value and as a 
guide to reconstruction activities. 
Unesco considers its surveys of 
technical needs of high priority 
for they play a fundamental role 
in the major task of wmotilizing 
the media of mass communication 
as effective instruments for get- 
ting “people to talk to people” 
And only by this means, it is felt, 
can peace be based on solid 
foundations: those of understand- 
ing and respect among all nations. 
  
  
  
in the technique and practice of 
journalism everywhere. 
This idea is perhaps not very 
new. But it has now given rise to 
one of the most important and 
interesting projects in the field 
of international information. 
Various expert commissions 
convened by Unesco confirmed 
the need for such an International 
Institute of Press and In- 
formation. A resolution passed by 
the Unesco Commission on Tech- 
nical Needs in Press. Radio, Film, 
in August 1947, emphatically 
called for its establishment and 
was endorsed by the second ses- 
sion of the General Conference of 
Unesco in Mexico City. 
In April of this year, before the 
world forum of the United Nations 
Conference on Freedom of In- 
formation in Geneva, the plan for 
creating such an International 
Institute was again strongly 
urged. 
The project for the Inter- 
national Institute of the Press 
and Information was included in 
the Programme of Unesco for 
1948, and a provisional budget of 
$25,000 was set aside to facilitate 
its creation. ] 
Unesco has thus been active in 
guiding and aic:ng efforts likely 
to give life to this idea. A detailed 
plan is now being drawn up, 
setting out proposals for guiding 
principles, activities and statuies 
of the Institute. This plan is 0 
be submitted for discussion to the 
various professional organizations 
whose active and willing support 
alone can bring about its realiza- 
tion. Once established, the propos- 
‘ed Institute would be an entirely 
non - governmental, autonomous 
body. with its own administrative 
organization. Unesco wouid pro- 
vide a comparatively small initial 
subsidy, but it is intended to es- 
tablish the Institute on a basis of 
complete financial independence. 
The functions and, activities of 
the proposed International Insti- 
tute of the Press and Information 
would be manifold but within 
Unesco’s general interests. 
Above ail the Institute’s funec- 
ticns may be defined as g sys- 
tematic endeavour to clarify and 
intensify, amongst the public as 
well as professional circles, the 
knowledge of the power and res- 
ponsibilities of the press in mod- 
ern society. . ooh 
To Pool Press Experience 
It would be wrong to think of 
the proposed Institute as a 
tribunal or somewhat remote 
professional academy. It would 
act as an international centre of 
active research and study on tech- 
nical and professional problems 
covering all aspects of the vast 
field of press and information. 
Experienced and aspiring jour- 
nalists, editors, publishers and 
technicians could meet there for 
discussion and common study. 
The proposed Institute would be 
an ideal place for the exchange 
of ideas, comparison of methods 
and special courses of study. It 
would be one great pool of inter- 
national thought and experience 
in the field of press and in- 
. formation. 
With a permanent, highly- 
qualified staff at its disposal, the 
Institute would be a valuable 
instrument to assist existing aad 
rising schcols of journalism 
everywhere in co-ordinating reci- 
procal exchanges of informaticn, 
and in guiding all endeavours to 
raise and maintain high standards 
amongst the journalistic profes- 
sion. 
It would be one of the principal 
tasks of the proposed Institute to 
assemble such documentation and 
to make it available wherever it is 
needed. In addition, the Institute 
would be ideally suited to under- 
take the publication of specialist 
literature and periodicals. It would 
organize seminar sessions, meetings 
of experts, men of science and 
distinguished specialists, aad 
various courses for exchange 
scho.ars. 
Unesco has taken the initiative 
in working cut a plan for the 
creation of an International Ins- 
titute of Press and Information. 
It is now up to responsible and 
competent quarters in all coun- 
tries to help create this Institute 
which is so clearly needed.

## [Page 6](073809engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 73821: Exchange of persons programme vital to mutual understanding

6 UNESCO COURIER Vol. 1. —No 7. 
Exchange of Persons Programme 
‘Vital to Mutual Understanding 
By William D. CARTER 
Head, Unesco Exchange of Persons Bureau 
The international exchange of persons in ihe 
fields of education, science and culture has been 
recognized, since Unesco’s inceplion, as an im- 
poriant means of advancing the “objectives Of 
international peace and of the common welfare 
of mankind”, 
Unesco’s principal concerns in the field of 
international exchonge oy persons have been the 
development of a clearing house of information 
on exchange activities throughout the world and 
the promotion of international study oppor- 
with particular 
reference to Unesco’'s fields of interest. 
tunitics for mature persons, 
Fellowships, 
which allow travel for 
A world handbook of interna- 
tional fellowships, scholarships 
and study-grants will be publish- 
ed by Unesco early in 1949 for 
the use of government depart- 
ments, voluntary organizations 
and individuals concerned with 
the international exchange of 
persons. Detailed information 
wilt be included on all types of 
awards available for persons 
seeking opportunities for study, 
research, observation or similar 
higher educational pursuits in 
foreign countries. 
Data on such duty opportun- 
ities as have been made available 
since the end of the war will also 
be included in the handbook, 
and supplements to this initial 
volume will be published as addi- 
tional information is received at 
Unesco. 
Jn ty | p— 
CTE Ae 
To Rel Peoples Talking to Peoples 
It is hoped thag the handbook 
will be of value to those charged 
with oroad-scale planning and 
the administration of interna- 
tional exchange programmes. 
Interested agencies will find a 
detailed picture of the present 
scope of international study and 
observation programmes through- 
out the world and thus a basis 
for pianning additional program- 
mes will be provided. 
Collection and publication of 
this information in one volume 
will underline where programmes 
are adequate and where a real 
need of additional opportunities 
for international fellowships 
exists. In this way, interchange 
of persons programmes through- 
out the world will be stimulated 
and it is hoped new programmes 
promoted. 
In addition to its work as a 
centre of information on ex- 
change of persons activities, 
Unesco also administers directly 
a small fellowship programme, in 
svhich particular emphasis 1s laid 
on meeting study needs of mature 
persons in the three main fields 
of Unesco’s interest—education, 
science and culture. 
There are three main types of 
fellowships within Unesco’s fel- 
lowship operations : 
Unesco Fellowships directly 
financed by Unesco, which as- 
sumes basic administrative and 
‘operational responsibility. enlist- 
ing the collaboration of official 
and unofficial organizations in 
preliminary screening of candi- 
dates and in implementing plans 
of study. 
Unesco-sponsored Fellowships 
donated by accredited govern- 
mental or non-governmental 
agencies. Unesco gives assistance 
in planning, and is responsible 
for the basic administration in- 
cluding screening of candidates 
recommended by governments for 
final selection by the donor agen- 
cies. 
Fellowships within the Unesco 
Scheme. Except for general plan- 
ning and advice by Unesco, the 
general administration of these 
fellowships is the basic responsi- 
bility of the recipient and donor 
countries for the - .lection of can- 
study grants and scholarshins 
their participants to 
foreign countries can serve as a tangible means 
for getting “peoples talking to peoples”, tor the 
international sharing of skills and techniques 
Shell 
and for 
of pracise and 
of study. 
—as an integral 
framework—can 
the barriers to 
persons. 
The following 
field of activity. 
didates and detailed administra- 
tion. 
During the past year Unesco 
has been concerned with 58 
“Unesco Fellowships” and 130 
“ Unesco-sponsored Fellowships.” 
Forty-eight of the 58 * Unesco 
Fellowships ” which are currently 
being operated, are in the follow- 
ing fields of study :— 
Science and Social 
ment; 
Cinema and Ra.io Education; 
Educational Problems of War- 
Affected Children; 
Librarianship; 
Educational Administration; 
Art and Music Education. 
Six fellowships—one in each 
subject—were allocated in De- 
cember, 1947, to e- 1 of the fol- 
lowing war-devastated Member 
States of Unesco : China, Czecho- 
slovakia, Greece, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Denmark and 
the Philippines. A further six in 
these fields have been offered to 
three new Member States: Aus- 
tria, Hungary and Italy. 
Funds have also been provided 
to enable two specialists from 
China and two from India to visit 
principal computing - machine 
Develop- 
  
To Share Skills and Techniques 
laboratories in America and 
Europe and candidates for these 
awards are now being selected. 
The following * Unesco-spon- 
sored Fellowships” are being 
handled at present : 
12 offered by the British Film 
Producers’ Association and the 
Petroleum Company 
to candidates In fhe following 
counliries wishing to study 
British methods ot film pro 
duction: Belgium, China, 
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, 
Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, 
Norway. Poland, Venezuela, Aus- 
tria. Seven of these have been 
awarded. 9 
9 offered by the American Che- 
mical Society to chemists and 
chemical engineers from various 
war-devastated Member States, 
for 6 months ea 1. Two have 
been awarded to Czechoslovakia, 
1 to China and 1 to the Nether- 
lands. 
4 offered by the Belgian Minis. 
try of Education to fellows from 
China, Czechoslovakia, Norway 
and Poland for 6 months each. 
All recipients have now complet- 
ed their studies. 
16 have been awarded by the 
French Governmcat to China, 
Czechoslovakia, Greece, the 
Netherlands, Norway and Poland. 
64 offered by the Canadian 
Council for Reconstruction 
through Unesco to candidates 
from 13 Unesco Member States. 
for six months each (see bottom 
col. 3). 
Rotary International has donat- 
ed 1 fellowship to the Nether- 
lands and 1 to Poland. 
6 offered by various British 
newspapers to Czechoslovakia, 
Netherlands, France, Greece, 
Poland and Belgium. One of 
these has been awarded to the 
Netherlands. 
3 offered by the Norwegian 
raising professional 
standards everywhere, 
A serious obstacle to such a Jree interchange 
of persons across nalional jrontiers is the lack 
and cultural 
detailed njormation regarding 
study possibilities, There 1s also the problem Of 
overlapping—and, 
often gaps in some areas—in the various fields 
more important, there are 
To reduce these barriers, Unesco can be espe- 
cially useful. For Unesco can serve as a practical 
liaison unit among fellowship sponsors, as a 
world-wide clearing house jor information; and 
element of the United Nations 
take effective steps ito reduce 
the international exchange of 
review describes some of the 
work Unesco has undertaken thus far in his 
Government, in open competition, 
to scientists of Hungary, the 
Philippines, China, Denmark, 
Poland, Greece, France, Italy, 
Netherlands and Austria. 
5 offered by the Netherlands 
rg 
fe = 
Te Raise Professional Standards 
  
Government, in open competition, 
to Czechoslovakia, India, Pol#fnd. 
China, Greece and the Philip- 
pines. 
Applications for Unesco or 
Unesco-sponsored fellowships are 
presented from candidates’ own 
governments through the appro- 
priate ministries dealing with 
education, science and culture, 
with the assistance of Unescd 
National Commissions and Co- 
operating bodies. 
Sponsors must be competent to 
assure the candidate's returning 
to an occupation in his own coun- 
try, which will give him an op- 
portunity to utilise, to the maxi- 
mum. the benefits of the training 
received. 
While Unesco has stressed the 
promotion of exchange through 
study grants {= matur: persons, 
the Secretariat '~1s been concern- 
ed, particularly in the collection 
of information and the answering 
of enquiries, with a variety of re- 
lated problema. 
These include such questions 
as exchange programmes for pro- 
fessors and teachers and the 
problems arising from such ex- 
changes, student and young peo- 
ple’s exchang : with special re- 
ference to vacation study 
schemes, and educational and 
training opportunities for tech- 
nicians and administrators. The 
barriers which prevent a free 
movement of persons fo: educa- 
tional purposes are also under 
continuous study. 
Canada Offers 
64 Fellowships 
Educators, technicians and 
scientists from some thirteen 
war-devastated ---intries will 
be the recipients of sixty- 
four fellowships offered by the 
Canadian Council for Recons- 
truction through Unesco. The 
programme, to cost $182,000, 
will permit advanced study in 
seven fields of activity In 
Canada for six months. 
Designed to help raise 
standards in the fields of 
science, education and the 
arts in countries deprived by 
the war of their facilities, 
the programme is the result 
of a voluntary fund-raising 
campaign conducted througn- 
out Canada. Some seventy 
private organizations partici- 
pated in the nation-wide 
appeal. 
Countries to which the 
fellowships are being offered 
include: Czechoslovakia, Bel- 
gium, Denmark, the Nether- 
lands, Norway, Philippines, 
China, France, Greece, Italy, 
Luxemburg, Poland and 
British colonial possessions   devastated by the war.     


### 73822: Behind the world programme, another view of UNESCO

Behind the World Programme; 
Another View of Unesco 
(Behind the execution of Unesco’s world programme, and oul 
of the spotlight of public attention, there is a mass of delailed, 
headquarters labour without which none of the many wroizscts could 
be carried out. Members of any large organsgation, governmental or 
private, are familiar with this vital and unpublicized activity. Al 
Unesco House, it is carried out by an international team—the Central 
Adminisirative Services, under the direction of Gordon Menzies. The 
following article describes something of how tha: team backs up the 
programme departmenis of Unesco.) 
Unesco's Central Administrative Services Section was established 
last February to coordinate the provision of common services to the 
Programme Sections of the Organisation It is composed of six main 
units—Central Registry, Building Management, 
Purchase and Stores, Documents Service and the Restaurant 
Languages Service, 
and 
Commissary and provides a variely of services, supplies and equip- 
ment to all Sections of Unesco. 
The Building Manage- 
ment division maintains 
Unesco House and provi- 
des local transportation 
services. It is largely 
staffed by local vtechni- 
cians, ranging from car- 
penters and locksmiths to 
highly qualified telephone 
mechanics. - 
Many of these French 
workers knew the luxu- 
rious Hotel Majestic in 
its pride and saw it beco- 
me first the home of a 
French Ministry and then, 
in 1940, the headquarters 
of the German occupalion 
forces. 
The once famous ballrooms 
and reception rooms are used 
today to house Unesco’s Interna- 
tional Conferencé€s and meetings. 
To service these meetings— 
attended by representatives from 
many nations—Unesco maintains 
its own team of interpreters and 
summary reporters. 
The twenty-one members of 
the Reproduction Unit last year 
printed and assembled over 
twelve and a half million pages 
of documents, which were dis- 
tributed to the furthermost cor- 
ners of the earth through the 
Unesco Distribution Unit ana 
Central Registry. 
All documents are produced in 
French and English and, this 
year, to further the Organisa- 
tion's programme in the Latia- 
American countries, a small 
Spanish translation service has 
been established. It is anticipated 
that, during 1949, in line with 
Unesco’s growing interest in the 
countries of the Middle East, an 
Arabic translation service wili 
be added. 
The Central 
receives, circulates and files all 
incoming correspondance and 
cables, and despatches the O¥ga- 
nisation’s outgoing mail, is still 
in its infancy. In a recent month. 
however, the unit despatched 
over 7,000 communications. 
With world-wide shortages of 
essential supplies, currency res- 
trictions, import and export re- 
gulations, the task of maintain- 
ing the Organisation’s stocks of 
consumable items presents a day- 
to-day problem. 
Amongst the large variety of 
requests which regularly pour 
into the unit, some inevitably 
cause a lifting of the eyebrows. 
Registry, which 
One day, a telephone caller 
laconically requested the unit 
to obtain clearance through 
Customs for ‘the Atomic train’. 
This task Purchase and Stores 
accomplished—as soon as it re- 
covered its breath—but only after 
ascertaining that the train was 
a model, being sent by the So- 
ciety of Nuclear Scientists for 
Unesco-sponsored exhibition. 
The staff Restaurant and Com- 
missary are also a responsi- 
bility of the administrative ser- 
vices. An erroneous impression 
often exists that scientisis, wri- 
ters, artists and other intellec- 
tuals are singularly uninterested 
in the nature of the food pro- 
vided for (heir sustenance. In 
Unesco, however, the subject is 
a matter of great concern, and 
the Restaurant experiences con- 
siderable difficulty, especially in 
these days of ‘world food shor- 
tages, in catering for the indivi- 
dual tastes and national habits 
of such a varied clientele. 
The diversity of functions 
carried out by the Administra- 
tive Services is exceeded only by 
the variety of nationalities em- 
ployed therein, Individuals from 
twenty different countries are 
daily illustrating in a practical 
manner that it is indeed possible 
for the nations of the world to 
work together in friendly har- 
mony.   
A view of the Unesco Central Registry 
through which Member States are 
linked up with the Paris Headquarters. 
  . ledge and experience, 
FOUR SEMINARS 
(Continued from page 1.) 
The seminar on Childhood Edu-, 
cation in Czechoslovakia, which 
began its work on July 21 and 
will close on August 25, is under 
the direction of Dr. Aase G. Skard 
(Norway), with Dr. M.V. Ambros 
of the Czechoslovak Ministry of 
Education as Executive Assistant. 
Group chairmen are from the 
United Kingdom, United States, 
China and Switzerland. 
The scope of this seminar is the 
education of children between the 
ages of 3 to 13. 
It is primarily concerned with 
the psychological development of 
the child in relation to education 
for a World Society. The staff is 
supplemented by the presence of 
special consultants, including 
Ruth Benedict (USA), Dr. Frances 
Ilg (USA), Professor André Rey 
(Switzerland) and Dr. Thérése 
Brosse of Unesco. Madame Mau- 
rette, head of the International 
School in Geneva, also has parti- 
cipated in the meetings, lecturing 
on the “Development of World 
Mindedness among Children”. 
The third seminar, in England, 
opened on July 15 and will con- 
tinue through August 25, under 
the direction of Dr. Karl W. Bi- 
gelow of Teachers’ College, Co- 
lumbia University, New York. 
The Programme , Assistant is 
Virgil de Maesschalck (Belgium) 
and the Administrative Assistant 
is JG.M. Allcock, HMI, of the 
United Kingdom. 
Study group chairmen include 
representatives of Ecuador, Aus- 
tralia, the United States and 
France. 
At the seminar’s first meeting, 
Dr. Julian Huxley addressed the 
members and Dr. Clarence E. 
Beeby, Assistant Director-General 
of Unesco, spoke of Unesco’s edu- 
cational programme. - 
The seminar being held in 
Caracas opened on August 5 and 
will continue until September 8. 
Under the direction of Dr. Guil- 
lermo Nannetti, former Minister 
of Education of Colombia and 
recently Director of the Escuela 
Normal Superior of Bogota, this 
group will carry out its studies 
in four sections: rural and voca- 
tional education, teacher-train- 
ing, methods of eliminating illi- 
teracy and education for peace. 
Unesco contributed four travel 
fellowships to permit specialists 
to atterd the Caracas meetings. 
These various seminars are 
neither conferences nor congres- 
ses. Participants represent neith- 
er a government or ministry, nor 
an educational system. Thzy 
work as members of a team, as 
“resource people”, sharing know- 
studying 
means of bringing together and 
applying the latest research on 
specific aspects of education for 
a World Society.

## [Page 7](073809engo.pdf#page=7) 3

### IGNORE

Vol. 1.—No 7. UNESCO COURIER 
7 


### 73823: UNESCO National Commissions make programme effective

Unesco National Commissions 
make programme effective 
governments through which Unesco wins support for its pro- 
bide Commissions are the official liaison agencies created by 
~ gramme and secures the co-operation of organizations and indi- 
viduals throughout the world interested in “ advancing, through the 
educational, scientific and cultural relations of the peoples of the 
world, the objectives of international peace and of the common wel- 
fare of mankind.” 
They bring together the leaders 
of education, science and culture 
and the representatives of the 
important voluntary organiza- 
tions working in Unesco’s field, to 
advise the governments and to 
act as a link between the na- 
© tional community and the inter- 
national community. Through 
their special committees, subsi- 
‘diary co-operating organizations 
or regional bodies they provide 
the individual with a task to per- 
form and an opportunity to in- 
fluence national policies in edu- 
cation, science and culture in the 
direction of increasing under- 
‘standing between the peoples of 
the world. 
On the international plane 
they give the individual member 
of the community through na- 
tional delegations to Unesco Gen- 
eral Conferences a part to play 
in the formulaliion of new pro- 
grammes and in the suggestion 
of new emphases in established 
programmes. 
From the Final Act of 
Unesco, Article VII 
“1. Each Member State 
shall make such arrangements 
as suit its particular condi- 
tions for the purpose of asso. 
ciating its principal bodies 
interested in edu cational, 
scientific and cultural matters 
with the work of the Organiza. 
tion, preferably by the forma- 
tion of a National Commis. 
sion broadly representative of 
the Government and such) 
bodies. 
“2. National Commissions 
or national co-operating 
bodies, where they exist, shall 
act in an adv’ ...y capacity to 
their respective delegations to 
the General Conference and to 
their Governments in matters 
relating to the Organization 
and shall function as agencies 
of liaison in all matters of in- 
terest to it. 
“3. The Organization may, 
on the request of a Member 
State, delegate either tempeo- 
} rarily or permanently, a mem- 
ber of its Secretariat to serve 
on the National Commission 
of that State, in order to assist      in the development of its 
work.” 
National Commissions have 
been set up in the twenty-six 
following Member States: Aus- 
tralia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, 
Brazil, China, Colombia, Den- 
mark, the Dominican Republic, 
Ecuador, France, Haiti, Hungary, 
Iran, Italy, the Lebanon, Mexico, 
The Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Norway, Peru, the Philippines, 
Poland, the United Kingdom, the 
United States of America and 
Venezuela. 
In Afghanistan, Czechoslovakia, 
India, Syria and Turkey, plaas 
gre well advanced for the crea- 
tion of National Commissions 
and in the Union of South Afri- 
ca, where the National Advisory 
Council for Adult Education per- 
forms the functions of a Na- 
tional Commission pending the 
establishment of more specialis- 
.ed co-operative machinery, a 
meeting of Government represen- 
tatives, delegates to Unesco Con- 
ferences and the Advisory Coun- 
cil will shortly be held to con- 
sider the creation of a new na- 
tional Unesco body. 
In Canada an inter-depart- 
mental committee acts in an ad- 
visory capacity to the Govern- 
ment on matters relating to 
Unesco policy and programme, 
aad in Switzerland study and 
consultative cominittees have 
been set up this year to prepare 
for the creation of a national 
- eommission. 
The diversity of cultures and 
educational systems, and differ- 
ences in physical and economic 
conditions in Unesco’'s Member 
~ States are reflected in the mem- 
bership, organization and me- 
thod of appointment of their na- 
tional commissions. 
The Nationel Commissions of 
Ching and the United States 
have one hundred and twenty, 
and one hundred members res- 
pectively. The French National 
Commission has eighly mem- 
bers. The Italian and Mexican 
Commissions have sixty mem- 
bers; the Danish and New Zea- 
land National Commissions 
twelve and fifteen members res- 
pectively. hd 
In both Australia and the 
United Kingdom a series of Na- 
tional Co-operating Bodies have 
been set up to take responsibility 
for the various important bran- 
ches of Unesco’s activities. The 
work of these co-operating bodies 
is co-ordinated by central com- 
mittees on which the various 
programme interests are repre- 
sented. 
Many National Commissions 
including the Chinese, French 
and Brazilian Commissions have 
established programme commit- 
tees corresponding to the major 
programme divisions of Unesco. 
In Brazil and the United States 
the activities of the national 
commissions have been expanded 
to provide for regional activity. 
The Brazilian Institute of Educa- 
tion, Science and Culture is set- 
ting up regional bodies in each 
of the twenty-one States of Bra- 
zil, Representatives of these re- 
gional institutes and of the cen- 
tral Institute will be bought 
together this year at a National 
Conference. 
As the world programme of 
Unesco develops, the role of na- 
tional commissions becomes of 
ever-increasing importance. There 
is encouraging evidence that na- 
tional commissions are not only 
attempting to carry out projects 
in the Unesco programme assign- 
ed to them, but that they are also 
developing their own program- 
mes of activity to promote inter- 
national understanding and cul- 
tural interchange. 
The Danish National Comenis- 
sion, for example, discussed at 
its April meeting a scheme for 
the establishment of interna- 
tional seminars for teachers and 
youth leaders at Elsinore. 
The French National Commis- 
sion has planned a series of 
broadcasts designed to promote 
international understanding and 
to develop appreciation of the 
cultural and artistic achievements 
of other countries. 
Many National Commissions 
have active publication policies, 
The United States * National 
Commission News,” “the monthly 
journal of the Commission, pub- 
lished its twelth number on July 
1, 1948. *“ Unesco,” the monthly 
journal of the Austrian United 
Nations Association published its 
seventh number in July, 1948. 
The United States *“ National 
Commission News” has a very 
wide national circulation and an 
increasing circulation abroad. 
The Austrian publication “Unesco” 
has a circulation of 5,000 and it 
is distributed free to schools, uni- 
versities and learned institutions 
in Austria. 
The pamphlet * Unesco—in the 
minds of men” was published in 
Australia in response to a nation- 
wide demand for information 
about Unesco. 
Wherever Unesco’s message is 
known, people are asking: * What 
can I do to serve Unesco ? ” Na- 
tional Commissions are en- 
deavouring to develop program- 
mes of activity which will give 
the individual citizen and the na- 
tional organizations a part to 
play in building “the defences of 
peace.” 
The sustained and active sup- 
port of the peoples of the world, 
and their full participation in 
the programme of the Organiza- 
tion, are essential for the achieve- 
ment of Unesco’s purpose, 
  
Four Further 
Commissions 
Formed 
The Minister of Education of 
Afghanistan presided over the 
first meeting of the Interim Unes- 
co Committee held on July 1 at 
Kaeul, Dr. Kuo Yu-Shou. Unesco s 
special adviser on Asia and the 
Far East, was present at this 
meeting and explained the role of 
Naticnal Commissions in relation 
to Governments and the Unesco 
Secretariat to those present. 
J et 
“Le Moniteur Belge” published 
on July 14 a decree dated July 1 
creating the Belgian National 
Commission for Unesco. The de- 
cree was signed by the Regent, 
Prince Charles of Belgium, and 
by the Minister of Education, M. 
Camille Huysman. 
ge . 
° The Prime Minister and Minis- 
ter of Education of Bombay, Mr. 
B.H. Kher, presided over a meel- 
ing of the Committee appointed 
by the Ministry of Education of 
the Government of India to con- 
sider the formation of a perma- 
nent National Commission for Co- 
operation with Unesco held at 
New Delhi on July 10, 1948. Dr. 
Kuo Yu-Shou, Unesco’s Special 
Adviser on Asia and the Far East, 
was present at this meeting. 
Qe R 
The Lebanese National Commis. 
sion was created by Presidential 
decree on June 7, 1948. On June 
28, 1948, the Minister of National 
Education and Fine Arts signed a 
further decree nominating the   members of the Commission. 


### 73826: Philippine group links people with UNESCO

Philippine Group Links 
‘people with Unesco 
(Dr. Encarnacion Alzona, Executive Secretary of the Philippine 
National Commission, left Paris at the end of July to return to Mania 
after a several weeks visit to Unesco House. While here, she was able 
to study the work of the Unesco Secretariat, the developmen! ot the 
world programme and to bring about closer liaison between her country 
and the activities of the orgenizalion. 
(During her stay in Paris, Dr. Alzona also represented the Philip- 
pines at the Seminar on Programmes of Cultural Injormation, held 
al the European Centre of the Carnegie Endowment for Internalional 
Peace, and organized by Dr. Howard E. Wilson.) 
Dr. Encarnacion ALZONA 
Executive Secrelary Philippine National Commission 
and Cultural Matters was formally organized in January ot tills 
] HE Philippine Nalional Commission on Educational, Scientitic 
year at Malacanan Palace by the late Mr. Manuel Roxas, 
President of the Philippines. Iis functions were outlined as 
follows: to act in an advisory capacity to the Government sn Unesco 
affairs, to function as a liggs on agency between the Government and 
Unesco, and to study and report on such educational, scientific and 
cultural matlers as may from time to time be submitted to its con- 
sideration by the President of the Republic. 
  
£ 
ve 
\ NY 
Eh 
4 gl . | MN va 
Ei fa whl 
re Ps et 4 ii : ‘e wl 
  


### 73824: U.S.A: 5 regional meetings

U.S.A. - 5 Regional Meetings 
HE active sponsorshin of re- 
] gional activities by the 
United States National 
Commission and the delegation of 
programme activities to existing 
national organizations and spe- 
cial panels of experts, created to 
undertake Unesco projects, has 
given responsible citizens in the 
United States a practical role in 
the task of “building the defen- 
ces of peace.” 
Since the end of July, 1946, the 
U.S. National Commission has 
held four meetings and its Exe- 
cutive Committee has met seven 
times. Commission meetings have 
been held in Washington (Sep- 
tember, 1946), Philadelphia (Feb- 
ruary, 1947), Chicago (September, 
1947) and in Washington (Feb- 
ruary, 1948). A fifth meeting 
will be held in Boston from Sep- 
tember 27 to 29, 1948. 
Three of the five meetings of 
the Commission will thus have 
been held away from headquar- 
ters in Washington. The result- 
ing stimulation of interest in 
Unesco’s programme and purpose 
and the creation of public sup- 
port for the organization can 
hardly be overestimated. 
Similarly, National and Re- 
gional Conferen. :s have been 
successful in bringing a know- 
ledge of the objectives and work 
of Unesco to citizens in all walks 
of life in the United States. 
The first National Conference 
was held in ™hiladelphia in 
March, 1947; the next is planned 
for 3, 4, 5 March, 1949, in Cleve- 
land. 
In Philadelphia, the National 
Conference was attended by dele- 
gates from more than 500 na- 
tional groups, and fourteen sub- 
commissions studied the different 
branches of Unesco’'s programme. 
In Denver, three m- -th, later, 
there was held the Mountaiu 
Plains Regional Conference. Near- 
ly two thousand representatives 
of organizations in eight sur- 
rounding states sent delegates to 
develop concrete plans whereby 
- the people could best serve the 
objectives of Uncsco. 
Delegates proposed the forma- 
tion of state councils of organiza- 
tions and individuals interested 
in the aims and activities of 
Unesco. The major purpose of 
such councils is to provide a 
means of stimulating interest and 
coordinating activities within a 
state. 
Over three thousand people 
from seven states and the Terri- 
tories of Alaska and Hawaii at- 
tended the second Regional 
“debates proceeded at an unusual- 
Unesco Conference in San Fran- 
cisco, May 13-15, 1948. 
Section meetings on the various 
aspects of Unesco’s world pro- 
gramme provided opportunity for 
vigorous group discussions. No 
prepared speeches were made at 
the meetings—attended by fifty 
to one hundred persons—and the 
ly rapid. pace. The outstand- 
ing success of this regional con- 
ference was due in very large 
measure to careful pre-conference 
planning, strong community sup- 
port and the intelligent leader- 
ship and enthusiasm of —< Con- 
vening Committee and those as- 
sociated with it. 
A Slate Coordinating Council 
for Unesco has been set .up in 
Washington, under the chair- 
manship of Mrs. Pearl A. 
Wannamaker, State Superinten- 
dent of Public Instruction, Olym- 
pia, Washington.   
The Commission has fifteen 
members and is divided into four 
committees, Executive, Educa~ 
tional, Scientific and Cultural. 
There is a full-time Chairman 
and an Executive Secretarv. Ad- 
ministratively, it is under the 
Office of the President. 
The Government-owned house 
at 3336 Taft Avenue, Risal City— 
a new city south of the capital, 
Manila—serves as ils headquar- 
ters. Here, there is a newly- 
equipped office for the use of 
visiting Unesco representatives; 
and a small library open to the 
public. 
In the Philippines there has 
been a considerable interest in 
the work of Unesco. Returning 
delegates from the first two Unes- 
co annual sessions received many 
invitations to speak on Unesco 
from civic organizations and 
schools. The press, libraries and 
professional groups have snown & 
continuing interest in the organ- 
ization's activities, 
Some of the activities which the 
National Commission has carried 
out to make the work of Unesco 
effective within the Philippines 
during the first five months of 
the Commission's existence mignt 
be described as follows: 
The preparation of a national 
bibliography by the Bureau of 
Public Libraries, 
Very successful co-operation 
with the United Nations Appeal 
for Children in the Children’s 
Emergency Fund Campaign, 
Collection of data for Unesco’s 
BOOK OF NEEDS, Volume II. 
Selection of candidates tor the 
six Unesco Fellowships allocated 
to the Philippines. 
Distribution of books donated 
through Unesco by the kncycio- 
paedia Britannica, Allied Books 
Centre of London and the Livers 
pool City Libraries. 
Assistance rendered the Unesco 
field worker who surveyed Fhilip- 
This is the firsi such regional 
American students enroute to Europe under 
the programme of Exchange of Persons 
pine Educational 
Needs in April 
‘with the full co   
eration of the 
yifice of the Pres 
dent, Department 
~ Foreign Affairs 
nd the Depart: 
acnt of Education 
Approval‘ of the 
teaching about 
the United Nations 
and its Specialized 
Agencies in the 
schools. An appeal 
was sent to alt 
school heads. 
Approval of Phis 
lippine  participa- 
tion in the Uni- 
ted Nations and 
Unesco essay COI   
council, and it is felt that the de- 
velopment of similar groups 
would fill a useful function as 
clearing houses of information 
on Unesco and that they might 
service state and local councils 
in a given area. 
The United States National 
Commission is carefully review- 
ing the role of regional, state and 
local councils. Zor their success- 
ful operation it is essential that 
there should be practical tasks 
in relation to the Unesco pro- 
gramme for such community 
groups to perform. 
Duplication of effort must also 
be avoided ard decentralized 
activities coordinated with the 
work of the National Commission, 
its associated organizati--s and 
the Secretariat of Unesco in 
Paris, if results of permanent 
value are to be ¢..xined.   
tests for young people. This was 
entrusted to the United Nations 
Association in the Philippines 
and the Department of Educa 
tion. 
Recommendation to the Govern- 
ment for the sending of Philip» 
pine delegates to the Unesco kdu- 
cation Seminars being held this 
summer, . 
Acceptance of Unesco’s gift of 
two microfilm readers for the 
Philippines. 
The present members of the Na+ 
tional Commission will serve until 
the end of the present year. The 
Commission receives yearly from 
the Government a modest sum 
for the payment of the salaries of 
the chairman, executive secretary. 
and a small secretarial staff, and 
the per diem allowances of mein- 
bers who are private citizens

## [Page 8](073809engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 73827: Distinguished world thinkers study bases of human rights

8 UNESCO COURIER Vol. .—No 7. 
Distinguished World Thinkers | 
Study Bases of Human Rights 
One of the most important and least- 
publicized Unesco projects during the past 
months has been the compilati 
wide symposium of the philosophic 
Such an undertaking—in a 
world distraught with such fearsome problems 
as the hunger of millions and 
ideologies—may appear an academic one. Yet 
it is being carried out at a particularly timely 
moment. It is being undertaken following his- 
Human Rights. 
tory’s most terrible contlict—a 
T was at the first session of 
{the General Conference that 
an enquiry into the origins 
and philosophic bases of Human 
Rights was incorporated into the ° 
programme of Unesco. Then, 
little over a year after the end 
of ihe war, such a project was 
particularly timely for a world 
consciousness had develop- 
ed towards this question. 
on of a world- | 
bases of 
the clash of 
  conflict by the fruition. 
By 
     
peoples of the world against 
Human Rights. It is being 
moment when, after such a struggle, men and 
women everywhere are examining the question 
of ‘what are the rights of humanity’. 
In the following article, Jacques Havet, mem- 
ber of the Philosophy and Humanities Division 
of Unesco—who was instrumental in preparin 
and implementing the 
something of the project which is now nearing 
losophers, scientists and political 
figures throughout . the world. 
J acques This was carried both through 
National Commissions and di- 
H AVY E T rectly to the individuals approa- 
* . ched. 
Unesco Philosophy Nearly sevenly replies were 
and Humanilies Division received, ranging from very 
brief replies to lengthy studies 
Our whole social structure 
had been shaken by ihe 
repercussicns of total war. 
People everywhere sought 
a common denominator to 
the problem of fundamen- 
tal Human Rights. 
Sporadically throughout 
history there have been 
affirmations of these 
rights. The American De- 
claration of Independance 
in 1776, the Declaration 
of the Rights of Man by 
the French Nalional As- 
sembly in 1789 and the 
Declaration of Rights of 
the Toiling and Exploiled 
Peoples, adopted by the 
All-Russian Congress of 
Soviets in 1918 are but 
three striking examples of 
such pronouncemen:s. 
A world-wide declara- 
tion, however. had never 
been undertaken. Such a 
formulation would have to 
reconcile the various divel 
gen! or opposing points 
of view. It would have 
also to be sufficiently 
definite to have real signi 
ficance both as an inspira- 
tion and as a guide {0 
practice. but also suffi 
cienily general and flexible 
to apply to all men, 
and {o be capable of 
modification to suit peoples 
at different stages of social 
and political development 
while yet retaining signi- 
ficance for them and their 
aspirations. 
At the first session of 
Unesco's General Confe- 
rence in November, 1847, 
it was decided to ask phi- 
losophers and thinkers 
throughout the world what 
they thought about Hu- 
man Rights, their develop 
ment during the last cen- 
tury and what they 
thought were the forces 
threatening those rights. 
Delegales to the con- 
ference realized that such 
a project would have to 
pe in relation to the work 
of the Human Rights Ccm- 
mission of the United Na- 
tions, and that coordina- 
tion would be necessary. 
The Human Rights Com- 
mission was at that time 
preparing one of the most 
significant projects of so- 
eial history: the drafting 
of .a universal bill of i   
Some Extracts 
From the Replies 
phi- 
Holy 
From Jacques Maritain, distinguished 
losopher and French Ambassador to the 
See: 
“..No declaration of the righis of 
can ever be exhaustive and final, It must 
always be expressed in terms of the state 
of the moral conscience and of civilization 
at any given momeng of history. And it i8 
just jor this reason that, since the consi- 
dcrable success achieved at the end of the 
eighteenth century by the first written 
declarations, it has always been a matter 
of major interest for men to renew these 
declarations from wage to age...” 
man 
From the late Mahatma K. Gandhi, Father 
of India’s Independence: 
s..1 learned from my illiteraie but wise 
mciher that all rights to be deserved ana 
preserved came from duty well done. Thus 
the wnery right to live accrues to us only 
when we do the duly of citizenship of the 
world, From this one fundamental statement, 
perhaps it is easy enough to define ihe 
duties of Man and Woman and to correlate: 
every right to some corresponding duty to 
be first performed. Every other right can 
be shown to be a usurpation hardly worth 
fighting for.” 
From Aldous Huxley, distinguished British 
writer and philosopher: 
«“. The increasing pressure of population 
upon resources and the wagings, threat of, 
and wunremiiting preparation jor total war 
—these are, at the present time, the most 
formidable enemies to liberty... Heavy 
pressure of population upon resources 
threatens liberty in several ways. Individuals 
have io work harder and longer to earn a 
poorer living. At the same time, the eco- 
nomic situation of the community as a 
whole is so precarious that small mishaps 
—such as untoward weather conditions— 
may result in serious breakdowns. There 
can be little or mo personal liberty in the 
midst of social chaos; and where social 
chaos is reduced to order by the intervention 
of a powerful centralized executive, there is 
a grave tisk of totalitarianism...” 
From Professor Harold J. Laski, prominent 
political Scientist, of the University ol 
London: 
“...To provide the appropriate inspiration, 
such a Declaration (of the Righis of Man) 
would have to De both bold in its general 
character and concrete in its detailed account. 
Ii would have to take account rather of the 
possibilities which are struggling to be born 
than of the traditions that are dying be- 
fore our eyes. It would be better to shave no 
Declaration than one that was half-hearted 
and lacking in precision, or one which 
sought an uneasy compromise between irre- 
concilable principles of social action...” 
From Quincy Wright, noted American 
scholar of international law and Professor 
at the University of Chicago: 
“Human rights suggest rights which are 
alike for all human beings, Yet it is recogn- 
ized that much of human nature i38 a 
product oj the particular culture in which 
the individual has developed. Consequently, 
if all men have something in common which 
might provide the basis for a universal bill 
of human rights, it must reside either in 
common biological, psychological or spiritual 
characteristics which persist in spite of 
cultural differences, or in those common 
elements of the many culiures which may 
be regarded as a world culture...” 
    
Human Rights. At the 
meeting of the UN’ Economic 
and Social Council in January, 
1947, Unesco representatives 
made it clear that the Specialized 
Agency wanted to assist in the 
project. Such assistance, it was 
agreed, could Lest be made LY 
conducting an inlernafional en 
quiry among thinkers, social 
scientists and philosophers to 
find areas of agreement on Ihe 
question, and to present the 
resulting symposium to the Hu- 
man Rights Commissign for 
study in preparing the Bill of 
Human Rights. 
Thus Unesco determined two 
purposes for its enquiry: that of 
presenting a statement t(o the 
Human Rights Commission, and 
that of preparing the materials 
for publication to the general 
public. 
A memorandum which inclu- 
ded a questionaire was there- 
fore prepared by a special com- 
mittee and despatched to phi- 
the denial of 
attempted at a 
symposium —describes 
of the question but averag-. 
ing between two and four 
thousand words each, 
These represented nearly 
all the world’s national 
groups and nearly all 
ideological approaches. 
A Unesco committee of 
experts met in July, 1947 
to study the replies. The 
commitiee was made up 
of persons representing a 
wide range of opinions 
ard faiths. It drafted 
slatements on the philoso 
phic bases of Human 
Righis, emphasizing the 
consideration of historical 
changes, and trying—in a 
dynamic perspective — to 
show to what extent 
seemingly  widely-opposed4 
conceptions aimed at com 
mon future ideals. 
These statements were 
sent to the Human Righls 
Commission which consi- 
dered them at its meeting   in Geneva in December 
of last year. i 
At the same time, . 
Unesco re-convened its ex- 
peris’ panel in December 
and again in July, 1948 
to prepare the publicationt 
of a symposium of the 
replies. These were care- 
fully studied, and from 
the hundreds of thousands 
of words in the compiled 
statements, a manuscript 
of about one hundred 
thousand words was pre- 
pared for publication. 
Among the authors, let us 
mention: 
Harold Laski, Jacques 
Maritain, Benedetto Croce, 
E. H. Carr, Salvador de 
Madariaga, Aldous Huxley, 
Richard McKeon, Quincy 
Wright, F.S.C. Northrop, 
and Humayun Kabir. 
Jacques Maritain is at 
present writing an intro- 
duction for the whole 
symposium, 
The book will be pub- 
lished this year in English, 
French amd Spanish, and 
—it is hoped—it will later 
be published in other lan- 
guages. One may expect 
thal such a compilation of 
different views of Human 
Rights will arouse a great 
interest among ihe public 
and help the creation 
of a better understanding 
belween men of different 
cultures. 
of Unesco. 
Kleber, Paris-16e, France. 
Czechoslovakia 
way (Retail Counter Service) 
Tower Lane. ~— Belfast: 
Low Countries: 
9 Lange Voorhout. The Hague   
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Bureau 
6-month subscription: 2s.6d. or 30.50 or Fr. frs. 100. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos-Aires. 
Australia: H, A. Goddard Ltd, 255a, George St., Sydney. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West, Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga, R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Librairie FF Topic. 11 Narodni, Prague, 
Denmark : Einar Murksgaard, 6 Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Great Britain: HM Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
, P.O Box 569, London, S.E.1. 
orders), — Manchester 2: 39/41 King Street. — Edinburgh 2: 
Castle Street, — Cardiff: 1 St Andrew’s Crescent. — Bristol 1; 
80 Chichester Street 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris. 5e. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale. Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi, 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie, Booksellers, The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle. Av. Fouad Ier, Beirut. 
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, 
Sweden: Ab. C. E. Fritzes. Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot, Lausanne, 
(Post 
13a 
Afd., Fondsaministratie     


### 73828: World music catalogue to list best reproductions

World Music Catalogue 
to List Best Reproductions 
N the belief that music, as a basic and universal form of human 
expression, can make a substantial contribution to international 
understanding, Unesco’s Division of Arts & Letters is developing 
a project for a world catalogue of recorded music. Such a catalogue, 
which is intended to be produced in sections, stwould be of great 
service to educational instilutions, professional musicians as weil 
as to the general public. 
The project had its beginnings 
at the first session of the Gener- 
al Conference, when the Direc- 
tor-General was instructed to 
“survey the techniques and me- 
thods of reproduction in music...” 
The subsequent report sub- 
mitted by the Secretariat showed 
that the techniques of music 
reproduction had been highly 
developed and that the assis- 
tance of Unesco was needed not 
so much in stimulating improv- 
ed techniques but rather in mak- 
ing recordings of good music 
more readily available to the 
peoples of the wagld. 
The second session of the Ge- 
neral Conference therefore in- 
structed the Director-General: 
“To prepare a catalogue of 
world musie, listing music which 
is already available in recorded 
form and music which should be 
recorded to supplement existing 
material...” 
Nearly twenty years ago, the 
Institute of Intellectual Cooper- 
ation of the League of Nations 
recognized the recording of music 
as a great contribution of inven- 
      
  
tive genius to culture. For the 
preservation of the original 
interpretation of composers or 
great virtuosi, for ethnographic 
documentation or the fullest 
development of musical know- 
ledge, records are regarded as of 
incontestable value. 
And now Unesco has taken up 
the idea where the Institute left 
off. A committee of experts met 
at Unesco House (July 26-29, 
1948) to work out methods to be 
adopted for collecting informa- 
By 
Luis Heitor Correa 
de Azevedo 
Music Specialist, 
Arts & Letters Division     
tion for the proposed world ca- 
talogue. The committee was 
composed of prominent authori- 
ties in the music world from the 
Netherlands, France, the United 
Kingdom, Switzerland and the 
United States. 
A world catalogue of recorded 
music cannot be confined to the 
works available at any given 
period, however. Nor can it be 
compiled over-night. It must, in 
fact, be a continuing activity, 
since records are constantly 
being produced. It will be ne- 
cessary to revise and to sup- 
plement the catalogue at regular 
intervals. 
The committee recommended 
that a central index of all exist- 
ing records be prepared. To this 
index will be added information 
_about every new recording. From 
it will be taken necessary in- 
formation for specialized cata- 
logues of particular types of 
music. 
The experts recommended that 
Unesco pay particular attention 
to folk-music and the music of 
the East as well as to serious 
Western music. In the prepara- 
tion of the proposed catalogue, 
the cooperation of Unesco Na- 
tional Commissions and interna- 
tional musical. organizations, 
musicologists and other experts 
will be sought. 
The committee also pointed out 
to Unesco that the free flow of 
recorded music was being serious- 
ly hampered by existing cartel ar- 
rangements between certain com- 
mercial producers. 
Haugesunds Avis (Haugesunds, 
Norway, July 9, 1948) on the con- 
ference of Directors of Children's 
Villages at Trogen, Switzerland: 
“The Children’s Village Confe- 
rence is no doubt one Of the 
most successful projects yet 
undertaken by Unesco. The 
children’s community at Trogen, 
where the conference was held, 
has young people from many 
countries whq are learning to be 
international citizens at (he 
same time without losing their 
national identity.” 
L’Osservatore Romane (Vati- 
can City, July 19, 1948), on the 
Institute of the Hylean Amazon : 
“The value and the importance 
of this scientific initiative must 
not be measured only for the 
practical developments which it 
may permit, in the first instance 
for the countries directly interest- 
ed in the area of research and, 
in the final analysis, for the 
whole community oj nations... It 
can in fact be considered under 
another aspect and evaluuted ac- 
cordingly in a wider significance, 
as for example that of future in- 
ternational co-operation... 
“The initiative taken by Unesco 
in the Amazon region can consti 
tute, therefore, example of a way 
which is perhaps not direct but 
easier towards the basic target of 
modern society. The example 1s 
important. It has the significance 
of the first stone of an impressive 
edifice. It has the force of an 
encouragement of which the na- 
tions of Latin America can 
perhaps tomorrow claim with 
pride to be the father.” 
La Derniére Heure (Brussels, 
July 17, 1949), on the Unesco 
Seminars on Education for a 
World Society . 
The seminars “can render 
eminent services, perhaps not im- 
mediately but surely in the long 
run.. Independently of all the 
economic and political factors 
which provoke conflict and on 
which the School has doubtlessly 
little influence, it remains certain 
tha! the orientaiion of the mind 
towards peace or towards war is 
primarily the result of the edu- 
cation which guided in one direc- 
tion or in another... 
“The School must be used in 
the cause of raising in all men a 
sincere desire for understanding 
and for peace.” 
The Newark News (Newark, 
N. J., June 27, 1948), on the pro- 
ject of translating the world's 
written classics : 
“The aim of Unesco would be 
to put the great zones of world 
culture into direct contact. It 
would seek to reveal the human 
aspects of national cultures and 
to make clear the unily and 
brotherhood of man. It would 
attempt thus 1o promote mulual 
understanding and bring into 
closer harmony the conflicting 
views which obtain in world coun- 
cils today... . 
“The plan for a mutual ex- 
change of the classics among the - 
nations will not soon dissipate the 
disputings and differences in the 
councils of the nations, but it is 
destined to gain support as a s'ep 
in the right direction.” 
  
Editorial Offices: Unesco, 19, Avenue 
Kleber, Paris (16¢). 
Editor: S.M. KOFFLER. 
Director: H, KAPLAN, 
| au Reproductions Authorized | 
IMPRIMERIE 
DU “NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE” 
21, Rue de Berri - Paris (8e), 
 