# [102011](102011engo.pdf) 4

## [Page 1](102011engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

TROGLODYTES 
a hidden omy 
- i CANADA: C$5.75 - USA: $4.80 - SWITZEREAND: SF6.90 - Re FI 10 - DENMARK: KR38  

## [Page 2](102011engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

We invite readers to send us 
photographs to be considered 
for publication in this feature. 
Your photo should show a 
painting, a sculpture, piece of 
architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be an 
example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send 
us pictures of two works from 
different cultural backgrounds 
in which you see some striking 
connection or resemblance. 
Please add a short caption to 
all photographs. 
The big peace 
1992 
Within an outline of the Arabic word for peace, 
Brazilian artist Carlos Eduardo Abbud has drawn 
‘Hebrew, Christian, Polynesian, Celt, Amerindian and’ 
Shinto-Buddhist religious symbols. 

## [Page 3](102011engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

    
AT | R00 0 T = re 
» 
As - be 3 eg 5 a 
Cover: nun 0 a chuechb at Lalibela 
(Ethiopla). © Amaud de Wildenberg, Heritage 
2004 /La Caixa Foundation 
Battie of Stalingrad, © L'lllustration/Sygma, 
a hidden world 
10 
e LIFE BELOW GROUND 
| 4 by Jacek Rewerski 
I oNreRvIgw Wis 15 
JEAN CHINA: WHEN LOESS MEANS MORE 
by Jean Paul Loubes 
] DANIEL v 
ITALY: ROCKS IN A HARD PLACE 
f 9 by Pietro Laureano 
| MONTH % MONTH al 
ETHIOPIA’S NEW JERUSALEM 
BAHGAT ELNADI by Kassaye Begashaw 
AND 
ADEL RIFAAT 35 
TROGLODYTIC SITES ON THE WORLD HERITAGE LIST 
- Mogao Caves (China) 
i 42 The archaeological site of Petra (Jordan) 
The rock churches of Ivanovo (Bulgaria) 
COMMENTARY BY The Nubian monuments from Abu Simbel to Philae (Egypt) 
FE D E fe i C (9) Ajanta Caves — Ellora Caves — Elephanta Caves (India) 
The Bandiagara Escarpment (“Dogon Country”) (Mali) 
i M AYO > The rack cones of Cappadocia (Turkey) 
FH Mesa Verde (United States) 
Wieliczka salt mines (Poland) 
  
 
: 44 Consultant: Jacek Rewerski 
GREENWATCH 
PROTECTING 
PLANT LIFE 
by France Bequette 
| 47 
HERITAGE 
LUXEMBOURG: THE 
23 
SaL2ONY OF ElROPE 50 YEARS AGO... 
| 20 Commemorating the end of the 
AS IT WAS... 
THE UNESCO COURIER Second World War (1939-1945) FEBRUARY 1959 
THE UNESCO ( OURIER 
48th year 
Published montniy in 30 languages and In Braille     
“The Governments of the States parties to this Constitution on behalf of their peoples declare, 
“that since wars begin in the minds of mer, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed. . . 
“that a peace based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would riot be a peace which could secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peeples 
of the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if itis not to fail, upon the intellectual and mora! solidarity of mankind. 
“For these reasons, the States parties . . . are agreed and determined to develop and to Increase the means of communication between their peoples and to employ these means for the purposes 
+ Veli » 
of mutual understanding and a truer.and more perfect knowledge of each other s lives. .... EXTRACT FROM THE PREAMBLE TO THE CONSTITUTION OF UNESCO, LONDON, 16 NOVEMBER 1945 
3 LL

## [Page 4](102011engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

Jean Daniel 
HB At a time when nations seem 
increasingly threatened by the process 
of globalization, the idea of the 
nation-state—the subject of your 
latest book—is giving rise to a good 
deal of thought and comment. 
Jean Daniel: After a long period of 
neglect the nation has again become a 
highly topical subject, especially in the 
United States and Germany. Each 
month dozens of books are published 
on this theme in different parts of the 
world. I trace the origins of the idea of 
the nation to Johann Fichte’s! famous 
Addresses to the German Nation, a 
book which is outstanding both for its 
depth and objectivity and for its impact 
on European thought. 
No-one else has ever made a more 
subtle and penetrating eulogy of what 
is called “the right of blood” [jus san- 
guinis]. Fichte maintains that without 
the nation—real or imaginary—a people 
has no future, and that the Germans 
are fortunate because they have had a 
national experience made possible by 
the existence of a language and racial 
purity. He expounds this in such philo- 
sophically sophisticated terms and in 
such noble language that few people 
have seen any connection between his 
views and the racist theories that were 
set forth later by Joseph de Gobineau? 
and Houston Chamberlain3 and were to 
lead to Alfred Rosenberg and Hitler. 
In my opinion, Fichte remains top- 
ical because in some places there is a 
persistent feeling of nostalgia for “the 
right of blood”, unpopular though the 
concept may be among Western elites. 
Hl Could you give some examples? 
J. D.: Examples of this nostalgia can be 
found in ethnic and religious groups in 
the Baltic states, 
Georgia, in Armenia, Azerbaijan and of 
course in the former Yugoslavia, even 
though in some cases the heritage of the 
right of blood seems doubtful. 
in Ukraine, in 
The example of Israel is very inter- 
esting. On the one hand Israel welcomes 
people from all over the world who are 
often (especially the Russians) the 
product of ethnic mixing. On the other 
hand, marriages between Jews and non- 
Jews are forbidden in the diaspora5. 
And since proselytism is out of the ques- 
tion and conversion is a difficult enter- 
prise, marriage between Jews continues 
to be the ideal. Sometimes this consan- 
guinity is given a dangerous theological 
significance: that of a holy alliance with 
a distinctive people which must remain 
pure, the people to whom God speaks. 
HB And the Arab countries? 
J. D.: In theory, Islam is a universal reli- 
gion which is hospitable to all peoples 
and cultures. But in reality it respects 
the right of blood. 
H Is Islam more progressive in this 
respect, since anyone is a potential 
convert? 
J. D.: Don’t forget that St. Paul, who 
lived in pre-Islamic times, abolished the 
need to be circumcised before 
becoming a Christian. That did not pre- 
vent certain inquisitors from considering 
that converted Jews were not proper 
Christians. 
For Muslims it is inter-ethnic mar- 
riages rather than interreligious mar- 
riages that pose a problem. But it comes 
down to the same thing—we are dealing 
with prohibitions which show that in 
the final analysis what counts is the 
right of blood. 
What’s more, the right of blood is 
making a strong come-back all over the 


### 102024: Interview with Jean Daniel: the state of nation

interview 
The state of the nation 
world, directly and indirectly, and is being 
justified in various ways—Dby the idea that 
intermingling does not succeeed, or that 
it leads to bastardization or to the disso- 
lution of identity. . . . To some extent, 
many people who aspire to universality 
tell themselves that in the end it is better 
to achieve it via the community. 
HM This debate was inaugurated by 
the French Revolution, which 
formulated two conflicting ideas of the 
nation. On the one hand there is the 
“abstract nation that springs from 
“free contract” between autonomous, 
aware, responsible individuals, and on 
the other the real, physical nation that 
is a product of history and imposes 
itself on individuals, whether they like 
it or not. Or is this a simplification of 
what actually happened? 
J. D.: Enthralling debates about this 
took place between the revolutionaries, 
especially concerning the emancipation 
of the Jews, the Protestants and the 
blacks. 
When Stanislas de Clermont-Ton- 
nerre said “Everything to the Jews as 
individuals, nothing as a nation”, he had 
enthusiastic supporters who did not 
believe in communities. But he also had 
detractors. His proposal was rejected. 
Someone came to see him and said: “I 
don’t know any ‘individual’ Jews. I only 
know a community.” Then his visitor 
explained how individuals detached 
from their community structures did 
not exist. 
As for the Protestants, the Revolu- 
tion gave them equality. It emancipated 
them and gave them access to positions 
The right of blood is making a come-back’ 
all over the world. 

## [Page 5](102011engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 102024: Interview with Jean Daniel: the state of nation

The French writer and journalist 
Jean Daniel is founder-director of 
the Paris weekly Le Nouvel 
Observateur. He has been an ardent 
champion of the cause of human 
dignity and a lucid and critical 
observer of the events of the last half 
century. The author of many novels 
and essays, he was recently 
awarded the Albert Camus prize for 
a collection of short stories entitled 
L’ami anglais (Paris, Grasset, 1994). 
Here he talks to Bahgat Elnadi and 
Adel Rifaat about the current 
evolution of the nation-state, the 
theme of his latest book, Voyage au 
centre de la nation (Seuil publishers, 
Paris, 1995). 
from which they had been excluded. 
But they continued to define themselves 
in a way that was simultaneously reli- 
gious and individual. And so at this 
period when God was deprived of his 
sovereignty, when the temporal was sep- 
arated from the spiritual, when the 
individual was dazzled and over- 
whelmed by his freedom, French 
Protestants found a thoroughly grati- 
fying form of integration: they had their 
cake and ate it too. 
Things were more complicated for 
the blacks. Slavery was abolished, then 
reinstated. Economic questions compli- 
cated relations with the black commu- 
nity even further. The heirs of the Rev- 
olution behaved very badly and finally 
came out in support of slavery. All this 
is magnificently described by the Cuban 
writer Alejo Carpentier in his novel 
Explosion in the Cathedral. 
To conclude, it is true that an 
abstract idea of the individual exists. 
The Declaration of the Rights of Man 
and of the Citizen of 1789 makes no 
allusion to the duties of the individual 
(in other words there is no bond with 
the community and no responsibility 
towards it). The only limitation on 
freedom is that one should not trespass 
on one’s neighbours freedom. Two 
  
  
counter-revolutionaries, Edmund Burke 
in England and Joseph de Maistre in 
France, later pointed out correctly that 
the men of 1789 were to some extent 
talking nonsense, that they had invented 
a creature which turns its back on 
human nature. 
Of course, the need for a sense of 
community exists in all societies. It has 
been seen, for example, in the strength 
of tradition in Britain or in the heritage 
of the feudal monarchy in France, not 
to mention societies where the patriar- 
chal principle is so strong that the indi- 
vidual is not only an abstraction but an 
absurdity. The community impinges 
constantly on the members of these 
societies from the cradle to the grave, 
notably through rites of initiation, mar- 
riage and sexuality. The individual 
derives his balance from the community, 
and when he is alone he feels protected 
by remembering his community. 
So is it possible to strike a balance 
between individual freedom and soli- 
darity with the community? One place 
where this balance has been found is 
the nation-state, which was constructed 
in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century 
Europe to meet this very need. 
BH Widely different ideas of the 
community have been proposed. . .. 
J. D.: In France, for example, there is a 
big difference between the ideas of 
Maurice Barrés? and Charles Maurras8. 
Barres is a kind of aesthete of the 
French nation. For him the nation 
means having the same dead, and 
remembering them in the same way. 
5 
© 
Mi
ch
él
e 
B
a
n
c
i
l
h
o
n

## [Page 6](102011engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Jean 
Daniel | 
LE 
Maurras had a more vigorous idea of the 
nation. He said to Barrés: “Your dead 
interest me, but it’s not mourning them 
that makes a nation. It’s the fact that 
they are dead. The blood that has been 
shed.” 
De Gaulle had a similar idea. For 
him the nation is primarily an idea. Seen 
in this light, his thinking was much 
more progressive than that of Francois 
Mitterrand or of many African heads of 
state today. For De Gaulle the French 
nation is a certain idea of France and 
the hardships shared in serving this 
idea—but hardships shared with 
others, remember. France was made 
with foreigners. 
The idea of shared hardship is 
essential here. Before there can be a 
nation there has to be a certain number 
of common memories, projects and 
hardships. The universal must be asso- 
ciated with what Simone Weil? calls 
enracinemeni—taking root. Here we 
have come a long way from the free indi- 
vidual of 1789, who asks himself every 
day “do I want to be French or not?” 
Bl Between the wars, in the societies 
of the South, the notion of the 
individual, abstract though it may 
have been, was nevertheless a 
spearhead that helped to dislocate 
religious and patriarchal structures. 
There was never any danger of being 
too abstract. On the contrary, 
patriarchal despotism was so deeply 
rooted that it took all the virulence of 
the abstract ideal of 1789 to 
overthrow it. 
J. D.: Indeed. But in the West, the modern 
individual eventually went too far and sev- 
ered all connection with the sacred. The 
4   
© 
Mi
ch
él
e 
Ba
nc
il
ho
n 
problems he or she encountered in 
Europe were not the same as those expe- 
rienced by modernist intellectuals on the 
other side of the Mediterranean. 
HM In some ways the preoccupations of 
intellectuals in the South today recall 
those of the 19th-century European 
intelligentsia. And the crisis of the 19th- 
century European intelligentsia gives 
the 20th-century South a foretaste of 
what to expect. ... 
J. D.: This reminds me of a very telling 
anecdote. At the end of his life, Tol- 
stoy—who had fought against serfdom 
in Russia and was largely responsible for 
its abolition—used to say when he saw 
the rather arrogant and vulgar behav- 
iour of the former muzhiks: “How fine 
was the struggle in the days of 
serfdom!” 
In just the same way, in the struggle 
for the freedom of the individual, the 
struggle itelf is a source of fulfilment. 
An ideal exists in its most open, most 
balanced form during the struggle 
waged on its behalf. When the battle is 
won, one sees that its goal has been 
betrayed or else that it was vain. Revo- 
lutions soon betray themselves. 
As for the revolutions in the South 
during the first half of the twentieth 
century, the individual began to fulfil 
himself in the struggle. He found true 
fulfilment at the time when he was most 
committed and responsive to the call of 
his community at a time of danger. As 
soon as the struggle was over, his 
freedom was either confiscated by a dic- 
tatorship or, at best, impoverished. 
WM There is a cyclical phenomenon, 
here. After the great age of triumphant 
nationalism, the idea of individual 
freedom—as defined by French 
humanism—was reaffirmed with new 
vigour. It is true that its 
fundamentalist negation has been 
quicker to occupy the ground. ... 
J. D.: Perhaps the expansion of French 
humanism complicated matters rather 
than simplified them. It made almost 
everyone schizophrenic. People experi- 
enced it on two levels—as a source of 
greater inner wealth but also of more 
conflicts and uneasiness. Eventually 
they became so unbalanced that they 
wanted to go back to the old-style com- 
munity because it was simpler and more 
reassuring. Instead of seeing a partic- 
ular richness in these two levels, as Sen- 
ghor did, they saw them as a betrayal 
of the myth of a return to the past, of 
the myth of authenticity, of a golden 
age. This golden age never really existed 
but nostalgia for it made it possible to 
resist schizophrenia. 
The five or six fundamentalists I have 
met during my life are former schizo- 
phrenics who have wanted to free them- 
selves from their failure to discover a syn- 
thesis between the two civilizations and 
ideals that divided them. They said to 
themselves: “I only take one of them and 
I back it to the hilt so that I have a firm 
sense of reality on which I can rely.” This 
perverse effect of the contagion of 
humanism is worth thinking about. 
HB As far as perversity is concerned, 
we prefer to think about the perversity 
of states where the individual exists 
but lacks the protective garment of 
citizenship. 
J. D.: Tt is true that citizenship was the 
vocation of the individual in the West. 
Many remedies for the failings we have 
been discussing can be found in citizen- 
ship, because the citizen is a responsible 
person. Pierre Mendes Francel0 thought 
that freedom conferred more duties than 
rights and that national solidarity made 
non-stop claims on citizens. In the duties 
of the free citizen the individual finds a 
balance equivalent to that which in tra- 
ditional societies is provided by depen- 
dence on the community. 
But things have changed, even in the 
West, in recent decades. There have 
been two big changes—the coming of 
the affluent society, which has trans- 
formed the individual into a consumer, 


### 102024: Interview with Jean Daniel: the state of nation

      
      
Is it possible to strike a balance between individual 
freedom and solidarity with the community? 
The nation-state is a response to this need. 
4 E E —— ——— 

## [Page 7](102011engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 102024: Interview with Jean Daniel: the state of nation

and the development of the audiovisual 
media, which has transformed the indi- 
vidual into a televiewer. The ideal of the 
market economy, which has turned the 
individual into a competitive consumer, 
is at odds with humanist culture. Fur- 
thermore, as a televiewer, the individual 
has less and less need of elections and 
parliaments, reacting with increasing 
passivity to a procession of images, 
instead of making active judgments in 
the privacy of his conscience. The com- 
bination of the consumer and the tele- 
viewer is annihilating the citizen. It does 
not deprive him of freedom by imposing 
constraints but by the extent of the new 
needs it implants in him. The nation is 
threatened with dissolution by the 
market economy and by television. 
HB Is it possible that the dissolution of 
the nation under the pressure of an 
increasingly globalized market will 
lead to larger supranational 
groupings, just as the 19th-century 
nation-states were formed out of 
statelets? This question is relevant not 
only for Europe and North America but 
also for the Arab world and sub- 
Saharan Africa. How else will survival 
in the 21st century be possible? 
J. D.: What you describe may come 
about but it is not inevitable. I have 
noticed that major social phenomena 
are the product of reactions rather than 
actions. Social phenomena obey the law 
of the swinging pendulum. When the 
pendulum has swung too far one ways, it 
swings back just as far in the other. This 
observation is perhaps less common- 
place than it seems because it can lead 
to extremely tense situations. 
To take one example, the idea of the 
swing of the pendulum has led scientists 
such as Claude Lévi-Strauss to talk of a 
“race tolerance threshold”, which is a 
very dangerous notion. If you have too 
many foreigners in a given area, a rejec- 
tion mechanism takes place. Lévi- 
Strauss has spent his life studying 
tribes that he admired so much that he 
wanted to protect their purity (in a 
sense he was in favour of the right of 
blood) and since he saw that intermin- 
gling led to acculturation, he came to 
believe that cultures have the right to 
protect themselves against each other. 
It is true that inputs from outside are 
sometimes necessary, but the dosage 
must be carefully watched. Ultimately, 
economy - television; 
Lévi-Strauss sees the world as a set of 
cultures that have the right to defend 
themselves but must not seek to domi- 
nate each other. 
Bl What do you think of the idea that 
our attitudes to the nation have taken 
us back into the 19th century? 
J. D.: Unlike the French thinker Régis 
Debray, I don’t believe that we have 
returned to the nineteenth century, 
because in the nineteenth century you 
had none of the phenomena—interna- 
tional exchanges, demographic factors, 
technology, planet-wide interdepen- 
dence, the interpenetration of cultures, 
the abolition of distance, the babeliza- 
tion of languages—that you have today 
and which lead many people to feel that 
they are losing their identity. 
To return to the example of France, 
since European citizenship does not 
exist and French 
becoming diluted, many people will 
either fall back on nationalism or 
become spineless individuals. Else- 
where, retreat into religion and expres- 
sions of fundamentalism are more or less 
violent reactions to the radically new 
idea that we all inhabit a single planet. 
Where will all this lead to in the end? 
Since the trend towards globalization is 
irreversible, I think it is possible that 
nations may disappear under the com- 
bined effects of a sense of loss of iden- 
tity, of consumption, of television and 
citizenship is 
the absence of wars. 
Think of the ideas put forward 
about the identity of France by the 
French historian Fernand Braudel. 
Braudel says, more or less, that France 
is a kind of miracle, a product of 
chance, and lists all the reasons why it 
 
should not have become a nation. There 
was no complementarity between the 
scattered pieces of France. There was 
no need for France to become France. 
Nor is there any need today for 
Europe or the Arab world to form a fed- 
eral unit. Millions of French and 
German people had to die before it was 
decided to give priority to economic 
interests and the construction of Europe 
began. First of all people felt the need 
to stop exterminating each other, then 
came the discovery of economic com- 
plementarity. Supranational groupings 
may or may not be made—it will all 
depend on human determination, not on 
some kind of historical inevitability. H 
1. German philosopher (1762-1814). His 
Reden an die deutsche Nation, 14 addresses 
given at the university of Berlin in 1807 and 
1808, set forth his ideas on the foundations 
of national recovery after the collapse of 
Prussia.—Ed. 
2. French writer (1816-1882), author of an 
“Essay on the inequality of the human races 
(1853-1855; Eng. trans. 1915).—Ed. 
3. British-born German writer (1855-1927), 
author of a pan-German racist theory 
expounded in his book The Foundations of 
the 19th Century (1899, Eng. trans. 1911) 
which influenced Hitler.—Ed. 
4. German politician (1893-1946). A leading 
theorist of national socialism.—Ed. 
29 
5. The Jewish communities dispersed 
throughout the world. —Ed. 
6. A representative of the nobility in the 
Estates General at the beginning of the 
French Revolution.—Ed. 
7. French writer (1862-1923) and 
nationalist. —Ed. 
8. French writer (1868-1952) and 
monarchist.—Ed. 
9. French writer and philosopher 
(1909-1943).—Ed. 
10. French politician (1907-1982).—Ed. 
  
etreat into religion and expressions of fundamentalism 
are more or less violent reactions to the radically new; 
idea that we all inhabit a single planet. 

## [Page 8](102011engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO 
OURIER 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 
31. rue Francois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France 
Fax; (331) 45.66.92.70 
Internet: UNEsco. CoOUNEr@unesco.org 
Director: Bahgat Einadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Glltian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Aracell Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: lasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Iustrations: Arfane Bailey (Tel. 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag (Tel. 45.68. 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel. 45.68,47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: Mouna Chatta (Tel. 45.68.47.14) 
Artwork Consultant: Eric Frogé 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: El-Said Mahmoud El-Shenitt (Cairo) 
Italian: (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Deihl) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Claude MontriguX (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Moacyr A. Fioravante (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Javaid labs! Sved (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Kang Woo-tiyon (Seoul) 
Swahili: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kormnhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Plyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Katrl Himma (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana (Donostia) 
Thai: Sudhasinee Vairabul (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanol) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasilluk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Femandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. Fax: 42.73.24.29 
Subscriptions: Marie Thérése Hardy (Tel, 45.68.45.65), 
Jocelyne Despouy, Jacqueline Loulse-Julle, Manichan 
Ngenekea, Michel Ravassard, Mohamed Salah El Din 
(Tel. 45,68.49.19) 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (Tel. 45.68.4564) 
Accounts: (Tel, 45,68.45.65) 
Shipping: Daniel Meister (Tel, 45.68.47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel.: 45.68.45.65 
1 year: 211 French francs, 2 years: 396 FF. 
Students: 1 year! 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's Issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Individual articies and photographs not copyrighted may. be reprinted pro- 
viding the credit ling reads “Raprinted from the Unésco Courier”; plus date. 
of issu, and thre voucher copies are sent to the editor Signed articles 
reprinted must bear author's name; Non-copyright photos wili be supplied 
on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be relumed unigss accompa. 
nied by an intemational reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles 
express the opinions of the authors sad do not necegsanly represent the 
opinions of Unesco ort ts of the U > Qouper, Photo 
oaptlons and hisadlines 5 £5 Th 
nit 
   
  
 
   
   
staff. The bound:  
    
    
       
ns [Xerox], Ar 3A m 
Mighigan 48100 U.S.A (Bi N.C. ition, Indian Head Inc., 111 
West 40th Street, New York, USA (4) Bell and Howell Co. Old Mansfield | 
Road. Woostar, Ohio 44691, LSA, 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed In France) 
DEEQT LEGAL: C1 - DECEMBRE 1995 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N® T1844 - DIFFUSE PARLESNMP.P. 
Phatocemposition, phiotagravure: La Courrier de "Unesco. 
Impression; MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z|. Route d'Etampes, 45331 Maisherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 NT 12-1905.0PF 95843 A 
This fssue comprises H2 pages, a 4-page Insert between 
pages 2-3 and 50-51 and an B-page photo supplement. 
EEE 
MELIES, MAGICIAN OF THE SCREEN 
When I read your double issue on the 
cinema (“A Century of Cinema”, July- 
August 1995) I was surprised to find nothing 
about Georges Méliés, a great illusionist of 
the cinema and inventor of unforgettable 
special effects. Dubbed the “Magician of 
the Screen”, he is held to have built the 
world’s first studio, in Montreuil, an eastern 
suburb of Paris. Some 150 of his films have 
been preserved, and many books have been 
written about him. 
This cobbler’s son, who himself started 
out in life in the shoe business, really 
deserved a place in your excellent issue. 
Michel Juignet 
President of the French Cobblers’ 
Federation 
Paris (France) 
WELL INFORMED 
I should like to point out a mistake in your 
September 1995 issue (“Women—one half 
of heaven”). The well shown in the photo on 
page 43 cannot possibly be a Tuareg well. 
The Tuareg live mainly in Mali and Niger. 
The well shown in the photo is more likely to 
belong to the nomads known as the Beidane. 
André Patris 
Fontenay-aux-Roses 
(France) 
1945 REMEMBERED | 
I think it is extremely unfortunate that so 
far this year you have not devoted an issue or 
even an article of the UNESCO Courier to the 
fiftieth anniversary of 1945, the year which 
saw the liberation of the concentration 
camps and the victory of the forces of peace 
and democracy over the unspeakable bar- 
barity of Nazism—events that led to the 
foundation of UNESCO. 
I feel this not only because I am a sur- 
vivor of Nazi barbarity (I fought in the 
French Resistance and was deported to 
Auschwitz). I am thinking of all my friends, 
boys and girls of twenty or younger, known or 
(in most cases) unknown, who will never be 
able to bear witness. By the time of the cen- 
tenary in 2045, the last surviving voices will 
of course have fallen silent. 
S$. Radzinski 
Paris (France) 
See pages 23-30 of this issue.—Ed. 
In your “Century of Cinema” issue (July- 
August 1995) you say that the brilliant 
young film-maker Milco Mancevski is “Mace- 
donian” by nationality. 
I should like to remind you that United 
Nations resolution No 617/1993, which also 
applies to UNESCO, refers to Mr. Mancevski’s 
country as the “Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia” . . . pending attribution of a 
definitive name, which I hope will come in 
the near future. 
Dimitris Papastamos 
Permanent Delegate of Greece 
to UNEsco 
MORE AFRICAN WRITERS, PLEASE! 
I like your magazine very much and regret 
that I did not subscribe to it sooner. My 
family and high-school friends also enjoy 
reading it. 
But there is one thing that shocks us. 
We have noticed that the Courier, particu- 
larly since September 1994, has taken no 
interest in our continent. My teachers have 
always told me that writing originated in 
Africa, in Egypt, to be precise. However, in 
your April 1995 issue, “The origins of 
writing”, you say it began in Mesopotamia! 
What’s more, why can’t you find African 
specialists to contribute to your magazine? 
I note that the author of the article on 
Africa published in your April issue is a 
British linguist. 
Nor do Africans feature in your inter- 
views. And judging from the Courier, one 
might think that there are no heritage sites 
in Africa either. To date you have only pub- 
lished articles about World Heritage sites 
on other continents. 
United Nations institutions exist for the 
whole planet. It is impossible to imagine 
that they might be infected by the infamous 
virus of racism. 
So, more African writers, please! 
Théophile Azonglahoun 
Mono 
{Benin) 
Our themes are not treated in a spirit which 
is confined to any single continent or 
country as such. We are concerned above 
all that the viewpoints advanced on each 
theme should reflect the widest possible 
range of philosophical and cultural atti- 
tudes. Nearly all this year’s issues, for 
example, have included an African per- 
spective. Among the personalities we have 
interviewed in recent years are the film- 
maker Sembéne Ousmane, the musician 
Manu Dibango, and the historian Joseph 
Ki-Zerbo.—Ed.

## [Page 9](102011engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

1. See pages 26-27, 
2. Pages 4-7   
nth by month 
The Prime Minister of Israel was assassinated on Saturday 4 November as he was leaving a 
peace rally in Jerusalem. He was murdered by a Jewish fundamentalist who was reported as 
saying that he had “acted on God’s order” to punish Yitzhak Rabin because Rabin had agreed 
to share Palestine with the Palestinians. 
“The hawk with wings of a dove” was one of seven persons, each honoured as a peace- 
maker by UNESCO, profiled in the previous issue of the Unesco Courier. These exceptional 
men violated tribal taboos because of their belief that, by acknowledging the position of 
those who differ from them, people gain stature rather than lose it. Abraham Lincoln and 
Mahatma Gandhi are but two of the great historical figures who paid the price for overstep- 
ping this mark before Yitzhak Rabin. Who, one wonders, will be next on the list? The same 
threat hovers over Peres, Arafat and Mandela. 
Political assassination, the supreme weapon of terrorism, is not a new phenomenon. It 
makes its grim appearance at turning points in history when, after a long period of violent 
confrontation between two camps, a chance of reconciliation suddenly appears. A leader who 
is bold enough to seize that opportunity becomes a vulnerable target for those on his own 
side who are totally committed to the violence on which he has turned his back. He has under- 
stood that the conflict must end; they think that it must go on forever. He has begun to believe 
that the enemy can become a neighbour, a partner, a friend. For them the enemy will always 
be the enemy. 
In the period we are living through today—as Jean Daniel remarks in the interview pub- 
lished in this issue?—people in many countries are being driven by suspicion and rejection of 
the unfamiliar and are hauling up drawbridges against the outside world. 
At a time when the process of globalization is bringing us closer together, those who are of 
a receptive, conciliatory frame of mind are heing challenged by those whose reaction is to 
exclude and reject. In such conditions, political assassination may well spread. 
This is a threat it would be absurdly simplistic to combat only with the weapons of repres- 
sion and counter-insurgency. To get to the root of the evil it is necessary to attack what lies 
at the heart of all fanaticism—the conviction that one has a monopoly of a higher truth, 
that one's cause is more valid than all the rest, especially when it bears a label that is sup- 
posedly of divine manufacture. 
It cannot be repeated too often that what is sacred is life, dignity and individual freedom; 
that each people has its own interests and should see that they are respected, but that it 
has no right to set them up against the wider interests that it shares with humanity as a 
whole. 
All this is admirably set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed 
fifty years ago by the United Nations. Now is a particularly good time to read this document 
again. 
BAHGAT ELNADI AND ADEL RIFAAT 
9

## [Page 10](102011engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 102025: Life below ground

Life below ground 
Troglodyte communities down the centuries 
have created a little-known form of 
architecture that demonstrates exceptional 
versatility and resourcefulness 
  
    
Strictly speaking, troglodytes are 
~ people who live in caves hollowed out 
by human agency. The earliest of them lived 
in the New Stone Age, when societies aban- 
doned hunting and turned to farming and 
animal husbandry. Unlike their ancestors, the 
hunters of the Old Stone Age who took tem- 
porary refuge in natural caves against bad 
weather or attack, troglodytes (the word is 
derived from the Greek trogle, hole, and 
dunein, enter) used a favourable geological 
environment (soft but not friable rock) to 
create areas that could be used as dwellings 
and for economic activity as well as for wor- 
ship, burial and defence. 
 K
g
o
e
v
s
k
y
 
© 
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ri
s 
by Jacek Rewersk 
It is simpler to hew a shelter out of rock 
than to build one, but considerable under- 
standing of the natural environment is called 
for, as well as a remarkable capacity to adapt to 
it. Contrary to what is often thought, the 
underground dwelling is not a backward 
form of architecture but rather a more eco- 
nomical way of living, above all in regions 
where building materials such as wood are 
rare. As a result, most troglodyte dwellings 
are found in arid regions, where the big dif- 
ferences between day-time and night-time 
temperatures and the frequency of sand- 
storms are an incentive to search for service- 
able shelter. 
Hewn from the living rock 
To a greater extent than natural caves, “artifi- 
cial” underground dwellings are designed ona 
human scale to meet human needs. The eco- 
nomic and ecological advantages of this ancient 
form of habitat, especially stability of temper- 
ature, have attracted the interest of modern 
architects, who believe that it holds rich possi- 
bilities for the present and the future. 
The oldest known troglodytic site is at 
Beersheba in Israel, where thirty-odd under- 
ground dwellings dating from the fourth mil- 
lennium B.C. were excavated in the 1950s. The 
dwellings, which could house between 200 
and 300 people, are positioned at intervals 
along a two-kilometre-long site on the banks 
of a stream. At the neolithic site of Banpo, in 
RE 
=m fl 
- ET Lo le 
fd 
-  
Lett, a member of a troglodyte 
group in China’s Shanxi 
Province. 
Below, the Golden Temple of 
Dambulla (Sri Lanka). 

## [Page 11](102011engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 102025: Life below ground

Nh 
i yi 
aR § RR TIE IA rotons 
  
- A 
TRA RL LL 3 
iad 
J EARNS A 
RRR Se 
RAN Ra WAALS 3 Sons ; Ras Fein 
 
  
  
  
  
i,
 
  
  
  
  
      
  
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
D
o
c
u
m
e
n
t
i
 
di
 
Ar
ch
it
te
tu
ra
 
a
r
m
e
n
a
,
 
Mi
la
n 
Bamian Valley (Afghanistan). 
At centre is the “Little 
Buddha”, a 38-metre-tall 
statue which was sculpted in 
the rock face in the 4th-5th 
centuries. The cliffs are 
perforated with monks’ cells. 
Lett, cross-section of the 
monastery and church of 
Gheghrard (Armenia). 
China’s Shaanxi province, there are extensive 
remains of hollowed-out dwellings which pre- 
figure settlements that appeared in China later 
on. The prehistoric site of La Madeleine in the 
Périgord region of France, which has given its 
name to an important culture of the Old Stone 
Age, is interesting on two grounds. Firstly, it 
shows how troglodytism began in rock shel- 
ters that were first used by hunters and then 
extended by digging. Secondly, it was inhab- 
ited over an extraordinarily long period which 
lasted, with interruptions, from the Mag- 
dalenian (10,000 B.C.) to the sixteenth century. 
Troglodytism belongs to a very ancient 
and widespread tradition which still con- 
tinues to be practised. There are more than 
40 million troglodytes in China today. In 
Tunisia, ancient dwellings hewn vertically out 
of the rock have been transformed into 
attractive hotel complexes. Remarkable 
examples of cave-dwelling communities still 
exist in Spain, Italy and France. In the Saumur 
11 
eh a 
© 
C.
 
Le
na
rs
, 
P
a
r
i
s

## [Page 12](102011engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 102025: Life below ground

Fe fisad au in Matmata (Tunisia). a Ti] 
-y y sans a S 3 
    
    
al % 
  
IN
ES
T 
W
e
i
s
s
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
region of France, near the river Loire, many 
cave dwellers enjoy the same amenities as 
householders who live above ground. At the 
same time many troglodytic sites have been 
abandoned, many are deteriorating and will 
soon be beyond repair, and others have dis- 
appeared entirely, even if some are being ren- 
ovated thanks to tourism. Is troglodytism 
merely a survival from a bygone age which 
will one day be forgotten? | 
As an original way of life and form of 
architecture, troglodytism is part of the 
world’s cultural diversity. But the traditional 
systems to which it belongs and which have 
functioned for thousands of years now seem 
doomed gradually to disappear under the 
pressure of growing standardization. Both the 
ancient and the modern forms of the heritage 
are in danger. Troglodytism is little known 
and tends to be a source of suspicion, largely 
because of the ambiguous image of the 
underground world, regarded in many cul-  © 
J. 
Re
we
rs
ki
, 
Mo
zé
-s
ur
-L
ou
et
, 
Fr
an
ce
 
Y.
 
E.
 
8r
an
di
ly
 
© 
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ri
s 
A rock shelter made by a 
combination of hewing and 
building in the Dordogne tures both as the home of the dead and a place 
region of France. of renewal, tomb and matrix. It is a source of 
both attraction and repulsion. 
Sanctuaries and refuges 
One of the most spectacular forms of this 
architectural tradition is sacred troglodytism. 
Underground temples, monasteries, burial 
vaults and catacombs hewn out of the rock 
constitute a vast heritage designed for wor- 
ship or burial, showing how the human imag- 
ination regards rock as an impregnable form 
The village of Monsanto f shel To bury one’s dead in a k b 
(Portugal) nestles amidst © sheder 20 Y i ToCk-10m 
massive granite boulders. is to stake an eternal claim to that place. 
© 
At
el
ie
r 
d’
Ar
ch
it
ec
tu
re
 
J.
 
P.
 
Lo
ub
es
, 
B
o
r
d
e
a
u
x
 

## [Page 13](102011engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 102025: Life below ground

or Ny fic Sle A cave-dwelling has been practised as a defen- 
— LEE sive ploy on every continent by individuals 
2 : ER and communities. Many of the villages con- 
bi structed by the Dogon people along the steep 
Hl sandstone Bandiagara cliffs in Mali contain 
refuges in crannies in the rock to which the 
iE } villagers could retreat when attacked. In the 
A EEE West of the United States are sites where for- 
WE tified villages were built amidst a multitude of 
granaries and food-stores hewn out of the 
rock. People living in these villages clinging 
to canyon walls could cut themselves off 
from outsiders by removing the ladders that 
BE gave access to them. In Cappadocia, thou- 
a SE sands of people could take refuge with stores 
of food and livestock in the extraordinary 
troglodyte settlements of Kaymakli and 
8 Derinkuyu. 
i717 iS, There are large numbers of underground 
i | civilian and military fortifications in Europe, 
19m 3 ranging from Roman and medieval refuges to 
wi 8 | the buried parts of twentieth-century defen- 
7% : 4 sive systems such as the Maginot Line. 
® 9 i Poland, a land of plains which has been 
  
% invaded many times, is particularly rich in for- 
: tifications which in many cases have an under- 
i i 8 ground section as their main feature. Highly 
: 8 interesting specimens of underground archi- 
RE tecture have also survived on old battlefields. 
: AVE B® During the First World War, the German 
aia % "army built a network of dugouts in old quar- 
a 3 i ries on the Chemin des Dames in Champagne 
| # A a : (France) and joined them by means of tunnels 
© CANE lg Bl and railways. These underground installations 
& 
  
; i gx 
§ 
HA
F        
  
} i) h i i "Wi oh 4 . # } \ 
SE | \ i » WW 
« : +) 
Above, L’Hélice Terrestre, a 
. “contemporary art space” 
The tomb-temples of Petra in Jordan, the created in Anjou (France) by 
Buddhist temple-monasteries of Ajanta and Jacques Warminski. Trowels 
Ellora in India, the burial vaults of Lycia and and tea-spoons were among 
h k ch h dh . fC the tools used to excavate 
the roc churches and hermitages oI Lap-  ynderground rooms from tufa. 
padocia in Turkey are outstanding examples Above-ground sections of 
Warminski’s work (right) were of troglodytic sanctuaries. Some of them, 
moulded in cement. 
such as the rock churches of Lalibela in 
Ethiopia, are still used for worship. These 
forms of sacred architecture hewn from the 
   
living rock are highly sophisticated. Carving a 
sanctuary from the block, like sculpture, 
‘allows no room for error. Co Sas 
People who live in caves become invisible ™ 
and inaccessible to the outside world, and 
R
H
E
 
ve
 
T.
 
Gi
lo
u 
© 
As
k 
I
m
a
g
e
s
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
i 
i 
Ay 
zy
 
a
 
: 
g 
: 
J 
}

## [Page 14](102011engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 102025: Life below ground

© 
Th
ie
rr
y 
Bo
rr
ed
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
    
THE UNDERWORLD 
HADES (the acronym of Histoire 
Architecture-Découverte-Etude- 
Sauvegarde) is an international 
multidisciplinary research group for 
the study and promotion of the 
rock-hewn heritage. It is affiliated to 
the International Council on 
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS). 
We should like to contact 
people with specialist or non- 
specialist knowledge of the 
underground and rock-hewn heritage 
who may be interested in working 
with us. We are anxious to find out 
what is being done in this field 
throughout the world and to 
discover new sites. We should also 
like to assemble as much 
information on the subject as 
possible and create an 
internationally accessible data bank. 
HADES would be pleased to 
hear from any person, institution 
or business interested in 
contributing to an original project 
on behalf of this unusual and little- 
known heritage. 
Jacek Rewerski 
President, HADES 
Below left, Las Cuevas (the 
Caves) of Guadix in Andalusia 
(Spain). 
Below right, Ostrog 
Monastery in Montenegro 
(former Republic of 
Yugoslavia). 
 
equipped with electricity and telephone 
included barrack-rooms, refectories, hospitals 
and chapels. On most First World War battle- 
fields, men stationed for long periods under- 
ground produced forms of art—graffiti, sculp- 
tures, poems carved on the walls—which are 
by no means negligible. 
Architecture 
by subtraction 
In spite of its wealth, diversity and beauty, the 
underground heritage does not enjoy the same 
prestige as that built on the surface. Improving 
its status is not easy. The conservation of so- 
called “natural” habitats is a new departure. We 
must try to understand how they blend into 
the environment and how to preserve them 
from erosion, the risk of which is increased by 
their fragility, which is caused by digging and 
is inherent in the very principle of this “sub- 
tractive” form of architecture. Conserving a 
cave dwelling is a totally different activity from 
conserving a building made of “dead” stone 
removed from its environment. A cave 
building lives, changes and ages with the earth 
of which itis a part. 
This multi-faceted heritage—monu- 
mental, archaeological, ethnographic, urban, 
rural, industrial—illustrates to an exceptional 
degree the ways in which human settlement 
can blend with the environment. It is per- 
fectly suited for inclusion in UNESCO’s 
World Heritage policy, which takes into 
account both the cultural and natural dimen- 
sions of sites. Some major troglodytic sites 
registered on the World Heritage List 
© 
Cl
au
de
 
S
a
u
v
a
g
e
o
t
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 © 
K
e
y
s
t
o
n
e
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 
(described elsewhere in this issue) are now 
strictly protected, but many others are still 
awaiting the necessary national and interna- 
tional recognition. They must be saved from 
ruin and from oblivion. 
With the growing popularity of environ- 
mentalism more and more people are inter- 
ested in getting “back to the earth”. At the 
same time, infrastructures in towns and cities 
are increasingly being buried underground as 
a result of demographic pressure. Troglo- 
dytism is being rediscovered. 
Will our children be the troglodytes of 
tomorrow? [| 
An underground gallery of 
munition storehouses in the 
Maginot Line, the celebrated 
French defensive fortification 
(1940). 
    
JACEK REWERSKI, 
of France, is a researcher and 
teacher at the French National 
Centre for Scientific Research 
(CNRS). A Unesco consultant, he 
is president of the HADES 
research group (see box this 
page), which is associated with 
the International Council on 
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS).

## [Page 15](102011engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 102026: China: when loess means more

China: when loess means more 
An original solution to 
the challenge of living 
in a semi-desert 
climate, the dug-out 
villages of the Yellow 
River offer many 
advantages to their 
inhabitants 
A young cave dweller 
at Pinghu 
in Shanxi province. 
   
More than forty million Chinese still 
HEE ive underground, most of them in the 
Huang Ho (Yellow River) basin in the 
country’s central provinces of Gansu, Henan, 
Shaanxi and Shanxi. 
Climate, geography and geology have 
encouraged the development of this kind of 
 
by Jean Paul Loubes 
architecture. With low rainfall and an aridity 
that increases the further one travels north- 
westward, the climate of these continental 
regions is subject to wide swings in tempera- 
ture between night and day, summer and 
winter. The land has been extensively 
sculpted by the 4,800-kilometre-long river 
S 
fl 
I’ 
fe 
= . AS 
3a | 
Y 
Be Ta 
Se
rg
e 
Si
be
rt
 
© 
C
o
s
m
o
s
,
 
P
a
r
i
s

## [Page 16](102011engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 102026: China: when loess means more

Se
rg
e 
Si
be
rt
 
© 
GL
MR
, 
Pa
ri
s 
The village 
of Shang Hong Chi 
in Shanxi Province. 
  
JEAN PAUL LOUBES, 
of France, is a teacher at the 
Architecture School of Bordeaux. 
His published works include a 
study on troglodytic dwellings in 
China entitled Maisons creusées 
du Fleuve Jaune, L'Architecture 
troglodytique en Chine du Nord 
(Paris, Créaphis, 1989). 
16 
and its tributaries. Throughout its long his- 
tory the giant Yellow River has left in its 
lower basin deposits of materials detached 
from the land in its upper reaches, deposits 
that have been shaped by its wandering 
course. 
Geologically speaking, the middle basin of 
the Huang Ho forms the world’s largest area 
of loess, a silt deposit made from an accumula- 
tion of dust carried by the wind during the ice 
ages. Highly consistent, the soil is easy to dig 
and, with sufficient irrigation (since it does not 
retain water), it can become fertile cropland. 
Such conditions have traditionally attracted 
human settlement, and these loess regions 
were the cradle of Chinese civilization in very 
ancient times. A variety of forms of cave 
dwelling developed here, confirming that 
troglodytism is an advanced form of architec- 
ture that has developed over time, just like 
surface building. All the different possibilities 
of cave design, vertical and horizontal, are 
found in the Yellow River region. 
Wells of heaven 
Here, on flat ground, entire villages consist of 
dwellings built around vertical shafts. The 
layout of the dwellings follows rigorous prin- 
ciples. A shaft approximately fifteen metres 
square is dug vertically into the ground to 
form a courtyard. This area, around which 
the different rooms are built, is the equivalent 
of the central courtyard known as the “well 
of heaven” which is a feature of the traditional 
dwellings of northern China. It is usually six 
metres deep, which explains why the tem-

## [Page 17](102011engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 102026: China: when loess means more

The bed-stove (kang) of 
rammed earth inside a shaft 
dwelling in China's Shaanxi 
Province. 
Looking down onto the 
courtyard of a loess shaft 
dwelling in Shanxi Province 
(China). 
  
perature is stable and why each shaft is 
sound-proofed from the next. Rooms are 
dug sideways into walls facing south, east and 
west. Each wall contains two or three 
rounded or pointed arches. The north-facing 
side of the shaft is taken up by entrances and 
sometimes a storage chamber. 
The main rooms—bedrooms, the room 
for the ancestors’ altar and the living room— 
are dug into the south-facing side. As in the 
traditional Chinese house, each one 1s 
equipped with a kang, a stove under a 
rammed earth bed. The screen-wall, or 
yingbi, of the dwelling is another feature that 
is also found in houses built above ground. It 
stands in the courtyard facing the entrance, 
and its main purpose is to prevent evil spirits, 
which move in straight lines, from entering 
     
     
  
  
  
Se
rg
e 
Si
be
rt
 
© 
C
o
s
m
o
s
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Pian of a Chinese loess 
village. This form of 
settlement permits a high 
density of population while 
maintaining a clear 
distinction between public and 
private areas. 
   
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
al
l 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
© 
V.
 
Du
bo
ur
g,
 
Bo
rd
ea
ux

## [Page 18](102011engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 102026: China: when loess means more

Se
rg
e 
Si
be
rt
 
© 
G
L
M
R
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Se
rg
e 
Si
be
rt
 
© 
Co
sm
os
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Abandoned dwellings in Gao 
Gun village (Shaanxi 
Province). A cave serves on 
average three generations. 
The troglodytic University of 
Yan’an, Shaanxi Province. 
RATS Ad 
. 
— 
ERAS 
: Tos 
 
the house. Screen walls are about two metres 
high, and are made of rammed earth, adobe 
or fired brick, topped with tiles. In the 
middle of each wall is a small niche containing 
a divinity. 
Each house is reached by a sloping path 
made of rammed earth, in some cases shaped 
into a staircase with a smooth ramp beside it. 
When the slope is particularly steep the ramp 
may tunnel through grain stores, tool sheds, 
or sometimes even a well. In some cases the 
site of the dwelling is indicated on the surface 
by a built entrance marking the beginning of 
the ramp. Once again, the design of these 
entrances is the same as that found in tradi- 
tional houses built on the surface. 
The dug-out villages are remarkable 
he Pr 
: = Nye oa 
faas | Fol YE r 
 
examples of a form of housing design that 
combines the heating advantages of under- 
ground conditions and the climate outside. 
The central shaft is the key structural factor. It 
organizes and defines the living area and lets 
in light and warmth from the sun. With 
dwellings located beneath the soil and fields 
at ground level, the land is used twice over. 
In these villages private and public space 
is divided into two levels with just a few 
metres between them. At any point in this 
urban fabric the two levels communicate. 
This original system combines two qualities 
that do not usually coexist in traditional 
housing: the dwelling is extremely isolated 
and yet the public space and the social life that 
goes with it are just above the doorstep. 
Dugout 
and built-up areas 
Caves hewn from the hillside are especially 
well adapted to the hilly country of Henan, 
Gansu and Shaanxi provinces, making skilful 
use of the topography and the resources of 
indigenous architecture. 
Caves are dug laterally into loess cliffs. 
This is the most widely used technique 
because it is the most straightforward way of 
attacking a hillside facing south or southwest. 
The rubble is generally used to make a flat 
area in front of the entrance to the dwelling, 
which eventually becomes the courtyard. 
Packed-down loess is an extremely homoge- 
neous material and enables symmetrically 
shaped arches—pointed, rounded or other- 
wise—to be made. 
The extensive Chinese heritage of dug-out 
dwellings ranges from the simplest four-by- 
six-metre rooms to layouts of extreme intri- 
cacy. In addition to the rooms dug out of the 
hillside, the courtyard may be used as a site for 
constructed houses, for troglodytic dwellings 
are often combined with other forms of archi- 
tecture. Some highly elaborate troglodytic 
dwellings are built on terraces on different 
levels and consist of a complex of buildings and 
artificial caves. These caves have the same 
shape as excavated vaults but are made of 
stone masonry. Entirely made by human 
agency, they have all the advantages of natural 
caves, especially their constant temperature. 
Their thick walls and massive earth roofing 
provide a mild and stable temperature. 
This blend of excavation and surface 
building is typical of Chinese architecture. Hl

## [Page 19](102011engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
  
  
» - -
 
£F . PF) hot - THE 7 
: odes 8 A 
Labi of Lis: 
Br oP 
{ 
n 
® 
© 
Si
lv
ia
 
Im
pe
ra
to
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
is 
a 
UN
es
co
-s
po
ns
or
ed
 
pr
oj
ec
t 
ex
ec
ut
ed
 
by
 
La
 
Ca
ix
a 
F
o
u
n
d
a
t
i
o
n
 
an
d 
A
g
e
n
c
e
 
G
a
m
m
a
 
wi
th
 
th
e 
pa
rt
ic
ip
at
io
n 
of
 
Ko
da
k.
 


### 102047: Italy: rocks in a hard place

[taly: rocks in a hard place 
During its chequered 
history the ancient 
rock-hewn town of 
Matera withstood 
many waves of 
invaders. The 
pressures of 20th- 
century life proved 
harder to cope with. ... 
Asove, Matera’s chapel of 
Santa Lucia alle Malve. 
Pierced into the soft limestone cliffside 
of a deep ravine in the high hills of 
southern Italy is a complex of troglodyte 
dwellings that has existed for thousands of 
years. Known as the Sassi (rocks) of Matera, it 
bears traces of human activity dating from as 
far back as the Old Stone Age, although it was 
not until neolithic times that the site began to 
be occupied. At that time the high plateaux of 
the Basilicata region in which Matera is situ- 
ated were inhabited by semi-nomadic tribes 
who found the gravinas or deep canyons 
etched into the limestone hills ideal places in 
which to halt during their seasonal wander- 
ings in search of grazing land. 
  
Stones and time 
When man began to use metal tools, it 
became easier to dig into the soft stone. 
Tombs and underground ritual chambers 
with central pillars left after the excavation of 
by Pietro Laureano 
rocky rubble, date from this period. The first 
scattered rock dwellings were hewn around 
water reservoirs. Water became an object of 
worship, for it is rare in this region of 
scorching summers and icy winters, where 
annual rainfall amounts to no more than 500 
millimetres. 
In time these early human settlements 
began to coalesce into urban centres. 
The rugged topography of the region, 
with its inaccessible rocks and hidden valleys, 
enabled its inhabitants to withstand many 
waves of invaders down through the cen- 
turies. The Greeks in the eighth century B.C. 
were followed by the Romans (fourth and 
third centuries B.C.), the Byzantines (fifth 
century A.D.), the Lombards (sixth and sev- 
enth centuries), the Saracens (ninth century), 
the Normans (eleventh century), the Slavs 
and the Hungarians (eleventh century) and 
finally the Aragonese (fifteenth century). The 
r 
=

## [Page 20](102011engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 102047: Italy: rocks in a hard place

  
aridity of the land helped to strengthen its 
people’s spirit of independence, and ancient 
traditions continued to be observed even as 
they were renewed and invigorated by new- 
comers. 
The region’s ancient agricultural and pas- 
toral culture provided favourable conditions 
for medieval monasticism. Hundreds of 
churches, chapels, crypts and rock-hewn 
cathedrals adorned with frescoes were hol- 
lowed out in Matera. More than monasteries, 
caves and caverns became retreats and 
refuges for religious bodies which engaged in 
experimental attempts to create ideal com- 
munities and supported and promoted local 
agriculture and the local economy. 
Medicinal plants were harvested on the 
high plateaux, which were rich in aromatic 
shrubs. The caves, where saltpetre, lichens 
and moulds could be found, were converted 
into storage rooms and laboratories where 
miraculous elixirs were produced. According 
to one sixteenth-century chronicler, a sub- 
stance found in Matera called bolo (an 
20 
fe 
a NY 
ochreous clay formed by dissolution of the 
limestone) was even dubbed “holy earth” at 
the court of the Medicis where it was 
observed to have healing properties and to be 
an antidote to poison. 
An object-lesson in ecological 
management 
The organization of life in the Sassi was deter- 
mined by five factors: the scarcity of 
resources, the need to use them collectively, 
the interplay between soil and water, and 
knowledge of the laws of mechanics and 
fluids. 
Blending perfectly into its natural setting, 
the town of Matera climbs vertically up the 
steep sides of its gravina, the location and dis- 
tribution of its dwellings determined by the 
rocky layers laid bare by the canyon. Two 
natural amphitheatres formed by two gullies 
known as grabiglioni (“small crevasses”) 
were subjected to intensive excavation and 
terracing. The dispersal and collection of 
\y “ah 
The dwellings of Matera hug 
the rock face. 
Vertical cross-section > 
of the trogiodyte 
settlement. 
Tiered terraces p 
are used for water collection 
and storage.

## [Page 21](102011engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 102047: Italy: rocks in a hard place

   
  
water runoff via a network of channels, cis- 
terns and caves protected the slopes against 
the destructive effects of erosion and pre- 
served the stability of the terrain. 
When it rains, water runs helter-skelter 
over the clay surface of the high plateau, cre- 
ating ponds and marshes. During dry periods, 
the clay cracks and springs dry up. On the 
plateau and slopes, which are rich in red, fer- 
tile soil (bolo), were woods and fields. The 
dwellings with their deep subterranean 
chambers were built lower down along the 
grabiglioni, blending in with the rocky cliff 
face. Grouped into units, they open out onto 
terraces and hanging gardens. Each unit forms 
a vicinato (neighbourhood), a remarkable 
example of community organization. 
The dominant architectural forms are 
cave-like. The basic element (the lamione) is a 
single barrel-vaulted room which may be the 
nucleus of a large structural complex. The 
terrace outside can be used as a communal 
Inside a tower lit 
by an oculus 
(late 15th century). 
  
  
      
  
  
Dr
aw
in
gs
 
all
 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
   
courtyard, and beneath it is a communal cis- 
tern used for storing water that runs off roofs 
carefully designed for this purpose. Stairways 
serving as vertical axes of communication 
follow the course of diagonal water run-off 
channels. The horizontal drainage system, 
used to channel water into the terraced gar- 
dens and to fill cisterns deep inside the caves, 
provides a framework for paths leading to 
the vicinati. 
The vertical development of the city in 
medieval times integrated earlier construc- 
tions, used the law of gravity to facilitate water 
distribution and afforded protection against 
the wind. Two districts, known as Sasso 
Caveoso and Sasso Barisano, grew up around 
the two grabiglioni, which provided humus- 
rich land for cultivation. In the centre was a 
fortified area, the civita. Craftsmen’s work- 
shops and shops were built on the edge of the 
high plateau, where the large cisterns and 
rock-hewn grain storage silos were located. 
 © 
Si
lv
ia
 
Im
pe
ra
to
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
2
0
0
1
/
L
a
 
Ca
ix
a 
F
o
u
n
d
a
t
i
o
n

## [Page 22](102011engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 102047: Italy: rocks in a hard place

© 
Si
lv
ia
 
Im
pe
ra
to
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
 
 
Upsetting the balance 
This complex and harmonious urban system, 
based on the drainage, control and distribu- 
tion of water, survived intact until the eigh- 
teenth century. Then, in the nineteenth and 
especially the twentieth centuries, the ability 
to manage environmental resources in a spirit 
of community died out. The modern city of 
Matera extends above the run-off slopes to 
places where the builders of the old city 
never dared to venture. The filling in of 
drainage areas for use as roads and the 
destruction of the capillary network of water 
collection brought to an end time-honoured 
constraints that had to be observed in order 
to strike a balance between urban develop- 
ment and scarce natural resources. The urban 
network became denser and reached satura- 
tion point. As the dwellings became increas- 
ingly tightly packed, the system whereby life 
in them was organized began to break down. 
Deteriorating hygienic and environmental 
conditions in the 1950s led to a decision to 
transfer the population of the old town to new 
quarters. When the evacuation project from 
the Sassi began, 15,000 people—two-thirds of 
Matera’s population at the time—were living in 
2,997 dwellings, 1,641 of which were consid- 
ered to be troglodytic. Since then the caves 
have remained virtually empty, but for visitors 
they document a unique architectonic experi- 
ence, the creation over centuries of a remark- 
able urban area where people managed natural 
resources with great economy and skill. Hl 
(3 
} 
A
A
A
 
Pes
 
£] 
A
 
En
 
Sa
 
1
 
i 
Above, the interior of the 
church of San Nicola dei Greci 
{12th century). 
Right: Madonna and child, a 
12th-century fresco in the 
chapel of Santa Lucia alle 
Malve. 
     
  
—
—
i
 
L
d
 
De 
a
s
 
» 
PIETRO LAUREANO, 
an Italian architect and town 
planner, is the author of Sahara, 
giardino sconosciuto (“The Sahara, 
an Unknown Garden”, published 
by Giunti, Florence, in 1988). 
22 = 
    
J
 
© 
Si
lv
ia
 
Im
pe
ra
to
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
 
A

## [Page 23](102011engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
The storm clouds began to gather in the 1930s with the rise to power of totalitarian 
and expansionist regimes in Japan, Germany and Italy... 
Y 1937: Japan invades China. Here, a Japanese 
: h . column on the road to Beijing. : 
~~ © Lapi-Viollet, Paris 
INASIA [me 
vo 
   
  
  
 
     
 
1939: Japan invades the Chinese isiand of Hainan. 
@ L'lllustration/Sygma, Paris 
  
      
1939: Hitler invades Czechoslovakia 
@ L'llustration/Sygma, Paris 
1939: Hitler's ally, Mussolini, invades Al 
To © L'lllustration/Sygma, Paris \ 
IN wi 
  
  
fl = LS 
France and Britain attempt to appease Hitler. Here, Chamberlain, Daladier, Hitler and 
Mussolini meet to sign the Munich agreement in 1938. : 
@ Archiv fiir Kunst und Geschichte, Berlin

## [Page 24](102011engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

                        
victory in the Sp: 
@ L'lllustration/Sygma, Paris 
  
  
  
   
          
  
  
  
  
    ho Eakal] 1 Rh PEN 2 
  
vipa NSAI HEA 
  
  
    1 September 1939: German troops attack Poland 
oad DOLLAR ELEE: . 3 September: France and Britain 
LE ieclare war on Germany. 
} 
© L'lllustration/Sygma, Paris 
 

## [Page 25](102011engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lo po 
i c [3 E 3 Qo n. 
e Soviet Union. 
ation/Sygma, Paris 
th 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C studio. 3B 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
- 
4 L 
 
 
Comes   
  
  
    
Lil   »   
pact with Stal 
in 
® L'lNus 
Hitler breaks his 
 
 
se in the Pacific, 
$ main naval ba America’ 
into the war. 
. Paris l 
Harbor, on Pearl 
nited 
[STEN 
ck 
the U 
Ln 
bringing 
Japanese aircraft stage a surprise atta 
States 
on/Sygma         
8
.
 
 
 
w 
=
x
 
 
 
 

## [Page 26](102011engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
  
        
   
 
£1
) 
A
d
 by
 
Ne Ti
l 
— on
 
   
. re 
  
1 
4 f 
A
)
 
SNOWS DOMDI 
 
Noto 
nent 
  
s station: 
 ] . 4 the stree of Stalling 
    URGE an surrende! 
       g point UERVETEL 
lustratio yEma, Paris 
    
HID DE 

## [Page 27](102011engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

years 
TT 
  
20 November 1946, The first General Conference opens at the Sorbonne in Pans. Ustseorgcial mondial 
[Lhe ear e ars 
  
—
—
 
    
   
  
        2 Pad Pe GE So Sr = Pi 
2 CME REA 
1951. The and zone research Dh isEsea/B. io tin 
  
  
    
     
    
Translations from 
world literature feature In 
the Unesco Collection of 
Representative Works 
Uhpzed Archives 
  
so wA®    wi Ceara 
wt a" 
AE nr Asstt . 
     1950. The joint Unesco tin education arogrammie on behalf of Palestinian refugee chiidren, 
Uneco/0. Rogar. 
THE {_]NESCO COURIER 
Uppiement in th Nevsrrisar 1905 issie 
o 10 D2 30%) SEQFTIEYY 
  
  
 

## [Page 28](102011engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

  
1966, Postgraduate braining § for students ST deve cotntries. 
E4000) Rogar 
  
    
  
WS Zr 2 ez gn, Pe 
fo r= lap - ita pe I 
A865; The SITE satelite brings television ta many Indian viliges: Usesal/Alry 
  

## [Page 29](102011engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

“A women + 
5 Africa, thes M, 02 < education project in. 
 
 
1967, Literacy pilot project. theses 6 gai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cad} {i Eh] ik 
 
 
 
 
 

## [Page 30](102011engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Y
E
N
   
  
    
     
     
     
  
  
  
    
  
     
  
   
1976. Arid tand research in the Mount Kutal “biosphere teserve (Kenya). 5. The Intemational Hydrologial Programme, 
© Yann Arthus Berimnd/Ear th from Mow UNESCO 45 Santis Zacohin, Pens    
I. Grande Comate 
: nila ” 
MORON) Archipel Zo latiauses 
des Comores Cd Ambre 
LL. : 
I. Mohd |, Anjouan 
| Moye 8 < 
  
a
p
 
V
a
 
ed
 
S
$
 
\3
 
-
 4 
lily
, 
£ 
'S
. 
Z
 
\ 
S
a
 
a
o
 
1974. The Man and the mit (MAB programme. — poet as a ore wabie energy source, 
 Ractister © EORPOU0 Lira) Lavanis-Rocrat 
  
: : Me Bi 
\ / Lf 4 got! f= ——— Pe, WV for gin] 
bod IN NSE BK WC YE aa 
   
   
urope . \l { 
| 
\ 
\ \ \ 
\ rere aanzisha | 
ye a barabara ya 
{tsk | pune =m 3a yopa'a ri 
aikoa ys Kanda YET. 
   
   
1976. The Geological World Atfas. © CoMW, Uns 1972. Hetiicg African a traditions and promoting African aes Uses, Claude 
    
  

## [Page 31](102011engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 102049: Ethiopia's new Jerusalem

  
   
  
    
2 | (Cras ei 
\ 1) i Lv i 
A547 
      
    
NI 4 ave RN Ym . : = yl . i 1 ING : he 
World Harltage: Meidan-Emam, Isfahan (Iran), 
Kooh & Raph, Pare 
1973. A world study of marine pollution is faunched under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), 
: ORIFCSI/SHC © Minister af Supply and Services Canada 
  
     
   
76. World Heritage: the Galapagos islands (Ecuador). 
Ri oe Senet © Raph, Pans 
19 
  
     
. i 
 
1578, World Heritage: the rock-hewn churches of Lalibela (Ethiopia). © A de Wieser, Hevliage 2001, Lis Cama Fondation, Hentrge 2001 1s 3 
test sponsored proiect executed by the La Catka™ Foundating and GAMMA Presse iniages iif the participation of Hoda. 
+ Th Ta 
Joe == = A 
National Park biosphere reserve (Chile), £ Gonisr © Explorer, Paris 
  
i H 
   Aa ARES 
Fi LE Dizscomn © Rapho, Paris 
  

## [Page 32](102011engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 102049: Ethiopia's new Jerusalem

  
  
  
  
     
World Heritage: Merida {Spain}. 
CMa Hie At Caine. 
    
orld Heritage: the Impetat Palace eof the Ming and, Qin Byisties In Beljing. (China). 
Rapin, Bais. 
| 
 
 
- dak 
      
i Word bags Palmyra 5 an Ard ublic). 
i es nan gation. —_—        
  
World Heritage: the Old oily of Havana (Cuba). 
ES SAY AE RL Billard: Heigl FOOL Lh Calva Foondtio 
      
 
: World Herta Humaytin's Tomb In Delhi nia 
iy : CL Payne Helage 200040 Gala Falincsiond     iAWorid ii Hawail Volcanoes National Park (U SAL). 
“OM Friedel @ Frioha, Pare 
I ET = se =78 

## [Page 33](102011engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 102049: Ethiopia's new Jerusalem

  
      
  
    Bane A) oN, 0) 
[Mest Hert at the foot pr tha. Fe clits, In the land of the. 
Dogon peop} e of Mall: 4 Wer ieee 001 "La Cais Foal ath il 
   
  
[Wald Heritage: he Sanctuary of Bom ly | 
CEL Frdire, Morttass 2001012 Gaisz Founda 
World Hertiage: the. temple of Borobuidir (indonesia). 
Uinecayiteviaart 
8, AFRALPHA word processing Software for 
lL on languages JL a il Se - 
     
       
     
a RL apart 
ki; Jal Cai 
The General History 
of Africa {vols 1 
ant 2),   
    
1989 Research on the harman genoiri ; 
on Fram nom fod 
  
i= “Charlevoix. bicsphere! 1eserve, Quebec. {Canada). 
HE EG PASE 
Lua 
 — CRT 2 
CE TR Fo = 
    
1988. i slang at the ne Of Alexandtia, 
ET la —— (E&Y     
     
     
 
fd PR wry 
z =nn $ i 
 

## [Page 34](102011engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 102049: Ethiopia's new Jerusalem

  
  
  
History of 
Civilizations 
of Central 
Asia 
  
   
    
   
  
 
   
   
  
    
    
. Trier a—rirr= RTH rr 
2 
Rr 
Th ¥ :  Em ¥ 
LHPTR TT    CI 
World Heritage: A Baroque altarpiece In the historic city of Sucre 
(Bolivia) vB Sine © Rapa Pans 
The Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg (Russia), 
Derba Hontige 2001/7 La Calva” Foandation 
  
World Heritage: 
© 
  
2a, 
ded de 
  
  
  
   
         
ul 
i 
is 
a 
I 
; 
5 “ Tod eta 
: 
Ta A etd 
Bookmark biosphere reserve (Australia), 
1992. Ald for the Sarajevo dally newspaper Osfabodenje (Bosnia). 
DR. Thnates 
O AFP/E Bouys 
3 
|) 
A) 
  
a —

## [Page 35](102011engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 102050: Troglodytic sites on the World Heritage List

  
      
vo. 
Wald 
h : y » 
4 - 
2) “1 
> -~ 
Cl 
g Pa | 
Wk Vv ; — g 
N\ & Al 
£ 41 nL 3 
=r ~ 
A — \ 
- 4 Lod). 
A * * y > TE Fa 
Pts + —_—_— = ) pr 
- . A 
pattie or El Alamein in the Egyptian dese : 
4 1 CH ENT line protect 2 Suez Canal 
> [1S [ the Ge ' » 
ha — play a 2 vital role in 
the defence of their country. 
® Keystone, Paris 
© Keystone, Paris 
| ls 
resistance 
  
          
ACCENT ER CNET CER able), leader of the Coaiiot partisans. 
Keystone, Paris 
dec orn. 
hd; 
ELS - PERL 
acto of ta area She 
Bar ho OI 50 2 doth Camp, 
@ Keystone, Paris. 

## [Page 36](102011engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 102050: Troglodytic sites on the World Heritage List

VL TART TNF 1943 
; on hs , ny! 
X - - Myer We 
o - 4 
A Sh 
~~ - - a am 
~- ~~ 
he b PY Eo LS. 
5 ~ 
" Qa - Y 
v - 3k TAL, 
a - Vu ! 7 cy i Whe a . 
- Mate on Rise = 
LF oes BLN . 
p> i 
  
J aa Ww ~ 
pat +2 My. oo 
k ~\ 
x . i 
a8. 
| a 
a 0° ews ANT, 
Lhe A _— 
. hr 
ST 
] 
i.
 
aa
 
. 
FF
 " 
: WEY k ~ ids > ou 
% , - or a . Aes 
Ss A: ie yi Re, 
“ - " 
    
  
- 
= _ . “- 
- So wy Pl 
~ pa fn 
1S Sy IM Ye ~ 
CNC AAAS 14 
 
 
   
        
Preparations in a North African portion 
‘the Allied invasion of Sicily. 
[RIS OLR SE 
: Advance troops of General 
s 2nd Armoured Division arrive in 
Jean-Loup Charmet, Paris 
  
     
  
e Allied Conference at | Re 
left to right: Stalin, Roosevelt 
and Churchill. 
© Keystone, Paris 

## [Page 37](102011engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 102050: Troglodytic sites on the World Heritage List

me Sef rin 
rE 
AN 
Preparations in an African port for the Allied inv. 
; hern France. , 
® Keystone, Paris 
© Gamma, Paris 
Ad 
LE 
an troops led by General MacArthur 
land on Leyte (Philippines). 
  
  
    
       
  
       
  
  
WN 
" Berlin: Soviet soldiers raise the flag 
over the Reichstag. 
Gamma, Paris  
29 eI
 

## [Page 38](102011engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 102050: Troglodytic sites on the World Heritage List

se TS . 
TAT = ol » 
NT - iba a F% 
hd, 
© » 
February. At the Yalta 
  
  
       
          ALLL 
      
‘the Allied leaders decide to hold a co ancisce 
[0 he creatio! of the Unite Lio 
L) R 0 
ra) 
3 3 
American warships in the Pacific. 
© L'lllustration/Sygma, Paris 
Eat 5 2 
UCR: ERE A 
controlled for most of the 
. the end of the bl 
® Keystol 
  
‘Hiroshima 
® Uishida/Repros-Gamma, Paris 
  
(Japan). 
July-August. At 
CELETEY EOTEER TE 
to right, Attlee 
  
dam Conference Allied 
    
The Allies turn 
attempt to 
CETTE N 
  
o massive destruction in an 
rce the Axis powers to 
ow, Dresden (Germany). 
Keystone, Paris. 
p FTI 
CANE ET, STV ea     
  
   
  
Nes atop ne Sma 1S18 
              
one of the iast and lierces: 
 
   
TY 
JOEL CEE AC 
ional surrender.   
      
 
      
An intemation 11 : 0 C stice 
AOR EFARVETRA 1 DU 
UU LL) - - nan pga LJ ’ ’ 
d a, B

## [Page 39](102011engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

|
_
|
 
T
I
T
S
 
Carved out of the 
living rock eight 
centuries ago, the 
churches of Lalibela 
are still a magnet for 
worshippers and 
pilgrims 
Above, a nun praying in a 
cave near the Church of 
Gabriel and Raphael at 
Lalibela. 
  
Et jopia’s new Jerusalem 
by Kassaye Begashaw 
The rock churches of Lalibela, which 
are hewn out of the mass of red vol- 
canic tufa that makes up the high plateau of 
Lasta, are a remarkable offshoot of the flow- 
ering of Christian civilization in Ethiopia in 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 
Christianity was introduced into the 
Aksumite kingdom of Ethiopia around 330 
A.D. Atthe end of the fifth century it spread as 
a result of the efforts of monks who had come 
from Antioch, but the allegiance of Ethiopian 
Christians went to the Coptic church. 
   
In the ninth century, the Aksumite 
kingdom disintegrated under the pressure of 
Islam and the Beja invasions. Following the 
gradual contraction of the Byzantine empire, 
Christian Ethiopia became increasingly iso- 
lated. The upheavals that followed the collapse 
of the kingdom of Aksum and the shift of its 
political and religious centre southwards led to 
the emergence in the twelfth century of the 
Zaghawa dynasty, which reinforced ties with 
the Coptic church and encouraged missionary 
activity. 
The new capital of the kingdom was set up 
on a mountainside in the region of Lasta. Now 
a small town perched at an altitude of 2,600 
metres, the monastic centre of Lalibela, named 
after the Zaghawa king who excavated the 
churches there, was intended to be a new 


### 102050: Troglodytic sites on the World Heritage List

“Holy City”. 
A unique architectural complex 
The eleven medieval churches and chapels of 
Lalibela, which form two distinct groups on 
either side of a mostly dried-up stream, the 
Yordanos (Jordan), scarcely rise above ground 
level. Four of them are monolithic. The others 
are smaller and are either semi-monolithic or 
underground their sites indicated to the 
faithful by a facade sculpted in the rock. Each 
of the two groups constitutes an organic 
ensemble enclosed in a kind of surrounding 
wall within which visitors are able to move 
around via a network of alleys and tunnels hol- 
lowed out of the tufa. 
The monolithic churches, which stand in 
the centre of shafts seven to twelve metres 
deep, were carved straight out of blocks of 
rock separated from the rest of the plateau by 
© 
A
r
n
a
u
d
 
de
 
W
i
l
d
e
n
b
e
r
g
.
 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
2
0
0
1
 
is
 
a 
U
N
E
s
c
o
-
s
p
o
n
s
o
r
e
d
 
pr
oj
ec
t 
e
x
e
c
u
t
e
d
 
by
 
La
 
Ca
ix
a 
F
o
u
n
d
a
t
i
o
n
 
an
d 
A
g
e
n
c
e
 
G
a
m
m
a
 
wi
th
 
th
e 
pa
rt
ic
ip
at
io
n 
of
 
K
o
d
a
k
.

## [Page 40](102011engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 102050: Troglodytic sites on the World Heritage List

© 
Ar
na
ud
 
de
 
Wi
ld
en
be
rg
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
. 
© 
A
r
n
a
u
d
 
de
 
W
i
l
d
e
n
b
e
r
g
.
 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
. 
  
 
The sunken Church of St. 
George (Bete Gyorgis, 11th- 
13th centuries) is patterned 
on the shape of a Greek cross. 
Opposite page, the north- 
west facade of the Church of 
Gabriel and Raphael. 
The Flight into Egypt, a wall 
painting in the Church of St. 
Mary (12th-13th centuries). 
trenches. Carving started at the top (the vaults, 
ceilings, arches and upper windows) and con- 
tinued down to the bottom (the floor, doors 
and base). To allow the torrential summer rains 
that affect this region to run off, the floor of the 
spaces created in this way are on a slight incline. 
Protruding features of the architecture, such as 
roofs, gutters, cornices, lintels and window sills, 
project to a varying degree depending on the 
prevailing direction of the rain. 
The excavation work apparently took place 
in several stages, so that architects, workers and 
craftsmen could work at eye level without 
having to erect scaffolding. Some hewed the 
monolith out of its surrounding rock, others 
fashioned it. Rubble was removed via openings 
  
such as windows and doors. Simple tools were 
used—picks and levers for excavation, and 
hatchets and chisels for finer details. 
Rare paintings and sculpture 
Probably the most impressive of Lalibela’s 
churches is Bete Medhane Alem (the House of 
the World’s Redeemer), which is 33 metres 
long, 23 metres wide and 11 metres high, witha 
sculpted cornice supported by 34 square pil- 
lars. It is the only church in Ethiopia which has 
five naves, as did the former cathedral of 
Aksum, according to Father Francisco 
Alvarez, the chaplain of a Portuguese embassy 
to the Solomonic court in the sixteenth century. 
The interior is reached by three doors 
giving onto the west, north and south respec- 
tively, in accordance with Christian custom. 
It is built according to the basilica pattern, 
with an east-west orientation, and divided 
into eight bays lined with 28 pillars rising to 
the semicircular arches of the ceiling. 
The neighbouring church, the House of St. 
Mary (Bete Maryam), which occupies a smaller 
area than Medhane Alem, is nine metres high. 
Its walls, which have windows in the Aksumite 
style, house three naves whose special feature is 
that they are covered from top to bottom with 
decorative paintings representing geometrical 
motifs (Greek crosses, swastikas, stars and 
rosettes) and animals (doves, phoenixes, pea- 
cocks, zebus, elephants and camels) and with 
frescoes—mostly now destroyed—illustrating 
scenes from the life of Jesus and Mary as 
described in the gospels. Some specialists

## [Page 41](102011engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 102050: Troglodytic sites on the World Heritage List

  
believe that these paintings date from the reign 
of King Zar’a Ya’kub (1434-1465). Above the 
main door is a bas-relief representing two 
horsemen slaying a dragon, an exceptional piece 
of sculpture given the scarcity of animated 
carvings in Ethiopian sanctuaries, as indeed 
throughout the Christian Middle East. 
Quddus Mikaél (St. Michael), Bete Gol- 
gotha (the House of Golgotha) and Bete 
Selassie (the House of the Trinity) form an 
ensemble of churches. The largest of the 
three, Quddus Mikaél, is harmoniously 
divided up into three naves by cruciform pil- 
lars. The most notable feature of Bete Gol- 
gotha, a church dedicated to Christ’s Passion, 
is its series of seven lifesize ecclesiastics 
carved out of the walls of the two naves. It 
also houses, in a niche, a Christ in his tomb. 
The small chapel dedicated to the Holy 
Trinity (Bete Selassie) is reached through Bete 
Golgotha. It is trapezoid in layout and houses 
three monolithic altars. Arranged in a semi- 
circle and adorned with crosses, these altars 
contain cavities in their centre in which the 
priest placed the Tobot (Ark of the Covenant 
in Geez, the Ethiopian liturgical language) 
during mass. At the back of the crypt, two 
mysterious figures with their hands clasped in 
prayer stand on either side of an empty niche 
topped by a cross within a circle—perhaps a 
representation of the Trinity. 
Bete Merkoreouos and Bete Gabriel 
Roufaél (the House of Mercury and the 
House of the Archangels Gabriel and Raphael) 
are underground chambers originally used for 
© 
Ar
na
ud
 
de
 
Wi
ld
en
be
rg
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
. 
TC
A 
A 
(
7
 
R
R
A
 
= 
A
a
d
 
E [) 
: 
a
 
a
l
s
 
h
 
x
 
Y
N
 
 
 

## [Page 42](102011engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 102051: Science that must be shared

® 
Ar
na
ud
 
de
 
Wi
ld
en
be
rg
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
. 
An Easter service. 
 
non-religious purposes and later consecrated. 
Once they were probably royal residences. A 
little further on, Bete Abba Libanos contains 
features which are characteristic of both the 
monolithic churches and underground 
churches: its four sides are separated from the 
mountain by a high hollowed-out gallery that 
runs round the construction, while its roof is 
integral with the upper rock mass. Bete 
Amanouel (the House of Emanuel) is a three- 
naved basilica which displays all the features of 
the classical Aksumite style. 
Set apart from the other churches at the 
bottom of an almost square shaft (22 x 23 
metres), Bete Gyorgis (the House of St. 
George) has the shape of a Greek cross. Set 
on a very high base, the church contains nei- 
ther paintings nor sculptures which might 
distract attention from the harmony and sim- 
plicity of its lines. On the ceiling, each arm of 
the cross is intersected by a semicircular arch 
carved out of the continuation of the pilasters 
that rise from the four corners of the central 
space. While the construction’s lower win- 
dows are in the Aksumite style, the higher 
ones consist of pointed arches with fleurons 
similar to those found in Bete Golgotha. 
The new Holy City 
In addition to its eleven churches, which are 
on the World Heritage List, Lalibela contains 
other, less architecturally distinguished mon- 
uments whose presence helps us to under- 
stand the more general significance of the 
ensemble and its unity. That unity is the result 
of King Lalibela’s sense of organization—even 
if it is unlikely that all the excavation work was 
carried out solely during his reign (1190- 
1225). The significance of this exceptional site 
is abundantly clear from its topography and 
toponymy: the stream that bisects the former 
capital is called the Jordan, and a stone cross 
marks the spot where John the Baptist bap- 
tised Jesus. 
Christ’s tomb in Bete Golgotha, the House 
of the Cross (Bete Masqual), the House of the 
Consecrated Bread (Bete Lehem), Adam’s 
Tomb, and the platform in front of the House 
of the Archangels Gabriel and Raphael which 
local people call “Pilate’s Pretorium”—all these 
monuments concentrated in a single spot sug- 
gest that Lalibela was intended to be a replica of 
the Holy City of Jerusalem, which was taken 
by Saladin in 1187, and which could not at the 
time be visited by pilgrims because of the 
Third Crusade. | 
  
A narrow passage between 
two churches. 
    
KASSAYE BEGASHAW, 
of Ethiopia, is head of the Centre 
for the Study and Conservation 
of the Cultural Heritage at the 
Ethiopian Ministry of Culture and 
Sports Affairs. 
ST 
134 Aly 
© 
A
r
n
a
u
d
 
de
 
W
i
l
d
e
n
b
e
r
g
.
 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
F
o
u
n
d
a
t
i
o
n
 

## [Page 43](102011engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 102051: Science that must be shared

re a HA 
~~ sitesof “outstanding 
universal value” had been 
placed on UNEsco’s World 
Heritage List. The sites 
[ESL 
pages illustrate aspects of 
oa in Went 
  
  
  
U
N
E
s
c
o
/
I
C
O
M
O
S
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 
Mogao Caves (China) 
   
The earliest work on these Buddhist 
rock temples dates from the fourth 
century A.D. The caves are located 
on the edge of the Taklamakan 
(Gobi) Desert in Gansu province, on 
the Silk Route, and were the site of 
intensive activity until the fourteenth 
century. The most important 
structures, including a 33-metre- 
high Buddhist temple, date from the 
Tang dynasty (seventh century). 
Adorned with frescoes and 
sculptures by artists of a variety of 
origins, the caves are a record of ten 
centuries of central Asian history. 
Placed on the World Heritage List 
in 1987 Un
es
co
/I
CO
MO
S,
 
Par
is 
 
a Troglodytic sites and regions 
o Troglodytic sites on Unesco’s World Heritage List 
1. Mesa Verde 2. Bandiagara 3. Matera 4. Wieliczka 5. Ivanovo 
6. Cappadocia 7. Petra 8. Abu Simbel 9. Lalibela 
10. Ajanta/Ellora/Elephanta 11. Mogao 
 
1. The cliff of Mogao. The site comprises 492 
caves, 2,415 sculptures, 45,000 m2 of wall 
paintings. 
2. Interior of cave 428, Northern Zhou dynasty 
(557-581 A.D.). 
3. A facade built over a cave entrance. 
4. Detail of a wall painting in cave 257 showing the 
king of the stags saving a human figure from 
drowning (Northern Wei dynasty, 386-534 A.D.). 
35 
U
N
e
s
c
o
/
I
C
O
M
Q
S
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
U
n
e
s
c
o
/
N
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
C
o
m
m
i
s
s
i
o
n
 
of
 
th
e 
Pe
op
le
’s
 
Re
pu
bl
ic
 
of
 
Ch
in
a 
fo
r 
U
n
e
s
c
o

## [Page 44](102011engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 102052: Protecting plant life

  
     
 
Tr
og
lo
dy
ti
c 
sit
es 
on 
the
 
Wor
ld 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
Lis
t 
~
~
 
   
   
  
-\
 
  
oN 
- WE 
SS : >» Ah 2 
; a, oe Sr 
EN Th. nd 
cd 5 - 
—— -n 
© 
Ja
pe
 
Ta
yl
or
, 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
ix
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
 
 
@ 
J. 
R
e
w
e
r
s
k
l
 
Le
na
rs
, 
Pa
ri
s 
~ " 
@f
 
@ 
Ja
ne
 
Ta
yl
or
, 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
lx
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
 
The remains of this ancient Arabian 
city, which was the capital of the 
Edomites and then, in the fifth 
century B.C. of the kingdom of the 
Nabatacans, stand in a natural circus 
reached via a narrow, two- 
kilometre-long defile. Temples, 
tombs and palaces, half free-standing, 
half hewn from the pink sandstone 
cliffs, form a unique blend of 
Oriental and Greco-Roman 
architectural traditions. 
Placed on the World Heritage List 
mn 1985 
 
  
© 
Ja
ne
 
Ta
yl
or
. 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
20
01
 
/L
a 
Ca
lx
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
 
    
  
3 
The archacological site of Petra (Jordan) 
1. ARoman 
amphitheatre with a 
3,000 to 4,000 
audience capacity. 
2.in background: an 
ancient inn for 
travelling merchants. 
3. Water rises by 
capillary action and 
corrotes the base of 
the monuments. 
4, A communal grave, 
The coloured 
strigtions in the rock 
are caused by the 
dissolution of 
minerals. 
5. Human habitation 
of troglodyte shelters 
began over 2,000 
years ago. 
6. Fagade of the 
Khazna Firaoun 
(Pharaoh's Treasury). 
Un
es
co
/P
, 
ll
ev
a 
Ux
ne
sc
o/
P.
 
ll
ev
a 

## [Page 45](102011engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 102052: Protecting plant life

  
   
         fot 
  
  
Situated on the banks of the 
| Russenski Lom River, the monastery 
complex of Ivanovo consists of 
| churches, chapels and cells which 
were hewn from the rock between 
| the restoration of the independence 
of the Bulgarian church in 1235 and 
the annexation of Bulgaria by the 
Ottoman empire in 1396. Frescoes, 
which originally covered the walls of 
almost all the churches and chapels, 
illustrate the development of the 
school of Tarnovo (capital of the 
second Bulgarian kingdom) and, 
more generally, of Bulgarian and 
Byzantine art. 
Placed on the World Heritage List 
in 1979   
1. Natural site and spiritual centre. 
2. A natural cave modified by human hand, 
 
 
  
  
   
@ 
J.-P, 
Fo
rg
et
, 
M
a
u
r
e
p
a
s
 
\ : 
| 8 EE IR 
JLIINILEN monuments from Abu 
1. Detail of the facade of the small temple 
of Abu Simbel, dedicated to the goddess 
Hathor and to Nefertari, wife of Ramses il. 
2. Facade of the main temple. Statues 
of Ramses Il. 
3. Cross-section of the main temple 
of Abu Simbel. 
4_ inner sanctum of the main 
temple. From left to right: 
Ptah, Amon-Re, Ramses || 
and Re-Horakhte, 
5. Inside the main 
temple. 
U
n
e
s
c
o
/
P
.
 
ll
ev
a 
  3. Figures are portrayed in the lvanoyo frescoes with a sense of drama that 
relates them more closely to Hellenistic than to Byzantine art. 
4. After centuries of damage, the frescoes of Ivanove now offer only a few 
tantalizing glimpses of medieval Bulgarian art. 
   
  
   
 
Conquered around 1550 B.C., Nubia 
(especially the area around Aswan) 
became a strategic strongpoint of 
Pharaonic Egypt. The open-air 
museum of Nubia and Aswan 
comprises the temples of Abu 
Simbel, hewn from the rock by 
order of Ramses II in the fourteenth 
century B.C, the great temple of Isis 
and a complex of several temples 
built between the fifteenth century 
B.C. and the second century A.D. 
Placed on the World Heritage List 
in 1979 
J
a
c
q
u
e
s
 
Br
un
 
© 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s 
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
al
l 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
w
 
Di
di
er
 
Do
rv
al
 
© 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
(}
 
© 
J.
-P
. 
Fo
rg
et
, 
M
a
u
r
e
p
a
s

## [Page 46](102011engo.pdf#page=46) 2

### 102053: The European Environment Agency

### 102052: Protecting plant life

Ajanta Ca ves — Ellora Caves — Elepha 
ul oT S 
qa 
     
  
Pa
ri
s 
      
         
     
) 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
No
u 
& 
JL
 
sp
lo
re
r,
 
Pa
ri
s 
   
a 
AJANTA 
1. General view of the 
cliff, 
2, Cave No. 1. The 
Vakataka period (3rd- 
5th centuries A.D), @ ? tn 
3. Facade of cave No. & 3 3 
18. 5 5 5 
: : : 
ELEPHANTA 2 2 : 
4, The temple (6th-8th © © a 
centuries A.D. ). B 8 2 
5. Three-headed Shiva. 3 S 
e 7 7 
ELLORA x < = 
6. Entrance to cave ; = 
No. 10. MH Ajanta ® Hewn froma cliff monasteries. The oldest date from 
7. The sanctuary of . : 
Visvakarman (cave No. overlooking a bend in the Waghora the seventh century and the most 
a. Saves hi River (Maharashtra State), the thirty recent were probably made between 
sun. Ajanta caves include five Buddhist 800 and 1000 A.D. 
sanctuaries and monastic annexes. Placed on the World Heritage List 
The first group of caves were made in 1983 
in the second century B.C. ona HW Elephanta ® The Elephanta 
basilical pattern in which the main Caves, on the little island of 
nave is separated from the aisles. A Gharapuri, offshore from Bombay, 
second group was hewn out are divided into two groups. The 
between the fifth and seventh main site contains five Hindu rock- 
centuries A.D., during the Vakataka ~~ hewn sanctuaries which embody 
and Gupta dynasties. Abundant many features of traditional 
statues and wall paintings mark one architecture. The sculptures in the 
of the highest points of Indian art. main cave which surround the chapel 
Placed on the World Heritage List containing the lingam (phallic symbol 
in 1983 representing the fertilizing aspect of 
HM Ellora MW Unlike Ajanta, Ellorais Shiva) are among the most important 
the product of three great religions of their kind dedicated to the cult of 
of ancient India. Thirty-four caves Shiva. They have been approximately 
hewn from a high basalt cliff on a dated to some time between the sixth 
two-kilometre-long site in and eighth centuries A.D. 
Maharashtra state contain Buddhist, Placed on the World Heritage List 
Brahmanic and Jainist temples and in 1987

## [Page 47](102011engo.pdf#page=47) 2

### 102054: Luxembourg: the balcony of Europe

### 102052: Protecting plant life

- a" ae " i |. 
~The Bandiagara Escarpment (‘Dogon Country’) (Ma 
A 
1. A Dogon village built 
on rock. Alongside the 
rectangular houses 
are grain stores with 
conical thatched 
roofs. 
2. A natural cave once 
modified for human 
habitation, 
3. The entrance 10 a 
religious leader's 
dwelling, protected by 
a carved snake. 
4, The houses are 
built of dry stone or 
unbaked clay bricks. 
The walls are coated 
with clay. 
5, Traditional houses 
clinging to the cliff 
face. 
  
Covering an area of some 400,000 
hectares, this site includes almost 250 
traditional villages of the Dogon 
people, most of which huddle against 
the cliff. The Dogon, a people 
formed about 800 years ago from the 
intermingling of tribes which had 
been chased from Mandé with the 
local Tellem people who lived in 
caves and rock shelters, preserved a 
number of their predecessors’ rock 
sanctuaries. They later developed a 
form of social organization which 
was reflected in their architecture. 
Placed on the World Heritage List 
mn 1989 
: ) a Hi 
= ‘ We A Rly ~~ pa ns 
RT IA PEPIN vi TH 
AT ATACAAS i 
a or Ya 
  
       
   
iw. THA Zz oy hs ; 4 f , 
; wi y ke y 4 i > 4 =~ 
Co a e 77 
wi or. 4 
LAL" 2 2 
WS ; 
™ - 
  Cy 2 
-   
ax
a 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
 
0
1
/
L
a
 
 

## [Page 48](102011engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 102054: Luxembourg: the balcony of Europe

     
    ho 
~The rock cones of Cappadocia (Turkey) 
     Lg 8  eae yh UY Co RA 
= 
  
  
© 
Th
ie
tr
y 
Bo
rr
ed
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
      
          
1. Landscape of 
Cappadocia, in the 
heart of Anatolia, The 
site was created from 
a massive flow of lava 
from Mount Argaeus. 
2. Volcanic cones 
topped with 
dovecotes, 
3. A troglodyte 
dwelling still In use. Kl
au
s 
B
o
s
s
e
m
e
a
y
e
r
 
© 
St
ud
io
 
X,
 
Pa
ri
s 
H
a
n
s
 
J. 
B
u
r
k
h
a
r
d
 
© 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s 
    
    
    
  
un 
0 
5 : 
| R. ™ 
2 2 
a 
a 
j=h > 
2 2 
2 5 
= =) 
2 2 
- 
Q 
| oc a 
4 
As early as the fourth century A.D. 4. The king's palace in 
uy : a the underground city 
Christian anchorite communities of Ozkonak. 
{ wri, 5. A rock-hewn took shelter in the unusual conical rn oa 
peaks sculpted by erosion in the Goreme Valley. 
: > : . 6. Zelve Valley. 
heart of Turkey’s Anatolia region. 7. Rocky pyramids in 
Goreme Valley. They began creating troglodytic 
villages to protect themselves from 
Arab invasions, and by the middle of 
| the ninth century stone churches 
were being gouged from the soft 
rock and richly decorated with 
figurative painting. 
Placed on the World Heritage List 
in 1985 
— 
40 
@ 
J.
-P
. 
Fo
rg
et
, 
M
a
u
r
a
p
a
s

## [Page 49](102011engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 102054: Luxembourg: the balcony of Europe

   = Mesa Verde (United States of America) 
   
  
   
The traditional habitat of the Anasazi 
Indians appeared in the sixth century 
A.D. in the form of partially buried 
villages on the high table-land of 
Mesa Verde (Colorado). From the 
eighth century on it developed in the 
form of villages that were partly 
troglodytic and partly built above 
ground. Buried structures known as 
kivas were made and were used for 
various cultural activities. The 
civilization of the Anasazis, to which 
the Pueblo Indians belong, reached 
its zenith between the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries. At the end of 
this period the surface villages were 
abandoned and the Indians settled in 
Fr
an
ci
s 
Go
hl
er
 
@ 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s 
     
 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s 
® 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Le
na
rs
, 
Pa
ri
s 
 
          
      
       
    
     
 
  
s more rudimentary defensive 
2 buildings huddled against the sides of 
& 3 the canyons. 
Zt 5 Placed on the World Heritage List 
fs ie i in 1978 
Ly 1. At the end of the 12th century 
    the Anasazi Indians abandoned 
the table-top mesas to establish 
new dwellings In the sides of 
canyons. 
2, The “Spruce-Tree House". 
3. The Cliff Palace, built with 
stones taken from the ciiff. 
d Ti 
Lzniny ni {ArT ot — 
e 8 i 
   
   
    1. The "cave of 
crystals”, 
2. Kinga Chapel, hewn 
and sculpted from the 
rock salt. 
3. This 162:step 
stairway, whose 
existence was 
recorded for the first 
time in 1669, climbs 
from the first to the 
second level of the 
mine via a 27-metre- 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
         
  
) ghd high cavern, 
fh 
pw - ve or wl 
i . 2 
o 
= S 
7 2S 
¢ 2+ : Cad « | 5 =z 
WV . TS Tea, © 2 
og . Pe, oF. Li po a 2s : 8 
id ' . Ral he : Natl a Wor | 3 
i Fo % se EERE RT © 
le AER i a ES SR Ey 3 
Underground mining of rock salt 300 km. The old galleries strikingly 
deposits began in the thirteenth illustrate the evolution of mining 
century, and in the course of time processes over the centuries. 
galleries were opened up on nine Underground chapels are adorned 
levels, to a maximum depth of 327 with altars, pulpits and statues carved pi N @ 
metres. Their total length, including out of salt. : J 3 
wells, corridors, labyrinths, Placed on the World Heritage List v i — ~B 
excavations and rooms is nearly in 1978 a - OPN : 
2 
+

## [Page 50](102011engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

U
N
E
s
c
o
/
I
n
é
s
 
Fo
rb
es
 


### 102054: Luxembourg: the balcony of Europe

  
  
SCIENCE 
THAT MUST 
BE SHARED 
Science is a product of intellectual work by persons 
trained in reflection and analysis to venture beyond 
what is already known. This exercise in thinking 
requires a minimum number of conditions, the 
most important of which under present circum- 
stances is freedom. For although scientific progress 
was possible in the past when political and social 
contexts were under threat, the growing com- 
plexity of research and scientific development 
today require a high level of freedom in order to 
keep moving forward. As a result, the future of sci- 
ence is closely bound up with the advance of 
democracy and respect for values conducive to the 
free circulation and discussion of ideas. 
Contrary to the fears of Alexis de Tocqueville 
and other nineteenth-century thinkers, democ- 
racy has not built a kingdom of mediocrity inim- 
ical to the development of higher forms of art and 
science. Rather, the opposite has occurred. The 
vitality and creative force of democratic society— 
in which the state is secular, powers are separated 
and all ideas are subject to debate—have turned 
out to be much greater than its early critics imag- 
ined. These qualities have not only enabled it to 
surmount the danger posed by various forms of 
totalitarianism but also to promote unprecedented 
cultural and economic development. 
An unexpected turn of events 
However, on the threshold of the twenty-first 
century, the nature of the challenges and threats 
with which democracy has to cope is changing. 
Since 1989, the end of the Cold War has given new 
emphasis, and in some cases greater virulence, to 
old disputes of ethnic or religious origin that had 
survived under wraps in the shadow of the East- 
West confrontation. It is quite clear that they are 
not the consequences of freedom but the result 
of many years of oppression. The triumph of 
democratic principles in Eastern Europe, the 
break-up of the Soviet empire and the nuclear 
weapons reduction agreements have opened up 
COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR 
broad vistas of peace while at the same time 
releasing resentments and twisted perceptions 
long harboured in the secret places of the heart. 
The countries of the free world had prepared 
for war, but not for peace. They were surprised 
when the course of events diverged from what 
the prophets of doom had predicted. The iron 
curtain was soon a thing of the past; peace was 
achieved in Namibia, El Salvador, Mozambique, 
the Middle East and South Africa. Conflicts were 
no longer international but intranational. The 
threats to security are now poverty, the unbal- 
anced distribution of resources, runaway popula- 
tion growth, massive emigration and social injus- 
tices that create reactions of rejection. 
This turnaround caught out some countries 
which had little inclination to take radical deci- 
sions, looked no further than the next elections 
and regarded any reference to future generations 
as an irritation. Their budgetary and productive 
priorities, social organization and defence struc- 
ture are geared to the threats of the past but are 
unsuitable for tackling the problems of the future. 
The examples of Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda 
underscore the inability of the international com- 
munity to solve new, “low-intensity” post-Cold 
War conflicts. 
An intolerable situation 
The individual and collective violence that consti- 
tute the seedbed of war can take many different 
forms. In politics it manifests itself as oppression 
and tyranny; in economics, as exploitation and des- 
titution; and in society, as exclusion and intolerance. 
Every effort to establish a culture of peace must 
take into account these deep roots of human con- 
flict and give priority to the transmission of values, 
the forging of attitudes and the drafting of legal pro- 
visions to replace those of the declining culture of 
war. The pillars of this undertaking are education 
and development, which make it possible to elimi- 
nate the most dehumanizing aspects of extreme 
poverty, and to contribute to the elimination of dis- 
crimination and the establishment of governments 
that respect the will of the people and the agree- 
ments they have entered into. Twenty years ago, in 
1974, the industrialized countries undertook to 
promote the development of the less privileged 
countries by allocating to them 0.7 per cent of their 
GDP (keeping 99.3 per cent for themselves!). With 
a few praiseworthy exceptions—the Nordic coun- 
tries in particular—they have not honoured their 
undertaking. 
Worse still, the meagre “development assis- 

## [Page 51](102011engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

tance” on offer sometimes included military equip- 
ment. As a result, there has been no endogenous 
development in most of the countries in question. 
Foreign debt and the maroeconomic structures put 
in place have led to an intolerable situation that has 
nevertheless been tolerated for years: the poor 
countries are paying the rich! Millions of people 
drawn by “city lights” are fleeing the poverty of 
rural areas to go and live in the squalid, crowded 
solitude of the major urban centres. One day, help- 
less and desperate, they will head north. How easy 
and wrong it is to deplore radicalism and extremism 
where poverty, marginalization, exclusion and 
ignorance have been allowed to proliferate. 
The idea that development is synonymous 
with economic growth has long been superseded. 
Nowadays, the ethical and social problems arising 
from scientific and technological progress brook 
neither delay nor evasion. When UNESCO speaks 
of the need for development with a human face— 
integrated, endogenous, sustainable, supportive 
and environment-friendly—it is merely com- 
plying with one of its basic precepts: the duty to 
act as the conscience of the United Nations 
system in a world that hesitates, in the presence of 
powerful interests and forces of inertia, to take the 
new directions that, at the dawn of a new millen- 
nium, are morally inescapable. 
The responsibilities of the scientist 
Scientific knowledge in the basic disciplines 
(mathematics, physics, chemistry and biology) is 
now centred on half a dozen lines of inquiry that 
will certainly change the character of society in the 
twenty-first century. Broadly speaking, this work 
is organized around ecological problems and the 
search for alternative sources of energy; optic 
fibres and superconductors; lasers and work 
relating to space technology; and research in 
biology, especially genetics and biotechnology. 
Those who are taking scientific knowledge for- 
ward in these areas, like many of their colleagues 
working in other sectors, bear the awesome respon- 
sibility of informing public opinion and those who 
shape it about the potential risks of the application 
of knowledge, and of explaining the constantly 
changing instruments that science devises to cope 
with those difficulties. But if the scientists” words 
are to fall on receptive ears and their conclusions on 
fertile soil, steps must be taken to strengthen 
exchanges of communication and influence 
between the centres of knowledge and power, and 
between researchers and leaders in all political and 
social spheres, especially at municipal level. 
While municipal and regional authorities have 
in the past needed architects, hydraulic engineers 
and communication experts, from now on they 
will also need the services of environmental spe- 
cialists to help them preserve soil quality (through 
the appropriate “scientific” use of artificial fertil- 
izers), to encourage the recycling of natural prod- 
ucts and improve public health by suitable waste 
processing, to avoid air and water pollution, to 
protect biological diversity and to safeguard the 
historical heritage. This aspect of the scientist’s 
task is particularly urgent in the most highly devel- 
oped countries which, in almost direct proportion 
to their productive capacity, are the greatest pro- 
ducers of toxic wastes. 
One of the tragedies of the contemporary 
world is the dearth of activity in applied science 
compared with the enormous volume of accu- 
mulated theoretical knowledge. Laboratories and 
universities in the industrialized world are 
bursting with knowledge that could alleviate the 
misery of millions of human beings, but the means 
of applying that knowledge are not available, 
although the more discerning countries are begin- 
ning to realize that, in the final analysis, their own 
security is at stake. For example, there is no AZT 
for many Aids sufferers in Africa. Imagine the 
sense of injustice and marginalization that these 
patients for whom there is no medicine must feel. 
If I have dwelt on the social impact of scien- 
tific work, it is because I am convinced that this is 
one of the decisive parameters of the century that 
is about to begin, because I believe that there are 
solutions that can be applied. When my official 
responsibilities take me to a school in the heart of 
the African forest, a research centre in Siberia or 
an archaeological site in South America, I always 
meet enthusiastic young people who are giving of 
their best—sometimes under conditions of 
extreme hardship—in order to secure peace and 
collective welfare. These young people look to the 
“intellectual and moral solidarity” enshrined in 
UNEScO’s Constitution as the key to human dig- 
nity. For this reason, I repeat on each of my jour- 
neys that “there is only one really pressing need, 
and that is to share”. It is the saying that one of the 
great religious figures of our time, Abbé Pierre, 
keeps on his modest desk and it is a motto that 
should govern our daily life. 
Of the principles proclaimed by the French 
Revolution in 1789—Liberty, Equality, Fraternity— 
the first inspired the great political and social trans- 
formations of the nineteenth century while the 
second, the egalitarian ideal, dominated the twen- 
tieth century after the Russian Revolution. But the 
culture of war in which they developed prevented 
them from producing all the benefits that had been 
anticipated. Let us strive, with scientists in the van- 
guard, to make the third of those principles, Fra- 
ternity, the historic driving force of the twenty-first 
century, the mobilizing ideal of the culture of peace, 
whose first page is waiting impatiently for us to 
trace the outline, in unison throughout the world, 
of the most novel yet ancient solution of all times, 
the only one on which we will be judged at the end 
of the day: love. | 

## [Page 52](102011engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

A he first European Conference on 
B the Conservation of Wild Plants 
was held in September at Hyéres 
(France), at a time when 25,000 
wild plants are threatened with 
extinction. The Conference, entitled 
“Planta Europa”, was co-sponsored 
by Plantlife, a charity dedicated to 
saving wild plants, and by the 
French Ministry of the Environment. 
It was attended by 200 experts from 
thirty European countries 
In his inaugural address, the 
well-known British botanist and 
environmentalist David Bellamy, 
president of Plantlife, noted that 
plants have for too long been too 
low on the list of conservation con- 
  
cerns. “Pandas may reign supreme 
as the logo for the World Wide 
Fund for Nature (WWF),” he said, 
“but as every schoolchild will tell 
you they are totally dependent on 
bamboo both for their habitat and 
their staple diet.” 
THE THREATS 
  
David Bellamy went on to list the 
“seven deadly sins that threaten the 
flora of Europe” as “changes in land 
use practice including: 1) extensive 
and intensive farming based on ever 
larger fields and the reseeding of 
meadows and pastures with 
nitrogen-hungry monocultures; 2) 
the replacement of the rural work 
force, crop rotation, fallow and 
mixed farming by machines and an 
armamentarium of chemicals; 3) the 
eutrophication of water due to the 
excessive use of fertilizers and inten- 
sification of animal husbandry 
including the foddering of sheep and 
cattle on heath-, moor- and bogland; 
4) drainage on a massive scale 
including the loss of water meadows 
and farm ponds; 5) road-building 
dissecting viable populations of 
plants and the animals and insects 
y fo  
Al
ai
n 
Le
 
To
qu
in
 
@ 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Al
ai
n 
Le
 
To
qu
in
 
© 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
A botanist 
pollinating a 
Hibiscus £ 
boryanus. ge 
s 
Young Hottentot 2 
fig plants 3 
(Carpobrotus 2 
edulis). 2 
which depend on them and upon 
which they depend; 6) acidification 
due to the increasing use of fossil 
fuels and the replacement of native 
woodlands and coppice with exotic 
conifers; 7) overgrazing by sheep, 
cattle and other herbivores.” 
The some 12,000 species of 
flowers and ferns in Europe are also 
under threat from environmental 
degradation due to the intensifica- 
tion of farming, industrial and 
urban expansion, the growth of 
tourism and uncontrolled extrac- 
tion of natural resources. Twenty- 
five higher plant and fern species no 
longer exist in their wild state, and 
many more have been reduced to a 
very small number of specimens. 
The situation is particularly wor- 
rying since the distribution of bio- 
logical diversity worldwide is irreg- 
ular. Europe is responsible for sev- 
eral plant-life territories of 
worldwide interest in such areas as 
the Alps, the Pyrenees, the   
Seed preserved in 
cold storage at the 
Botanical 
Conservatory in 
Brest (France). 
 
Spanish mountain chains, the 
Balkan mountains, the Mediter- 
ranean basin and its islands, the 
Canaries and the Azores. 
The first thing that must be 
done is to catalogue all the world’s 
plant species, and this will be a 
long, costly and complicated job. In 
Europe, for example, botany as a 
discipline has lost much of the 
prestige it once had, except in 
Spain where there are a number of 
top-level botanists. It is gradually 
being overshadowed by disciplines 
such as molecular biology. Some 
wags have even begun to wonder 
whether present-day researchers, 
with their eyes glued to electronic 
microscopes, could tell a field of 
barley from a field of wheat! 
THE RESPONSES 
  
And yet international legal tools to 
protect plant life do exist. The 
Washington Convention on Interna- 
tional Trade in Endangered Species 
of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) 
came into force in 1982 in more 
than 130 countries. And Europe’s 
wildlife and environment have been 
protected by the Bern Convention 
since 1979. Despite these regula- 
tions, however, indigenous plant 
populations are still being plun- 
dered to meet the demands of the 
horticulture business. In the 1980s 
Southern Europe and Turkey 
exported between 50 and 70 mil-

## [Page 53](102011engo.pdf#page=53) 0

### IGNORE

lion bulbs per year, mainly to the 
Netherlands but also to the United 
Kingdom and Germany. 
The best way to protect plants 
in their natural habitats is to estab- 
lish protected areas. According to 
two French experts in natural 
resources, Matthieu Glachant and 
Francois Lévéque, there are a total 
of 4.85 million km2 of such areas, 
covering 3.7 per cent of the earth’s 
land surface, including biosphere 
reserves, parks and natural reserves 
of all sizes. But it is difficult to 
provide proper protection in 
densely populated regions. It would 
be a pity if we could no longer see 
wild plants growing in nature and 
had to look them up in dried plant 
collections, even collections as rich 
as those in Geneva (5 million speci- 
mens) and Vienna (3.8 million). 
Botanical gardens and seed or 
pollen banks provide for the con- 
servation of plants outside their 
natural habitat. A Council of 
Europe study published in 1994 
notes that the world’s 2,500 botan- 
ical gardens play an important role 
in scientific research and in the con- 
servation of endangered species, 
and that it is in them that the 
greatest variety of plant species— 
roughly 80,000—are found outside 
natural ecosystems. Using speci- 
mens grown in botanical gardens 
many countries, including Aus- 
tralia, Russia and the United 
States, have created national data 
banks for rare or endangered 
indigenous plants. “Red Books” 
compiled by some countries on 
their endangered plant life are also 
conservation tools. 
techniques 
valuable 
Extremely rigorous 
must be used for collecting, freeze- 
drying or vacuum storage of speci- 
mens in seed and plant tissue 
banks. But in France, for example, 
  
Sy
lv
ai
n 
Co
rd
ie
r 
© 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Je
an
-L
ou
is
 
Le
 
M
o
i
g
n
e
 
© 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
such facilities have been instru- 
mental in restoring to life a certain 
variety of club moss of which only 
one sterile fragment had survived. 
This raises the problem of how 
far a plant population or its habitat 
should be modified to ensure the 
survival of the species. Take, for 
example, the narcissi that grow on 
the Glénan group of islands off 
France’s Brittany coast. They were 
dying out, partly through being 
trampled on by tourists and partly 
because their bulbs were being 
removed. Their habitat was fenced 
off to protect them, but trees and 
bushes grew and smothered the 
flowers. A solution was found by 
introducing sheep, which do not 
eat narcissi. The introduction of 
foreign plants can also pose prob- 
© TOFIND OUT MORE: 
BW Plantlife: The Natural History Museum, 
~ Cromwell Road, London SWT7 58D. Tel: (19 44) 
© 17193891 11; Fax: (19 44) 171 938 9112. 
WB World Plant Conservation Bibliography, 
Roval Botanic Gardens, Kew and the World Con- 
servation Union (IUEN), 
BW Widening Perspectives on Biodiversity, 
A. Krattiger et al., IUCN, 1994, 
WB Principles and Practice of Plant Conser- 
vation, David R. Given, IUCN, 1994 
BM L'enjeu des ressources génétiques vége- 
tales, Aspects scientifiques, écologlques et 
economiques Matihieu Glachant and Francois 
Leveque with the collaboration of A, Boniean, Les 
Editions de l'environnement, Paris, 1993, 
WM La biodiversité, enjeu planétaire. Conserver 
notre patrimoine génétique, Michel Chauvet and 
jin Olivier, Le Sang de la terre, Paris, 1993, 
  
lems. A pretty flowering plant 
called the Hottentot fig (Carpo- 
edulis), 
South Africa, is spreading along 
the coasts of the Mediterranean 
and California and smothering 
brotus originally from 
endemic plants. After rashly intro- 
ducing St. John’s Wort into their 
country, Australians had to import 
an insect that preys on this invasive 
plant. Australians are also faced 
with the proliferation of gum suc- 
cory (Chondrilla juncea), which 
originated in the Middle East and 
has such a tough stalk that it is dif- 
ficult to scythe. 
All the same it was reassuring to 
find out from the “Planta Europa” 
conference what naturalists are 
doing on a worldwide scale to pro- 
tect wild plants, for plants are not 
only a source of pleasure but also 
potential food and medicine for 
tomorrow. [ 
  
The Royal Botanic 
Garden, 
Edinburgh (United 
Kingdom). 
    
FRANCE BEQUETTE 
is a Franco-American 
journalist 
specializing in 
environmental 
matters. 
 
A narcissus from 
the Glénan islands 
(Narcissus 
triandrus). 
 
i
e
 
THE RHINOCEROS IS ALIVE AND (FAIRLY) 
WELL IN ZIMBABWE 
The Pan-African News Agency (PANA) reports 
that in the fast 18 months, the Zimbabwe 
Society for the Protection of the Rhinoceros 
has not registered a single case of poaching in 
the four protected sites it has established. 
When Zimbabwe became independent in 1980 
the rhinoceros population numbered several 
thousands. Now there are only 300 left. 
Poachers sell rhino horns, which are used to 
make so-called aphrodisiac powder and as 
scabbards for swords, for as much as 
$US90,000 each. The Harare government has 
invested 500,000 Zimbabwe dollars (about 
$US62,500) to protect the survivors. { 
GLOBAL WARMING: 
A CLOUDY OUTLOOK 
Researchers at the United States’ National 
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) in 
Boulder, Colorado, report that clouds absorb 
about four times as much solar energy as had 
been previously thought, and by using the 
new values have arrived at preliminary results 
that predict a warmer, drier climate than that 
shown previously. An NCAR study of the tiny 
particles that form the nuclei of cloud 
45 
F

## [Page 54](102011engo.pdf#page=54) 0

### IGNORE

Fa
ul
kn
er
 
D
/
P
H
R
 
@ 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
P.
 
R
o
g
n
o
n
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
droplets and raindrops suggests that the 
burning of tropical forests may be the largest 
source of these particles, other cloud con- 
densation nuclei being dust and sea salt. The 
increase in nuclei could result in a decrease in 
rainfall. 
  
WENO'S RISING TIDE OF WASTE 
About 17,000 people live on Wendo Island, 
capital of Chuuk State (Federated States of 
Micronesia). Weno, whose area is just under 
20 kmz2, has a serious solid-waste problem. 
Because of a quarrel between land-owners and 
the government about land use, the existing 
disposal site has been closed. When a repre- 
sentative of the World Health Organization 
(WHO) visited Weno last year, he found that 
there was no public service for the collection 
of solid waste, so that people had to trans 
port their waste to the public dump them- 
selves. However, since neither the dump nor 
its access road are well-maintained, illegal 
dumping has increased. Even with the road in 
good repair, a new site will have to be opened 
up sooner or later. But where? Weno's waste 
disposal problem is one being faced by many 
communities all over the world, # 
DONKEYS FIGHT BATTLE 
AGAINST DUNES 
The June 1995 issue of the French magazine 
Sécheresse contains an article co-authored by 
Professor Pierre Rognon of Paris and Jean Meu 
nier, an agronomist living in Mauritania, 
describing how the latter has developed a 
simple, effective and inexpensive way of halting 
desert advance. Saplings are planted in wire- 
   
mesh cylinders wrapped in plastic bags, and are 
watered at root-level via a system of buried 
plastic bottles linked to a bottle acting as a 
funnel from the surface. After 6 months, the 
saplings are 2.5 metres tall, enough to stabilize 
the sand. The cheapest way to bring in the 
water is on donkey-back, and Meunier has 
developed a rubber sandal to increase the 
bearing surface of donkeys’ hooves and pre- 
vent them from sinking into the soft sand. 
  
NE WOMAN, MANY TREES 
The 1994 annual report of Switzerland's Depart- 
ment of Development and Humanitarian Aid 
(DDA) tells the heartening story of Mariam 
Begum, of Bangladesh. Mariam, who never 
attended school and teamed to read and write 
through an adult literacy programme, started a 
nursery on 280 m2 of land lent to her by the 
state. Three years later she was working on an 
area ten times bigger. In 1994 she sold 10,000 
trees and earned ten times the average 
Bangladeshi income. She hired a fulltime 
employee, and her husband joined her busi 
ness. Now Mariam has become a forestry con 
sultant and plants trees for wealthy landowners. 
Because of entrepreneurs like her, more than 
two million trees have been planted in 
Bangladesh since the DDA-supported forestry 
programme was started nine years ago. 
     en 
THE WATER HYACINTH 
STRIKES AGAIN 
  
Burkina Faso is the latest African country (see 
Unesco Courier, May 1995, p. 47) to be threat 
ened by the water hyacinth, a small, floating 
water plant with round leaves and beautiful 
pale-blue flowers. According to the Burkina 
Faso Botanical and Technological Research 
Institute, the hyacinth encourages evapora 
tion. If it spreads to the dams of Kompienga 
and Bagré, the water supply of the country’s 
capital, Ouagadougou, will be jeopardized. A 
media campaign has been launched in the 
national languages, calling on people to 
destroy the water hyacinth before the advent 
of the rainy season. If the campaign fails, it 
will cost several million dollars to get rid of the 
troublesome plant. 
INITIATIVES 
The European 
Environment Agency 
   
The European Environment Agency was created in 
1990 and became operational in 1993 when its head- 
quarters were established in Copenhagen (Denmark). 
It is funded by the European Commission and by con- 
tributions from non-member states of the European 
Union such as Norway and Iceland. Although an off- 
shoot of the European Commission, it operates inde- 
pendently, collecting information and distributing it 
upon request to the general public and to a network of 
“Topic Centres”—public or private member-state insti- 
tutions concerned with the environment. Its first pro- 
ject was to develop and co-ordinate the European Envi-. 
ronment Information and Observation Network 
(EIONET), to which more than 450 institutions belong.” 
The Agency’s Multiannual work programme (1995- 
1999) comprises 93 projects. They give priority to areas 
such as air quality and atmospheric emissions; water 
quality; water pollutants and water resources; the state 
of the soil, of fauna and flora and biotopes; land use 
and natural resources use; waste management; noise 
emissions; chemical substances hazardous to the envi- 
ronment; and coastal protection. 
Five Topic Centres are already acting as lead orga- 
nizations for work in these priority areas. The Air Emis- 
sions project, for example, is being headed by the 
Umweltbundesamt in Berlin, and the Nature Conser- 
vation project by the Muséum Nationale d Histoire 
Naturelle of Paris. 
The Agency publishes a series of documents (mainly 
free of charge), including a monthly newsletter. One of 
these documents, Europe’s Environment, the Dobris 
Assessment, published in 1994, is particularly remark- 
able. Illustrated with photos and diagrams, it presents 
in less than twenty pages a summary including some 
memorable figures. For example, two-thirds of Euro- 
peans live in urban areas covering 1 per cent of the total 
land area. A city of a million inhabitants consumes a 
daily average of 11,500 tonnes of fossil fuels, 320,000 
tonnes of water and 2,000 tonnes of food and produces 
25,000 tonnes of CO2 1,600 tonnes of solid waste and 
300,00 tonnes of wastewater. Tourism is one of 
Europe’s most important social and economic activities: 
the coastal Mediterranean received 157 million tourists 
in 1990, and 100 million tourists visit the Alps each 
year. 
EEA 
Kongens Nytorv 6, 1050 Copenhague K, Denmark. 
Tel.: (+45) 33 36 71 00. Fax: (+45) 33 36 71 99.

## [Page 55](102011engo.pdf#page=55) 0

### IGNORE

  
» 
hs de sate ak 
uit 
  
The balcony of Tre 
A pocket-sized international airport; 
a fast-expanding money market; a 
European centre which houses the 
headquarters of the Secretariat of the 
European Parliament and other Euro- 
pean institutions such as the Court of 
Auditors, the Court of Justice and the 
European Investment Bank; a strategic 
crossroads where the history of Europe, 
from the Early Middle Ages on, has lit- 
erally been carved in stone; the leg- 
endary spot where Melusinal, wife of 
the city’s founder Count Sigefroid, is 
said to hide—Luxembourg, capital of 
the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, is all 
of these. Its inhabitants, who number 
fewer than 100,000, speak not only 
their native tongue Letzebuergesch (a 
but 
French and German, and in many cases 
Mosellan Franconian dialect), 
English and even Italian, Spanish and 
Portuguese. A good half of the capital’s 
population is made up of foreigners. 
cry AND CROSSROADS 
Located at the intersection of two Roman 
  
roads, one from Paris, the other from 
  
 
Capital of the Grand Duchy, 
Luxembourg City was coveted by the 
powers of western Europe for 
centuries, Since 1994 its old districts 
and fortifications have been 
registered on UNESCO's World 
Heritage List. 
Top, Luxembourg 
as it was in the 17th century. A copperplate 
engraving by Frederik de Wit (1698). 
Above, the Corniche and 
St. Michael's Church. 
by Jean-Pierre Kraemer 
A.
 
So
ld
ev
il
le
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Lyons, on a rocky promontory between the 
two deep valleys of the Alzette and the 
Pétrusse, the site of the future city strad- 
dled the linguistic borderline between 
France and the Holy Roman Empire, in 
the heart of ancient Lotharingia. It was 
ideally suited to fortification. 
    THE GIBRALT
OF THE NORTH’ 
In about 1000 A.D., on the site of a 
modest Roman fort called Lucilin- 
burhue, or Liitzelburg (“little castle), 
Sigefroid built a feudal castle which 
was to become the seat of the illustrious 
house of Luxembourg and the “Acrop- 
olis” of the future fortified town. 
At the beginning of the fourteenth 
century the town had 5,000 inhabitants 
and enjoyed an economic boom thanks 
to its ideal location on the trade route 
between the two leading trading regions 
of the time, Lombardy and Flanders. Its 
third surrounding wall, known as 
Wenceslaus’s Wall, which protected 
both the upper and lower towns, dates 
from the end of the fourteenth century. 
© 
Hi
st
or
y 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
th
e 
Gr
an
d 
Du
ch
y 
of
 
L
u
x
e
m
b
o
u
r
g

## [Page 56](102011engo.pdf#page=56) 0

### IGNORE

B
u
s
s
 
Wo
jt
ek
 
@ 
Ho
aq
ui
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
Its strategic location made Luxem- 
bourg a very attractive prize for the 
great continental powers and dragged it 
into the upheavals of European politics. 
After becoming part of the possessions 
of Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, 
in the fifteenth century, the Duchy 
passed into the hands of the Spanish 
Habsburgs, who considerably rein- 
forced the fortress when it came under 
threat from the French. After being 
besieged by Vauban. it eventually fell 
to Louis XIV in 1684. A skilled strate- 
gist and military engineer, Vauban then 
extended the fortifications up to the 
top of the promontory. from which he 
had succeeded in breaching the town’s 
defences. 
Luxembourg remained in the hands 
of the Austrian llabsburgs for most of 
the eighteenth century. then fell to the 
army of the French Republic in 1795. 
before becoming part of the German 
Confederation in 1815. The Congress of 
Vienna. which redrew the political map 
of Europe, made Luxembourg a Grand 
Duchy. The eity. occupied by Prussian 
troops who further reinforced its forti- 
fications, became a “federal fortress” 
designed to act as a barrier against the 
French. But at the London Conference 
of 1867 a treaty signed by the great 
powers of the time in the hope of pre- 
venting a Franco-Prussian war stipu- 
lated that the Grand Duchy should 
remain in a state of “perpetual neu- 
trality™. that the Prussian garrison 
should withdraw from the fortress. and 
that its imposing fortifications should 
48 
Ch
ri
st
ia
n 
S
a
p
p
a
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
The Pont Adolphe. In background, the state 
Savings Bank. 
be dismantled. The dismantling process, 
which took sixteen years, resulted in 
the disappearance of one of the most 
powerful strongholds in Europe. once 
‘alled “the Gibraltar of the North”, 
Initially regarded as a disaster by 
the city’s burghers. the treaty had a 
beneficial effect on Luxembourg. The 
removal of the fortifications opened up 
a large area of building land and offered 
undreamt-of growth possibilities. Par- 
liamentary buildings were erected. new 
 
districts such as the Plateau Bourbon 
became urbanized. and cultural institu- 
tions were sited there. The price to be 
paid for this boom was the loss of a 
unique heritage of military architee- 
ture. the surviving remnants of which 
form part of the historic site placed on 
the World Heritage List in December 
1994. 
INSPIRATION FOR ARTISTS 
AND WRITERS 
The different powers that ruled Lux- 
embourg [rom the sixteenth te the nine- 
teenth centuries left their stamp on the 
city’s military and civilian architecture 
through a process of historical super- 
imposition. But the site is chiefly inter- 
esting because of the boldness with 
which the city blends into a landscape 
whose beauty has impressed many great 
artists and writers. 
There exist 338 street plans, maps 
and drawings of Luxembourg which 
make it possible to chart its develop- 
ment both spatially and temporally. 
Many artists have painted views of the 
fortified town. Goethe made a series of 
pencil sketches and drawings height- 
ened with wash and sepia. But there 
The European Court of Justice building 
on the Kirchberg plateau. 
  
     

## [Page 57](102011engo.pdf#page=57) 0

### IGNORE

can be little doubt that it was J.M.W. 
Turner who. in his twentv-odd water- 
colours of the site, best captured its 
atmosphere. 
RELICS OF A PRESTIGIOUS PAST 
[t is true that Luxembourg lost much of 
its architectural heritage as a result of 
the military attacks to which it was con- 
stantly subjected. Gone are its feudal 
castle, which was destroyed by a gun- 
powder explosion in 1554, the sump- 
tuous Renaissance buildings put up by 
Governor Pierre-Ernest de Mansfeld, 
which fell in ruins in the seventeenth cen- 
tury, and the fortress walls, which were 
for so long a threat to peace in Europe. 
But important relies of Luxem- 
hourg’s prestigious past have survived. 
such as the Eglise St.-Michel. which is 
over 1.000 vears old, and Notre-Dame 
cathedral, a national shrine and place of 
annual pilgrimage. whose three spires 
can be seen from far outside the city. 
There are also some superb seigneurial 
residences, such as the Hotel de Bour- 
gogne, seat of the presidency of the gov- 
ernment, the Maison de Cassal, the 
Hétel de Raville, and the Maison Mohr 
de Waldt. Also of great interest to visi- 
tors is the Grand Ducal Palace, whose 
fine facade shows the influence of the 
Spanish Renaissance. 
Above all, an elusive spirit of place 
  
A.
 
So
ld
ev
il
le
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 
Above, the organ loft (1620-1622} by Daniel 
Muller in Notre-Dame Cathedral. 
Grund, Luxembourg’s lower town, 
on the banks of the Alzette (left). 
has survived intact in Luxembourg. The 
visitor can sense it in the steep and 
narrow medieval streets; on the cliff-top 
esplanade, known as “the balcony of 
Europe”; in the casemates dug by Hab- 
sburg troops, in which the whole popu- 
lation of the Grand Duchy could hide; 
in the back streets of the lower town; at 
a bend in the Alzette River, where one 
might almost be in some Venetian calle; 
on the surrounding hills, which offer 
the finest views over the Bock—the 
“Acropolis”, where Mclusina is thought 
to be sewing a linen blouse, the comple- 
tion of which will herald the collapse of 
the castle. 
Apart from its legends, perhaps Lux- 
embourg can be regarded as a European 
paradigm. After being subjected for so 
long to the ravages of war, the city now 
embodies what was, perhaps, Lucilin- 
burhue’s true mission: the desire for 
peace in Europe. || 
I Melusina: a fairy of popular legend. Her 
union with a mortal guaranteed the fertility 
of the peoples land and the prosperity of 
their homes. —Ed. 
JEAN-PIERRE KRAEMER, 
of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, is president of his 
country’s National Commission for UNESCO. 
49 
Ch
ri
st
ia
n 
S
a
p
p
a
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 58](102011engo.pdf#page=58) 0

### IGNORE

As it was... 
THE UNESCO URIER 
February 1959 
  
People foolishly believe that if they ban the hydrogen bomb they have finished. Make no 
mistake: if a war starts, every hydrogen bomb and every weapon of war will be thrown in. 
The only way to save humanity is to ban war itself. 
   
A ban on war 
by Lord Boyd Orr 
Nobel Peace Prizewinner (1949) 
    
 
  
  
Which road 
will humanity take? 
by Nikolai Semenov 
Nobel Prizewinner for Chemistry (1956) 
War is a relic from the past. a terrible and barbarous survival which should have no place 
in a civilized world. The menace of war has a disastrous psychological effect in people and 
entails the squandering of a vast amount of labour and resources: an enormous number of 
men do nothing but learn how to kill one another. The overall effect is to prevent nations 
from concentrating their efforts and using their resources to improve living standards. to 
enrich their cultural life and to assist economically under-developed countries; it prevents 
them from feeding and clothing their people properly and hinders normal technological 
development. 
The most important task today is to end this nightmare. A unanimous and active world 
opinion could have a decisive effect in settling these questions. leaving aside other relatively 
secondary problems not directly related to them. 
In this collective effort to safeguard international peace. to ban the testing of nuclear 
weapons and these weapons themselves and to abolish war. the scientists, in all countries, 
who are sincerely concerned for man’s future and for the progress and integrity of science. 
must unite and take a leading part. 
I am convinced that the vast majority of true scientists do not work simply for the 
money they earn. Thus they cannot stand idly by while science is destroyed and the 
prospects which are opening up for it are brought to nothing. It is a great blow for us to 
see the results of our scientific work used to the detriment of mankind. and in the present 
case we cannot tolerate it. We scientists must not stifle our humanitarian feelings but on 
the contrary, give them full freedom, as should every honest person. We should be keenly 
aware of our responsibilities. and then act accordingly, uniting our efforts to solve these 
problems. 
All of us living in the twentieth century, whether scientists or not, have a great obliga- 
tion, not only to ourselves but to future generations. If we succeed in dispelling the heavy 
threat of war and concentrating our efforts on opening up a new and enlightened era, 
mankind can look forward to a truly happy existence even during our own century. ® 
  
  
 

## [Page 59](102011engo.pdf#page=59) 0

### IGNORE

: ol 
   
= 
The Vortex Family 
A Family Saga Set in Haiti 
by Jean Mérellus 
1995,232 pp., ISBN 92-3-103092-2, 135 FF 
The Vortex Family is a richly poetic 
novel, set in Haiti in 1949, by one of 
Haiti's leading contemporary writers. 
The characters, Solon and Olga and their 
middle-class family, reflect Haiti's 
cultural richness: they are cheerful, 
violent, cynical and generous. The book 
affirms with sensual brilliance the life 
force of the Haitian people, which 
prevails over political intrigue, and it 
casts light on an enigmatic and 
mysterious land. 
The New Page 
by Federico Mayor 
1995, 98 pp., ISBN 92-3-102949-5, 215 FF 
For Federico Mayor, Director-General of 
UNESCO, only a culture of peace, based 
on a culture of democracy, may ensure 
the possibility of changing radically our 
economic, social and political perceptions 
comprising the interests and needs of the 
North and South in a new renaissance of 
hope and creativity. 
  
A world of books! 
The Scientific Education of Girls 
An Education Beyond Reproach? 
by the French Commission for UNESCO under 
the supervision of Renée Clair 
1995, 207 pp., ISBN 92-3-103168-6, 149 FF 
Experience has shown that, éven if their 
capabilities equal those of boys, many 
girls choose to turn away from the 
sciences for numerous conscious and 
UNCOASCIOUS reasons, a situation which is 
worth while studying. This book focuses 
on assessing situations and diagnosing the 
causes. It also gives some examples of 
national strategies designed to fight this 
insidious trend. 
  
Working with Street Children 
Selected Case-studies from Africa, Asia and 
Latin America 
1995304 pp., illus, ISBN 92-3-103096-5, 100 FF 
This book shows how individuals and 
non-governmental organizations, includ- 
ing many religious organizations, have set 
up tens of thousands of highly effective 
projects throughout the world to ensure 
the reinsertion of street children into 
their families and/or society through 
education. 
Maria Calleja’s Gozo 
A Life History 
1994, 246 pp, illus., 92-3-102977-0, 170 FF Study Abroad 
29th edition 
1995, 1,376 pp, ISBN 92-3-003148-8, 120 FF 
Legendary home of Calypso, Gozo, in 
the Maltese archipelago, has a long 
history going back beyond Classical 
times. [ts culture has been shaped by 
Phoemeians, Romans, Arabs, Normans, 
Germans, French, Spaniards, and the 
Hospitaller Order of St John of 
Jerusalem. Against this island setting, 
Maria Calleja tells her own story by 
opening a window into the Gozitan life 
and the vanishing traditions in a changing 
world. 
A complete guide to plan your studies 
abroad. It contains detailed information 
on 3,082 offers in 134 countries for 1996 
and 1997 in all academic and professional 
disciplines in post-secondary education. 
 

## [Page 60](102011engo.pdf#page=60) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
UNESCO World i 
2 A Heritage Desk 
: p= Diary 1996 I 
va ww 3 1995, 64 pp., 54 full-colour photos, 
\ = ISBN 92-3-003202-6, 99 FF 
\ Trilingual text: English/French/Spanish 
By purchasing the UNESCO 
re World Heritage Desk Diary 1996 i 
— wd you are contributing to the World 
CAREERS Heritage Fund, aimed at 
| safeguarding the treasures of i 
mankind. You will be able to 
organize your time with a unique 
working tool, illustrated with 54 I 
full-colour photographs of cultural 
and natural sites from different 
countries. i 
Order form A 
YES, I wish to purchase 
Maria Calleja’s Gozo: A Life History (Ref. 102977-0) copy(ies) 170 FF = FF | 
The New Page (Ref. 102949-5) copy(ies) 215 FF = FE 
The Scientific Education of Girls (Ref. 103168-6) copy(ies) 149 FF = FF i 
Study Abroad, 29th edition (Ref. 003148-8) copy(ies) 120 FF = FF 
UNESCO Warld Heritage Desk Diary 1996 (Ref. 003202-6) copy(ies) 99 FF = EF | 
The Vortex Family: A Family Saga Set in Haiti (Ref. 103092-2) copy(ies) 135 FF = EF 
Working with Street Children (Ref. 103096-53) copy(ies) 100 FF = FF 
TOTAL = FF § 
Payment by QO cheque® QVISACard 4 Eurocard UO MasterCard f 
Card No. Expiry date Signature 
Surname Name i 
Address 
Postcode City i 
Country j 
Return this form with payment to: 
UNESCO Publishing, Sales Division, 1, rue Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France. Fax: (33-1) 42 73 3007 i 
  
{ A [ * Eurocheques not accepted and UNESCO will not bear any bank charges 
       
PB-PUB-COU95 ]

## [Page 61](102011engo.pdf#page=61) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO ((OURIER Index 1995 
JANUARY. THE SUN. Interview with Montserrat Caballé. Our middle-aged neighbouring star (P. Lantos). Myths with the sun in them (P. Borgeand). A Tight 
that shines through time and cultures (M. Singh). Zoroastrianism and the cult of fire (M. Tadjadod). Manolo plugs into the sun {C. Flavin & N. Lenssen). India’s 
self-help solar villages (Sanjit Bunker Roy), The World Solar Summit (interview with B. Berkovsky). The new Alexandria library. Fact file. Building a culture of 
peace (F. Mayor). Heritage: The Pantheon (C. Duvelle & M. Rost). Greenwatch: The food/population equation (L. Brown). Listening: Mambo mania (I. Leymaric). 
Global view: The UNESCO Prize for the Promotion of the Arts. Archives: Men of lite faith (J. Bojer). Anniversary: Louis Pasteur (L. L. Lambrichs). 
FEBRUARY. THE MULTIMEDIA EXPLOSION. Interview with Régis Debray. ‘New ways of being together’ (D. Bougnoux). Unequal voices (A. Matelart), 
The media: a modern scapegoat? (E. Valverde). Interactivity—a matter of give and take (M. Sénécal). The Internet: journey into cyberspace (D. Pchissier). From 
global village to global mind (D. de Kerckhove). The shoals of freedom (M. Frybes). Monopolies, minarets and videos (S. Hammami). UNESCO's strategy (inter- 
view with H. Yushkiavitshus). From the Cold War to the era of new technologies (A. Modoux). Fact file. Reinventing the press (F. Mavor). Heritage: The great 
temple of Thanjavur (A. Murugaiyan). Greenwatch: Clean driving: a green dream? (F. Bequette). Anniversary: Fuzuli, poet of divine love. Archives: Intuition, intel 
ligence and the making of modern man (S. de Madariaga). Listening: The heartbeat of jazz (I. Levmarie). 1995: United Nations Year for Tolerance (Lieh-tzu). 
MARCH. DEVELOPMENT: THE HAVES AND THE HAVE-NOTS. Democracy, the common heritage of humanity (Aung San Suu Kyi). Dismantling the 
mechanism of exclusion (I. Sachs). The culture of silence (A. Traoré). Empowerment, an escape route from poverty (J. Friedmann & L. Sandercock). The rag-pick- 
ers of Pune. South Africa: leaving apartheid behind (R. Meunier). Change from within (P. Anyang Nvong’o). PRONASOL: Mexico's war on poverty (J. Marques- 
Pereira). An ethical commitment (ID. Jain). Brazil: a country in arms against hunger (H. de Souza). Hoping against hope (E. Morin). Fact file. Sharing our knowl- 
edge (F. Mayor). Heritage: The stones of Byblos (S. A. Jalu). Greenwatch: Montseny, harmony in the hills (F. Bequette). Anniversary: José Marti (C. Vitier). Global 
view: Population growth and development (interview with J.-C. Chasteland). Archives: Sensationalism and the popular press (B. S. Cano). 1995: United Nations 
Year for Tolerance: Violence, an affront to humanity (F. Mayor). Listening: Opera from Taiwan (I. Leymarie). 
APRIL. THE ORIGINS OF WRITING. Interview with Ernest J. Gaines. The written word (X. Perret). Mesopotamia: The birth of writing (B. André-Salvim). 
China: From pictograms to pinyin (R. Tang-Loace & P, Colombel). Central America: Colour-coded languages (J. Galarza). Islam: The calligrapher’s art (H. 
Massoudy). Africa: An inspired invention (ID. Dalby). Japan: A four-in-hand script (Shiro Noda). The Western world: The power of the pen (FH. J. Martin). Fact 
file. A colossus with feet of clay (F. Mayor), Heritage: Quito (J. E. Adoum). Greenwatch: Environment-friendly Oman (F. Bequette). Anniversary: S’eb of Tabriz 
(H. Esmaili}. Global view: An international debate on literature today and tomorrow (A. Blokh & A. Meddeb). Archives: The press and the public (P. Scott 
Vowrer). Listening: I. Leymarie talks to D. Parnayik. Books: A man and his time. 1995: United Nations Year {or Tolerance: An uphill task (T. Ben Jelloun). 
MAY. THE PILGRIMS WAY. Interview with The Abbé Pierre. A mysterious journey (F.-B. Huyghe). The thrice-holy city (A. Laurent). Pathways to enlighten- 
ment (M. Pye). The road to Compostela (M. Bravo Lozano). Chinese Buddhist pilgrims in India (P. Magnin). Pilgrimages in Judaism (N. de Lange). Where the 
rivers meet (R. Bharucha). The heart's infinity (A. Meddcb). Unfettered freedom (F. Mayor). Heritage: The mystery of Persepolis (C.-E. Doxuan). Greenwatch: 
Mining, a clean bill of health? (F. Bequette). Archives: The Latin American intellect (A. Reyes). Listening: The eye and the ear (I. Leymarie), 
JUNE. AIDS, A WORLDWIDE EMERGENCY. Interview with Nicolae Breban. Editorial (F. Mayor). From HIV to Aids (R. Weiss). The state of research (L. 
Montagnier). What can be done? (M. Merson). The Maghreb: women in the front line (H. Himmich & L. Imane). Zimbabwe: the social roots of Aids (M. Bassett). 
India: no time to lose (I.S. Gilada). Europe: the political dilemma (R. Stissmuth). New therapeutic approaches (J.-M. Andrieu), Health and human rights (J. Mann). 
The search for a vaccine (M. Girard). Aids in a different light (M.-T. Bocabeille). Fact file. Heritage: Susah (M. Ghachem). Greenwatch: Turkey (F. Bequette). 
Listening: cultural counterpoint(l. Leymarie). 
JULY-AUGUST. A CENTURY OF CINEMA. Interviews with Milos Forman, Jean-Paul Rappencau, Suresh Jindal, Mant Kaul, Abbas Kiarostami, Tomas 
Gutiérrez Alea, Nagisa Oshima, Marcello Mastroianni, Milco Mancevski, Volker Schléndorfl. An art and an industry (P. Schepelern). A birthday or a funeral? (K. 
Zanussi). Hollywood (T. Balio). Perchance to dream... (L. Steketee), Methuselah or Peter Pan? (J.-C. Carriere). Windows of opportunity (J. Palmer). The first 
Indian studios (R. Maitra). A silver-screen symphony (E. Faure). Egypt through the looking-glass (M. Wassef). Mexican melodrama: the remake (J. C. Avellar). 
Cinecitta (F. Bono). The African cinema in crisis (G. Kaboré). The Babelsberg Studios. Yesterday's images for tomorrows eyes (1. Wagner). Appeal by the 
Director-General of UNESCO; Saving the cinematic heritage (F. Mayor). Anniversary: Abai Kunanbayev, 1845-1904 (interview with C. Aitmatov). 
SEPTEMBER. WOMEN: ONE HALF OF HEAVEN. Interview with Nelson Freire. A time for partnership (R. Eisler). The North: a disturbing independence 
(interview with B. Friedan). The South: a joint struggle (interview with A. Traoré). Pride without prejudice (A. Jung). A bank that only lends to the poor (interview 
with M. Yunus). Three women from Pakistan (A. Inavatullzh). Going it alone (C. Catarino & L. Oso). Africa’s invisible women (P. Made). The Mothers of the 
Plaza de Mayo (A. D. Ortiz). Rigoberta Mencht, witness to an age. Somalia: the great escape (H. Keynan). Norwegian politics bridges the gender gap (H. Skjeie). 
Lithuania: the first statute for women (U. Karvelis). Men supporting women (M. S. Kimmel). Are men and women on the same wavelength? {(C. Vidal). The road to 
Beijing (interview with I. Breines). Fact file. Women Nobel Laureates. Listening to Africa (F. Mayor). 1995: United Nations Year for Tolerance: A triptych by Soffa 
Gandarias (S. Nair). Heritage: Baroque Zacatecas (F. Segovia). Greenwatch: Drylands and deserts (F. Bequetre). 
OCTOBER. THE UNITED NATIONS. Grounds for hope (B. Boutros-Ghali). Fifty years on (F. Mayor). Key dates. Major conflicts. The balance sheet: The 
road to peace (M. Bertrand). The development debate (C. Comeliau). The struggle for human rights (P. Alston). Peace-keeping operations. Organization chart of 
he UN system. Principal organs. Programmes and organizations. Specialized agencies. Specialized agency chiefs Jook ahead. Greenwatch: Gender and environment 
(F. Bequette). 
NOVEMBER. PEACE, A NEW BEGINNING. Interview with Yehudi Menuhin. A new beginning (F. Mayor). Our common home (E. Morin}. The road to 1945 
(C. Bekri). UNESCO's programme for peace (A. S. Sayyad). Demilitarizing military service (A. Baer). Peacemakers honoured by Unesco: Nelson Mandela (T. Ben 
Jelloun), Frederik Willem de Klerk (A. Johnson), The Hague Academy of International Law, Shimon Peres (C. Enderlin), Yitzhak Rabin (L. Beyer de Ryke), 
Yasser Arafat (L. El-Kholy), Jimmy Carter (F. Lewis), Juan Carlos I (R. L. Acufia). Greenwatch: Fish farming, a 4,000-vear-old growth industry (TF. Bequette). 
Heritage: The Iguacu Falls (E. Bailby). Listening: The birth of the blues (I. Leymarie). 1995: United Nations Year for Tolerance: The watchful eye of democracy (R. 
Hoggart). 
DECEMBER. TROGLODYTES. Interview with Jean Daniel. Life below ground (J. Rewerski). China: when loess means more (J. P. Loubes). Italy: rocks in a 
hard place (P. Laureano). Ethiopia’s new Jerusalem (K. Begashaw). Troglodyric sites on the World Heritage List. Science thar must be shared (F. Mavor). Heritage: 
Luxembourg (J.-P. Kraemer). Greenwatch: Protecting plant life (F. Bequette).

## [Page 62](102011engo.pdf#page=62) 0

### IGNORE

IN THE NEXT ISSUE 
DANCE 
Vv 
INTERVIEW WITH MAURICE BEJART 
HERITAGE: THE TEMPLE OF APOLLO EPICURIUS 
ENVIRONMENT: GREEN CROSS INTERNATIONAL 
three good 
reasons for 
offering your 
friends a gift 
subscription: 
The Unesco Courlers the only international magazine published in30. 
Ianguages and read by hues of thousands of people 120 counties 
2 ime 
Ea RL Sl 
J | 
“It associates its readers with Unsco's mission of furthering “universal | 
——— of today and E — 
tomorrow freedoms...without distinction of race, sex, language or religion... Ci i 
  
  