# [056740](056740engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](056740engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

3 ols 
——— — 
  
    
IE A window open on y the world 
The 
Im “ou ri Cc Ts 
i January 1970 (23nd year) - U. K.: 2/-stg - Canada: 40 cents - France: 1.20 Fo 
 
  
1970 a 
EDUCATION 
AT THE 
CROSSROADS 

## [Page 2](056740engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
WPT ITN 
fo Aaa 
oo 
— 
Yu oF ¢ he) 
es if 
| mont Encyclopedic scril 
ot VL sl EL LR I 2 i" Ld : 
This miniature from Baghdad (Iraq) depicting a scribe copying a text, dates om 
the year 686 of the Mohammedan Era (1287 A.D.). It embellishes a manuscript d 
the ** Epistles "* of the Brothers of Purity, a group of philosophers and men of 
science who lived in Basra, Iraq, in the 10th century A.D. Compiled from 
letters written by these scholars, the Epistles compose an ‘* encyclopedia * ¢ 
BYR CEERI EL ET EY SEN LT TOM EL (VEEN ET EL GEER EV TI [Ts ET Te TY ETL WETTER 
Many of the views expressed therein were contrary to orthodox Islamic doctri 
and most of the * Brothers * writings were burned in the 12th century A.D. 
» pb : i > 
YE 4 Ee Ji 1 ¥a Pi A fai du + al Ara i 

## [Page 3](056740engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

‘WwCourier 
JANUARY 1970 
23RD YEAR 
  
PUBLISHED IN 
THIRTEEN EDITIONS 
 
English Japanese 
French Italian 
Spanish Hindi 
Russian Tamil 
German Hebrew 
Arabic Persian 
U.S.A. 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7e 
Annual subscription rates: 20/-stg.; $4.00 
(Canada); 12 French francs or equivalent; 
2 years: 36/-stg.; 22F. Single copies: 2/-stg.; 
40 cents: 1.20 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, ltalian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew and Persian. In the 
United Kingdom it is distnbuted by H.M. Stationery Office, 
P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCC TOURIER’’, plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessanly represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is Indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- 
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy. Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Takao Uchida (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition: Annapuzha Chandrahasan (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: T.P. Meenakshi Sundaran (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition: Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) 
Persian Edition: Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Photo Editor: Olga Rédel 
Layout and Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief Ne
 
1 
- 
19
70
 
MC
 
69
41
-2
51
 
A 
 
    
 
 
    
   
   
Page 
4] 1970, INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION YEAR 
by Leo Fernig 
6| EDUCATION... 
BUT FOR WHOM?... AND HOW? 
by Pierre Rondiére 
11 | THE RACE BETWEEN EDUCATION 
AND CATASTROPHE 
by Howard Brabyn 
13| THE COST OF WORLD ARMAMENTS 
0 $4,000,000,000,000 in the next ten years 
16 | THE STUDENT OF TOMORROW— 
3 TOWARDS A NEW GLOBAL HORIZON 
3 by René Habachi 
2 21 | ARE THERE REALLY TOO MANY TEACHERS? 
g by John Chesswas 
= 
© 24; NEW LOOK IN SOVIET SCHOOLS 
; by losif Nekhamkin 
. 27| EDUCATION PUT TO THE QUESTION 
? by Paul Lengrand 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
UNESCO NEWSROOM 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Encyclopedic scribe (Iraq) 
  
  
5 
; 
: 
 
Cover 
1970 has been designated as 
International Education Year to 
focus world attention on today's 
crisis in education—a problem 
affecting governments and teachers, 
parents and young people in 
every country. In this issue, the 
“Unesco Courier" discusses some 
of the burning questions that 
have brought world education 
to the crossroads of a critical 
reappraisal of its aims and methods. 
Other aspects will be examined 
in forthcoming issues during 
International Educational Year. 
Cover design specially executed for Unesco 
Courier by Roman Cieslewicz, Société 
Mafia, Paris

## [Page 4](056740engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 56721: 1970, International Education Year

Ts year, 1970, is to be International Education 
Year. The decision was taken at the General Assembly 
of the United Nations by a unanimous vote late in 1968, 
which is to say that the world community agreed that an 
International Education Year was both necessary and useful. 
Responsibility for guiding the implementation at international 
level was placed on Unesco. 
Education is a large enterprise. It has been said that 
teachers form the largest single professional group in the 
world; and the process of education in schools, colleges 
and less formal situations goes on all the time and occupies 
a considerable part of the world’s population. Why then 
should a special occasion be declared and why should it 
take the form of an international year? Any answer will 
have to show clearly in what way 1970 would be different, 
educationally speaking, from 1969 or 1971. 
increasing problems, in terms of their size and also 
of their nature, are besetting the educational enterprise 
throughout the world. An international conference held at 
Williamsburg, Virginia, in October 1967, on the theme “The 
World Crisis in Education” (1), revealed that deep-seated 
maladjustments in most educational systems are bringing 
us fast to the verge of a crisis. And it was at the 
Williamsburg Conference that the idea of an International 
In 6 r | a 0 | | Education Year was launched. 
In the developing parts of the world the issues are 
fairly well known and are keenly felt by the people directly 
concerned. In spite of very heavy state expenditures on 
education and brave efforts by those involved in the 
process, the gap between goals and achievements seems | 
to widen steadily. 
P UTTING this in simple terms, most of the newly 
independent countries have attempted to provide a modest 
level of education for all their citizens, for this is a basic 
human right; they have attempted also to develop education 
beyond the primary stage in order to train sufficient middle 
and higher level people to speed up national development. 
Yet both the humanitarian and the economic goals seem 
to be no nearer now than they were a decade ago:   ‘As populations have risen and economic structures have 
TELE ro. WE not expanded fast enough, the belief that Investment in 
_. : a educational facilities is an economic investment has been 
LEO FERNIG took up his apriniment os 25 Direcier of the ) tempered by a realization that education as it now exists 
I Do ati HR VEE is a slow and not very efficient process. The economic 
Unesco, where during the past 2 years he played 8 a eedng role in ¥ returns to be gained from creating schools now will not 
slaboret and execution Unesco's the tion and execution of Unes ’ educst ; Dgramn arrive in time for additional schools to be provided next 
FARE TE Sh eS ER AS year or in three or four years time. hh & | - » A fd dy " 
Still more striking has been evidence that the very 
structures of these educational systems—forms of 
schooling, curricula and teaching methods based upon 
patterns introduced before independence—are themselves 
charged with the possibility of a great deal of wastage or 
inefficiency. A large number of pupils leave school 
prematurely or fail their grades and therefore spend several 
years in the same classroom. 
From the point of view of public funds, in the majority 
of developing countries it costs between two and four 
times as much to put a pupil through a basic primary school 
course as it would have cost had he proceeded at a normal 
pace of completing one grade a year. 
4 in the developed countries the economic situation may 
 
(1) See Philip H, Coombs’ The World Educational Crisis: a systems 
analysis. Oxford University Press, 1968.

## [Page 5](056740engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 56721: 1970, International Education Year

be better, but it is doubtful whether the educational crisis 
is any less severe. There have been a number of 
challenges to the established order of things. In some 
cases the challenge has come from the students themselves, 
notably at universities, who feel that the patterns of 
organization and teaching, as well as the adequacy of 
preparation for professional life, leave a great deal to be 
desired. In other cases the challenge has come from 
employers, organized professional groups, or from the 
teachers themselves. 
As life in the industrial societies becomes more and 
more complex the relevance of existing arrangements for 
educating and training young people is questioned. Or 
rather, what is called into doubt is the policy of continuing 
on established lines, of providing more schooling for more 
students, and making it last longer. At even the lowest 
level of analysis, such a policy can only result in a similar 
economic burden to that already witnessed in the developing 
parts of the world, 
It would appear, therefore, to be a common view 
throughout the world that we need to pause for a moment, 
in this vast and continuing enterprise of education, and see 
what we are doing, how fast we are going and where we 
think we want to go. 
In the course of such reflection it is likely that we will 
discover that we are attempting to face a twentieth or 
twenty-first century world with institutions and methods 
which date back to the nineteenth and eighteenth centuries. 
We will discover the need to change and we may, 
collectively, achieve some understanding of the nature of | 
this change and therefore plan to bring it about. This 
seems to be the general idea behind the International 
Education Year (EY). : 
Ws is the IEY? It could be described as a 
combined effort by all the countries of the world to do 
something extra or special about their educational problems 
in order “to mobilize energies and inspire initiatives in 
education and training” (the phrase used by the original pro- 
poser of the IEY in the United Nations General Assembly). 
The IEY is basically a national! affair for each country 
to undertake. The possible types of action comprise any 
or all of a natural chain of operations: study and reflection 
about education or about some aspect of education across 
the nation; the identification of outstanding problems; 
experimental activities in order to find solutions to such 
problems; full involvement of the public in the discussion 
of educational issues; all of these leading finally to changes 
of educational policies. 
For the most part such a national exercise would be 
focused on the educational provisions within the country 
itself. However, there are some aspects that go beyond 
national boundaries. Each country will find inevitably that 
it can take account of, learn from, the experience from 
other countries, and in turn make a contribution to others. 
The latter aspect could even, in some cases, take the shape 
of increased educational aid from developed to developing 
countries. 
This is of course a broad and theoretical outline. The 
main point to establish is that activities undertaken with 
particular reference to International Education Year should 
have some special quality, should have an element of 
spontaneity, should bear directly on the need for, and the 
desire to, change. 
As a result of the United Nations decision and of Unesco's 
appeal! to member states to prepare programmes for the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
 
Photo © Francisco Hidalgo, Paris

## [Page 6](056740engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION YEAR (Continued) 
International Education Year, an increasing number of 
national programmes are being sent forward. Two or three 
brief examples may be given. 
In France, six important journals in the field of education 
will devote special issues to the IEY themes; a seminar 
is to be organized on the mechanisms of the learning 
process, and late in 1970 the French National Commission 
for Unesco intends to arrange a research conference on 
the evaluation of projects in functional literacy. 
Japan is preparing an ambitious programme which may 
include national events (including the issue of a special IEY 
postage stamp), the creation of new institutions (a university 
and an institute for in-service teacher training) and the 
increase of contacts between Japanese educators and 
those abroad. Aid to developing countries will form an 
important part of the Japanese contribution to IEY. 
In Tanzania the IEY emphasis will be placed on specially 
devised new courses at a high level—directed for the most 
part to innovation and reform in education, 
The notion that the International Education Year consists 
of a large number of national programmes is easy to 
accept, but it should be made clear that such national 
programmes are themselves not merely a matter for a small 
group of officials in a central ministry. Adequately to 
achieve the objectives of the Year and to focus attention 
on the direction of educational change, it will be essential 
for all parts of the national community to participate in 
one way or another, 
Community action at the level of local authorities or 
even of individual schools and colleges will be essential 
in any country. The role of teachers and students is 
obvious since they are the people most directly concerned 
with the educational process—perhaps too much so. The 
other groups and institutions in the nation, parents, 
employers, churches, professional associations, need also 
to be engaged in study, experimentation, discussion and 
proposals for policy changes. 
| is probably true that those national pro- 
grammes for International Education Year will succeed best 
which achieve or even stem from widespread action by 
communities, associations and institutions throughout the 
country. 
However, it must be recalled that this is an “Inter- 
national” Education Year and one may ask whether there 
will be anything more to it than an aggregate of separate 
national programmes. And indeed international bodies do 
have an essential role. They provide the means for 
communication between countries, offer a framework for 
action and make it possible to add an international 
dimension to a great deal of what is undertaken nationally. 
The majority of international bodies, both non-govern- 
mental and intergovernmental, have been approached and 
have shown great readiness to take part in this aspect of 
the International Education Year. The major rble, however, 
will fall to the United Nations itself and the two Specialized 
Agencies most directly concerned with education and 
training, namely Unesco and the International Labour 
Organization. 
In preparing the IEY, the guiding principle has been that 
of re-orientation: existing staff and on-going projects and 
programmes are being pressed into service so that Unesco 
may serve its member states by acting as a channel of 
communication, and a source of information, guidance and 
inspiration, 


### 56721: 1970, International Education Year

### 56723: Education: but for whom, and how?

EDUCATION... 
 
Photo © Michel Hétier

## [Page 7](056740engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 56723: Education: but for whom, and how?

BUT FOR WHOM? . AND HOW? 
As this century draws to a 
close, the developing countries face 
their biggest challenge: how to find 
the quickest short cut to close the 
gap between themselves and the 
industrially developed nations. 
The development of science and 
technology certainly appears to be 
the best and most effective way to 
bring this about. Man, with his capa- 
city for planning, organization and 
innovation, will be the chief driving 
force for this radical transformation. 
This has been true at all times and 
in all countries. Studies in Washington 
show that even more important than 
investment, the major factor for expan- 
sion in the United States since 1925 
has been the education and training of 
men and women. 
But in trying to apply this to the 
developing Third World we are imme- 
diately faced by a host of situations 
which though they may appear inde- 
pendent one of the other are in reality 
closely interlinked. 
The French sociologist Jean Four- 
astié has rightly said that “A child 
whose life has been dominated by a 
fanatical or highly emotional upbring- 
ing, or more important by the belief 
in magic and other misguided tenets, 
will in all probability find it much 
harder to understand the methods of 
experimental science much less to 
apply them.” 
The Director-General of Unesco, 
René Maheu, recently declared: “The 
absence of intellectual stimulation 
arising from a lack or insufficiency of 
education... inevitably results... in a 
slowing down of the mental process. 
We know, furthermore, that forms of 
mental retardedness can no longer be 
overcome if certain learning pro- 
cesses... have not been mastered at 
an appropriate age.” 
The U.N. Advisory Committee on 
the Application of Science to Develop- 
ment reports: “If the levels of teaching 
in the majority of the developing 
countries cannot be considerably 
improved and raised so that the 
appreciation of modern science and 
technology becomes a major factor, 
there is little chance of science and 
technology being effectively applied in 
these countries.” 
We thus see that the logical 
conclusions to be drawn are these: 
without short cuts the developing 
countries cannot possibly catch up; 
 
PIERRE RONDIERE, French writer and 
journalist, is the author of "Rendez-vous 
1980 - La science et la technique au se- 
cours du tiers monde” (Science and Tech- 
nology to Aid the Third World), published 
In collaboration with the United Nations by 
Editions Payot, Paris, 1968 (7.50 F). 
without the application of science and 
technology no short cuts are concei- 
vable; and without education the 
application of science and technology 
is impossible. So without education 
there can be no short cuts. 
But that is not all. The question that 
immediately comes to mind is: educ- 
ation, fine, but for whom, and how? 
For the past 20 years, the nations 
of the Third World—both the govern- 
ments and the people—have launched 
out into a vast fight to overcome 
illiteracy and raise their educational 
level. Three entire continents have 
been caught up in the fever. 
In 1960, the governments of Asia 
adopted the now-famous “Karachi 
Plan” which foresaw seven years of 
compulsory primary schooling for all 
children by 1980. 
In 1961, African Ministers of Educa- 
In many countries 
of the Third World, 
the immense effort 
to develop education 
is hardly keeping 
pace with the effects 
of the population 
explosion. In Mali, 
for instance, 
68,000 children 
attended primary 
school in 1861; three 
years later this figure 
was almost 
double—113,000. 
But, as in 1961, it 
still represented - 
only 10 per cent 
of Mali’'s school age 
population. In many 
countries, the 
number of children 
for whom there is no 
room in the 
classroom is rising 
every day. 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
El
iz
ab
et
h 
Wi
lc
ox
, 
by Pierre Rondiere 
tion agreed to an ambitious pro- 
gramme with three main objectives: 
six years compulsory education for all 
African children by 1980; entry of 
20 per cent of primary school children 
into secondary schools; a university 
enrolment of 300,000 students. 
The countries of Latin America 
followed suit in 1962 with their own 
plan to provide six years of primary 
schooling for all children throughout 
the continent by 1970. 
Education budgets in the Third 
World have thus spiralled upwards at 
a dizzy pace—since 1960 about twice 
as fast as the increase in national 
income. 
The effort made by the less well 
off countries has been and remains 
today so intense that most of them, 
despite their poverty, devote a higher 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 8](056740engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 56723: Education: but for whom, and how?

FOR WHOM, AND HOW ? (Continued) 
The hot potato of ‘porous’ education 
proportion of their national income to 
education than do the developed 
countries. The figure is often as high 
as 25 per cent and sometimes even 
higher, compared, for example, with 
France's 17 per cent. 
Expenditure on education in all 
these countries has risen faster than 
other budget spending. It has, in fact, 
been pointed out that public funds 
devoted to education cannot go on 
much longer increasing faster than 
those earmarked for other national 
needs without jeopardizing government 
targets in other fields. 
And here a difficult decision must 
be faced: the choice between more 
schools and fewer hospitals, factories, 
fertilizers, roads and dams, or fewer 
schools than planned and more hos- 
pitals, factories, fertilizers, roads, 
dams—and illiterates. 
Education certainly, but for whom? 
In their attempt to respond both to 
the intense desire for learning and to 
the need for education as a means to 
progress, the governments of the three 
“hungry continents” have adopted 
various solutions which can be roughly 
divided into two groups. 
In the first group of countries, 
essentially the African countries, pri- 
mary education has been made available 
to all. Since the number of qualified 
student teachers leaving the training 
colleges is insufficient to deal with 
such a situation, use is made of 
relatively unqualified “monitors™— 
pupils who failed the secondary 
school entry examination or who 
simply hold a primary school leaving 
certificate, 
Thus in the Ivory Coast, for exam- 
ple, only 600 of the 7,500 primary 
school teachers hold diplomas, while 
the proportion of “monitors” in primary 
education elsewhere in French- 
speaking Africa is between 70 and 
80 per cent, and as high as 90 per cent 
in Chad. 
The result, in certain countries, is 
that five years after their primary 
schooling these so-called literate 
young men and women have once 
again become illiterates. 
Broadly speaking, the system works 
as follows. The “monitor” has his 
class of 50, 60, 80 or even 100 children 
recite in chorus from a textbook, 
whose contents they scarcely under- 
stand. Since selection for promotion 
to a higher grade is stiff, pupils who 
do not succeed stay on in the lower 
grade for a second, third and some- 
times even a fourth year before finally 
dropping out. 
They form what specialists call 
“the wall”, and progressively para- 
lyze an already weak educational sys- 
tem. As the pupils chant their daily 
lessons, “the wall” forms a kind of 
chorus, reducing to silence the more 
recent arrivals, even if these children 
are more gifted. On average only 10 
Photo Documentation Frangaise 
to 20 per cent of the pupils in these 
classes of 100 children manage to 
pass into the next grade without 
staying on for a second year. 
The educational wastage is conse- 
quently enormous. Mr. Amon Tanoh, 
Education Minister of the Ivory Coast, 
has stated that “out of 10,000 children 
entering primary school in any given 
year, 3,900 reach the next grade, more 
than half of this number after remain- 
ing in the lower grade for a second or 
third year. 
About 30 per cent of the initial 
group reach the first-year of the inter- 
mediate classes and about 20 per cent 
the second year, most of them after 
seven, eight or ten years at school. 
Of the 10,000 who entered the first 
grade, only 1,685—less than one-sixth 
—obtain their primary school leaving 
certificate. 
Despite the crushing financial bur- 
den shouldered by these needy coun- 
tries, the returns are very low. 
The second group of countries can 
be said, with a few notable exceptions, 
to take in Asia, Latin America and the 
Middle East. Here the educational 
system works quite differently. A 
large proportion of children are still 
not accepted for primary school educ- 
ation, but the great majority of those 
who are finally pass out with a certi- 
ficate of secondary education. 
For these privileged children educ- 
ation starts at the age of six and

## [Page 9](056740engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 56723: Education: but for whom, and how?

DROPOUTS 
AND 
REPEATERS 
Recent experience has 
revealed some of the pitfalls 
which have beset the ‘ 
developing countries in their 
eagerness to expand and 
modernize education. The 
enormous amount of wastage 
in education and the high 
proportion of children who 
stay in the same grade for 
two or more years is due, 
among other causes, to the 
lack of qualified teachers. In 
some parts of Africa, out 
of six children entering 
primary school, only one 
obtains a leaving certificate. 
In the industrially developed 
countries, where in many 
cases the number of 
would-be university students 
doubles every six or 
seven years, wastage in 
education is also a problem 
but to a far lesser degree. 
These photos symbolize 
the two aspects 
of the problem. 
finishes at 18. Students pass without 
much difficulty from one grade to the 
next, and the final certificate at the 
close of this easy-going school life is 
generously awarded. 
In this second group of countries 
the dominant factor is obviously the 
extension of secondary education. In 
Mexico, primary education has increas- 
ed by about 50 per cent since 1955, 
while secondary education has risen 
by 300 per cent. Similar trends are 
to be seen in several Asian countries. 
Educators call this type of educational 
system “porous” or “open”. 
A Teheran university professor has 
this to say about it: “The quality of 
education is worse than weak. 
Secondary schools accept all candi- 
dates, even the most mediocre. | know 
teachers with 70 students or even 
more, who become so discouraged 
that they have given up teaching their 
classes. University entrants have 
been so badly taught that | have even 
seen students writing out their English 
language lessons phonetically in Ara- 
bic script. With such an open second- 
ary education we will never form an 
active elite.” 
However harsh the conclusion, it 
would be wrong to conceal it: whether 
because of educational “wastage” or 
the “porousness” of school systems, 
education in the Third World today is 
turning out few teen-agers who tomor- 
row will be able to work for the 
development of their homelands, and 
even fewer who will be able to take 
full advantage of the possibilities 
offered by science and technology. 
Education certainly, but how? 
How has this situation come about? 
First there has been the population 
explosion, the effects of which were 
calculated either inaccurately or not 
at all. The result has been a general 
rise in school enrolment. In Mali, for 
example, ten per cent of children aged 
between six and 14—a total of 68,000 
—went to school in 1961. Three years 
later, in 1964, the proportion of the 
same age group in school was still 
ten per cent—but the figure had almost 
doubled, to 113,000. 
Since Algeria's independence in 
1962 the number of pupils has more 
than doubled in the primary schools, 
from 600,000 to 1,400,000; more than 
tripled in the secondary schools, from 
35,000 to 110,000; and increased more 
than ten times in higher education, 
from 600 to 7,000. What budget could 
be expected to support such a spiral 
indefinitely and at the same time to 
provide for the training of qualfied 
staff at all levels? 
The second factor has been a 
reversal of the process by which educ- 
ation has extended in the past. Up 
to now, whether in Europe, the United 
States, the Soviet Union or Japan, 
industrialization has always preceded 
education, even in periods when the 
birth rate fell. 
  
 
Photo University of Rochesier, N.Y., U.S A. 
In today's developed countries 
there were for a long time more fac- 
tories than schools, and industry finan- 
cially supported the education which 
was to provide it with urgently needed 
qualified workers. Yet even so it took 
Europe more than a century in this way 
to provide primary education for all its 
children. 
In the developing countries, however, 
schools are opening before the factor- 
ies in a period when the birth rate is 
increasing and when man’s knowledge 
—particularly in the fields of science 
and technology—is growing twenty, 
fifty, or a hundredfold. Difficulties as 
serious as the problem we are consid- 
ering here were bound to follow once 
the decision had been made to launch 
such an ambitious programme as the 
introduction of universal education 
within 20 years. 
Do these difficulties mean that the 
programme must be abandoned and 
all hope of its achievement given up? 
Certainly not. Should the developing 
countries, then, base their approach 
on the European model and wait an- 
other century before the children of 
the three continents can find their 
place in school? Even less so: 
imitation would be no solution. Educ- 
ation remains a basic necessity, but 
the experience of recent years puts 
the question into a new perspective: 
“for whom and how?” 
The essence of the solution is to 
link quantity and quality, and to find 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](056740engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 56723: Education: but for whom, and how?

10 
FOR WHOM, AND HOW? {Continued} 
1,500,000 technicians and engineers needed by 1980 
short cuts within the education systems 
themselves. 
The developing countries are now 
fully aware of the pitfalls into which 
their early enthusiasm led them, but 
they are not giving up in despair. 
They are facing the problem squarely 
and courageously. 
Severna states have al- 
ready abandoned the principle of eight 
years’ obligatory schooling. Laos has 
reduced the period to three years. 
Dahomey has decided not to increase 
the number of pupils at its primary 
schools over the next few years. 
The government of Tanzania has 
agreed to restrict the number of chil- 
dren receiving schooling to 49 per 
cent, the level attained in 1964. 
George Skorov, the Soviet economist, 
and formerly a specialist at the Inter- 
national Institute for Educational 
Planning, set up by Unesco, has 
commented: “This was a very difficult 
political decision because it means 
that half of each age group will help 
to swell the ranks of the illiterate, who 
already represent 85 per cent of men 
and 96 per cent of women over the 
age of 15.” 
Morocco envisages another solution: 
to accept an increasing number of 
six-year-olds but to eliminate pro- 
gressively the less gifted. : 
Algeria has decided to prune the 
final primary grades of second-and 
third-year stayers by imposing an age 
limit of 13 for secondary school entry. 
Nigeria, in an attempt to raise the 
quality of her secondary education, is 
to allow only 15 per cent of those who 
have finished their primary education 
to go on to secondary schools: last 
year 1,000 out of 3,000 candidates 
were admitted. 
In Algeria over the same period, 
22 per cent were admitted compared 
with 70 per cent the previous year. 
It is interesting to note, in passing, 
that this approaches the figure in 
France in 1939, when 20 per cent of 
children were in secondary schools. 
Finally there has been a major move 
to solve the essential problem of 
improving the qualification of teaching 
staff: Algeria, Ivory Coast and Daho- 
mey have stopped recruiting “moni- 
tors”. Today only certificate-holders 
are admitted as teachers in these 
countries. This is the same decision 
that France took in the nineteenth cen- 
tury for its primary education. 
Already a start is being made to 
answering the question: “education, 
but for whom?” 
At the request of numerous govern- 
ments, Unesco has replied to the 
second part of the question—"educ- 
ation, but how?"—by concentrating 
much of its effort on the improvement 
of the status and professional quali- 
fications of teachers. 
In Latin America, Unesco, in associ- 
ation with the universities of Sao Paulo 
(Brazil) and Santiago (Chile), has 
trained 400 candidates in educational 
administration and educational and 
vocational guidance. It has also sent 
experts to work at the continent's five 
major teacher training colleges—Pam- 
plona (Colombia), San Pablo del Lago 
(Ecuador), Jinotepe and San Marcos 
(Nicaragua), and Tegucigalpa (Hondu- 
ras). In two years 1,600 trainee 
teachers have taken experimental 
courses at the colleges using new. 
methods which will in future be 
extended throughout the rest of these 
countries. 
Unesco has also helped to organize 
40 study courses and round table 
discussions aimed at improving teach- 
ing methods and at providing teachers 
in Bolivia, Columbia, Ecuador, Salva- 
dor, Guatemala, Haiti, Nicaragua, and 
Peru with opportunities for in-service 
training. At the Inter American Centre 
in Venezuela, problems affecting 
teaching in rural areas have been 
studied with Unesco’s help. 
In Africa, Unesco and the U.N. Dev- 
elopment Programme have helped to 
set up teacher training colleges in 
Mali, Nigeria, Ivory Coast and the 
Congo; and some 30 African countries 
benefit from the advice of Unesco 
specialists. 
I. necessity for finding 
short cuts within the educational 
system is one of the themes taken up 
by the United ‘Nations Consultative 
Committee on the Application of 
Science and Technology to Develop- 
ment. It is also a matter of concern 
to the developing countries themselves, 
and a major preoccupation of Unesco. 
As Prof. Thomas Balogh, of Oxford 
University, has pointed out, to imitate 
blindly the systems practised in the 
industrially developed part of the 
world would be at once an error and 
a danger. 
In this connexion, and as part of a 
pilot project to explore new methods 
for teaching physics best suited to the 
needs and teaching situation in Latin 
America, Unesco brought together for 
one year 26 teachers from universities 
and pedagogical institutes in eight 
Latin American countries. These spe- 
cialists compiled five programmed 
instruction texts, eight inexpensive 
laboratory kits, and 12 short silent 
films as well as a half-hour sound film 
as part of the course on “The Physics 
of Light” 
A similar pilot project for chemistry 
teaching in Asia has been set up under 
Unesco's auspices, and others are 
under way in Africa on the teaching 
of biology and in.the Arab states on 
mathematics. 
Increasingly important is the work 
of other U.N. Specialized Agencies, 
among them the Food and Agricul- 
ture Organization, the World Meteoro- 
logical Organization, the World Health 
Organization and the International 
Labour Organization, who are multi- 
plying their efforts, whether in agricul- 
ture or meteorology, medicine or the 
training of qualified workers, to raise 
the standards of all forms of education 
in the impoverished countries. 
B.. these combined efforts, 
even with the help of bilateral aid pro- 
grammes now operating between many 
countries, do not meet even half the 
present needs. 
By 1880 the school population of the 
Third World will have risen from its 
present total of 400 million to 600 mil- 
lion. It has also been estimated that 
if these countries are to attain the 
point of economic “take-off”, they 
will need 900,000 semi-skilled techni- 
cians (four times as many as today) 
and 600,000 engineers and scientific 
specialists (compared with 150,000 
today), not to mention agronomists, 
administrators, accountants or doctors. 
Where is the capital to be found to 
train teachers and educate children, 
to build schools and universities? It 
is abundantly clear that unless the 
more prosperous industrialized nations 
make a greater effort in this respect, 
the developing nations will not begin 
to free themselves of their impoverish- 
ment by 1980. The gap between dev- 
eloped and developing countries will 
remain. Inevitably the first step 
towards closing that gap is to raise 
the level of education. 
In 1967, Robert McNamara, at that 
time U.S. Secretary of Defense, and 
today President of the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Develop- 
ment, summed up the problem of the 
three gaps—economic, technological 
and educational—when he declared: 
“If the wealthy nations of the world 
do not do more to close this sundering 
economic split which cleaves the 
planet, none of us will ultimately be 
secure. The seismic social shocks 
will reach us all, and with them will 
come the inevitable tidal of waves of 
violence. The widening economic 
chasm between the rich nations and 
the poor nations can be as threatening 
to our security as the emergence of 
nuclear weapons. It is as simple—and 
it is as sobering—as that. |

## [Page 11](056740engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Mi
ch
el
 
Hé
ti
er
  
by 
Howard Brabyn 
Hoven history becomes 
more and more a race between educa- 
tion and catastrophe,” wrote H.G. Wells 
nearly fifty years ago in his “Outline 
of History”. And if in 1920, when 
they were written, these words were 
dismissed by many as being an in- 
defensible exaggeration, today they 
are widely accepted as axiomatic. 
The immense growth in man’s pro- 
ductive capacity during the twentieth 
  
HOWARD BRABYN is an English writer 
and journalist who has specialized in popu- 
larizing scientific and educational questions. 


### 56725: The Race between education and catastrophe

The race between 
education & catastrophe 
century, and particularly since the end 
of World War Il, has brought with 
it the realization that ignorance, poverty 
and disease can be eliminated. Now 
the underprivileged two-thirds of the 
world’s 3,630,000,000 inhabitants are 
insisting on action. 
Pressure for educational opportunity, 
therefore, now comes not only from 
an enlightened minority who see 
education as a means of producing 
the highly-qualified manpower and 
mentally alert citizens that national 
interest demands, but increasingly 
from the uneducated masses them- 
selves. 
“Everyone born into this world has 
a natural right to education,” declared 
Horace Mann, and the people of the 
world are clamouring for fulfillment of 
this right. The “catastrophe” of which 
H.G. Wells spoke will occur if they 
are denied their educational rights, 
either as part of a deliberate policy 
or as a result of a failure to under- 
stand the size and urgency of the 
effort needed. 
Comparative studies on education 
have been primarily concerned with 
differences in structure, content and 
method. While there is a vast amount 
to be learnt from such studies they 
cannot tell us anything about the size 
of the educational effort being made. 
1

## [Page 12](056740engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 56725: The Race between education and catastrophe

BETWEEN EDUCATION AND CATASTROPHE (Continued} 
They tell us only something about the 
quality of that effort. 
But details of the financial effort 
made between 1950 and 1965 by a 
large sample of countries have been 
gathered by the Unesco Office of 
Statistics (1). Although it is important 
to stress the need for the utmost 
caution in making interpretations of 
statistics such as these, they do at 
feast allow us to distinguish broad 
trends in expenditure on education. 
The dominant feature which emerges 
from a study of the data collected by 
Unesco is the increase, both in ab- 
solute terms and in relation to total 
national spending, in expenditure on 
education. The increase was most 
pronounced in the period 1960 to 1965, 
with the proportion of the national in- 
comes of a group of 90 countries spent 
on education rising from 3.6 per cent 
in 1960 to 4.5 per cent in 1965. 
Translated into human terms, this 
increase represents a very consider- 
able achievement, The total world 
school enrolment at the three main 
levels of education—primary, secon- 
dary and higher education—was 
estimated at 324 million pupils for 
the school year 1960-61 {excluding 
mainland China, North Korea and North 
Vietnam for which no recent figures 
are available). The corresponding 
figure for 1966-67 was 428 million, an 
increase of 104 million, or 32 per cent, 
in six years. 
Total school enrolment has increas- 
ed at an average annual rate of 4.8 
per cent whereas world population has 
increased annually by 1.9 per cent 
The fast growth in school enrolment 
reflects the progress made in develop- 
ing countries towards generalizing 
primary education. Although a smaller 
proportion of total population attends 
school in Africa and Asia, these two 
continents registered the highest aver- 
age annual rate of increase in enrol- 
ment during the period in question. 
Great strides have been made in 
granting girls and women the educa- 
tional rights they have for so many cen- 
turies been denied. It now seems in- 
credible that in ancient China it was 
a commonplace that “a woman with- 
out ability is normal”, that Sophie, in 
Rousseau’s Emile, was given a moral 
rather than an intellectual education, 
and that Napoleon founded a school 
for girls at Ecouen in 1807 to turn out 
“women who believe, not women who 
think.” 
Recent years have seen a sweep- 
ing away of these taboos. Enrolment 
of girls and women at all three educa- 
tional levels has increased from 140 
million in 1960-61 to 186 million in 
1966-67, a 33 per cent increase. The 
percentage of girls and women out 
of total enrolment was estimated at 
127 (1) “International Developments of Educa- 
tional Expenditure: 1950-1965 by Friedrich 
Edding and Dieter Berstecher (Unesco Statis- 
tical Reports and Studies), 1969 ($2,00, 12]-). 
43 per cent for 1966-67, the same level 
as for 1960-61. But in Africa, the 
percentage of girls and women enrol- 
led increased from 35 per cent in 
1960-61 to 38 per cent in 1966-67 and 
in Asia from 37 per cent to 38 per cent. 
Despite George Bernard Shaw's 
disparaging remark that “those who 
can, do: those who can't, teach,” the 
extent to which the demand for educa- 
tion can be met and the quality of 
the education given depends largely 
upon the numbers of teachers available 
and the ratio of teachers to pupils. 
The use of teaching machines, tele- 
vision and other audio-visual aids has 
not, as yet, become a significant 
factor. 
It has been estimated that there were 
some 17 million teachers for 428 mil- 
lion students in primary, secondary - 
and higher education in 1966-67. The 
world average annual growth in teach- 
ing staff since 1960-61 has been cal- 
culated at 3.9 per cent. 
However, total world enrolment of 
pupils has increased faster than the 
number of teachers, giving slight 
increases in the pupil/teacher ratio 
which stood at 31 pupils to 1 teacher 
at primary level in 1966-67 as compar- 
ed with 30 to 1 in 1960-61. At sec- 
ondary school level the average was 
19 pupils to 1 teacher in 1966-67 as 
compared with 16 to 1 in 1960-61. 
Fuomee of the overall 
educational effort being made, even in 
countries where first level education is 
still the prime concern, is the signi- 
ficant increase in enrolment in higher 
education. In 1966-67, 73 per cent of 
total world enrolment was at the 
primary level, 23- per cent at the 
secondary level and 4 per cent at the 
higher level. 
Africa hasthe highest rate of increase 
among the continents with percentage 
increases of 41 per cent, 84 per cent, 
and 74 per cent for the first, second 
and third levels respectively. Equally 
noticeable is the development of higher 
education in Asia, particularly in female 
enrolment, where the highest growth 
rate for any continent was registered. 
Statistical tests, based on an 
analysis of the main causal factors 
behind the international development 
of educational expenditure, show three 
factors to be dominant—the national 
income, the size of the age group 
corresponding to different levels of 
education and the proportion of highly 
qualified manpower in the active 
population. 
In most countries these factors tend 
to have an increasingly strong influence 
on future educational expenditure. 
Other influences, in particular the de- 
mand for equal opportunities and the 
drive for qualitative improvements in 
formal education, are likely to give 
further impetus to the expansion of 
educational budgets. 
in 1967 
[= 
in 10 years 
 
Many of the forecasts of educational 
expenditure, however, are based on 
wrong premises. There is a tendency 
to assume that all nations will have to 
follow a pre-determined path of dev- 
elopment. International expenditure 
comparisons tend to lead to the per- 
petuation of past expenditure pat- 
terns. At a time when great changes 
in curricula, techniques and organiza- 
tion are in the offing, comparisons bet- 
ween national expenditures become 
less and less meaningful. 
The strong interdependence between 
expenditure on education and on other 
public needs suggests that education 
should be planned as an integral part 
of the overall national effort. Instead 
of making invidious international com- 
parisons, it is more important, perhaps, 
to compare the proportion of the total 
national product devoted to education 
with that devoted to other public needs. 
When this sort of comparison is made 
it appears distressingly obvious that

## [Page 13](056740engo.pdf#page=13) 2

### 56735: The Cost of world armaments

### 56725: The Race between education and catastrophe

ARMAMENTS 
pEcpXeleloXeleloXolelo} 
$ 4,000,000,000,000 
  
our values have become distorted and 
that, in most countries, education is 
receiving a very meagre slice of the 
national cake. 
In the time it takes to read this sen- 
tence eleven children will have been 
born into the world. In the same 
period of time five people will have 
died. The terrifying demographic ex- 
plosion the world is now experiencing 
gives a measure of the staggering size 
of the education, food and health prob- 
lems with which we are faced. 
Decrre the efforts enum- 
erated above, the number of adult 
illiterates in the world has probably 
increased in the last ten years from 
740 million to something like 800 mil- 
lion. Unless an enormously enlarged 
effort is made this progression will 
continue.     
Bonnie oxen or Hilary. purposes Wy TA bat 
reached a new record high. In 1967, the military spending 
“of the world’s nations totalled $182,000 million dollars, 
according to “World Military Expenditures, 1966-1967," the 
findings of a recent survey of 120 countries carried out 
by the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 
‘co-operation with other U.S. government agencies and 
Several, international Bodies; Ll Unesco and WHO. 
ou 
Since in education lies the key to 
the solution of such problems as birth 
control, improved food production, bet- 
ter elementary hygiene, etc., we must 
concentrate our resources upon its 
furtherance, Only through education 
can we de-fuse the population “bomb” 
which, in the long run, may represent 
a greater threat to our planet than 
nuclear weapons. How far we are 
failing in this task becomes evident 
when we learn that the world as a 
whole is spending about 40 per cent 
more on military programmes than on 
public education (see next page). 
Not only must the world change its 
expenditure priorities; in the field of 
education it must re-define its objec- 
tives. At the primary level instruction 
in hygiene and feeding habits must 
be regarded as equally important as 
instruction in reading and writing. Uni- 
versities in the developing countries 
must direct students towards those 
studies that bear a close relationship 
ONTINVED oN NEXT E 
 
to the needs of the country in its exist- 
ing state of development. It is less 
important to provide a minority with 
a maximum of culture than to arm the 
majority with a basic minimum of 
knowledge. 
"Take some more tea,” 
Hare said to Alice. 
“I've had nothing yet,” Alice replied, 
"so | can’t take more.” 
“You mean you can't take less,” 
said the Hatter: "It's very easy to take 
more than nothing.” (Lewis Carroll) 
There is no room for complacency 
about results already achieved. If the 
world Is to emerge from its present 
“Alice-in-Wonderland™ situation, we 
must offer the uneducated masses 
much more than the “nothing”, or next 
to nothing, they have been receiving 
up to now. A massive, no-expenses- 
spared, educational effort- must be 
undertaken immediately. In less than 
a generation it may be too late. wm 
the March 
13

## [Page 14](056740engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 56735: The Cost of world armaments

oy 
14 Military expenditures of the less developed nations 
$170 per. capita spent on military programmes. 4 
Startling findings from a world : 
Survey on arms expenditure 
The world spends 40 per cent more on armaments 
than on public education: $159,000 million for milita- 
y budgets; $11 1,000; million for public education 
I | hj Ele 
Average annual expenditure per soldier, world-wide, 
is $7,800. Average public expenditure for edu- 
~ cation is $100 annually per child for the estimated 
1,000 million young peogle in the world school-age 
“population (ages 5-19). 
F Developed countries whol a ich higher pro- 
~ portion of their gross national product on public 
education (5 per cent) than do the Jess-developed 
countries (CL centay : 
The less developed « So ae have 72 per cent of 
~ the world’s population, but public expenditure on 
~ education is only 11 per cent of world panditize. 
A x 1 gl i | bs 
= less developed countries spend an varagecot 
per capita annually for education as compared 
RY an average of Lia per capita in the sveioped 
countries. 
: LI Vo 
Nel RUTY $44,000 million increase in world military 
~ spending from 1965 to 1967, the United States and 
the STOTT SUL TTT I FT RT up almost three-fourths 
of the world total. - 
Fonts spends more than 4 times as much on edu- 
~ cation as on military services. Canada twice as 
much. Other developed countries which spend 
~ more on education than on military programmes: 
Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, 
~ Sweden, Switzerland, n. 
‘Many countries spend large sums " privately= 
~ financed education and health in addition to public 
funds for these purposes. Private spending on 
education in the U.S.A. is estimated at $7,000 million 
~ compared with public expenditures of $34,000 mil- 
“lion. But total U.S. figure for education is less 
BR GED “Wostalrds the size of its igi 
a slamE ig " 
e developing countries did ote ‘escalate thei 
military spending as much as the industrially de- 
veloped nations in the period 1964-1967. Their ave- 
rage military outlay per capita was $8 (as against 
~ an average of $170 in the developed countries). 
But since the standard of living is low in these 
~ countries, with an average per capita G.N.P. of 
$186, even a diversion of $8 per capita for military 
i purposes fepigsents 2 very heavy burden. 
; | | L NIT 
1e world total of about $8,000 million in ‘econo- 
mic aid to the developing nations is less than one- 
~ half of 1 per cent of the abi national produ 
of the donor countries. 
Aid to the developing countries averaged $3 per 
capita in the developed countries as compared to 
    
LI 
were more than twice as large os! ‘their receipts 
of forsign.e economic aid. 
WORLD ARMAMENTS (Continued) 
Compared with 1962 when the United Nations estimated 
world spending on arms at 120,000 million dollars, there 
has been an increase of more than 50 per cent. If this 
trend continues, arms expenditure will consume the astro- 
nomic sum of 4 billion dollars (or 4 trillion dollars in Ame- 
rican usage: $4,000,000,000,000) over the next 10 years. 
It is almost impossible to explain what these staggering 
figures mean in terms comprehensive to the ordinary man 
in the street, but an attempt is made in the graphic presen- 
tation published opposite. It shows that if a coin were 
dropped every second, it would take 5,750 years for the last 
coin to drop for the 182,000 million dollars spent in 1967 on 
armaments, and 126,000 years for the last coin to drop for 
the sum of $4,000,000,000,000 likely to be spent on arms in 
the next 10 years. 
Or to put it another way, if the coins 2 % millimetres in 
thickness are piled flat one on top of the other: they would 
reach all the way to the moon and extend beyond it by 
71,000 kilometres just for the amount spent by the world 
on military matters in 1967. For military expenditure in 
the next 10 years at the rate we are going, the pile of 
coins would rise ten million kilometres into space, or 
30 times the distance between Earth and the Moon. 
The world is now spending more money on military 
affairs than at any period except the peak fighting years 
of World War Il, and this represents 7 per cent of the 
world's gross product. This is equivalent to the total 
annual income of the 1,000 million people in the countries of 
Latin America, South Asia and the Near East combined. 
During 1964-1967 military spending increased faster than 
world population growth (by 7 per cent) and much faster 
than the growth of the world’s gross product (16 per cent). 
  
Thousands of millions 
of dollars 200- 
180- 
159 160+ 
140+ 
  
li = 100- 
Elli
 
i
h
 
i, 
52 60- 
  
| a 0.5 
oe esd ali x 
Military Public Public Foreign U.N. and 
education health economic aid specialized 
agencies 
             
     

## [Page 15](056740engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

§ 


### 56735: The Cost of world armaments

Not oobes one > each s 
( or < PF thousand: 
I years more 
than the age of 
ju the ic 
| | tor the 13st coin io: drop: | 
of the $182,000 million the world 
‘spent on armaments in 1967. 
g¥ it | would hake, » 
| (or the time olapsod Zz | £508, 
since the age of KF EA 
Neanderitis Man ) 3 ENN oN 
for the $4,000,000, 000,000 
likely to be spent on arms 3 
in i the next LC years   

## [Page 16](056740engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 56737: The Student of tomorrow; towards a new global horizon

“Someday, all of us will spend our lives in our 
own school, the world. And education—in the 
sense of learning to love, to grow, to change—can 
become not the woeful preparation for some job that 
makes us less than we could be but the very essence, 
the joyful whole of existence itself.” 
(Marshall McLuhan) 
pa
in
) 
4 an 
3 
- 
-
 
i
o
n
s
 
ih
 
  
THE STUDENT 
-—~N wnt 
FRE DER ee FTE 
    
Photo © Dolsneau-Rapho, Paris 
0. world is falling apart, 
but there is much disagreement as to 
why, how and even where. For some 
people the Western industrialized 
world is the “sick man” of present-day 
society. For the Socialist countries 
of Eastern Europe no such crisis 
apparently exists. In the Third World 
the whole context is different. Yet, 
everywhere we seem to be witnessing 
a parallel process of corrosion 
irrespective of the terminology used. 
In the Western countries there is no 
mistaking the unrest among youth. 
The revolts and uproar in the uni- 
versities, the political involvement or 
the total disinterest in political matters, 
the hippy movements, the increasing 
permissiveness and eroticism... all 
point to a deep-rooted disorder in 
modern society and the yearning for 
a new pattern of civilization. 
Sooner or later the explosion was 
bound to come from within the world 
of education where the present “mal 
du siecle” was first discussed among 
a few individuals and then was taken 
up by whole clusters of dissatisfied 
youth, and finally burst out in its 
violent upheavals in the universities of 
Japan (Tokyo), the U.S.A. (Berkeley, 
Columbia), Europe (Rome, Paris) and 
elsewhere. 
For the Socialist countries, no such 
problem would seem to exist. But if 
nothing happens in broad daylight can 
we be sure that nothing is really going 
on behind the scenes? The answer is 
a very tricky one. As a matter of fact, 
no one can deny that the Socialist 
ideologies took a head start in meeting 
the challenge of the 20th century. 
Their concept of the world includes 
both international solidarity and the 
active involvement of the individual in 
his community—the two critical points 
of the crisis experienced by other 
countries, 
But since political reality does not 
always go hand in hand with ideology, 
the idea of solidarity often comes a 
cropper when it meets up with big 
power strategy. Then even the best 
intentions fly out the window. The 
RENE HABACHI of the Lebanon fs a member 
of Unesco's Division of Philosophy and was 
formerly professor of philosophy at the Leb- 
anese, French and American Universities in 
Beirut. He is the author of many works on 
philosophy.

## [Page 17](056740engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 56737: The Student of tomorrow; towards a new global horizon

OF TOMORROW — 
TOWARDS 
A NEW GLOBAL HORIZON 
by René Habachi 
resulting frustation, therefore, is not 
so far different from the dissatisfaction 
found in Western countries. 
As for the developing countries, the 
crises they are going through obviously 
stem from different causes, even 
though outwardly they may seem the 
same. Here, in a sense, the social 
and economic situation is perhaps 
most out of balance. Modern ways 
superimposed on traditional attitudes 
have had a double appeal and created 
a double emotional shock. 
Traditional ways though outmoded, 
are struggling hard to survive in these 
developing nations. The abrupt intro- 
duction of modern techniques has 
brought with it echoes of the tensions 
from abroad, though this inner conflict 
seems to have been overlooked by 
most sociologists. As a result the 
impact of development aid has been 
considerably reduced. The reaction 
of many Africans to the modern ways 
of today is psychologically different 
from that of a young person in the 
West, and has other shock wave 
effects. 
And so, for everyone, the world 
around us does seem to be breaking 
apart. Whatever the local scene, the 
overall picture is ridiculous and hard 
to fathom. All over the world young 
people have a feeling of being 
uprooted, of a world in disorder where 
cracks are appearing in every corner 
of the globe and spreading and 
spreading to create a deep chasm of 
demoralization. 
“Something is rotten in the State of 
Denmark,” Hamlet said. Later, when 
he looked out onto the absurdity of 
the world, he exclaimedI 
“The time is out of joint. O cursed 
[spite 
That even | was born to set it right.” 
A cursed spite, perhaps, but oh, how 
exciting! What better time than this 
to be alive. 
Yes, time is out of joint. A whirl- 
wind of youth is battering at the doors 
that adults have barred and barricaded. 
But young people today are wasting no 
time over the dilemma of “to be or 
not to be". They have made their 
choice and are living their lives in 
ways their elders had not foreseen. 
The world's population is certainly 
a most important factor here. Mankind 
has attained a new age. Not only 
because we are on the verge of an 
extraordinary transformation, as in. all 
great periods of history, but also 
literally, because mankind has become 
younger both physically and mentally. 
More than half the world’s population 
today is under 25. If we consider that 
the other half includes many old people 
whose lives have been prolonged by 
modern science but who represent the 
past rather than the future, one thing 
strikes us: for every adult alive there 
are now three young persons. Never 
in history has the world known such 
a youthful population. 
Sons have argued with their fathers 
from time immemorial, but in the past, 
these arguments, while often sharp and 
even bitter at times, have usually been 
settled when the older generation 
accepted the new ways and changed 
their thinking. But today things have 
taken a much more dangerous turn 
and we are on the verge of a complete 
break. There are even those who 
claim that the break has already come, 
and that barring a miracle, it can only 
gain momentum. 
W.. in heaven's name has 
happened? The fact is we are living 
in a “paradox” world, or to put it 
another way, literally a “revolting” 
world, where the new society which 
is overwhelming civilization has been 
created by the older generation itself. 
But the older generation is paralyzed 
by routine and fear, and stubbornly 
refuses to relinquish control. Instead 
of taking advantage of what they 
themselves have created, and pushing 
ahead boldly on the new path they 
have set, they have stopped dead in 
their tracks. 
What are the important features that 
characterize the new society? | would 
point to three: First, the shrinking of 
space, second, the speed of communi- 
cations and third, the pangs of inter- 
national solidarity, 
| need not dwell on the first two, 
since so much has already been 
written on them. From now on, the 
limits of the Earth are those of outer 
space where national frontiers are 
meaningless. Viewed from the moon, 
our planet is a tiny island lost in an 
ocean of light-years. 
No less extraordinary than this new 
vision of space is the way electronic 
communications now link us instantly 
to the most distant events. The tele- 
communication satellite now brings the 
furthest continent closer to us on our 
TV screen than our next-door neigh- 
bours. Here we are no longer in the 
realm of the abstract written word, 
but in direct contact with the image 
with its full colour and on the spot 
sound. The “Gutenberg Galaxy”, to 
borrow Marshall McLuhan's phrase, 
has been replaced by the “television 
medium“, and the whole physical 
universe in its infinite variety is now 
brought before our eyes and senses, 
thereby making everyone of us 
suddenly aware that we are all citizens 
of one nation-planet—Earth. 
That is why the third point—inter- 
national solidarity—has taken on such 
vital importance today. Recognizing 
himself as a planetary being, man has 
at the same time acquired a global 
conscience, or as Jacques Berque and 
other sociologists have put it—a new 
“worldliness”. How petty all the 
quarrels of rival blocs now appear. 
How futile and ominous the haggling 
over political frontiers. How ana- 
chronistic the grab mentality that 
makes men—Ilike children clutching 
their toys—deny to others the riches 
which belong to all mankind. But 
despite all these squabblings, a wave 
of feeling is sweeping across our 
planet in search of world unity. 
Nature is retreating before the 
onslaught of industry, just as outer 
space is being vanquished by modern 
technology. But modern technology, 
though it is merging and blending 
different societies, is reducing the 
individual to faceless anonymity. In 
sharp contrast to this, the young 
people of today are asserting their 
own individuality in no uncertain terms, 
claiming the right to build their own 
future and the world of tomorrow. 
As a group of students at Columbia 
University recently told me, they 
cannot accept that a society capable 
of governing itself should use its 
power, with cold impersonality, to 
control the destiny of everyone. 
One can well understand, therefore, 
the reasons for the recent assault 
against the education system. Certain 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20 
11

## [Page 18](056740engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
Original lithograph by the French artist, Roland Topor, © Topor-Olivett: 


### 56737: The Student of tomorrow; towards a new global horizon

Instead of burdening his memory with a mass of facts and figures, the student 
of tomorrow will store these in his computer and will thus be free to analyse 
the whole, make useful comparisons and draw appropriate conclusions.

## [Page 19](056740engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 56737: The Student of tomorrow; towards a new global horizon

## [Page 20](056740engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 56737: The Student of tomorrow; towards a new global horizon

20 
THE STUDENT OF TOMORROW (Continued from page 17) 
The mirror-image of a crumbling society 
modifications and innovations have 
been introduced, it is true, but even 
these already appear old fashioned 
and out-of-date. Education has simply 
failed to adapt itself to the tempo of 
our changing world. “lt advances 
towards the future while fixing its eyes 
on the past in a rear-view mirror,” as 
McLuhan has aptly put it. 
Today the real need is not so much 
just to define the aims of education as 
to find new methods to make education 
more effective. Aims and methods 
are so closely interdependent that if 
the latter are inadequate the former 
will automatically suffer. To develop 
the spirit of total world-mindedness 
implies education of the total man 
who, as an individual, is concerned 
with the fate of a!l his fellow men in 
this world, without thereby losing 
anything of his own personality or 
individuality. 
To conceive of education as a 
broadening of horizons to encompass 
the globe means extending it over the 
entire life span. Education will no 
longer be compressed into the early 
years of life but will continue until the 
day one dies. This “lifelong educa- 
tion” will mean a reduction of tra- 
ditional teaching programmes in favour 
of a constant renewal of learning, for 
as long as one remains mentally active. 
In this new context, the relative 
importance of teaching proper and the 
accumulation of knowledge will no 
doubt undergo a profound change. 
Factual knowledge will take its seat in 
the classroom, as it were, while 
teaching proper will breathe the 
freedom of the open air. A young 
student on the one hand and an adult 
worker on the other will no longer be 
worlds apart when the whole of one’s 
life time is recognized as an integral 
part of education. 
Ts broadening of the idea 
of education will make it much easier 
for global thinking and a global 
approach to develop and take root. 
The school system, with its buildings 
and other facilities, will then be viewed 
simply as one of several “stop-overs” 
in a lifetime of “extra-mural™ education, 
or better still, of “education abroad”. 
Why not? Today's so-called cultural 
tourism is but a pale, distorted image 
of those university caravans of 
wandering scholars who each year 
now travel from one land to the other, 
criss-crossing one another or joining 
up for large discussion or study 
sessions. As they travel from country 
to country they are learning about our 
world at first hand instead of from the 
abstract teaching of a textbook or the 
limited outlook of a teacher. 
But will the placing of education onto 
a new orbit in itself guarantee that 
our entire planet will henceforth come 
into our purview? It is equally true 
that the whole earth must also be 
placed in the mind-orbit of each and 
everyone of us. Here modern science, 
with its satellites and electronic techno- 
logy, will be able to come into its own, 
filling classroom TV screens (they are 
rapidly: replacing the lecturer in many 
schools) with live pictures, detailed 
demonstrations of scientific research, 
and concrete examples for the com- 
parative study of different cultures. 
By making use of the scientific 
method of integrating data we shall 
one day be able to eliminate the 
nightmare of ever-increasing informa- 
tion now choking the school curriculum. 
Not by a senseless hacking and 
mangling process of compression but 
by producing a new coherent synthesis 
of existing data. 
Here the language of mathematics 
will no doubt play a major role, at least 
in those fields which lend themselves 
to its precision. Those that do not 
will increase their effectiveness by the 
added use of the live image. In fact, 
the very abstraction of mathematics 
could be made less abstract and hence 
more human by means of the TV screen 
which will help to bring the language 
of mathematics closer to the living 
reality it symbolizes. 
So we see that the whole process 
of education is undergoing a formidable 
change. In the school of tomorrow, 
personal initiative will be called upon 
as never before in cultural subjects 
generally as well as in the choice of 
a career. Instead of burdening his 
memory with a mass of facts and 
details, the student of tomorrow will 
store these in his computer, allowing 
himself the time and freedom to 
analyse the whole, make useful 
comparisons and draw appropriate 
conclusions. 
Programmed instruction permitting 
each student to judge and criticize his 
(or her) own work, the students of 
tomorrow will be able to choose from 
among different programmes those 
that suit them best. Or else, from a 
list of courses proposed by a new-look 
type of teacher, the students them- 
selves will decide the length and 
category of subjects for study which 
previous self examination had indicated 
as advisable, 
As for vocational guidance, students 
will have a clearer picture of their 
possibilities through special charts 
indicating future openings calculated 
on the basis of a flexible plan of 
future needs, as well as films showing 
the advantages and disadvantages of 
a particular career, and the chances 
of success, 
Tomorrow's younger generation will 
not only have a clearer idea of their 
own community's progress and its 
economic and political directions, but 
will be invited to prove their worth by 
participating fully in the discussions 
and decisions affecting world society 
as a whole. 
ft goes without saying that the 
teacher-student relationship will have 
changed into one of teamwork, where 
the teacher plays the role of leader 
rather than that of professor, of agent 
for the free circulation of culture 
rather than its custodian. Teachers 
will continue their research work with 
students as co-members of the re- 
search team in a community enterprise. 
0. course, some of the 
above may well border on science- 
fiction. But we should recognize that 
while highly technological societies 
tend to increase the areas of anonym- 
ity and depersonalization, progress in 
the application of the sciences will 
allow a return to greater personal 
choice and the creation of new sources 
of career opportunities. 
Will education thus resolve the 
crisis of civilization? This has not 
been its purpose. It is helping to find 
ways towards a solution, but there can 
never really be only one solution. 
For education is the mirror-image of a 
crumbling society; it can also be the 
spark that prepares its reconstruction. 
In this sense, it can help to create a 
new world of humanism. 
And is this not, in the final analysis, 
our ultimate objective? We are in 
search of a new type of humanism—a 
world in which men are rooted in their 
individual society yet open to the 
world, a world in which universality 
and individuality are equally preserved. 
Up until now, these two notions have 
always seemed almost totally in- 
compatible. But perhaps this very 
incompatibility is the driving force of 
progress—ijust as a difference in water 
level can be a source of electric 
energy. Except that instead of being 
reserved for only a small portion of 
the globe, this potential must be 
utilized by the world as a whole so 
that the world's total energy is per- 
manently released. 
Are we so far from Descartes's 
dream “to read in the great book of 
the world”? Are we so far removed 
from the fervour of the Middle Ages 
and the men who carved the genesis 
of their universe on the walls of their 
cathedrals? Not really, except that, 
today, this great book must be written 
and read by all men, of all religions 
and races everywhere—and our world 
demands that all the people of the 
earth join together to forge a single 
_ history. 
Perhaps it is precisely to the extent 
that we dare to be modern that we are 
most faithful to tradition. This faith in 
change is mankind's triumphant answer 
to the challenge of time. It is the 
reconciliation of man with the universe, 
and of all men answering the call to 
unity. n

## [Page 21](056740engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
/
M
T
I
 
- 
Ad
y 
En
dr
e 
. 
: 
| 
One person out of every 
hundred in most industrially 
developed countries is a 
teacher. Above, the amphitheatre 
of the Faculty of Science at the 
University of Szeged (Hungary). 
| these days of striving 
for greater and greater productivity in 
various kinds of enterprises, eco- 
nomists point to education as a “labour 
intensive” activity, conservative and 
slow to adapt itself to modern prac- 
tices. How true is this criticism that 
it uses a large quantity of manpower, 
and educated and trained manpower 
at that? 
A simple calculation from data 
JOHN CHESSWAS, of Unesco’'s Depart- 
ment of Planning and Financing of Edu- 
cation, was formerly head of educational 
planning in the Uganda Ministry of Edu- 
cation, and a staff member of the 
International Institute for Educational Plann- 
ing, in Paris. He Is the author of several 
books on educational planning, particular 
concerning its application to the developing 
countries. 


### 56738: Are there really too many teachers?

Are there really 
too many teachers? 
by John Chesswas 
concerning countries for which suitable 
information is available produces the 
ratios between population and teachers 
and between total employees and 
teachers, about 1965, shown in the 
table on page 23. 
Thus one could say, for instance, 
that in Kenya every 278th person or 
every 18th employee is a teacher. To 
be sure, there are always some ele- 
ments of doubt in statistical counts and 
projections, and difficulties arise from 
differences of interpretation of the term 
“employee”. But even if the figures 
in the table are taken as simply indi- 
cative of an order of size, the results 
give food for thought. 
In developing countries, which have 
relatively less developed educational 
services, teachers represent only a 
small proportion of the population. 
Yet in some cases the ratio of wage 
earners to total population is also 
extremely small. This is particularly 
true of the first three countries in the 
table (page 23) where teachers thus 
represent a sizeable proportion of each 
country's wage earners. 
Even more interesting, perhaps, is 
the situation in the more developed 
countries which have a base of com- 
pulsory primary education and a well 
developed upper second and higher 
level of education as well, and at the 
same time a predominantly wage-earn- 
ing economy. 
As we see from the table, the two 
“space nations”, U.S.A. and U.S5.S.R, 
come very close to one another, and 
within the same range come Canada, 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](056740engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 56738: Are there really too many teachers?

22 
TOO MANY TEACHERS ? (Continued) 
Lowest status of all, or nearly so 
Albania, France, Norway, Australia and 
New Zealand, the whole forming a 
highly significant group. Italy and Ire- 
land follow a little behind, probably 
because their educational systems are 
somewhat less developed than those 
of the main group. Within this limited 
group, the United Kingdom, somewhat 
surprisingly, has the smallest propor- 
tion of teachers in terms both of total 
population and employees. 
Generally speaking, about one per- 
son in every hundred and one em- 
ployee in every thirty-five in these 
countries is a teacher. But when one 
considers the wide range of occupa- 
tions found in such countries, these are 
low figures indeed. 
Furthermore, there is a widespread 
tendency not only for more young 
people to enter school, but also for 
them to stay there longer. To this 
must be added the constant demand 
by teachers for smaller classes in 
the interests of educational efficiency 
and teaching standards, which clearly 
means that more teachers are needed 
for the same number of students. Com- 
pound these two factors, and educa- 
tion claims an even larger proportion 
of the population and of wage-earners. 
In countries all over the world the 
total cost of education has been rising 
at a very fast rate, certainly faster 
than national income, and especially 
since the Second World War. Some 
countries are now spending from six 
to seven per cent of their Gross 
National Product on education. 
It is already being said that the 
limit has been reached. This limit 
must obviously come at some point for 
every country, as education is only one 
of numerous activities sharing the 
national cake. Yet the prospects des- 
cribed above would push even higher 
the fast rising share which education 
already demands, 
If more and more children are to be 
kept in school longer and longer—and 
how long formal education should last 
is itself a debatable question—then 
perhaps the time has come for a broad 
reassessment of current educational 
practices. Indeed, to carry the point 
to its logical conclusion, the very con- 
cept of “education”, recognized as a 
universal human right, may be called 
in question. 
But in this article it is not proposed 
to enter into such spheres. Its concern 
is solely with educational practices in 
MAKING 
LEARNING FUN 
These totally absorbed young 
children in a first grade 
classroom (left) are learning 
to read. As their teacher's 
tape recorded voice comes 
through the earphones, they 
watch story illustrations 
projected on a screen or 
follow her words In a book. 
The use of audio and visual 
electronic devices as teaching 
aids has enabled first grade 
beginners to attain third year 
reading proficiency In eight 
months. Right, this little girl 
has just answered a question 
put to her by a programmed 
teaching machine. If her answer 
is correct, the following question 
will appear on the lefthand 
screen. She covers her eyes, 
waiting to see if she was right 
and if the machine surprises 
her with the next problem. 
Ph
ot
os
 
US
IS
 
relation to the function of the teachers 
applying them. 
At least one important probability 
can be foreseen if present practices 
are continued. If education continues 
to command the present proportion 
of the wage-earning force, or if that 
proportion increases, as it well may, 
then it will be difficult if not impos- 
sible for a country to pay to such 
a large force of middle and high level 
manpower, salaries which they will 
accept as equitable to their education, 
training and status vis-a-vis other 
employees of equal standing. 
The result will be that in many 
countries teaching will stay near or 
at the bottom of the popularity poll of 
occupations for educated persons. Is 
that what we want for our children? 
Thus, instead of lowering the 
student-teacher ratio by simply reduc- 
ing the size of classes, would it not 
be more sensible to seek means of 
raising it, without loss of educational 
efficiency and standards? This is where 
consideration of the new educational 
techniques—television, radio, program- 
med instruction, and the latest entrant 
in the field, computers—comes in. 
It is not possible here to discuss

## [Page 23](056740engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 56738: Are there really too many teachers?

o LEY a W - * 
SEN ~ SRY : 
-, » - 3 . -“ . . 
hn ° cold + : Ten a» y ) 
ul - i . x - , a R " 
RT» Sa SR 
the relative merits of each of these, 
or combinations of them, perhaps in- 
corporating mixtures of more conven- 
tional techniques. The present pur- 
pose is to point out that current edu- 
cational practices must be subjected 
to scrutiny, and changes in methods 
must be sought so as to reduce the 
manpower demands of education and 
put at the disposal of the teacher more 
productive means to help him achieve 
his object, at the same time enhancing 
his position and status. 
This has been done in many spheres, 
RATIO OF POPULATION AND EMPLOYEES TO TEACHERS (ABOUT 1965) 
  
      
Population/teachers Employees teachers 
Country Excluding Including Excluding Including 
teachers in teachers in teachers in teachers in 
higher education}higher education|higher education] higher education 
Kenya ............... 278:1 I 18:1 a 
United Arab Republic ... 2221 206:1 15:1 14:1 
British Honduras ....... 86:1 85:1 11:1 11: 
Canada .............. 91:1 80:1 32:1 28:1 
USA. ....... cco... 99:1 81:1 36:1 30:1 
Japan ............... 1111 99:1 54:1 48:1 
Albania .............. 1151 11141 36:1 35:1 
Czechoslovakia ........ 94:1 84:1 43:1 381 
France ............... 117 :1 11241 34:1 32:1 
Germany (Fed. Rep.) ... 184 :1 ee 83:1 I. 
Hungary ............. 1171 107 :1 55:1 50:1 
Ireland .............. 1071 102:1 39:1 37:1 
taly .........ccv... 106:1 100:1 39:1 37:1 
Netherlands .......... 135:1 ..- 48:1 A. 
Norway .......vvvvnn. 84:1 80:1 33:1 32:1 
United Kingdom (less N. 
Ireland) ............ 12311 11511 58:1 54:1 
Australia ............. 113:1 1071 36:1 34:1 
New Zealand ......... 101 :1 92:1 38:1 34:1 
USSR............... 1011 93:1 34:1 31:1   
This table shows the proportion of population to teachers and of employees & wage-earners 
to teachers in 19 countries. Figures are based on data in the Unesco Statistical Yearbook 
(1967), the Yearbook of Labour Statistics (1968, ILO, Geneva), and the Demographic Year 
Book (1967, United Nations). For France, figures of employees & wage-earners are 
crucial importance. 
  taken from OECD Manpower Statistics, 1954-1964.   
  
even, in spite of the forbodings of 
economists some twenty years ago, in 
the tertiary sector (service industries) 
of some countries. So why not in 
education too? 
Whatever means are tried, they must 
be subjected to a complete economic 
analysis. It is pointless saving money 
on teachers if in the process as much 
as is saved, or perhaps more, is spent 
on the alternative means used to re- 
place them. In some cases, in fact, 
it has been shown that the same 
number of teachers is still required, so 
that the cost of the new technique 
becomes an additional burden. It may 
be found that a saving made on the 
number of teachers employed is can- 
celled out by the need to employ 
other kinds of human skills——those of 
technicians to maintain the electronic 
teaching aids, for instance. 
The question of the initial, the main- 
tenance and the depreciation costs of 
expensive equipment thus becomes of 
So does the need 
to see that it is not maltreated. This 
raises the question of the maturity, 
motivation and responsibility of the 
students. 
' To leave a class of 9-year-olds 
unsupervised in a room with an 
expensive machine which is supposed 
to teach them is asking for trouble and 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32 
23

## [Page 24](056740engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

24 
New look 
by losif Nekhamkin 
As the world enters the 
1970s under the banner of scientific 
and technical progress, the appli- 
cation of this new knowledge has 
become the decisive factor in econo- 
mic development. 
Formidable changes have taken 
place which influence our thinking and 
concepts of what criteria to apply to 
general education. What should be 
taught? How should it be taught? 
What should education imply? What 
should our schools be like? Educators 
in every country are all asking these 
questions. 
Sociologists, economists, scientists 
and statesmen, too, are pondering 
these problems, bearing in mind the 
needs of tomorrow's citizens, the men 
and women who are today infants or 
just entering school, but who will be in 
the prime of their lives as the twenty- 
first century arrives. 
By then they will be living in a world 
which we today cannot visualize by 
any stretch of imagination. Yet 
somehow we must decide what kind of 
education will help the child of 1970 to 
become a responsible citizen thirty 
years from now, 
In the U.S.S.R., this problem natur- 
ally preoccupies the educator and 
also the State itself, which from its 
inception has given the highest 
priority to public education and 
cultural development. Even when civil 
war and foreign intervention threatened 
the very existence of the newly-estab- 
lished state, at a time of economic 
devastation and widespread famine, 
Lenin told the First All-Russia Con- 
gress on Education: "Public education 
is an inseparable part of the struggle 
we are waging.” 
Today, as in the past, the Soviet 
Union gives high priority to public 
education, and it need hardly be said 
that Soviet education has never stood 
still. Like other countries, the U.S.S.R. 
has faced complex problems posed by 
the need to keep abreast with constant 
change and progress, 
Formerly these problems were re- 
 
IOSIF NEKHAMKIN, Soviet writer and 
journalist, has specialized in the popula- 
rization of educational, scientific and 
technological questions. He is science 
editor of “Soviet Union”, the illustrated 
monthly published in Moscow. 


### 56739: New look in Soviet schools

in Soviet schools 
solved by merely increasing the num- 
ber of subjects and extending the 
period of schooling. This simple expe- 
dient, however, no longer works. The 
amount of knowledge required for 
what is now regarded as a basic edu- 
cation has reached the point where 
it can no longer be crammed into even 
the tremendously expanded school 
programmes of today. 
These programmes have required 
children to use their minds as vast 
storehouses of facts, dates, theorems, 
names, experiments, figures and for- 
mulae. And despite this (or more 
likely because of it) schools have not 
brought home to children the ideas, 
interests and needs of the 20th cen- 
tury. Overburdened with the funda- 
mentals of classical education in all 
subjects, children have felt much more 
like contemporaries of Newton, Lomo- 
nosov and Lavoisier than those of 
Einstein, Kurchatov and Wiener. 
The problem facing Soviet schools, 
as well as schools in all industrially 
developed countries, was how to im- 
prove the educational system and 
bring it in line with the requirements 
of scientific, technical and cultural pro- 
gress. |t was one whose solution was 
beyond the scope of the schools 
themselves, since it called for the con- 
certed efforts of educators, psycholo- 
gists, doctors, specialists in every 
branch of education, parents, the pub- 
lic in general and scientific and gov- 
ernment organizations. 
A Joint Commission of the Academy 
of Pedagogical Science and the Acade- 
my of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. was 
set up a few years ago to direct this 
work. The question was soon being 
discussed and hotly debated in spe- 
cialized publications and in the daily 
press. Research programmes and 
experimental pilot projects in schools 
were launched and the views of spe- 
cialists in medicine, psychology, ped- 
agogics, didactics and methodology 
were sought. 
The research and discussions cen- 
tered on two main questions—“teach- 
ing methods” and “the scope and 
content of education”. In other words, 
the search for ways and means that 
give full scope to the process of 
harmonious all-round development and 
"offer the best chance of revealing and 
stimulating the creative potential of 
every child. 
This quest, of course, is never end- 
  
m
a
g
a
z
i
n
e
 
“S
ov
ie
t 
Un
io
n   Ph
ot
o 
© 
A 
Ga
ra
ni
n 
- 
ing. But today, when programmes 
based on the results of pilot-projects 
have been tested in hundreds of So- 
viet schools and are now being follow- 
ed by many thousands of children, 
it is possible to sum up some of the 
salient features of the work achieved 
thus far. 
In this connexion, | am reminded of 
a conversation | had a few years ago 
with an American educator, Dr. R. Hall, 
after he had visited Soviet schools 
and studied the work of Soviet edu- 
cators. He recalled the observation 
made over sixty years ago by a distin- 
guished American educator and 
psychologist, Dr. Edward L. Thorn- 
dyke, who complained that the results

## [Page 25](056740engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 56739: New look in Soviet schools

      
N
E
E
 
T
w
 
  
3 
- itn t 
id gE" ty i i 1} } i 
: 
- v 
I 
* : — 
; - 
ol Ol       
—
—
 
F
E
 
Quite a number of Soviet secondary schools combine general education with training in various 
trades and skills to be used by pupils in case they fail their entrance exams to universitles. 
teen-agers in a Moscow secondary school use a big computer to train for one of the world's 
newest jobs—computer programming. 
of pedagogical research were all too 
often left on shelves to gather dust, so 
that teachers made no use of them and 
scientific research had little effect on 
the development of educational plans 
and programmes. 
“In the Soviet Union | have seen the 
efforts you are making to establish 
close contact between researchers in 
the field of education and the teachers 
themselves, “Dr. Hall told me.” They 
work together on practical rather than 
theoretical questions, and this working 
relationship ensures that the results of 
research are applied directly in the 
classroom.” 
This is indeed the case. Academi- 
cian Isaac Kikoin, a leading Soviet 
physicist, once told me: “I remember 
what a journalist remarked, when he 
learned that school courses and text- 
books in physics were being devel- 
oped by four academicians and several 
doctors of science. He described our 
efforts as an outstanding sacrifice, 
bearing in mind the time we spent on 
this task at the expense of our own 
scientific work.” 
“But there was no need for the 
journalist to praise us so highly,” said 
Academician Kikoin. “You might say 
we were motivated by selfish consid- 
erations rather than a passion for self- 
sacrifice. Every scientist is interested 
in developing competent successors. 
The improvement of our schools is 
Here, 
one of the most effective ways of 
accomplishing this.” 
Many scientific groups like the one 
just mentioned are at work in the 
U.S.S.R.—in Novosibirsk and Moscow, 
Kharkov and Kazan, Leningrad and 
Kiev, for example. Distinguished 
scientists not only lecture, but often 
conduct entire courses in secondary 
schools. And the experience and 
knowledge they contribute to the 
drawing up of new schoo! program- 
mes have helped considerably to 
raise the standard of general edu- 
cation in the U.S.SR. 
What are these new programmes 
and how have they improved edu- 
cation? Firstly there has been a rig- 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
  
  
    
23

## [Page 26](056740engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 56739: New look in Soviet schools

26 
SOVIET SCHOOLS (Continued) 
orous revision and thorough clearing 
out of the storehouse of school 
knowledge, cluttered with subject 
matter accumulated over the centuries. 
This process was not one of simply 
“whittling down" the volume of mater- 
ial, but primarily of improving general 
concepts. As the logic of a scientific 
cognition of the world (from the par- 
ticular to the general} is not the same 
as the logic of learning about it in 
school, the learning process has no 
need to duplicate blindly the steps 
taken by the original discoverers of 
scientific truths. 
All reference materials and facts 
which did not demand “mental exer- 
cises”, but simply memorization were 
reduced to a minimum. This has given 
school programmes greater maturity: 
children are no longer required merely 
to memorize and reproduce what is 
taught, but to draw logical conclusions 
and to have a deeper understanding 
of the interdependence of facts and 
phenomena. 
In this process of “growing up”, 
schools have not needed to add extra 
hours to the programme. The Soviet 
school programme (elementary phase 
and secondary combined) still totals 
11,000 hours as before—fully enough, 
say educators, for a child to acquire a 
thorough background of general edu- 
cation. 
Methods and programme structures, 
of course, have been revised. The 
course on 19th century Russian his- 
tory, formerly covering 25 hours in the 
7th form and 30 hours in the 0th 
form, is now taught as a 50-hour cour- 
se in the 8th form. The result is a 
more in-depth course taught in fewer 
class hours. 
One sweeping change is the re- 
duction of the elementary phase in 
education from a four to a three-year 
programme. This new curriculum was 
many years in the making and de- 
serves special mention. 
One can hardly picture a seven- 
year old child confidently working out 
algebraic equations on the blackboard. 
Yet this is something that can be seen 
in the Soviet Union today, not as a 
special demonstration by exceptionally 
gifted children, but as part of everyday 
class work in a number of experimen- 
tal schools. 
Research into the learning capaci- 
ty of young children has produced 
some surprising results. It turns out 
that first year elementary pupils can 
master the kind of abstract concepts 
that were thought to be within the 
reach only of much older children. 
The mastery of algebraic abstractions 
is a particularly revealing example. 
Experiments carried out in Moscow 
and in a number of schools in the 
Kalinin and Tula regions show that 
the learning capacity of first form chil- 
dren today is considerably higher than 
that of their predecessors. 
It took a great deal of time and effort 
to establish this fact scientifically, to 
convince many people of its validity 
- 
“S
ov
ie
t 
Un
io
n"
 
ma
ga
zi
ne
 
Ph
ot
o 
@ 
A,
 
Ga
ra
ni
n 
  
and to apply the results of initial exper- 
iments as actual programmes in sel- 
ected schools. From these studies and 
tests came the conclusion that the 
existing four-year elementary curri- 
culum could be shortened to three, thus 
freeing about 500 hours for the teach- 
ing of systematic courses in such 
subjects as science, and making it 
possible to reduce the number of 
lessons in the secondary programme. 
It was primarily to lighten this 
heavy work-load—the bane of schools 
throughout the world—that the new 
programmes were introduced, as the 
U.S.S.R. Minister of Education, Mikhail 
Prokofiev has pointed out. As a scho- 
lar and educator, he is well aware that 
the lighter study load will give children 
opportunities for independent work 
and also to follow studies that corres- 
pond to their inclinations and abilities. 
The Soviet school programme is 
working towards this goal. For the 
upper classes, selective courses are 
planned which provide laboratory and 
practical training in such subjects as 
draftsmanship and designing, electrical 
and radio engineering, chemical and 
mechanical technology, agriculture and 
animal husbandry. 
In 1967-68, between 40 and 60 per 
cent of children enrolled in the Sth and 
10th forms throughout the country took 
advantage of these selective studies, 
and in 516 schools nearly 2,000 new 
classes offered specialized courses in 
mathematics, physics and chemistry. 
The changeover to the new pro- 
gramme, now accomplished in most 
of the 206,000 schools in the Soviet 
Union, is a challenge to the country's 
two and half million teachers. Schools 
have been re-equipped and teachers 
retrained. Teaching methods have 
been enriched with new ideas and 
reinforced with modern equipment— 
television, tape recorders, film projec- 
tors and computers. Soviet pedagog- 
ical specialists have produced text 
books and teaching aids specially 
adapted to the new programmes. 
This nation-wide renovation of 
school programmes, based on years of 
intensive research, calls for a vast 
financial effort by the government to 
meet the needs of the nearly 50 million 
children now enrolled in Soviet 
schools. When we add to this all the 
other forms of education provided in 
the Soviet Union we find that about 
80 million people are engaged in stud- 
ies of one kind or another. This means 
that some 300 million textbooks, 
published in 47 languages, are needed 
every year. 
| began by attempting to show what 
problems our scientific and technolo- 
gical age has created for schools. To 
conclude, | would say that this age can 
also help schools in overcoming these 
problems. |

## [Page 27](056740engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

by 
Paul Lengrand 
|; is two hundred years 
since Rousseau wrote Emile in which 
he expressed his stupefaction at the 
way men were educated in the mid- 
eighteenth century. Was it really 
necessary for human beings to adapt 
themselves to the educational system? 
Would it not be better for the system 
to be adapted to the needs of men? 
The fundamental question was clearly 
stated. 
Regularly since then, for each 
succeeding generation, the relationship 
between education and life has been 
the subject of studies, dissertations 
PAUL LENGRAND is chief of the Con- 
tinuing Education Section of Unesco's 
Department for the Advancement of Edu- 
cation. He has written numerous studies 
and articles on adult education and perma- 
nent education, and is the author of “Edu- 
cation Permanente”, published by Edition 
Peuple et Culture, Paris, 1966. 
  
Honoré Daumier, 
the 19th century 
French painter and 
cartoonist, is world 
famous for his 
satire on social and 
political affairs. 
His cartoons 
foreshadowed 
the tensions and 
conflicts of our 
modern industrial 
society. Nor did 
the shortcomings 
of the educational 
system or 
educational 
favouritism escape 
his sharp eye, as 
we see in this 
lithograph showing 
a prize-day 
ceremony in the 
1850s, which he 
captioned “First 
Prize for Health”. 
  
“Teachers and 
Small Fry™ by 
Honoré Daumier, 
Edition Vilo 
© André Sauret, 
Edition du Livre, 
The list of protests, 
proposals and projects is endless. 
After Jean-Jacques Rousseau came 
Jean-Henri Pestalozzi in Switzerland, 
Friedrich Froebel in Germany, Bertrand 
Russell in England, John Dewey in 
the United States, Célestin Freinet in 
France, Anton Makarenko in the 
Soviet Union, Maria Montessori in 
Italy, and dozens of other pioneers 
of educational reform. 
Nor should we forget all those 
philosophers whose first concern also 
was the education and development 
of man. If we read again the writings 
of Friedrich Hegel, Auguste Comte or 
Friedrich Nietzsche, we find on every 
page a reference to this same preoccu- 
pation—how can man, through his 
experiences, his thought processes 
and his relationships with others, 
develop his personality, strive con- 
stantly to improve himself and achieve 
real, untrammelled, tangible self- 
liberation. 
and experiments. 


### 188141: Education put to the question

EDUCATION PUT 
TO THE QUESTION 
It is true that we have an over- 
abundance of ideological material at 
our disposal. But it is evident that 
educational theory has only a very 
tenuous link with educational practice. 
The traditional structures have con- 
stantly exercised a passive, sometimes 
even an active, resistance to a trans- 
formation of the educational process 
in the interests of both the individual 
and society. 
Of all human undertakings it 
would appear that education is the 
one that encounters the greatest 
obstacles in the path of progress. 
For years institutions known for their 
conservatism, such as Churches and 
Armies, have been in the throes of 
a thorough evolution. National defence 
is no longer assured-in the barracks, 
but in the laboratories of the scientists. 
In Rome, at the very moment when 
bishops from all over the world are 
discussing with the Pope the nature 
of ecclesiastical power, humble priests 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
 
  
Monte-Carlo

## [Page 28](056740engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 188141: Education put to the question

28 
EDUCATION PUT TO THE QUESTION (Continued) 
The battle between traditional forces and innovation 
have joined the ranks of the protesters 
and are claiming the right to a share 
in decision-making. 
Until recently no such evolution has 
been apparent in the world of educa- 
tion, at least in the education of 
young children and adolescents. It 
is true that teaching as practised today 
in most advanced countries has made 
some progress as compared with the 
situation pictured in the biting analyses 
and sombre descriptions of Charles 
Dickens or Jules Vallés. 
Children are no longer whipped. 
Their intellects are no longer system- 
atically dulled. They are no longer 
obliged to learn by heart the tribut- 
aries of the Rhine or the Thames. 
The general moral standard has 
progressed and the shock-waves of 
a number of decisive advances in 
our civilization have been felt in 
education. 
Generally speaking the integrity of 
the child of today, at least physically, 
is respected. Up to a certain point 
syllabuses and methods have become 
more enlightened. But the greater part 
remains unaffected. 
The means at the disposal of society 
for the instruction and training of 
future citizens — the school and the 
university — retain the same character- 
istics generation after generation: only 
occasional relevance to ordinary life, 
lack of awareness of concrete reality, 
a divorce between pleasure and learn- 
ing and absence of dialogue and 
participation. 
I. obstacles in the path of 
change are well known. Some even 
have considerable justification. There 
is a handing down process in educa- 
tion that cannot be ignored. How, other 
than through teaching, can the present 
generation be linked with its pred- 
ecessors? 
It is quite normal and inevitable 
that the past, both that of mankind 
in general and of each separate 
society, should occupy a position of 
honour in any body of teaching. It 
is a public treasure store and we are 
only too well aware of the feeling of 
deprivation experienced by those 
whose access to their cultural heritage 
has been limited. 
But this “tradition”, precious though 
it may be, becomes an obstacle when 
it is not allied to a forward-looking 
view of life and when it becomes an 
alibi and a pretext for a refusal to give 
rein to the interplay of vital currents of 
thought. In fact, the whole system, 
as now constituted and operated, 
produces the obstacle. 
Compulsory education, the good 
grounds for which no one would 
dispute, paralyses innovation. Why 
change? Why try to do better? Why 
seek for formulae that meet the needs 
of evolving man better, when automat- 
ically each year our schools receive 
their quota of pupils? The law of 
supply and demand, which gives im- 
pulse to progress, does not apply here. 
Nor does the teaching profession, 
recruited and formed as it now is, 
greatly favour an imaginative or invent- 
ive spirit. By very reason of his 
profession the teacher, at whatever 
level, is never a participant in a 
dialogue. He does not have to justify 
himself to his equals, but passes, by 
way of the examination system from 
the statu pupillari to one of full 
authority, 
Is there any other position in the 
world that entails the same concen- 
tration of powers as are in a teacher's 
hands? He instructs, he moulds, he 
has the advantage of age and know- 
ledge. By definition he is always right. 
He is both jury and judge against whom 
there is virtually no appeal. He it is 
who apportions blame, punishment and 
reward. 
But, as we are well aware, this is 
not the way in which a man becomes 
truly adult and achieves his true 
fulfilment. If wisdom and the under- 
standing of men and of real-life 
situations penetrate at all into this 
enclosed little world, it is because, 
fortunately, some teachers escape and 
make contact with the outside world in 
which they face resistance from men 
and things—the world of politics, art, 
community life and of adult education. 
For their part, the legal and institut- 
ional authorities’ interests are not 
served by change nor do they desire 
it. What these institutions, whether 
the family or the State, are aiming 
at through education is the turning out 
of men who conform. 
Most of the school or university 
systems existing today are perfected 
instruments for the production of the 
type of individual who accepts as 
revealed truth the myths and terms of 
reference of society. What these 
authorities, whoever they may be, fear 
is the questioning spirit. 
It is this spirit that produces the 
independent son, the democratically- 
minded citizen, in short, the adult 
human being who, by definition, is far 
from docile, difficult to indoctrinate and 
capable of relying on his own judge- 
ment for vital choices and decisions. 
In these circumstances it is easy 
to understand how deeply shocked 
and astonished were those who, up 
till then, had been responsible for the 
educational process, when their power 
and authority were questioned, not 
timidly as in the past, by a few enligh- 
tened spirits, but on a massive scale 
by the revolt and challenge of those 
directly concerned. 
E... in recent years are 
too well known to need enlarging upon. 
Suffice it here to stress the importance 
of a point in history at which the spirit 
of contestation, which has been the 
leaven of progress in all the essential 
areas of modern civilization (the claims 
of workers, women, coloured people, 
colonies), penetrated the sector of 
education until then bristling with 
defensive devices. 
Student action has achieved a huge 
breach in the wall of educational 
conservatism. Through this breach’ 
has flooded an irresistible tide of long- 
standing questions, swelled by more 
recent speculation and fed by im- 
patience and new hopes. 
As has happened in face of oppres- 
sion, injustice and poverty, the victims 
are no longer resigned to acquiesc- 
ence. Those who accept the defects 
and shortcomings of education as 
being part of the natural order of 
things are becoming fewer and fewer. 
The world appears to be in search 
of a new form of education which, 
like any new order, must establish a 
balance between contradictory forces 
and recognize its fragility and tempor- 
ary nature. It would be impossible 
to draw up an exhaustive list of the 
questions being put, whether of fund- 
amental importance or of detail. But 
some of these questions are too insis- 
tent and too important to be ignored. 
What should be the scope of the 
educational process? To which parts 
of the human personality does it 
apply? Have not our definitions of it 
up to now been too narrow and res- 
trictive? Have not physical, social, 
emotional and aesthetic values been 
sacrificed to a limited conception of 
knowledge and the intellect? 
When we consider the development 
of the individual, what relationship is 
there between objective factors (sex, 
biological factors, socio-economic 
status), the different forms of action 
(on things and on men) and the various 
educational methods?

## [Page 29](056740engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 188141: Education put to the question

  
CHEMISTRY 
CLASS 
Cartoon by Sempé, 
the noted French 
humorous artist, 
taken from his book, 
*Sauve qui peut” 
(Everyone for Himself), 
published by Editions 
Dencél, Paris, 1964. 
  © 
Se
mp
é 
- 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
De
no
el
 
  
  
 
  
2 
  
  
    
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
To what extent can education be 
defined as an intervention from outside, 
the transmission of know-how and 
technique? How far does education 
indicate a way of being in the world, 
a systematic directed effort by the 
individual to co-ordinate the facts of 
experience into a unified and harmo- 
nious personality? And what is the link 
between these two notions of being 
educated and having an education? 
Where should the educative process 
take place? At school? At university? 
At home? In the factory? On the 
playing field? In the trade union? At 
the theatre? Through radio and tele- 
vision programmes? Is there an all- 
embracing, global concept by which 
we can determine the specific contri- 
bution made by each situation and 
each institution to the instruction and 
education of the individual? How can 
we link these various contributions 
into a harmonious whole? 
Is there a best age for education? 
Or should we not consider that 
each age raises specific problems 
and that at each stage of his existence 
the human being must make a new 
effort (being aided in this by institution- 
al structures) to comprehend new 
aspects of life, to comprehend himself 
and to find his place in life and to equip 
himself emotionally as well as intellec- 
tually to accept new challenges and 
assume his responsibilities competently 
and with circumspection? Is there not 
in this a considerable extension of the 
general concept of education as well 
as of the function it is called upon 
to fulfil in human destiny? 
How can we reconcile the needs of 
selection with those of training? 
To what extent does teaching, as 
it is practised today, take account of 
differences in nature, temperament, 
rate of maturing and of the variety 
of employments open to pupils? 
In present circumstances is educa- 
tion truly an aid to development? In 
what conditions could education fulfil 
this function? 
To what extent have the achieve- 
ments of the mind of modern man, 
such as his sense of history and the 
scientific spirit, among others, been 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](056740engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 188141: Education put to the question

      oY hve 
  
    
N
 
\\!
 
G
i
f
 
W
W
 
\\ 
fo
 
   22
8 
To
 
EN
E 
LIFE-LONG EDUCATION 
a cartoonist’s view 
Cartoons on these pages first appeared in the review 
“Education and Culture”, published in Strasbourg by the 
Councll for Cultural Co-operation of the Council © 
Europe and the European Cultural Foundation. 
  
   
EDUCATION PUT TO THE QUESTION 
 
The price paid for 
introduced into teaching methods and 
programmes? Is not educational pract- 
ice in schools and universities itself a 
formidable obstacle to the normal 
development of creativity in the child 
(and future adult)? 
How can the function of education 
be divided between in-school and 
extra-curricular activities? Could not 
educational institutions be used as 
cultural centres for the community? 
What training should teachers of all 
kinds receive to prepare them for the 
new tasks of education? In particular, 
should not a teacher learn to listen 
and to observe just as much as, if 
not more than, to speak? Is not his 
role to organize, to make the tools 
of work and research available rather 
than to spread out his wares of know- 
ledge before his pupils? 
What is the place and the role of 
competition in the field of teaching and 
what limits should be imposed on it? 
How can the principle of solidarity 
and collaboration, so vital to the indi- 
vidual and to society, be safeguarded 
against the effects of classification? 
How can we make use of the mass 
media, not only as a means of infor- 
mation and amusement, but for training 
the mind and the critical faculties? 
Can we allow national resources, of 
necessity limited, to be wasted by 
making children repeat a scholastic 
year, by allowing them to drop out or 
by weeding out processes against 
which there is no appeal, etc.? 
This is but a somewhat arbitrary 
choice from a whole complex of ques- 
tions each of which involves allied 
problems concerning the structures of 
society, the place of education in 
society and the manner in which 
education fulfils the aspirations, 
whether expressed or not, of indivi- 
duals and groups. 
Everyone will find other questions 
of his own, and | doubt if anyone is 
capable of supplying an exhaustive 
list of questions. The important thing 
is to be aware of the central, dominant 
fact—education in its entirety has been 
brought in question. 
Of course, we could decide to make 
no real changes and merely paper over 
the cracks in the wall. The reasons 
for inertia are easy to understand. 
The introduction of a new order is a 
formidable undertaking. It involves 
renunciation and sacrifice and requires 
an enormous amount of work of all 
kinds calling for courage, resolution 
and an unshakable confidence in 
man’s capabilities. It is the expres- 
sion of an optimistic view of life that

## [Page 31](056740engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 188141: Education put to the question

(Continued) 
 
standing still 
 
aims at sweeping away the remains 
of the pessimistic view linked to out- 
worn beliefs. But there is a price to 
be paid, sometimes a very high one, 
even for standing still. 
Different people have made different 
choices. The wind of change is rising 
in many quarters. Here the teacher 
has vacated his desk and no longer 
stands out from his class. There the 
very notion of the class has gone. 
In some countries, instead of 
schools, “educational units” are being 
built which encompass the whole 
educational process from the stand- 
point of the pupils (children, adoles- 
cents, adults), of the teaching given 
(study, ante-professional training, leis- 
ure time organization, information and 
communication), and of the teaching 
profession (calling for a contribution 
from all those members of the local 
community who are in a position to 
participate in the overall work of 
teaching and training). 
Above all there is the steady devel- 
opment of structures and methods in 
adult education. Here we see applied 
a number of the principles of the new 
thinking about education: no compul- 
sion, no certificates (except in certain 
exceptional cases) a choice of activ-. 
ities related to interests and aptitudes; 
exchange and dialogue; team work; 
equality of status as between pupil 
and teacher each of whom learns from 
the other; drawing the utmost from 
daily experience, etc. 
Suen advances, however 
remarkable and essential they may be, 
cannot all be applied to all educational 
fields. There will always remain a 
large area in the training of a child in 
which he will be the recipient of instruc- 
tion, even though he will very early be 
shown the way of autonomous learning 
or self-instruction. The fact remains, 
however, that adult education offers 
patterns of a freedom of expression 
from which all education can legitimat- 
ely and profitably draw inspiration. _ 
We are on the threshold of a new 
era in education in which more and 
more stress will be laid on subject 
matter. We shall move beyond the 
old era in which man was, above all, 
the object of the educational process. 
We have seen that part of the 
answer has developed in the world 
of education itself. But this is, and 
can only be, a partial solution. The 
undertaking is too wide in scope to 
remain the province of any one group, 
no matter how qualified it may be. 
The educational sector, it will readily 
be understood, is not the best placed 
to provide all the answers, both for 
the reasons stated above and also 
because it is neither satisfactory nor 
helpful to be both judge and litigant. 
One of the major contributions of 
educators, aware of the shortcomings 
of the theory and practice of the 
educational process, has been the 
recognition of the need for education 
of a continuing nature. But the pres- 
ent success of the notion of continuing 
education only serves to spotlight the 
vastness of the research and exper- 
iment required before this concept 
can become, not merely an inter- 
pretation of the educational process, 
but a guide to action. 
Who is to inform us as to the 
conditions for and the rhythm of pers- 
onal development? This is the task of 
the psychologist, the specialist in 
characterology. Who will work out 
the precise yield of the educational 
process considered by itself and in 
relation to other forms of investment? 
This is a job for the economist. 
For their part the sociologist and 
the politician will shed light on the 
role of education, as product and fac- 
tor, in the evolution of society. It is 
the artist, surely, who will contribute 
the most valuable lessons concerning 
the relationship between the produc- 
tion of a work of art and the devel- 
opment of the human being. 
For this new order, to which we 
aspire, to take shape and root we 
shall have to mobilize all available 
intellectual, spiritual and practical res- 
ources as well as those forces that 
support the whole social edifice. 
Experience gained from working in 
factory, field and office is surely just 
as important to the elaboration of the 
new educational doctrine as the wis- 
dom of philosophers, the imagination 
of poets and the theoretical and pract- 
ical systems of learned men. 
As a result of the new education 
a new type of man will gradually 
emerge who will be attuned to spiritual 
progress and social advance. Such 
a man will be less concerned with 
arming himself with an arsenal of pat 
answers and with assessing the 
breadth of his learning by the number 
of correct answers he can give. But 
he will be the questioning man. By 
a continuing educational effort he will 
be able to handle with ease and a 
sense of well-being the three essential 
forms of questioning—poetic, scientific 
and political. = 
  
  

## [Page 32](056740engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

J 
  


### 56738: Are there really too many teachers?

REALLY TOO MANY TEACHERS? 
for a quick end to the teaching pro- 
cess. Put a group of upper secondary 
students preparing for university en- 
trance in a similar situation and the 
result might be very different. 
It is possible that this latter group 
could be left alone with the machine, 
and the need for teacher-student con- 
tact would thereby be reduced. Here 
is the basic essence of the use of 
new techniques in place of some, at 
feast, of the conventional teaching 
force, 
In the former case, however, the 
human presence is still essential. At 
the lower levels of education, per- 
haps during the time that students are 
“compelled” to attend school, the 
opportunities to reduce the number of 
teachers would seem to be less than 
those at the higher levels, where the 
students are there voluntarily because 
they are looking for something, can 
understand the logic behind the need 
for care of the precious machine and 
generally can be trusted to act in a 
responsible manner. 
Loci at the cost aspects 
of the new techniques, we find one 
which stands out because of its cheap- 
ness. Many people associate program- 
med learning with a machine which 
controls the presentation of the 
sequential learning material. It is the 
control which matters, not the machine, 
and programmed material has been 
presented in simple book form with 
considerable success (1). 
The student is simply expected to 
cover up the answers to the material 
in the successive boxes and to move 
from box to box in accordance with 
instructions instead of using an ex- 
pensive machine to do the same thing 
for him. Essentially it is a matter of 
his behaving in a responsible manner, 
and if he can be made to see that it 
is to his advantage to do so rather 
than to “cheat”, then the purpose is 
achieved. 
Preparation of such programmes 
needs skill and care, and although 
(1) As in the Unesco-United Nations De- 
velopment Programme project at the Institut 
Pédagogique National de [Enseignement 
Technique (PNET) at Beirut, Lebanon. 
programmed material presented in such 
form may cost rather more than the 
conventional text-book, it will cost 
much less than complicated machines, 
and it does mean in particular that the 
learning of routine factual! knowledge, 
which many students now receive by 
the conventional teacher-student con- 
tact, can be undertaken without the 
presence of the teacher, if the students 
can be trusted to follow the rules. 
All this being said, there is one 
important question to be answered. 
To what extent is the personal in- 
fluence of the teacher on the taught 
an essential part of the educational 
process? 
There are those who argue that no 
mechanized form of instruction can 
do the job better than a good teacher. 
They maintain that the back-and-forth 
interaction between teacher and taught 
is essential for ensuring that the know- 
ledge which is being passed on is 
correctly understood and for the 
student to be able to use that know- 
ledge in an intelligent and constructive 
manner. It is considered that a ma- 
chine cannot replace a good teacher 
as the trainer of an imaginative, adapt- 
able human being; it might help him 
to do so, but can never take his place. 
There is also another aspect to the 
question of the human influence, less 
precise, less positively organized, but 
in many philosophies of education as 
important as the passing on of know- 
ledge and the ability to use it, if not 
more so—the moral training of the 
student, the formation of his character. 
Long ago, before our present cons- 
ciously organized style of education 
existed, these personal influences were 
automatically the responsibility of the 
family and the community. To a great 
extent they still are, but in some 
countries they are now recognized as 
partly the responsibility of the school. 
in fact, when a child finds himself in 
social contact with his fellow children 
and adults in a school situation, such 
influences happen of their own accord, 
planned or otherwise, and, moreover, 
they may not always be good in- 
fluences. 
In which case, must it not be assum- 
ed that the school must inevitably 
undertake part of this process? There 
are cases where there is a distinct 
(Continued from page 23) 
necessity for a modern state to orga- 
nize corrective human influences on 
children who come from disturbed 
homes, and in fact the school is often 
positively setting out to create an 
atmosphere for that very purpose. 
It can be argued that such compen- 
satory services should be provided 
outside the school, but this is only 
dodging the issue. In the full sense 
of the word “education”, this is an 
educational activity and if social 
workers are paid to undertake this task 
the money and the manpower are in 
fact devoted to an educational acti- 
vity, whatever the institutional orga- 
nization which is used for the purpose. 
. the human influence then 
essential to the educational process, 
whether for the purpose of passing on 
knowledge and skills, for the purpose 
of supervising, checking, guiding 
students’ work, or for the purpose of 
exercising moral guidance on them? 
Again it must be said that this may 
vary with students at different levels. 
There must obviously be a difference 
in attitude in this respect when one is 
dealing with a primary school child as 
against a student who is legally recog- 
nized as an adult and has a vote and 
the legal right to own property and 
marry without parental consent. 
When it comes to the point, if a socie- 
ty decides that such human influences 
are an essential part of the organized 
educational process, then whatever 
techniques, whatever machines, are 
used in that process, a degree of 
labour intensivity in education must 
be considered as inevitable because 
of the nature of the activity to be 
performed. 
Moreover, if this important service 
is to be undertaken by suitable, train- 
ed professionals, society must be 
prepared to pay them a remuneration 
which they accept as compatible with 
their status. With some twenty to 
twenty-five per cent of the population 
as students in schools and universities 
the six to seven per cent limit to 
the proportion of Gross National Pro- 
duct to be allocated to education would 
then almost inevitably have to be 
raised. |

## [Page 33](056740engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
WHO HAS "OPTED OUT"? 
Sir, 
In your interesting number, Youth 
Today (April 1969), the article “Crisis 
in Modern Society” begins: “Many 
young people have dropped out. of 
society..." As a secondary school tea- 
cher in daily contact with young people, 
{ disagree. Isn't it rather adults who 
have “opted out" of their responsibili- 
ties and left young people to get on 
with things as best they can? Isn't 
youth's "yearning for emancipation” due 
to their having to take on the respon- 
sibilities that their parents have evaded? 
And hasn't the child or teen-ager with 
a real home, and not just enough clo- 
thes, a place to live and a school to go 
to, become the exception? The influence 
of school, however great, can never 
replace family life. 
|] know a 13-year old boy who spends 
all his weekends alone at home because 
his parents have a full programme of 
outside social engagements, and also a 
girl of 16 who had to live alone for 
_ three months while her parents were 
touring Europe. And there are two 
boys, aged 13 and 15, in my class who 
always bring the house key to school 
because their parents are out more 
often than not. Other young children 
have to wait for hours in the caretaker's 
flat at their apartment building, while 
their mothers are at the cinema or 
elsewhere. And there are plenty of 
parents who can't even be bothered to 
come to school when their children 
receive prizes for their work. 
Frederica Mueller de Hauser 
Ramos Mejia 
Argentina 
MOTHER OF RUSSIAN CITIES’ 
 
Sir, 
As one interested in the problems of 
preserving historic and cultural monu- 
ments, may |! suggest that you publish 
some articles on the architecture of 
Kiev, often called “The Mother of Rus- 
sian Cities.” 
There are cities in the world whose 
names are synonymous with great peri- 
ods in the history of art. Athens, for 
instance, represents the art of Antiquity. 
Constantinople (Istanbul) symbolizes 
Byzantine art, to name but two. Kiev, 
in which Kiev Rus art flourished during 
the 12th and 13th centuries is another 
such city. Its majestic buildings, among 
them the Cathedral of St. Sophia, the 
first in Russia to be decorated with su- 
perlative ensembles of mosaics and fres- 
coes, are world renowned. The history 
of Kiev itself is no less interesting. 
l. Vasilieva 
Kiev, U.S.S.R. 
PERIPATETIC ‘COURIER’ 
 
Sir, 
You may be interested to know that 
after my employer has finished with the 
"Unesco Courier” each month, | read it 
through from cover to cover—and have 
done so for years. After | am through 
with it (and my husband has read it) it 
goes to my father in England, then to 
Letters to the Editor  
each of his neighbours. From there it 
reaches my brother, after which it is 
passed to his daughter who is a nurse 
in London. After that | lose track of It! 
But you can see that it is well circu- 
lated—and deservedly so. 
Betty Johnson 
New York, U.S.A. 
PUZZLING MASTERPIECE 
 
Sir, 
The “puzzling masterpiece” pictured 
in Treasures of World Art {October 
1969) might have been the stile of a 
sun-dial. The animal is probably Capri- 
cornis. 
CM. Leiton 
Dunoon, Scotland 
Sir, 
Although superficially resembling Walt 
Disney's “Bambi,” perhaps the creature 
which inspired the creator of the "puzz- 
ling masterpiece” was in fact a member 
of the class “Cephalopoda,” a Decapod 
—a relative of the cuttlefish or squid. 
The size is about right, and when looked 
at upside down the resemblence is even 
more striking. 
Paul S. Robson 
Newcastle upon Tyne, England 
PROBLEMS OF THE 
WORKING WOMAN 
 
Sir, 
| enjoyed the July 1969 number of the 
*Unesco Courier” very much. The 
theme "Man and Employment” concerns 
us all and | am pleased that you have 
tackled this rather delicate question. 
The article by Pierrette Sartin, “Real 
and Pseudo Problems of the Working 
Woman,” did not come up to the stan- 
dard of the other contributions. The 
article renders a doubtful service to 
the question of women at work, just 
because it is so polemic. She reproa- 
ches men for being afraid of the work- 
ing woman, and says that men oppose 
professional careers for women only to 
save their own skins. In short, she 
lays the blame on man, who wants to 
play the master of the world, while the 
poor, innocent woman, on the contrary, 
pines away under spiritual oppression. 
In reality, the situation looks a little 
different, and | am pleased that this 
article was accompanied by a picture 
of a brightly smiling woman sea-captain, 
from which | can perhaps infer that you 
yourselves are not quite in agreement 
with the militant Pierrette Sartin. 
For your amusement and for that of 
your readers, | should like finally to add 
a joke which throws some light on the 
relative points of view of employers and 
employees. The director of a factory 
stands with his assistant at the window 
at the end of working hours and says 
to him: "Just look what work does to 
people! In the morning they all come 
to work sulky, and in the evening they 
leave beaming and happy.” 
H. Haberli, 
Berne, Switzerland 
Editor's note: Our reader infers incor- 
rectly. We agree entirely with Ma- 
dame Perrette Sartin. 
DISCOVERY ' OF AFRICA 
 
Sir, 
I found the article by Francine 
N'Diaye, “The Art of African Pulleys” 
(May 1969) particularly enjoyable. The 
many illustrations, especially those in 
colour, were most impressive. Africa 
South of the Sahara, until now a closed 
book in most respects, truly seems to 
be revealing itself to the modern world 
at last. A recent and striking example 
was the First Pan-African Cultural Fes- 
tival which took place in Algiers in 
July 1969. Practically all the African 
nations took part and were able to 
promote a better understanding of their 
traditional and modern music, their 
theatre, cinema and art. 
Farid Younsi 
Algiers, Algeria 
YOUNG PEOPLE AND UNESCO 
Sir, 
| first started reading the “Unesco 
Courier” ten years ago when | was a 
student, and 1 am still grateful to the 
teacher who introduced me to it. | am 
now a lecturer in Social Education at 
St. Michael's College of Education. 
Malta, and my aim is to get as many 
students as possible Interested In Unes- 
co and its work, 
Philip Torteli 
St. Julian's, Malta 
ERASMUS 
  
Sir, 
With reference to the interesting 
article on Erasmus by Jean-Claude Mar- 
golin (November 1969), 1 would like to 
correct two points. The photo caption 
relating to the statue of Erasmus (page 
5), states that it stands in the Great 
Market Square of the new Rotterdam 
which arose from the ruins of the 
Second World War. The statue did, In 
fact, stand in the Great Market Square 
when the city was bombed in May 1940, 
but it has since been removed to its 
present site in Bulgersteyn Court, in 
front of the house where Erasmus was 
born (as your photo shows). The article 
itself describes Erasmus’ mother as the 
daughter of a physician from Zeven- 
becque. This should have read Zeven- 
bergen. 
W.C.). Claveaux 
Maarn, Netherlands 
OPERATION “RESCUE 
 
Sir, 
In recent years, children In Spain's 
primary and secondary schools have 
been forming working groups with the 
aim of rescuing forgottten or unknown 
monuments and works of art. Under 
Mision Rescata (Operation “Rescue”) as 
the movement is called, children work 
under guidance from a teacher, and 
operations are supervised from a centre 
in Madrid. Apart from countless minor 
works of art, the movement has already 
unearthed a hitherto-unknown E! Greco 
and a Visigoth necropolis. | think this 
example could inspire children in other 
countries. 
America de Furundarena 
Alicante, Spain   33

## [Page 34](056740engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
DESED (ETSI 
World illiteracy and 
the population explosion 
The rise in world population is out- 
stripping literacy drives. The number’ of 
illiterates in the world has risen by about 
60 million in the past decade and could 
total over 800,000,000 this year. These 
are some of the findings of a special 
Unesco report on world illiteracy based 
on information from 92 countries, which 
is to appear shortly as a book. In some 
countries, population is increasing so fast 
that literacy campaigns can only slow 
down the rate at which illiterates increase. 
And between 1960 and 1980, it has been 
calculated, the population of Asia will 
increase by 60 per cent and that of Africa 
by 65 per cent. 
Trade union supports IEY 
The United Automobile Workers, one of 
the largest U.S. trade unions, has pledged 
its support for International Education Year 
through collaboration with Unesco. Pro- 
posals under consideration by the union's 
International Affairs Department include: a 
world conference Jointly sponsored with 
Unesco on means of orienting education to 
each person's life experience (one 1EY goal 
is promotion of the concept of lifelong 
integrated education), and support for the 
Unesco programme to use communications 
satellites to beam educational programmes 
directly to battery operated television sets 
in developing countries. 
British scientist awarded 
1969 Kalinga Prize 
The 1969 Kalinga Prize for the Popula- 
rization of Science, awarded annually by 
an international jury chosen by Unesco, 
goes to Sir Gavin de Beer of the United 
Kingdom. Sir Gavin is well known as a 
scientist for his research in zoology and 
biology, and as a popularizer of scientific 
subjects. His books have ranged over 
scientific, historical, literary and philosoph- 
ic questions. From 1950 to 1960 he was 
director of the British Museum of Natural 
History, London. 
To combat discrimination 
in education 
Unesco is to set up a Conciliation and 
Good Offices Commission to deal with any 
disputes that may arise between countries 
adhering to the Unesco-sponsored Conven- 
tion Against Discrimination in Education. 
The Convention, now ratified by 52 coun- 
tries, has been in force since 1962. It 
seeks to promote equal educational oppor- 
tunities and treatment for all. The Conci- 
liation and Good Offices Commission is 
the second of its kind to be set up within 
U.N. system for the promotion of human 
rights. The first was created by ILO to 
resolve conflicts over the freedom of trade 
unions. 
Taking the pulse 
of the North Atlantic 
The largest array of research buoys ever 
to be moored in the ocean will be set out 
in February 1970 by Soviet oceanographers. 
Seventeen buoys equipped to measure 
oceanic currents at depths of from 10 to 
3,000 metres will be placed in the North 
Atlantic near the Canary lslands for a 
period of six months. Their observations 
will help to solve problems concerning the 
variability of North Atlantic currents, and 
the influence these have on the weather. 
When tested on a smaller scale in the 
Arabian sea two years ago, the Soviet 
system showed that even the chemical pro- 
perties of the ocean, including its corrosive 
effects, vary from place to place. 
‘Unesco-Asia’ 
A new bilingual (English-French) quart- 
erly, “Unesco-Asia”, has begun publication 
in Tokyo (Japan). Published by the 
Japanese National Commission for Unesco, 
it reports on activities of Unesco National 
Commissions in Asia and presents articles 
of special interest to Asian readers. 
Further details are available from: General 
Affairs Division, Japanese National Com- 
mission for Unesco, 2-2, Kasunigaseki 3- 
chrome, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo. 
Postgraduate courses 
at French nuclear centre 
An international postgraduate training 
course organized by the French Commis- 
sariat of Atomic Energy in collaboration 
with Unesco and the French National 
Commission for Unesco will be held at the 
National Institute of Science and Nuclear 
Technology, Saclay, France, from October 
1970 to July 1971. It will offer a choice 
of four courses: Special Metallurgy, Higher 
Electronics, Analytical Chemistry and Radio- 
  
series. 
  
POSTAGE-STAMP ART 
Two details of a third-century mosaic presented 
to the U.N. by Tunisia in 1961 appear on 6 and 
13 cent stamps issued recently by the U.N. Postal 
Administration in its “Art at the United Nations” 
The complete mosaic, showing the Four 
Seasons and the Genius of the Year, has been 
seen by millions of visitors to U.N. Headquarters in New York. As agent in France 
for the U.N. Postal Administration, Unesco’s Philatelic Service stocks all U.N. 
stamps and first day covers currently on sale. 
Philatelic Service, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris Te 
For details write to the Unesco   
  
[ 
BOOKSHELF 
  
~ MENTOR-UNESCO ART BOOKS 
: FONTANA-UNESCO ART BOOKS 
BW Greek Sculpture 
Introduction by Francois Chamoux 
: BW Oceanic Art (The Sepik Area of 
New Guinea) 
Introduction by Jean Guiart 
BM Van Dyck 
Introduction by David Piper 
HB Gauguin 
Introduction by John Russell 
Hl Matisse and the Nude 
Introduction by Alan Powness 
HB Calder, Mobiles and Stabiles 
Introduction by Giovanni Carandente 
Mentor-Unesco Art Books are pub- 
lished by the New American Library, 
New York and Toronto, by arrange- 
ment with Unesco, 1968 ($1.25) 
: Van Dyck, Gauguin, Matisse and 
Calder are available in hard cover 
editions ($2.25) 
Fontana Unesco Art Books are 
published by Collins, London, In 
association with Unesco, 1968 (6/-) 
* 
HM Science Year 
The World Book Science 
Annual 1869 
Field Enterprises Educationai 
Corporation, Chicago, London, Rome, 
Sydney, Toronto, 1969 
BH Language, an Introductory Reader 
By J. Burl Hogins and 
Robert E. Yarber 
Harper and Row, New York, 
Evanston and London, 1969 (34.95) 
EB Science in India 
By A.K. Biswas 
Firma KL. Mukhopadhyay, Calcutta, 
1969 (Rs. 16.00) 
HB The Bog People: 
Iron-Age Man Preserved 
By P.V. Glob 
Translated by RL.S. Bruce-Mitiurd     Faber and Faber, London, 1969 (50/-) 
L ad 
biology. Candidates’ applications should 
reach the Institut National des Sciences et 
Techniques Nucléaires at Boite Postale 
No 6, 91 - Gif-sur-Yvette, France, before 
April 15, 1970. 
Flashes... 
  
BW A strategy for agricultural development 
to meet the needs of an additional 1,000 
million people expected in the developing 
countries by 1985 is proposed in a four- 
year study completed by FAO. 
BM By 1973 the Republic of Korea will 
dispense with the Chinese characters used 
alongside the Korean "Hangul” alphabet, 
which was introduced in 1446. 
HB Four high schools in Nepal have joined 
the Unesco Associated Schools Project in 
Education for International Understanding, 
which now has 666 member schools in 
58 countries. 
BW The World Food Programme is to supply 
food worth $304,000 to youth training camps 
in Trinidad and Tobago during the next 
five years. Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S,
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
— 
Dé
pd
t 
lé
ga
l.
 
4°
 
tn
me
st
re
 
19
69
 
-C
 
1

## [Page 35](056740engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Just published by Unesco... 
NEW TRENDS IN BIOLOGY TEACHING 
Volume Il, 368 pages, $5.00, 30/-, 20 F. 
NEW TRENDS IN CHEMISTRY TEACHING 
Volume [l, 407 pages, $7.00, 42/-, 28 F. 
New trends Tendances nouvelles 
in chemistry 
teaching 
de l'enseignement 
de la chimie 
Volume 11 
...in the series 
THE TEACHING OF THE BASIC SCIENCES 
An international exchange of information on up-to-date approaches, 
content, curricula and techniques in the teaching of the basic 
sciences., Includes papers presented at congresses and seminars, 
original articles and reprints from professional journals. 
@ | The series includes: 
All volumes composite: English-French 
H NEW TRENDS IN BIOLOGY TEACHING 
Vol. 1 (1966) 2nd imp. 1968, 298 pages, $4.50, 27/-, 16 F. 
NH NEW TRENDS IN CHEMISTRY TEACHING 
Vol. 1 (1964-1965) 2nd imp. 1968, 359 pages, $7.00, 35/-, 24 F. 
HN NEW TRENDS IN PHYSICS TEACHING 
Vol. 1 (1965-1966) 2nd imp. 1968, 271 pages, $6.50, 39/-, 23 F. 
HB NEW TRENDS IN MATHEMATICS TEACHING 
Vol. 1 (1966) 2nd imp. 1968, 438 pages, $6.00, 36/-, 21 F. 
Where to renew your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Publications : Educational Supplies Pty Ltd, P.O. 
Box 33, Brookvale, 2100 NSW ; Periodicals : 
Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brook- 
vale 2100 N SW. Sub-agent : United Nations As- 
sociation of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th 
Floor, Askew Housz, 364 Lonsdale St.,, Melbourne 
(Victoria), 3000. ($ 2.75). — AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg 
Fromme & C°,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (AS 82) — 
BELGIUM. All publications: Editions “Labor”, 342, rue 
Royale, Brussels, 3. Presses Universitaires de Bruxelles, 
42, av. Paul Héger, Brussels 5. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgielei 147, Antwerp, |. For 
the Unesco Courier (170 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only: 
Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du Tr8ne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — BURMA, Trade Corporation N* (9), 550- 
552 Merchant Street, Rangoon, — CANADA. Queen's 
Printer, Ottawa, Ont. ($ 4.00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata,P.0.B. 244, 
Colombo, 2. (Rs 12.50) — CHINA. World Book Co. 
Ltd.,, 99 Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS, “MAM”, Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia, — 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L,, Spalena 51, Prague 1 
(permanent display); Zahranicni literatura 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1, — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard, L1td., 
6, Norregade, 1165, Copenhagen K. (Dan. Kr. 19.00). 
— ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco P.O. 
Box 2996, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 11.90). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48. (12 F). — GERMANY, All 
publications: R. Cldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145,8 Munich,80. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 12). — GHANA. Methodist Book Depot 
Ltd., Atlantic House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co.. 13-15 Lock Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akadémiai Kdényvesbole, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; AK.V. Konyvtirosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest VI, — ICELAND. 
Snaeb)drn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
— INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard. 
Estate, Bombay 1: 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 
36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 3/5 Asaf Ali Road, New 
Delhi 1; Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New Del- 
hi: Indian National Commission for Unesco, att. The Libra- 
rian, Ministry of Education, '* C" Wing, Room N° 214, 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi 1. (Rs. 13.50), — INDONE- 
SIA. Indira P, T,, Djl. Dr, Sam Ratulangie 37, Djakarca, 
— IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1/154 
Avenue Roosevelt, B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. McKen- 
zie's Bookshop, Al- Rashid Street, Baghdad; University 
Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. 
— IRELAND. The National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Balls- 
bridge, Dublin, 4. — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly 
Blumstein's Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-AvivIL, 12.50. — JAMAICA. Sang- 
ster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O.Box 366, 101 Water Lane, 
Kingston. — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., P.O, Box 5050, 
Tokyo International 100-31. — JORDAN. Joseph |. Bahous 
& Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. 
— KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait 
Bookshop Co., Ltd,, P.O, Box 2942, Kuwait, — LIBERIA. 
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286. 
Monrovia. — LIBYA. Agency for Development of 
Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 261, Tripoli. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg (F.L. 170). —MALAYSIA. Federal! Publica- 
tions Sdn Bhd., Balai Berita, 31 Jalan Riong, Kuala Lum- 
pur.— MALTA, Sapienza's Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta. 
— MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port Louis, — MONACO. British Library, 30, 
Bld. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V, Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 10). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. {Ned Ant.) N.V.,, Willemstad, Cura- 
¢ao. NLA. (NA fl 5.25). — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: Rutland 
Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130 Oxford Terrace, 
P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857 
Hamilton; Princes Street, P. O. Box 1104, Dunedin; Mul- 
grave Street, Private Bag, Wellington. (§$ 2.15) — NOR- 
WAY. All publications : A.S. Bokhjornet, Akersgt 41-Oslo 
1. For Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Litteratur- 
jeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6 (K.2.75). — PAKISTAN. The 
West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco Publication House, 
P.O.Box 374 G.P.O.,Lahore; Showrooms: UrduBazar, La- 
hore, and 57-58 Murree Highway, G/6- 1, Islamabad. Pakis- 
tan Publications Bookshop, Sarwar Road,Rawalpindi ; Pari- 
bagh, Dacca.— PHILIPPINES. The Modern Book Co., 928. 
Rizal Avenue P.O. Box 632, Manila.— POLAND. All publi- 
cations: ORWN PAN Palac Kultury, i Nauki, War saw 
For the Unesco Courier only : RUCH, ul. Wronia, 23, 
Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL, Dias & Andrade Lda,Livraria 
Portugal, rua de Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO. 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115. 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — SINGAPORE. Federal Pu- 
bhications Sdn Bhd., Times House, River Valley Road, Sin- 
gapore 9. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook Sales 
(PVT) Led, 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. — SUDAN. 
Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — 
SWEDEN. Alt publications : A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. 
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Box 16356, 103 27 Stock- 
holm 16. For the Unesco Courier : Svenska FN. 
Forbundet, Vasagatan 15-IV 101 23 Stockholm 1 
Postgiro 18 46 92 (Kr. 18) — SWITZERLAND, 
All publications: Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, 
Zurich, Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, 
Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only : Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
12-4811. (Fr. S. 12), — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok, 
(37.50 baht). = TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. —SOUTH AFRICA, 
All publications: Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty). Ltd., 
Libri Building, Church Street, P.O, Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg, 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr El Ni, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Sub/agent: 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.l., and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham and Bristol. (20/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, P.O. Box 433, New York, 
N.Y. 10016 ($ 5). — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA, Jugosiovenska 
Knjiga,Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zaluzba Slovenije, 
Mestni Trg. 26, Ljubljana.

## [Page 36](056740engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

          
  
| 
‘ 
. 
- 
- 
DESIGN Nar 
BY VASARELY nN a
FOR INTERNATIONAL NN—— =| 
EDUCATION YEAR —_— 1 
— > 1 
EE Lg nh 
universal man illuminated by knowledge originating from a point in the centre of the forehead. 
Photo Unesco 
 
 
  
  
  
  