# [083091](083091engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](083091engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
1789 
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
IN THIS ISSUE: 
AN EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW WITH 
Mr. FRANCOIS 
MITTERRAND 
PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC 
op 
ll antl

## [Page 2](083091engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
Today there are no more 
unexplored continents, unknown 
seas or mysterious islands. But 
while we can overcome the 
physical barriers to exploration, the 
barriers of mutual ignorance 
between different peoples and ~~ | ————— 
~~ Amodern Ulyss s can voyage 
to te nds of te earth. But 2 
diferent kind of Odyssey now 
beckons—an exploration of the 
the ways of lfe of is different 
peoples and ther outlook on the 
NY world in which the re. 
Iti such an Odyssey that the 
Unesco Courier now proposes to 
you, its readers. Each month 
contributors of different 
nationalities will provide from 
different cultural and professional 
ooints an authoritative. 
treatment of a theme of universal 
interest. The compass guiding this ) 
journey through the world's 
Le 1 S— 
BY 
| 
| 
| 
| 
for the dignity of people . 
everywhere. x JOINING 
RATAN | | 
new-look Unesco Courier is the 
| 
   
  
  
      
 
     
      
   
hy worldwide impact of the ide of ON | 
ane TB 
nevantaiaigiorest |[Y AGE ime, the Present of the 
mee (El 
women. 10 
Several l | wametauirie CHART 
Weshal welcome alyour ~~~ ITS : 
—_— Clr 
  
  

## [Page 3](083091engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
4 | 
Interview with 
Me. FRANCOIS MITTERRAND 
President of the French Republic 
BRE SEL 4, PE TT 
  
Cover: Earth, Sun, Moon 89, 
a watercolour by the French painter 
Georges Servat (1989) 
  
11 
 
1789: AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED THE WORLD 
THE REPUBLIC'S CITIZENS OF HONOUR 
by Ebsan Naragh 12 
TOM PAINE: THE ANTIMONARCHIST 
WHO TRIED TO SAVE A KING 
by Jean Lessay 18 
IN THE ANTILLES, 
‘LIBERTY FOR ALL 
by Yves Benot 19 
THE EAGLE AND THE SPHINX: 
BONAPARTE IN EGYPT 
by Mahmoud Hussein 24 
SIEYES, HERDER, GOETHE: UNIVERSALITY 
AND NATIONAL IDENTITY 
by Alain Finkielkrant 30 
THE REPUBLICAN DREAM 
by Simdn Bolivar 34 
POETRY, FREEDOM AND REVOLUTION 
by Serger S. Averintsev 36 
CHOMIN: THE ROUSSEAU OF THE EAST 
by Shin’ya Ida 40 
CHINA: RETHINKING THE REVOLUTION 
by Zhilian Zhang 44 
THE SPIRIT OF '89 
by Tabar Ben Jelloun 48 
GLOSSARY 58 
  
)(0 
FRANCOIS FURET: 
An idea 
and its destiny 
 

## [Page 4](083091engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  INTERVIEW 


### 83062: An Exclusive interview with the President of the French Republic, François Mitterrand

An exclusive interview with 
the President of the French Republic 
  
Francois Mitterrand 
   
  
ne ai 
Before the institutional upheavals of 1789, France (along 
with the rest of Europe and North America) experienced 
an immense ferment of ideas, an intellectual, ethical, ju- 
ridical and aesthetic revolution which paved the way for 
political change. Was this not a moment when secular cul- 
ture came to play a crucially important role as the driving 
force of history? Would it not be correct to say that culture 
plays a role which is just as important, if not more so, than 
economics as a source of dynamism (or inertia) in the evo- 
lution of humanity? 
Y.. are right to point out that the French Revolution 
did not take place in a void. It was the prolongation, in po- 
litical terms, of profound changes in ways of thinking, feel- 
ing and acting. 
Throughout the eighteenth century there was all over 
Europe a vast ferment of men and ideas—think of the trav- 
els and debates of the philosophers, scholars and artists of 
that time—which slowly changed the way in which society 
regarded itself. | 
The social and political order was no longer perceived 
as an immutable effect of divine will but as a balance which 
was both relative (the discovery of the “new world”, and 
other voyages had revealed the existence of other societies 
organized differently) and perfectible (as the victory of the 
American rebels had shown). 
For many people there emerged a new line of demarca- 
tion between the religious—a matter of personal conviction, 
the field of freedom of conscience—and the secular, of which 
government was to be an emanation. 
This emergence of a secular culture to which you refer 
was not in itself hostile to religion—one of the great figures 
of the Revolution was the Abbe Grégoire, a priest faithful 
to his religion and his ministry, and a republican—but the 
affirmation of man’s rights and responsibilities on earth. 
The evolution of the sciences played a part in this 
process. The progress of observation and experimentation 
made the world—from the secrets of nature to human 
relations—increasingly accessible to understanding, to ration- 
al analysis. Was this not the moment to think of rebuilding 
in a different way, with more reason, more justice and more 
liberty? 
The German philosopher Fichte, who regarded the 
Revolution sympathetically, saw in it a proof of the superi- 
ority of man over the beaver, which always rebuilds in an 
identical fashion, or over the bee, which invariably arranges 
the cells of its hive in the same way. 
The new ideas which were spreading at that time, 
transmitted in the salons, gazettes, and cafés, thus had a 
decisive influence. They not only provided the weapons of 
criticism but, in a society blocked by hereditary privilege 
and absolutism, in a sense legitimized the transition to 
action. 
Not that there was a ready-made theory of revolution 
waiting to be applied when the moment came. A great deal 
of improvisation went on under the pressure of events. 
But people did have a kind of compass of which the 
Rights of Man were the armature. 
However, during the same period, other movements 
were defeated, although the aspirations of the revolution- 
aries of Geneva, Batavia or Brabant, of the Italian Jacobins 
and the Hungarian patriots, the republicans of Mainz, the 
Irish rebels or the Polish resistance were not much differ- 
ent from those of the French. 
For history is not made by ideas alone. There must be 
a conjunction of economic, social and political conditions 
favourable to change. And there must always be the 
determination—individua! and collective—of men. 
In the last analysis, they alone are the driving force of 
history.

## [Page 5](083091engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 83062: An Exclusive interview with the President of the French Republic, François Mitterrand

 

## [Page 6](083091engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83062: An Exclusive interview with the President of the French Republic, François Mitterrand

    
PH self renunciation nor self- absorption 
There is a growing tendency to “localize” or “nationalize” 
culture in the sense that people speak, for example, of 
French, German, Chinese or Egyptian culture. Is there not 
a twofold danger here of encouraging compartmentaliza- 
tion between cultures and of centring each culture on it- 
self, of inciting it to turn towards the past rather than the 
future? Of course there are many cultural homelands, each 
linked to a specific language and history and each bearing 
a specific combination of creative resources. Some are more 
dynamic and aggressive than others and they must all have 
the opportunity to express themselves fully and freely. What 
can be done to protect them in such a way that they are 
not stifled? 
I would not be inclined to agree with you that there is a 
general tendency for culture to be increasingly confined 
within local or national frontiers. 
First of all because the entire history of humanity is one, 
often violent, sometimes peaceful, of growing contact be- 
tween human cultures. 
In our age, the media build many bridges, multiply in- 
fluences tenfold and make time contract. 
The question is whether this will lead to an enrichment 
of our different cultures and a more fertile dialogue between 
them. Or to new dissensions, new inequalities, between those 
who will master the world media and the rest, between those 
who will have access to the perpetually changing field of 
knowledge and the rest. 
This is a paradox of modern times; we know that the 
wealth of the world lies in the diversity of its cultures, in 
the variety of sensibilities and forms of expertise; we pos- 
sess fantastic means for improving mutual understanding and 
communication. But if we are not careful, these instruments 
of co-operation will become instruments of domination. And 
under the economic or political impulsion of the most ag- 
gressive cultures, a pernicious uniformization may come to 
prevail. 
So what is the answer? Neither self-renunciation nor self: 
absorption. 
Next, we must be thoroughly convinced of the impor- 
tance of what is at stake: there will be no lasting economic 
development, no social progress, no solid democracy, no 
world peace without the flowering of cultures which are 
sure of themselves and capable of mutual enrichment. 
Lastly, we must search for forms of cultural solidarity 
which respect the identity of everyone, co-operate without 
arrogance or excessive humility in the priority areas of edu- 
cation, science, and culture, the keys to a freely chosen 
destiny. 
It is in this sense that France is working, with others, 
for a Europe with a living culture, for the strengthening of 
links within the French-speaking community, and for recog- 
nition of the cultural dimension of development aid. 
On a vaster scale, this 1s Unesco’s raison d’étre and the 
ambition of the decade of cultural development launched 
in 1988. For today even more than in 1945, the following 
three objectives are indissociable: we must educate, seek and 
create together. 
Finally 1 would say that I do not believe in the 
past/present dilemma, but rather in the force of societies 
which know how to use their past to project themselves into 
the future. 
The project to rebuild, under Unesco auspices, a vast 
new library at Alexandria is one example of what I have 
in mind; to create modern conditions for access to 
knowledge on that Mediterranean shore is simultaneously 
to renew links with a prestigious past and to prepare the 
future, 
Is there an area where all these cultural homelands are in 
contact, an area of universal values? Could one go so far 
as to say that before the Enlightenment such an area was 
without intellectual landmarks, that it was latent in great 
works of art and literature produced in many countries— 
but that after 1789 it found philosophical expression in the 
concept of a universal man, cut loose from all ethnic, con- 
fessional and social moorings? 
I am tempted to reply with an anecdote. In 1827, Goethe 
was delighted to discover in a Chinese novel themes close 
to those he had used in his epic Hermann und Dorothea. He 
noted enthusiastically that there are places—in this case 
books—where humanity can overcome its divisions. And 
as a consequence he defined a programme in the form of 
a concept, Weltlitteratur [world literature], capable of tran- 
scending historic frontiers and cultural particularisms. That 
was his answer to your question about a possible area of 
universal values. 
The revolutionaries of 1789 felt no doubt on this score: 
their message was addressed to the whole planet, the rights

## [Page 7](083091engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 83062: An Exclusive interview with the President of the French Republic, François Mitterrand

  
of man and the citizen were proclaimed as universal. This 
was said with a force that still rings in our ears, and the es- 
sential thing was, for the first time, to say it in this way. 
We know that in practice things turned out somewhat 
differently. That liberty, armed for war, ended by assurn- 
ing in Europe the form and customs of conquest, as Jaures 
said. That equality for women, blacks, and the poor, was 
something less than true equality. 
But if the French Revolution was not always faithful 
to its principles, it was an ideal in whose name people would 
fight in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, in a con- 
text in which national and social questions came to assume 
greater and greater importance. Many peoples of Europe and 
Latin America, Asia and Africa, would make it their watch- 
word against the domineering pretensions of the West. 
And when in 1948, after a devastating world war, the 
need arose to reaffirm human rights, it was again the decla- 
ration of 1789 which inspired the universal declaration set 
forth at the UN. Later the universal declaration was com- 
pleted by the declaration of economic and social rights which 
had been called for in over a century of workers’ struggles. 
This was not aimed at the universal man cut loose from his 
social moorings of whom you speak; on the contrary it was 
concerned with people in specific situations, at work and 
in society. 
To return to your question, I think a distinction should 
be made between acts which bear political fruit—1789, the 
Declaration of the Rights of Man—and the complex course 
which, especially in the history of ideas, leads to them. 
First of all, the radical change of outlook which made 
the Revolution possible was a slow gestation which origi- 
nated long before the eighteenth century, in the humanism 
of the Renaissance, in the coming of the spirit of compari- 
son which shook the authority of religious revelation, in 
Galilean physics which heralded the Encyclopaedists, in the 
Wars of Religion which gave rise to the right of tolerance, 
in Montesquieu and La Bruyére who asserted the relativism 
of beliefs and customs. 
Secondly, throughout the eighteenth century different 
"sensibilities coexisted, some more universalist, others more 
relativist, than others, the echoes of which are found in 
modern critical debates on the idea of ethnocentrism, which 
claims to erect into dominant universal values the specific 
contents of a culture, and on the limits of the right to be 
different. 
educate, seek and create together 
In other words, it is not so easy to define the philosophi- 
cal area you describe. The recognition of new forms of 
determinism—economic, social and psychological—has al- 
ways raised the question of what is universal in man. 
But, more specifically, is it possible to act if all values 
are relative (to a place, a time, a given culture) and thereby 
cancel each other out? If racism is only one idez among 
others, and apartheid is the problem of South Africans alone? 
Can one do anything but postulate a minimum of univer- 
sal values in order to pass any kind of judgement outside 
one’s own immediate sphere and provide a basis for human 
solidarity? : 
Liberty, equality and fraternity are values which have 
stood up well to the wear and tear of time and have become 
sufficiently well acclimatized in all latitudes that people have 
continued to defend them. As nothing is ever definitively 
achieved in this field, there is a long way to go from the 
real to the ideal. 
I will conclude with the wise definition given by Tzve- 
tan Todorov in his latest work: “the universal is the horizon 
of agreement between two particulars”. This dialogue, he 
adds, is perhaps inaccessible but it is the only worthwhile 
postulate. 
What about the relationship between politics and culture? 
Is it possible to expect from politicians, above all from world 
leaders, an aesthetic of community relations, of relations 
between man and nature, of essential forms of solidarity 
between all humanity? Can such an aesthetic draw inspi- 
ration from the ideal whereby each person should act as 
if the meaning of his or ber action could be erected into 
a universal principle? 
I seem to remember that Kant formulated his categorical 
imperative in similar terms in his Groundwork of the 
Metaphysic of Morals. He set forth three moral laws: act 
as if the maxim of your action were to be erected into a 
universal law of nature, act in such a way that you always 
treat humanity as an end and never as a means, act as if 
your maxim was to serve as a universal law for all reasona- 
ble beings. 
To my mind it would be entirely beneficial if political 
leaders drew inspiration from these rules of conduct laid 
down by a philosopher who followed the events of 1789 
very closely!

## [Page 8](083091engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 83062: An Exclusive interview with the President of the French Republic, François Mitterrand

Fickle and libertarian, such is the essence of creation. 
This only irritates those who fear liberty. 
An aesthetic of relationships in the community? 
It is not for statesmen to define what is beautiful. But 
they are responsible for encouraging all that forges a link 
between people and strengthens the feeling of a common 
destiny. Art also has a part to play since it makes use of 
dreams, that essential commodity. 
Here a striking vista which makes the city more con- 
genial to its users; there a new museum, revealing its treas- 
ures to all; elsewhere a restored monument reminding the 
nation of a moment in its history; somewhere else a modern 
public library, beautiful and useful. 
To provide amenities, to adorn, to make a significant 
statement—all this can be done together. 
So many cities throughout the world bear the stigma 
of degrading forms of urbanization which display an ugly 
contempt for people. Other choices are possible which ex- 
press a desire for a better community life for all and a rejec- 
tion of laissez-faire, of the haphazard effects of exclusively 
private interests, of thoughtless conformity. 
I would not claim that the link between man and na- 
ture 1s the same for everyone, for the inhabitant of Buenos 
Aires and the villager of Casamance, for the Parisian and 
the Baltic fisherman. Some grapple with earth or water day 
after day, others enjoy them as a form of recreation. 
And yet the risks of exhaustion of certain natural 
resources are of concern to us all; the irremediable destruc- 
tion of the atmosphere will spare no one; the community 
has to pay a price for rashly polluted seas. 
Human development has been based on mastery of na- 
ture. If we forget what we owe to nature and despoil it, then 
we may be heading for perdition. Those who work close 
to nature know that an illtreated piece of land does not yield 
its wealth for long. 
And the city-dweller knows that by creating a garden 
or a park among the stones, we do more than embellish the 
city, we assert the continuity of a civilization, we indicate 
that human genius is rooted in respect for certain balances. 
Ihave cited these examples to show that politicians, and 
all citizens, must be more attentive to the essential solidari- 
ties between people and between people and their environ- 
ment, to preserve the vital balances not only for their own 
societies but for the future of the world. 
Remember that when Unesco acted to save Borobudur, 
Venice or Mont Saint-Michel, it did so because that heritage 
is part of the memory of all mankind, the common heritage. 
What was valid for the past is even more valid for the future. 
In today’s world, no one will find salvation by going 
against others. The increasing interdependence of economies 
and cultures makes solidarity an obligation. 
Political institutions should encourage the flowering of cul- 
tures and the circulation of their products in the freest pos- 
sible conditions. But isn’t the creative artist always 
necessarily at odds with the politician, even when the lat- 
ter is full of good intentions towards the arts? Is it not true 
that the artist needs to explore pathways that are anti- 
institutional? 
Avie The freedom to create is to some extent the 
barometer of all liberties. A society which restricts this free- 
dom usually attaches little importance to its members. 
Where people are free neither in their movements nor in 
their words, the force of creation is weakened even if cou- 
rageous works appear, condemned to a restricted diffusion. 
In relation to art, the political authorities bear the 
responsibility you describe: they should create conditions 
propitious for creation and circulation. 
I would also add an educational dimension, a responsi- 
bility towards young people or publics which are relative- 
ly unfamiliar with creative works. For loving also comes 
through learning, 
And sometimes too there is an obligation to see that 
market forces do not reign entirely unchecked, to take, when 
necessary, protective measures simply to defend the freedom 
to create against over-encroaching cultures. The example of 
the audiovisual media, at a time when the number of chan- 
nels and satellites is rapidly increasing, shows that it is im- 
possible to pay too much attention to this. 
The abuse of power begins with interference in content. 
History has too many regrettable examples of attempts to 
promote an official art exalting the “positive” virtues of a 
given regime. 
One important feature of the Enlightenment was the 
holding of a public debate on aesthetics. Many viewpoints 
were expressed and some of them make us smile today—as 
when Diderot recommended historical portraits as a par- 
ticularly revolutionary art form since they drew the atten- 
tion of the public to the great defenders of its rights... But 
fortunately no narrowly utilitarian conception of art 
prevailed. 
Fickle and libertarian, such is the essence of creation. 
This only irritates those who fear liberty.

## [Page 9](083091engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 83062: An Exclusive interview with the President of the French Republic, François Mitterrand

What cultural project do you personally dream of? What 
would you like to achieve with other world leaders between 
now and the end of the millennium? Is it possible to im- 
agine a cultural programme on a world scale analagous 
to Eureka? 
M.. I really tell you about my dreams? 
Very well, There is one project for my country which 
I hold dear and that is the great library of France, the launch- 
ing of which I announced last summer, on the day of our 
national festival. 
The book and the written heritage are at the heart of 
our civilization. During my first mandate, France greatly 
developed and modernized its library network. But our Bib- 
liothéque Nationale is too cramped in its old buildings and 
cannot, in spite of all efforts, adequately present its presti- 
gious heritage or receive all those who seek access to it, in 
some cases after travelling from distant countries. 
Whence the idea of building a great library on another 
site, radically new in conception, covering a vast field of 
knowledge, using the latest technologies of data transmis- 
sion, equally concerned with the audiovisual documents of 
today’s culture, and eventually forming part—with other 
French and foreign libraries—of a great network. 
Intend to follow the project closely. The building must 
be beautiful and—why not?—the site favourable to medita- 
tion, so that everything will combine to celebrate the pleas- 
ure of discovery and study, and encourage the acquisition 
of knowledge. 
Secondly, what would I like to achieve with other heads 
of state between now and the end of the millennium? There 
is so much to do if the world is to become less harsh to the 
needy, less given to destruction, more respectful of univer- 
sal human rights... 
One problem, however, seems to me of extreme and 
even frightening importance for the survival of humanity: 
the deterioration of the atmosphere. 
Everyone must understand that this is not just another 
form of pollution; it may spell the end of all life on the 
planet. Here everyone must join in the search for a solution. 
The United Nations is devoting an interesting research 
programme to this problem. But the moment has come for 
decision and action. 
This is why, on 11 March last, at The Hague, twenty- 
four countries signed an appeal urgently calling for the cre- 
ation of an international authority for the environment. 
As always in such a case, dogmatisms and egoisms, 
draped in a refusal to abandon any fragment of national 
sovereignty to a collective authority, are slowing the move- 
ment down. But twenty-four countries, for a start, are de- 
termined to go ahead. Others will follow as they come to 
realize what is really at stake, 
I wish therefore—long before the end of the 
 
millennium—to see human reason, that virtue so dear to the 
hearts of the men of 1789, triumph over the destructive 
ravages of laxity and laissez faire. 
You mention Eureka, the programme of European tech- 
nological development which now has a sister programme 
in the field of the audiovisual. 
At the time we faced a choice. Should we wait for unani- 
mous agreement among our partners, or should a few of 
us who were determined to act go ahead and leave the doors 
wide open for all those who might wish to join us later? 
We opted for the second course. Gradually the candidatures 
have flowed in, and not only from Europe. 
Cultural co-operation at planetary level, which owes 
much to Unesco, can also proceed in this way: a project, 
a programme, the united determination of some, others who 
join in later, | 

## [Page 10](083091engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

  
«w
f 
- 
No 
> 
J 
- 
3 
A Ia ‘ 
Fo / 
’ : 
{ r 
Tad 
: 
- re : : | 
=
.
 
] : 
- A 
LL J 
\ “ 
4 ] J 
’ 
1 
w al 
- . 
~ 
- 
ON 
- - 
. . 
eo F 
— 
Ww 
'Y 
4 
f 4 
Tike 
H r 
| J 
A 
# 
ra 
s 
5 
\ 
) 
5 |

## [Page 11](083091engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
“Au men are born and 
remain free, and have 
equal rights...” reads the 
first article of the 
Declaration of the Rights of 
Man and of the Citizen 
adopted by the Constituent 
Assembly between 20 and 
26 August 1789. Opposite, 
a painting specially 
executed for the Unesco 
Courier by French artist 
Brigitte Salom. 
  
Re att 
1789 
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
ARE are the ideas that, in response to some hitherto unexpressed popular 
expectation, trigger a determination for change, mark a break between the past and 
the future, and quicken the pace of history. 
Rarer still are those ideas which have crossed the frontiers of the time and place 
of their conception, and germinated much later in other parts of the world. 
How does the great idea of 1789, that of “man as a citizen”, stand up today? Root- 
ed in a specific culture—that of Europe—and a particular century—the age of the 
Enlightenment—it is now universally accepted. After, it is true, a circuitous jour- 
ney which saw it by turn debated and rejected, ignored and rediscovered, tolerated 
by some and demanded by others, until in 1948 it inspired a Declaration of Human 
Rights which was adopted by the international community. 
Out of this idea, diffused around the world by both French and foreign contempo- 
raries of the 1789 Revolution—Bonaparte, Jefferson, Goethe, Miranda—arose a great 
hope for universal fraternity. But this hope was gradually thwarted by theories which 
affirmed the preeminence of the collective spirit over individual liberty. During a 
long period it was betrayed by the process of colonial expansion, which substituted 
the notion of the civilizing mission of the West for the dream of the equality of 
people everywhere. 
In some cases modern movements for national emancipation regarded the principle 
of the rights of man and of the citizen with renewed esteem, but often the concept 
of the revolutionary state was preferred instead. Finally, in the last decades of the 
twentieth century, the Declaration of 1789 has come to be seen as a fundamental 
guarantee of freedom for each people and a framework for understanding and co- 
operation between all peoples. 
This issue of the Unesco Courier attempts to highlight some milestones on the itine- 
rary whereby this idea born in the wildest dreams of a handful of visionaries has 
become part of the common heritage of humanity. i1

## [Page 12](083091engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 
A key to the Bastille sent to 
George Washington by the 
Marquis de Lafayette. It is 
today displayed at Mount 
Vernon, Washington's home 
in Virginia (USA). 
On 6 October 1789 
thousands of angry Parisian 
women marched on Versailles 
and demanded to be beard 
by the National Assembly, A 
delegation was immediately 
received in the ball where the 
Assembly was sitting, as 
shown in this engraving by 
Jean-Francois Janinet. 
Though many French people departed, 
many foreigners arrived. They joined 
wholeheartedly in all our agitation; 
they came to embrace France. And if 
they had to die, they would prefer to do 
so rather than live elsewhere. Here, 
should they perish, at least they were sure 
of having lived. JULES MICHELET 
Liberty and Equality are blessings too 
important to be the heritage of France 
alone... THOMAS PAINE 
 
Either the Republic will be universal or 
it will not be.  ANACHARSIS CLOOTS 
  
  
  
 
  
  
    
  
    
                          
   
 
  
  
  
 

## [Page 13](083091engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
  
    
                   
  
  
1789 . 
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
  
  


### 83063: The Republic's citizens of honour

The Republic’s 
citizens 
of honour 
 
BY EHSAN NARAGHI 
¢ 
W- come from Europe, we come from Asia, 
we come from America, we are Humanity!” 
Thirty-six foreigners, each wearing the costume 
of his country, stood at the bar of the National 
Assembly. According to the report of the session 
of 9 June 1790, it was like being “at the centre 
of the world”. Pio the Neapolitan was there, don 
Pablo Olavidé the Spaniard, the Prussian Baron 
Trenckh, Dutch patriots and others too. Their 
leader and self-appointed spokesman was a young 
Prussian noble who called himself Anacharsis 
Cloots. Flanked by an Arab and an African, he 
addressed a silent and respectful audience. After 
praising the Assembly for the measures it had 
taken in favour of the rights of man, he demand- 
ed the honour of participating in the Féte de la 
Fédération' which, he felt, should not be only 
a French celebration, but one of all peoples. With 
these words, “a humanitarian exhilaration seized 
the deputies and, with lively applause, the Assem- 
bly received ‘mankind’ within its fold”. 
Anacharsis Cloots: 
“The Republic will be universal’ 
His real name was Jean-Baptiste du Val-de-Grace, 
baron de Cloots. The son of an adviser to the 
King of Prussia, the possessor of a great fortune Anacharsis Cloots 13

## [Page 14](083091engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 
From top: Benjamin 
Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, 
William Wilberforce, 
Jeremy Bentham. 
   
and an impassioned francophile, Cloots had visit- 
ed England, Italy and even Morocco, before his 
enthusiasm for the French Revolution caused him 
to settle in Paris. He contributed to Parisian 
newspapers and donated 12,000 francs to the na- 
tion to arm soldiers in the “sacred war of men 
against tyrants”. Elected to the National Conven- 
tion in 1792, he dreamed of creating a universal 


### 83063: The Republic's citizens of honour

republic, a federation of all nations. As the French 
historian Jules Michelet stated in his Histoire de 
la révolution francaise (1847-1853; “History of the 
French Revolution”), for Cloots Paris was “the 
cradle and capital of the general confederation of 
men [where] the States General of the world will 
assemble... Thus will there no longer be 
provinces, nor armies, nor vanquished, nor vic- 
tors. People will travel from Paris to Peking as 
easily as from Bordeaux to Strasbourg. The 
Ocean, arrayed with ships, will unify its shozes. 
Orient and Occident will embrace on the field 
of the Federation.? Rome was the metropolis of 
the world through war. Paris will be so through 
peace...”’. 
Cloots was one of the eighteen non-French 
personalities upon whom the Legislative Assem- 
bly, in 1792, bestowed the title of French citizen: 
“Considering that the men who, by their 
writings and courage, have served the cause of 
liberty and prepared the emancipation of peoples 
cannot be regarded as foreigners by a nation 
whose wisdom and courage have made it free..., 
considering finally that, at a time when a nation- 
al convention will determine the destinies of 
France and perhaps prepare those of mankind, 
it behooves a generous and free people to call 
upon its wisdom and confer the right to partici- 
pate in this great act of reason upon men who, 
by their opinions, writings and courage, have 
proven so eminently worthy, the National As- 
sembly declares the conferring of the title of 
French citizen upon Priestley, Paine, Bentham, 
Wilberforce, Clarkson, Mackintosh, David Wil- 
liams, Gorani, Anacharsis Cloots, Campe, Cor- 
neille Pauw, Pestalozzi, Washington, Hamilton, 
Madison, Klopstock, Kosciuszko, Schiller.” 
The example of 
- the young American democracy 
Among these eighteen honorary citizens were 
four Americans: Thomas Paine, a participant in 
the Revolution; George Washington, first presi- 
dent of the United States; James Madison, fourth 
president; and Alexander Hamilton, Washing- 
ton’s faithful companion. This was no accident. 
The French and American Revolutions were 
directly related. 
The Declaration of Independence of the 
American rebels, proclaimed in 1776 at the height 
of the conflict with the British, was the symbol 
of courage and hope of the young nation. The 
Declaration, especially its preamble, appeared to 
the French liberal élite as a triumph of the ideals 
of progress, liberty and democracy. Until then, 
the only European country which boasted of be- 
ing a home for politica] freedom was Britain. (Did 
its constitution not provide Montesquieu with a 
model for the separation of powers from which 
the Constituent Assembly drew inspiration?) But, 
whereas the British empire was not looked upon 
favourably by the French, the new American 
democracy received their total admiration. It was 
to George Washington, through the intermedi- 
ary of Thomas Paine, that the Marquis de 
Lafayette offered the key to the fallen Bastille. 
In the eyes of the French, one man, by his 
knowledge, wisdom and unaffected simplicity, 
embodied the virtues of this new nation: Benja- 
min Franklin. Sent to France to represent a na- 
tion which was not yet even a state, it was his 
mission to mobilize and channel French aid for 
the American cause. According to the French 
historian Jean Lessay, when Franklin arrived in 
Paris in December 1776, he was already famous 
in all the capital’s learned societies and cultured 
circles because of his scientific work, and espe- 
cially for his invention of the lightning rod, the 
impact of which it is hard to imagine today. He 
immediately drew on the considerable capital of 
sympathy his compatriots enjoyed in France, and 
established close relations with politicians and 
scientists. The academies, salons and clubs vied 
for his attention. When he died in 1790, the Con- 
stituent Assembly decreed three days’ national 
mourning, at the close of a vibrant tribute 
pronounced by Mirabeau. 
Jefferson and Paine 
After Franklin’s mission, the United States Con- 
gress sent to France in 1785 an urbane and learned 
politician who had been the principal drafter of 
the Declaration of Independence: Thomas Jeffer- 
son (1743-1826). 
The revolutionary intellectuals met often and 
discreetly at the home of this brilliant and 
hospitable ambassador. Numerous historians 
have detected his influence in the draft of the 
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the 
Citizen presented to the Assembly on 11 July 
1789 by his friend, Lafayette. Recalled by George 
Washington to occupy the post of Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, Jefferson continued to be an ar- 
dent defender of revolutionary France. In 1792, 
when the French Republic was proclaimed, he 
obtained its recognition by the United States, 
long before other countries. During his entire 
presidency of the United States (1801-1809), his 
friendship for France was unfailing. 
Thomas Paine was one of the pioneers of 
American democracy. With his political shrewd- 
ness and courage, he played a role of immense 
importance in Britain and the United States, as 
well as in France. Born in Thetford (England) in 
1737, he was a labourer until the age of thirty- 
eight, before becoming a writer, philosopher and 
militant revolutionary of world renown. 
Benjamin Franklin, whom Paine met in Lon-

## [Page 15](083091engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

don, encouraged him to migrate to the United 
States, where he landed in 1774. Two years later, 
he published his masterpiece, Common Sense, 
which advocated the independence of the English 
colonies. This pamphlet, of which 200,000 copies 
were published (for a population of 3,500,000), 
made the colonists aware of the necessity of 
wresting their independence by force. As one of 
his biographers has written, “Washington was the 
sword of the American Revolution, Paine was the 
pen”. Common Sense soon crossed the Atlantic 
and was an enormous success in Europe. By May 
1776 it had been translated and published in 
France. 


### 83063: The Republic's citizens of honour

After the American colonies had achieved 
their independence, Paine returned to Europe, 
faithful to his motto “My country is the place 
where freedom does not yet exist”. In 1789 in 
London he took up the cause of the French 
revolutionaries. To Edmund Burke’s attack on 
the Revolution set forth in his Reflections on the 
Revolution in France, Paine replied with his Rights 
of Man, hundreds of thousands of copies of which 
were printed in 1791. 
The British government banned the book and 
Paine was indicted for treason. He took refuge 
in France, where in 1792 he was elected to the 
National Convention. There, assisted in the de- 
bates by other deputies who acted as his inter- 
preters, he was, with the Marquis de 
Condorcet, the main drafter of the Girondin 
Constitution. 
From all corners 
of Europe... 
Among the other Englishmen who were 
proclaimed French citizens, David Williams also 
helped to draw up the Constitution under the 
guidance of Condorcet; James Mackintosh 
defended the French Revolution against Burke’s 
attacks in his Vindiciae Gallicae (1791), translat- 
ed into French and published in Paris in 1792 un- 
der the title Apologie de la Révolution francaise 
(“Vindication of the French Revolution”); and 
William Wilberforce (1759-1833), co-founder of 
the Anti-Slavery Society, was, with his lawyer 
friend Thomas Clarkson (1761-1846), a tireless 
and ardent pioneer of anti-slavery legislation. 
Child prodigy, Oxford graduate at eighteen, 
Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) was one of the 
greatest jurists of his time. His first book, 4 Frag- 
ment on Government, caused a sensation when 
it was published anonymously in 1776. Sym- 
pathetic to the French Revolution, he published 
four letters in the Courrier de Provence, a 
newspaper founded by Mirabeau, an Essay on Po- 
litical Tactics, and a Draft of a Code for the Or- 
ganisation of the Judicial Establishment in France. 
He wrote a pamphlet for the Convention in 1793, 
Emancipate your Colonies. For a long time Ben- 
tham enjoyed greater popularity in continental 
Europe and in the United States than he did in 
his own country. 
 
 
From top: Friedrich 
Gottlieb Klopstock, Tadeusz 
Kosciuszko, Philippe 
Buonarroti, Francisco de 
Miranda. 
“All law is evil,” he wrote, “because all law 
is a breach of liberty... Government must be 
mindful of two things, the evil of the offence and 
the evil of the law.” This citizen of the universe, 
as he was popularly known, was straightforward, 
pleasant, of strict morals, and totally disinterest- 
ed. It was in the Essay on Government (1769) by 
the chemist and theologian Joseph Priestley (who 
was elected to the National Convention but never 
took his seat) that Bentham found the phrase 
upon which his life’s work was based: “the 
greatest happiness of the greatest number”. 
Fighting 
for liberty 
For the National Assembly, the German epic and 
lyric poet Friedrich Goulieb Klopstock 
(1724-1803) symbolized, along with Schiller, the 
enthusiasm of the German intelligentsia for the 
Revolution. In 1788 Klopstock wrote an “Ode 
for the Convocation of the States General” in 
which he predicted the rebirth of France. In April 
1792, with the aim of defending France against 
the European coalition, he composed a poem en- 
titled “War of Liberty”, which he sent to the 
Duke of Brunswick, commander-in-chief of the 
Prusso-Austrian army. He even sent a constitu- 
tional programme to Roland, one of the revolu- 
tionary leaders. But, like most of the foreign 
revolutionaries, he lost his illusions during the 
Reign of Terror. 
The Pole, Tadeusz Késciuszko (1746-1817), 
future statesman and national hero, participated 
as a voluntary officer in the American War of In- 
dependence (1775-1783), where he gained fame 
through his heroism and military skill, particu- 
larly in the planning of fortifications. He was 
made an honorary citizen of the United States 
after being promoted to brigadier-general by 
Washington. After his return to Poland in 1784 
he fought against the Russians, and in 1793 was 
delegated to Paris to solicit help from revolution- 
ary France. While there he presented a pamph- 
let recommending the founding of a republic in 
Poland, following France’s example. Back in the 
United States in 1797, he used money from the 
sale of his lands, as well as his pension, to buy 
slaves to whom he gave their freedom. 
The Italian aristocrat Philippe Michel 
Buonarroti (1761-1837) joined the Jacobin Club 
and later became a French citizen by decision of 
the Convention. Sent to Corsica with special 
powers, he was entrusted with the task of 
propagating revolutionary ideas there. He was ar- 
rested as a follower of Robespierre, and while in 
prison befriended Gracchus Babeuf with whom 
he became a leader in the planning of art attempt 
to overthrow the Directory government in 1796 
known as the “Conspiracy of Equals”. In 1828 
he published his Conspiration de Babeuf, an ac- 
count of this unsuccessful enterprise. During the 
last thirty years of his life he organized a vast net- 
work of secret societies in France and Italy, be- 15

## [Page 16](083091engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

16 
  
From top: revolutionary 
emblems of the “German 
Jacobins”; Mary 
Wollstonecraft; Etta Palm, 
a contemporary miniature 
in which the ardent 
feminist can be seen 
rejecting ber husband’s 
advances. 
EHSAN NARAGHI, 
former director of Unesco’s 
Youth Division, is an 
Iranian sociologist and 
writer. He was the author 
of the first major study of 
the brain-drain. His other 
publications include 
L’Orient et la crise de 
I'Occident (“The East and 
the Crisis of the West”, 
Entente publishers, Paris, 
1977), and he is currently 
preparing a book on the 
sociological evolution of 
Iran. 
tween which he was a tireless emissary of revo- 
lution. 
Miranda, forerunner 
of Latin American independence 
Francisco de Miranda (1750-1816), another 
foreigner closely connected with the Revolution, 
played an important role in both Europe and in 
South America, where he fought for the indepen- 
dence of Venezuela and the Spanish colonies. He 
left the Spanish army in 1783 to fight in the 
American War of Independence, and then went 
to France where he served in the revolutionary 
army. 
He was a notable commander of French 
troops during the campaign against the Austro- 
Prussian armies in Belgium. He then went to 
London where he became the leader of a group 
of South American rebels working for the liber- 
ation of their countries. He formed the Gran Re- 
union Americana (“Great American Union”), 
which counted among its members the Argen- 
tine patriot José de San Martin; Bernardo O’Hig- 
gins, future liberator of Chile; and Antonio 


### 83063: The Republic's citizens of honour

Narifio, an early champion of Colombian in- 
dependence. The enthusiasm aroused by Miran- 
da’s arrival in Caracas in 1810 was such that the 
“Patriotic Society”, of which Simén Bolivar was 
a member, proclaimed the independence of 
Venezuela in the following year. 
In the name of women citizens... 
All credit, finally, to the non-French women who 
devoted themselves to the revolutionary cause, 
notably the English writer Mary Wollstonecraft 
(1759-1797), and the Dutchwoman, Etta Palm. 
From the outset, Mary Wollstonecraft was 
a supporter of the Revolution, and like Paine and 
Priestley published a reply to Burke, her Defence 
of the Rights of Man (1790). She went to live in 
Paris and joined the group of British people who 
supported the Revolution. A pioneer feminist, 
she published in 1792 a book entitled A Vindica- 
tion of the Rights of Women. 
Etta Palm also intervened in the course of the 
- French Revolution. L’Orateur du Peuple reports 
that, during a meeting of the Cercle Social on 26 
October 1790, a speaker expatiating on “the civil 
and political status of women in a well constituted 
state”, was unable to continue his speech. A 
woman called for silence and took the floor in 
the place of the exhausted orator. Without giv- 
ing anyone time to interrupt her, this “foreign 
lady, remarkable for her imposing height, said, 
‘Gentlemen, could it then be possible that revolu- 
tionary society, which renders unto men their 
rights, has rendered Frenchmen unjust and dis- 
honest with regard to women? ... I request, in the 
name of all women here present, that the orator 
continue.” ”’ 
At the close of the meeting, the women sur- 
rounded Etta, who urged them to unite. She 

## [Page 17](083091engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 83063: The Republic's citizens of honour

founded a “Society of Women Friends of Truth”, 
a kind of charitable circle which stood up against 
prejudice and soon became a centre of feminist 
activity. Her first speech as president of the So- 
ciety, addressed to the forty-eight Paris Sections, 
denounced the social conditions to which wom- 
en were subjected. Her speeches, read during 
meetings in Paris and the provinces, won the ap- 
proval and enthusiasm of women. She was pos- 
sibly the first woman to use a vocabulary of 
feminism, and it is probable that her expansive 
personality strongly influenced Olympe de 
Gouges (1755-1793), author of a “Declaration of 
Rights of Women and the Citizen” published in 
1792. 
Hope and tragedy 
Faced with the excesses of the Terror, all these 
men and women experienced a period of despair. 
A great admirer of the Revolution, the English 
poet William Wordsworth (1770-1850) wrote that 
the Terror revealed “what man can make of 
man”. Disillusion reached the depths of his com- 
mitment to the Revolution and pervaded his in- 
tellectual life. 
In the space of a few years, the atmosphere 
of universal fraternity and human solidarity, un- 
equalled in modern times, which had reigned at 
the beginning of the Revolution, gave way to ar- 
bitrary rule and fear. Could Paris, capital of hope 
and refuge of the free from all over the world, 
be relentlessly pursuing those she had so warm- 
ly welcomed? What had happened? Could it be 
explained by the collapse of the Revolution in 
face of the absolutist monarchies of Europe? Or 
by a gradual move towards dictatorship? Or by 
a stroke of fate that Cloots, before mounting the 
scaffold, described in these terms: “Revolution, 
men have been thy undoing.”’? How did the 
foreigners who rallied to the Republic live 
through this drama? What lessons did they learn 
from ir? 
These questions continue to haunt not only 
historians but all free people, not only in France, 
but throughout the world. n 
  
v2 
1. The Féte de la Fédération was a festival held on 14 July 1790 
to commemorate the first anniversary of the fall of the Bastille. 
2. The “field of the Federation”, now the Champ de Mars in 
Paris. Editor. 
Lf, a Polish engraving 
celebrating French liberty   \ Vd 
4 17

## [Page 18](083091engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 83065: Thomas Paine, the antimonarchist who tried to save a King

18 
The antimonarchist who 
tried to save a King 
BY JEAN LESSAY 
From L’Américain de la Convention, Thomas Paine, 
professeur de révolutions, Perrin publishers, Paris 1987 
   
I: was 11 December 1792, and a trial that the Girondins were unable to 
delay any longer was due to open before the Convention—the trial of King 
Louis XVI. 
The foremost and most inflexible champion of the Republic, Tom Paine 
did not believe in the inviolability of the sovereign. His position on this point 
was clear. Louis Capet—the name he was among the first to use to designate 
the king—was subject to the judgement of the French people. 
“I think it necessary that Louis XVI be tried, not out of a spirit of ven- 
geance, but because such a step seems to me to be just, legitimate and in con- 
formity with wise policy. If Louis is innocent, let us give him the opportuni- 
ty to prove his innocence. If he is guilty, then let the nation decide whether 
he is to be pardoned or punished.” 
But putting the king to death might provide England, in its turn, with 
a pretext to declare war. Would this be in France's interest? Furthermore, 
execution of the king—and Paine could bear witness to this—would be badly 
received in America, France’s foremost ally, whose help with supplies she 
needed at this time. Although they were confirmed Republicans, the Ameri- 
cans had not forgotten that Louis XVI had given them his constant support 
during the course of their own revolution. Would not his execution appear, 
in some way, as a way of punishing him for having acted thus? Whilst taking 
advantage of the pretext of the execution to declare war, hypocritical En- 
gland would delight in seeing the French themselves become the instrument 
of their vengeance by killing her former enemy and the ally of her rebel 
colonists. Did they really want to give such pleasure to the tyrant George III? 
On 15 January 1793, Paine, as a deputy to the Convention, put forward 
his arguments before the assembly: 
“Citizen President, my hatred of and aversion to monarchy are well 
known. They are based on reason and on conviction, and you would have 
to take my life before you could eradicate them. Yet my compassion for any 
man in his misfortune, whether he be enemy or friend, is just as keen and 
sincere...” 
There were, he added, grounds for abolishing capital punishment, that 
cruel vestige of the monarchical régime; furthermore, the Convention had 
been given no mandate to kill anyone. “Abolition of the death penalty has 
already been proposed, and I recall with great pleasure the excellent speech 
on this subject pronounced by Robespierre in the Constituent Assembly... 
Since France has been the first of all the nations in Europe to abolish royalty, 
let her be also the first to abolish the death penalty and to substitute for it 
some other punishment.” 
Paine pointed out that it is impossible to eliminate monarchy simply by 
eliminating the king, since the execution of Charles I had not prevented 
Charles II from coming to the throne. He also drew attention to another 
point which was worth consideration. So long as Louis XVI was alive, his 
two brothers, the Comte de Provence and the Comte d’Artois, could not 
lay claim to the throne. To kill the king would be to furnish them with a 
pretext to give free rein to their ambitions as possible successors. 
His speech ended with this twofold proposition: that the Convention 
should pronounce the sentence of banishment upon Louis Capet and his fa- 
mily, that Louis Capet should be detained in prison until the end of the war 
and that the sentence should come into force at that time. u 
Thomas Paine : 
 
The Convention 
decrees the abolition of 
slavery in the French 
colonies on 4 February 
1794. Drawing by 
Nicolas André Monsiau 
(1754-1837). 
JEAN LESSAY, 
a French writer specializing 
in the American 
Revolution, has published 
studies on Lafayette 
(Bordas, Paris, 1983) and 
Washington (J.-C. Lattés, 
Paris, 1985). His book on 
the Count of Rivarol, a 
royalist in the era of the 
French Revolution, will be 
published shortly. 
  
  

## [Page 19](083091engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 83066: In the Antilles, 'liberty for all'

In the Anti 
‘Liberty for all’ 
© BYYVESBENOT 
  
Wien the alarm bells of insurrection rang in 
Paris in July 1789, what could a plantation slave 
in the Antilles, in Guyana or in the Mascarene 
Islands know or make of these happenings in a 
far-off land? The question is all the more perti- 
nent in that the victory of the people of Paris on 
14 July was not achieved swiftly, with the sud- 
denness of a thunder-clap. It was the fruit of sever- 
al months of intense political activity, of waiting, 
of hope, of a release of tension expressed in in- 
numerable tracts and pamphlets. 
Overseas, the France of the ancien régime 
consisted of three social strata: the whites, the 
dominant, governing majority, numbering 
75,000; the 35,000 “coloureds and free blacks” 
5 
  
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
The ideas and principles of the French 
Revolution were fully implemented on 
the island of San Domingo, one of the 
worst of all colonial societies, the anti- 
thesis of Enlightenment Europe. Here, in 
the future Republic of Haiti, came 
revolt, the abolition of slavery, and 
independence. 
(known as mulattos), who were theoretically free, 
but whose status was inferior to that of the 
whites; and the 750,000-strong mass of black or 
half-caste slaves. This population was spread out 
over five Caribbean islands (San Domingo, Mar- 
tinique, Guadeloupe, St. Lucia and Tobago), two 
islands in the Indian Ocean (the Ile de France, 
today Mauritius, and the Ile Bourbon, today La 
Réunion), plus Guyana and St. Louis, the form- 
er capital of Senegal. 
Among these overseas territories, both by the 
number of slaves and the wealth it engendered, 
San Domingo had the lion’s share, with at least 
two-thirds of the slaves, half the whites and two- 
thirds of the half-castes. Yet San Domingo (to be 19

## [Page 20](083091engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 83066: In the Antilles, 'liberty for all'

20 
precise the French part of the island with its 
northern, western and southern regions, the rest 
belonging to Spain) attracts our particular atten- 
tion because another revolution broke out and 
triumphed there at the same time as the Revolu- 
tion in France. Reflecting the prosperity of the 
slave trade in the mother country, slave-ship ac- 
tivity in the Atlantic and Channel ports (Le 
Havre, Honfleur, Saint Malo, Nantes, La 
Rochelle and Bordeaux) did not let up: of the 
3,300 slaving expeditions recorded from 1713, 420 
took place between 1 January 1789 and 31 Janu- 
ary 1793. 
The flash-point, a false rumour 
The slaves did not wait for the sound of the can- 
non of the Bastille to rise in revolt. Despite the 
absence of books and newspapers, the memory 
of these heroic uprisings remains alive in the oral 
tradition. In San Domingo this memory goes 
  
back to 1758 and to the maroon (runaway slave) 
insurgent Macandal. None of these uprisings had 
succeeded, it is true, but a group of maroons, the 
Barohucos, established themselves on the fronti- 
er between the French and Spanish possessions 
and by 1784, after almost a century of resistance, 
had obtained the recognition of the authorities. 
Meanwhile, desertions from work, flight to the 
maquis and revolts in one or another plantation 
never stopped. 
Even before the news of the taking of the 
Bastille reached the islands, another false rumour 
was abroad—that the king had granted freedom 
to the slaves but the governors and the colonists 
were opposed to this and were keeping the news 
secret. One can speculate that this strange rumour 
originated with the convocation of the States 
General, the freedom of expression and publica- 
~ tion conceded temporarily for the period of the 
elections and perhaps from the speeches of the 
Marquis de Condorcet and the activities of the 
Society of Friends of the Blacks. However this 
may be, the rumour acted as a spur to the rising 
of slaves in Saint Pierre, Martinique, at the end 
of August 1789. 
When towards the middle of September 1789 
the news of the Paris revolt of July finally reached 
the islands, it was received with different feelings 
and was differently interpreted in the various cir- 
cles of colonial society. For the whites, the liberty 
thus acquired simply meant rejection of the pow- 
ers of the governors and other servants of the king 
and thus authorization to give free rein to their 
convictions and desires. Since these convictions 
were not the same for the planters as for the 
tradesmen and craftsmen of the towns, violent 
conflicts arose. Some proclaimed themselves to 
be Patriots (and later Republicans or even 
Jacobins), while others declared their loyalty to 
the king and to the ancien régime. 
Patriot or royalist 
but still pro-slavery 
The political labels imported from France 
changed meaning completely, however, when 
used by the whites of the colonies. “Patriots” and 
“Royalists” were united in their common pro- 
slavery stance and, in San Domingo at least, in 
their hatred of their mulatto competitors. This 
was not clearly understood in Paris where the 
Patriots thought of the “Patriots” of the colo- 
nies as their brothers. The Declaration of the 
Rights of Man and of the Citizen was of little con- 
cern to the members of this white minority who 
took it for granted that only they could claim the 
rights of citizens. Aware of the dangers of the sit- 
uation, however, the whites of San Domingo hur- 
riedly established censorship of mail coming from 
France and treated the mere fact of reading the 
Declaration to slaves or free coloureds as a seri- 
ous offence. 
In San Domingo, the slaves, just like the in- 
habitants of the popular quarters of Paris, saw 
in the revolutionary cockade the symbol of 
liberty. But here, as in Martinique and 
Guadeloupe, those who demanded this liberty 
were immediately executed in the traditional 
manner, being first beaten and then hanged. From 
1789 to 1791, the slave population of San Domin- 
go experienced or was subjected to conflicts be- 
tween whites themselves and between whites and 
free coloureds, repression by the whites and the 
colonial militia, made up of mulattos, of sporad- 
ic attempts to achieve liberation and the silence 
of the French Constituent Assembly on the ques- 
tion of slavery. 
In August 1791, there was a massive, violent 
uprising by the slaves of the northern plain, the 
richest area of the colony. Basing itself on the 
provisional ideology of a “King Liberator”, this 
insurrection upset all previously accepted ele- 
ments of the situation. Despite a series of cam- 
paigns against the slave trade and, to some extent, 
against slavery itself, the Constituent Assembly 
refused to make any move against the slave sys- 
 
Above and left, Colonists 
and Punishments (1989), a 
diptych by the Haitian 
painter Edouard Duval- 
Carrié.

## [Page 21](083091engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

The Republican army of 
San Domingo (1988), oil 
on canvas by the Haitian 
painter Edouard Duval- 
Carrié. The central figure is 
Frangots Dominique 
Toussaint, known to 
history as Toussaint 
Louverture (1743-1803). A 
former slave, leader of the 
black insurgents of San 
Domingo, he entered the 
service of the French 
Republic after the abolition 
of slavery. In 1796 he 
gradually achieved control 
of the island, expelling the 
Spaniards, forcing the 
British to withdraw, and 
setting forth a Constitution 
which made him the 
president for life of the first 
black republic in history, 
what is now Haiti. 
Arrested on the orders of | 
Bonaparte, he was deported 
to France where be died in 
1803. 
 
tem. On the contrary, by recognizing the legali- 
ty of the colonial assemblies, which were domi- 
nated by the large plantation owners, and by 
undertaking to make no changes to “the status 
of individuals” (in other words, the status of the 
slaves) except at the request of the colonial assem- 
blies (in other words, never), the Constituent As- 
sembly reinforced the status quo. This, perhaps, 
explains why the slaves, who had at first en- 
thusiastically adopted the symbols of the Paris 
revolution, made their appearance on the politi- 
cal scene draped in the white flag of the ancien 
régime. In fact, they were no more Royalists than 
the “Patriots” of the colonies were Patriots in 
the French sense of the word. From the very start 
there was no doubt at all about the revolution- 
ary nature of the general uprising of the slaves 
of the northern part of the island. 


### 83066: In the Antilles, 'liberty for all'

Liberty for all 
‘From the famous night of 23 August 1791, the 
insurrectionists numbered 50,000. And the strug- 
gle continued after their leaders were tempted, 
in December, to accept the offer of an honoura- 
ble compromise which, in the end, the whites 
withdrew. With covert aid from the Spanish 
authorities, which became overt after the out- 
break of hostilities with Bourbon Spain in 1793, 
they held out throughout 1792. The constant ob- 
jective of the black insurgent army, which was 
  
proclaimed and then achieved by Toussaint Lou- 
verture, was “Liberty for All”. This did not mean 
obtaining freedom for a few slaves at the whim 
of their masters, or the recognition of a few 
groups of maroons, as had been the case in 1784. 
Neither did it mean the kind of conditional 
liberty obtained by the North American slaves 
who enlisted in the British army at the time of 
the War of Independence. The slogan “Liberty 
for All” meant the immediate and uncondition- 
al abolition of slavery. Thus it was these slaves, 
officially Royalists though they may have been, 
and not one or other group of whites or mulat- 
tos, rather hastily assimilated to the colonial 
Third Estate, who fought to make the Declara- 
tion of Rights a reality in the Tropics. 
A step towards the abolition 
of slavery 
It might well have been thought that Article I 
of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of 
the Citizen of 1789, “Men are born and remain 
free and equal in rights...”, and, more specifical- 
ly, Article XVIII of the Constitution of the year 
1(1793), “No man can be sold or sell himself; his 
person is an inalienable property”, both implied 
freedom for all. Yet the silence of the Constituent 
Assembly on this was “echoed” by its successor, 
the Legislative Assembly (1791-1792), whose 
progress was limited to a concern for equality for 21

## [Page 22](083091engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 83066: In the Antilles, 'liberty for all'

22 
" Frvis RC 
{ 
3 A . oy   
The opening of the States 
General by Louis XVI in 
the great hall of the Hotel 
des Menus Plaisirs at 
Versailles on 5 May 1789. 
For the first time since 
1614 a King of France 
publicly and solemnly 
addressed the representatives 
of the nation. 
YVES BENOT, 
of France, is a teacher, 
journalist and writer. 
Among his published works 
are Diderot, de Uathéisme ad 
Panti-colonialisme (“Diderot, 
from Atheism to Anti- 
Colonialism”, Paris, 1970) 
and La Révolution francaise 
et la fin des colonies (“The 
French Revolution and the 
End of the Colonies”, Paris, 
1988). 
mulattos. For nearly a year and a half after that, 
the National Convention continued in this way 
and the voices raised in protest were ignored. 
Among those who spoke out were two men, 
Sonthonax and Polverel, then journalists, whom 
the Legislative Assembly and then the Conven- 
tion had sent to San Domingo as civil commis- 
sioners with extensive powers, not to abolish 
slavery but to supervise the application of the law 
of 4 April 1792 on full equality for “coloureds 
and free blacks” and nothing more. Of course, . 
they also had to proclaim the Republic and then 
ensure the defence of the island after the begin- 
ning of the war with Britain and Spain. It required 
T2555 
(H
ER
 
ES
 L
L
B
 
Roce, 5g kr 
FA al! hme 3 
3] ] 
a! 
{4 (A ia 19 
a ; "x
the persistence and resistance of the black insur- 
rection to force them to go beyond the powers 
expressly vested in them and to act not only in 
conformity with the law but also in accordance 
with the dictates of their own consciences. Fur- 
thermore, they had to call on the slaves of the 
Cape and the Cape region to put down the white 
rebellion led by General Galbaud on 21 June 
1793. Of course, the slaves who came to fight for 
the Republic were immediately granted their 
liberty; but this was still not enough. 
Slavery effectively abolished 
for the first time 
“On 29 August, Sonthonax finally decided to 
proclaim the immediate and unconditional abo- 
lition of slavery in the northern region. On 21 
September, his colleague Polverel followed suit 
for the southern and western regions. Unlike the 
abolition decrees of the nineteenth century, these 
allowed for no form of indemnity for the slaves’ 
former owners. This was a logical decision in 
view of the fact that, according to the Declara- 
tion of Rights, slavery was contrary to natural 
law and therefore could not be recognized in 
any way. 
The two decrees of Sonthonax and Polverel 
were the first decrees declaring the abolition of 
slavery issued by any slave-trading European 
power. The famous decree of the Convention of 
16 Pluvidse of the year II (4 February 1794) 
abolishing slavery merely ratified a fait accompli 
and made it applicable to all French colonies, 
something the Committee of Public Safety failed 
to do for the Indian Ocean islands or for Saint- 
Louis, Senegal. In any event, in San Domingo 
there came about a convergence between the con- 
victions of the envoys of the Convention, as well 
as Governor Laveaux, and the reality of the situ- 
ation created by the tenacious insurrection of the 
former slaves. It required this convergence with 
an insurrection that was not merely a distant 
aspect of the French Revolution, but a revolu- 
tion in its own right, to convert the abstract 
general principles of 1789 and 1793 into the first 
effective abolition of the slave system. 
It should, however, be emphasized that 
whereas in the northern region abolition seems 
to have been imposed by the military and poliui- 
cal situation, this was not the case in the west and 
south. In these two regions the uprising was 
either put down, indeed crushed (at Les Cayes), 
or else it had no permanence. Thus, Polverel, 
who signed the decree of 21 September, effective- 
ly liberated a large number of town and planta- 
tion slaves who, until then, had been forced to 
work in servitude. 
Toussaint Louverture 
rallies to the Republic 
Other circumstances arose which led Toussaint 
Louverture to inform General Laveaux on 6 May 
1794 that he was rallying to the support of the 
Republic with an army of between 4,000 and 
5,000 men. One of these was the policy adopted 
by the British, who invaded the island with the 
help of French émigrés and re-established slavery 
everywhere. Another was a change of policy by 
the Spanish who, having first backed the black 
insurrection as a military force, decided to align 
themselves with British policy. Another, perhaps, 
was a bluff by Sonthonax who, at the end of 
February 1794, took the risk of announcing the 
abolition of slavery by the Convention, when he 
could not have known of it—Laveaux and Tous- 
saint Louverture did not receive official confir- 
mation of the Paris decree until the beginning of 
July 1794. In any event, since abolition of slav- 
ery was supported only by France, Toussaint 
Louverture rallied to the Republic because in that 
way his own objective of freedom for all would 
be realized. 
Under Toussaint Louverture, in the new kind 
of state that he was to build with his own hands 
in San Domingo, the slogan of liberty for all was 
to take on a new meaning, perhaps unique in his- 
tory, just as the constitutional situation of the 
colony was unique from 1797 onwards. In that 
year, Toussaint Louverture, a general of the 
French Republic, was named Governor by Son- 
thonax in the name of France, a position he was 
to hold until 1801. In fact, from 1797 he was the 
only real power in the colony, the representatives 
of the Directory—Sonthonax, whom he sent

## [Page 23](083091engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

packing in August 1797, Hédouville, who 
suffered the same fate a year later, and Roume, 
who stayed until 1801—no longer took any deci- 
sions. It was a de facto independence, yet formally 
within the framework of the French Republic, 
the only European power to have made the abo- 
lition of slavery part of its fundamental code of 
law, 
But independence for whom? Clearly, the 
overwhelming majority of the “newly-freed”, the 
former slaves, benefited from it, but so too did 


### 83066: In the Antilles, 'liberty for all'

the mulattos. It is true that Toussaint Louverture 
waged war against some of them between 1799 
and 1800. Yet this was not a war against mulat- 
tos as such but against the attempt of the southern 
region to secede under the mulatto leader, Gener- 
al Rigaud. Before, during and after these hostili- 
ties Toussaint Louverture always hoped that the 
mulattos would take their proper place in the 
new unitary state. Independence was also on offer 
for those whites who were prepared to work 
(305 
August 1791: the 
beginning of the 
insurrection of the black 
slaves of San Domingo. 
  
within the new system, whether as planters, 
magistrates or technicians. Thus, the first state 
to emerge from the revolt of a European colony 
was, in the widest sense of the term, a non-racial 
state in which flourished the equality of men of 
a variety of origins, traditions and cultures. 
Whites and a mulatto were among the chief 
draughtsmen of the constitution Toussaint Lou- 
verture had drawn up in 1801. It was this type 
of revolution, based on human fraternity, that 
Bonaparte set out to destroy when he came to 
power, just as he put an end to the Revolution 
in France itself. 
Nevertheless, Toussaint Louverture’s origi- 
nal initiative, which, after his death in prison in 
1803 at Fort-de-Joux in the French Jura, was to 
lead to the independence fought for and won by 
Dessalines, remains a solid illustration of how the 
principles of the Enlightenment and of 1789 were 
brought to fulfilment outside the bounds of the 
Old World of Europe. mn 23

## [Page 24](083091engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

‘a 
Oa 
§ 
£5 
vd 
H
E
T
H
R
D
 
  
Above, the Sphinx at 
Giza, a work by 
Dominique Vivant, baron 
Denon, a French engraver 
and administrator who 
accompanied Napoleon 
Bonaparte to Egypt. Right, 
a portrayal of Bonaparte’s 
entry into Cairo in July 
1798, by Auguste Raffet, a 
French painter and 
engraver of the first half of 
the 19th century. 
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN 
is the pen name of two 
Egyptian writers who have 
published several books of 
political sociology, most 
recently Versant sud de la 
liberté, Essai sur I'émergence 
de l'individu dans le tiers 
monde (“The Southern Face 
of Liberty, an essay on the 
emergence of the individual 
in the Third World”, La 
24 Découverte, Paris, 1989). 
yf uy be 
TT EE BR i  

## [Page 25](083091engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

3 pv 
» 
. 
eld 
on 
a 
“     


### 83068: The Eagle and the sphinx; Bonaparte in Egypt

\;" 1789 
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
The eagle 
and the sphinx 
The Egyptian campaign led by Bonaparte 
Napoleon Bonaparte was meant wo liber In Egypt 
ate Egypt from her overlords and estab- 
lish a régime based on Enlightenment 
precepts. However, as a result of the dash 
of cultures and military failure things 
turned ont differently. All the same, the 
ideas of 1789 took root in Egypt... but 
in unexpected ways. 
[sD 7 0N 5 17 (O10] DJ 5 LEN) 3 
[x March 1798 the executive Directory of the 
French Republic decided to despatch a military 
expedition to Egypt under the command of 
General Bonaparte. 
In a paper presented in support of this plan, 
French Foreign Minister Talleyrand wrote: 
“Egypt was once a province of the Roman 
Republic; she must now become a province of 
the French Republic. The Roman conquest 
marked the period of this beautiful country’s 
decadence; the French conquest will herald the 
era of her prosperity. The Romans seized Egypt 
from a line of kings renowned in the arts and 
sciences; the French will rescue her from the 
hands of the vilest tyrants who have ever existed.” 
The general in charge of the expedition was 
therefore instructed both to “cut off the isthmus 
of Suez and to take the necessary measures to en- 
sure for the French Republic full control of the 
Red Sea” and “to improve the lot of the native 
inhabitants of Egypt by all the means in his 
power.” 
  
25

## [Page 26](083091engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

26 
The army was accompanied by a Commission 
des Sciences et des Arts, a group consisting of lead- 
ing figures in the sciences and the arts among 
whom were such famous men as the mathemati- 
cian Gaspard Monge and the chemist Claude Ber- 
thollet as well as a galaxy of talented engineers, 
architects, biologists, chemists, writers, painters 
and sketch-artists. Taken as a whole, the 165 
members of the Commission constituted a verita- 
ble walking encyclopaedia, a modern administra- 
tion in embryo and a “centre of excellence” for 
the promotion of intellectual and material 
progress. 
Make war on the Mamluks 
Respect the Egyptians 
“Here I am,” wrote Monge, “transformed into 


### 83068: The Eagle and the sphinx; Bonaparte in Egypt

an argonaut, carrying the torch of Reason in a 
land where for years its light has ceased to 
shine...” Bonaparte and his band of scholars were 
imbued with the notion that they were going to 
Egypt, not only to establish a military base as a 
bastion against the British, but also, and above 
all, to implant the ideals of 1789, by freeing the 
country from the medieval grip of the Mamluk Ss 
Beys, reviving agriculture and commerce, estab- 
lishing new industries, overcoming the scourge 
of endemic diseases and imposing a modern le- 
gal system... 
In a message to the soldiers under his com- 
mand, Bonaparte explained that the objective was 
not to force the Egyptians into submission, but 
rather to gain their support by defeating their op- 
pressors, the Mamluks. “You will find that the 
customs here,” he told them, “are different from 
those in Europe; you must get used to them. The 
peoples amongst whom we shall find ourselves 
treat women differently than we do; but in ev- 
ery country the rapist is considered to be a mon- 
ster... Pillage enriches only a few and brings 
dishonour upon all of us...” 
“The general officer commanding expressly 
forbids all Frenchmen, whether soldiers or 
civilians, to enter mosques or to gather at the en- 
trances to mosques... It is of supreme importance 
that each soldier pays for anything he acquires 
in the city and that they [the Egyptians] be 
neither cheated nor insulted. We must make 
friends of them and make war only cn the 
Mamluks.” 
A missed rendezvous 
The Mamluks were easily vanquished. But despite 
this, the Egyptians on the whole did not frater- 
nize with the French. On the contrary, they rose 
up in protest against the French presence, some- 
times even making cemmon cause with their lo- 
cal oppressors. A combination of reasons explains 
why this should have been so. 
In the first place, despite its revolutionary 
motives, the French army was an army of occu- 
pation which had suddenly burst in upon a so- 
cial and cultural arena totally alien to it. Further- 
more, this army belonged to a country of which 
the collective Egyptian experience retained the 
most bitter memory, that of the pitiless confron- 
tation between Christendom and Islam—the Cru- 
sades. With the exception of a minority of 
intellectuals, who were attracted by the secular 
French approach, the Egyptian people saw the 
French expedition as a new Crusade. 
Secondly, the watchwords cf liberty, equali- 
ty and respensibility had too new, too disturb- 
ing a ring to minds dominated by the imperatives 
of custom and of the community and too strong- 
ly imbued, over the centuries, with a spirit of sub- 
mission to Mamluk despotism. When Bonaparte 
informed leading Egyptian personalities of the 
creation of a Divan (Council), whose elected 
members would administer the country’s inter- 
nal affairs, their reply was that the people would 
only obey the orders of the Mamluks. As for 
equality, in a country where domestic slavery was 
still widespread, the concept seemed as bizarre as 
it was disquieting. 
Finally, the measures taken by Bonaparte to 
rationalize the legal code and to modernize the 
administration were seen by many as a provoca- 
tion. In Cairo, the inhabitants lived in family 
groups or in close-knit trade guilds, in sectors 
separated from one another by gates which were 
only open during the day. When the order was 
given to de-compartmentalize the city and to re- 
move these gates, a general feeling of uneasiness 
and insecurity resulted. The new consolidated 
regulations concerning property, inheritance and 
  
Members of Napoleon's 
Egyptian expedition 
produced a S-volume 
“Description of Egypt” 
illustrated with over 3,000 
drawings. The 
“Description” covered 
many facets of Egyptian 
life, from arts and crafts 
and household objects to 
monuments, zoology and 
botany. .

## [Page 27](083091engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

o> 
4)
 
a
w
:
 
Jib 


### 83068: The Eagle and the sphinx; Bonaparte in Egypt

  
taxation by-passed the established patriarchal hi- 
erarchies and local customs. The limit was 
reached when soldiers penetrated into the vari- 
ous sectors of the city and even into houses to 
impose public health precautions against the 
threat of plague—cleaning of streets and houses, 
washing of clothing and destruction of the be- 
longings of people whose deaths were suspected 
of being due to plague. This was seen as a viola- 
tion of the privacy of the home. 
Too many changes, introduced too rapidly, 
overturned centuries-old values. Popular discon- 
tent, exploited by the Ottomans and the Mam- 
luks and channelled by religious leaders, led to 
a succession of riots, which were bloodily sup- 
pressed. The gulf widened between the deep heart 
of Egypt and an army decimated by disease, its 
fleet destroyed by the British, which was find- 
ing its position increasingly difficult to maintain 
and whose only thought was to return home. 
Three years after it had set out, the French 
expedition ended in complete military failure. 
The revolutionary backlash 
Paradoxically, it was at this moment that revolu- 
tionary thought began to exercise a deep cultur- 
al, intellectual and political influence. Once the 
occupier was no longer physically present, once 
the brutalities of oppression were forgotten and 
the daily affronts that French behaviour inflict- 
ed on believers and on local traditions were a 
thing of the past, the revolutionary message be- 
gan to spread insidiously in the minds of men. 
An illustrious witness of these events, the 
chronicler Djabarti, relates that no sooner had the 
French army left than the former Ottoman and 
Mamluk overlords, anxious to re-establish their 
weakened authority over the population, began 
increasingly to resort to arbitrary measures and 
acts of cruelty. The people then began to appreci- 
ate the difference between a modern administra- 
tion and despotic power and to regret the absence 
of laws which, though they had jolted them out 
of their accustomed ways, at least were universal 
in their application. They recalled that Bonaparte 
had had soldiers of his own army shot for steal- 
ing a chicken from a peasant, whereas the Mam- 
luks did not hesitate to pillage entire villages. 
Some Egyptian intellectuals started to voice 
the respect inspired in them by the French scho- 
lars accompanying the expedition and the admi- 
ration they had felt when hearing them explain 
their discoveries and inventions and, perhaps even 
more, listening as they spoke of life, society and 
progress in terms which threw open to them 
hitherto unsuspected intellectual perspectives. 
What the Egyptians discerned in the words 
 Ee A Ry ET ie Ton y ! CVE ROIS AZ a aN es 
IX 2ITIVNR am al gees Lh a 
of the French was an appeal to overcome their 
feelings of inferiority, to take charge of their own 
affairs, to think not only of their duties but also 
of their rights, to go beyond their present mis- 
fortunes and look to the possibility of change, 
to a future which would be more than a cons- 
tant repetition of the past. This was a summons 
to escape from a universe dominated by intangi- 
ble, revealed truths and to enter 2 world open to 
question, to experience, to liberty, in which the 
mind, guided by reason, could explore an unlimit- 
ed range of possibilities. The more enlightened 
spirits of the age began to think that only by fol- 
Mubammad Ali 
(1769-1849), viceroy of 
Egypt (1804-1849). 
 
Te 
In this work by Auguste 
Raffet, Bonaparte is seen 
presiding over the Divan 
(Council) in Cairo. 
27

## [Page 28](083091engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
F ighting the Mamluks, 
detail from a painting by 
the French painter 
Théodore Géricault. 


### 83068: The Eagle and the sphinx; Bonaparte in Egypt

(1791-1824) 
lowing this path could Egypt be awakened from 
the sleep into which she had sunk for centuries 
and be given the opportunity to modernize and 
recover the prestige that had been hers in the 
heroic age of Saladin. 
Mubammad Ali, 
enlightened despot 
Two of these intellectuals, Djabarti and Attar, 
reflected on how Egyptians could become recep- 
tive to this new way of thinking that had reached 
them from the other side of the Mediterranean. 
They came to the conclusion that the first thing 
to be done was to reform the educational system. 
This they thought could be achieved by creating 
a new type of school in which a rational approach 
based on experience would be taught, and by 
sending Egyptian students to France where they 
could imbibe the spirit of progress. 
Their plans were to be realized thanks to an 
unforeseen political occurrence, the seizure of 
power by Muhammad Ali. An Albanian by birth 
and head of one of the Ottoman brigades sent to 
regain control of Egypt at the time when the 
French army was preparing to leave, Muhammad 
Ali was quick to grasp the radical novelty of the 
ideas, the organization and the techniques that 
the French expedition had displayed and the ad- 
vantages that could be drawn from them by a 
governor anxious to redress a country rapidly fall- 
Ing apart. 
He began by consolidating his political 
authority by allying himself with the country’s 
spiritual and intellectual leaders and then massacr- 
ing the leading Mamluk chiefs. With the reins of 
ES a TTT 

## [Page 29](083091engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 83068: The Eagle and the sphinx; Bonaparte in Egypt

  
power in his hands, he obtained the Ottoman sul- 
tan’s recognition of his status as Governor of 
Egypt and then launched into an enterprise com- 
parable in scope to that to be undertaken thirty 
years later by the Meiji in Japan—the moderni- 
zation, enforced from the top, of a patriarchal 
society. 
He reorganized the central structures of the 
state, established civil and military manufactur- 
ing plants, and set up an army. He took as models 
the officers and scholars of the French expedition, 
in all respects except one—the spirit of individu- 
al initiative. For it was not a question of strength- 
ening private as against state enterprise, but of 
reinforcing the state against private feudal power. 
The door was cautiously opened to Western 
science and technology. Scholars and European 
specialists were summoned to Egypt. Egyptian 
students were sent to Europe. Schools were creat- 
ed in which learning by heart and recitation gave 
way to experiment and reasoning. 
Agriculture was reorganized and the adminis- 
trative system reunified. The centralized irriga- 
tion system, left in ruins by the Mamluks, was 
reestablished. A transportation network was 
formed to link the various regions of the coun- 
try to the capital and to the port of Alexandria. 
A new police structure was established which 
gave the people a sense of security they had not 
known for centuries. 
Thus, an orderly, enlightened dictatorship 
replaced the previous corrupt, anarchic 
despotism. The hand of the state became more 
strongly felt in the daily life of the people, but, 
on the other hand, horizons began to widen and 
a sense of space, movement and change began to 
permeate a hitherto stagnant existence. For those 
called upon to work in the factories or to enlist 
in the army, the whole pattern and setting of life 
was revolutionized. 
Under pressure from the state, the different 
strata of society supplied the manpower neces- 
sary for the modernization programme. From the 
ranks of the ulemas (the learned of Islam) came 
the intellectuals who were to learn the lessons of 
the West. From the artisans, and later even from 
among the peasantry, came the workers who 
were to man the state factories. 
A great power in the making 
Muhammad Ali did not stop there. If Egypt was 
to become an industrial power, it was so that she 
could also become an Arab military power. To 
‘create an army modelled on that of Bonaparte 
rather than that of the Mamluks, Muhammad Ali 
took the bold step of introducing conscription. 
The peasant communities would provide the rank 
and file recruits; the officer corps would be 
recruited from among the sons of heads of the 
richer families. 
Prompted by Muhammad Ali, the moral 
shake-up produced by the French expedition was 
bringing about a major social upheaval. Starting 
from the pinnacle of power, the shock-wave of 
the technological characteristics that had brought 
about the modernization of the West was now 
travelling downwards through the structure of a 
traditional community. 
In a quarter of a century, Egypt thus became 
a great regional power whose armies were on the 
advance both north and south and whose victo- 
ries were beginning to galvanize the Arab peo- 
ples. Her political and military élan was to be 
disrupted when London and Paris joined forces 
to prevent the emergence, around the figure of 
Muhammad Ali, of a dynamic, conquering Arab 
nation. From then on, Egypt, like the other coun- 
tries south of the Mediterranean, was condemned 
to economic colonization. 
Pathways to modernity 
New pathways had to be taken if the concepts 
of the Enlightenment were to suffuse the minds 
of men. Intellectuals rather than the state became 
the chosen vehicle and the shackles of despotism 
were gradually thrown off. The spirit of progress 
became associated with the spirit of liberty and 
justice. The ideas of the Enlightenment fertilized 
trends of thought in which change, reform and 
the struggle against the arbitrary were to take on 
increasing importance. 
Tahtawi, who towards the end of the 1820s 
had led the first Egyptian student mission to 
France, opened the way to a new, rational con- 
sideration of a modern Egypt in which all should 
be equal in the eyes of the law. From then on, 
a liberal tradition emerged upon whose roll of 
honour are inscribed such prestigious names as 
Loutfi Al Sayyed and Taha Hussein, and in the 
wake of which, in the aftermath of the First 
World War, the national Wafd party was born. 
Religious thought itself came into question. 
To take up the challenge of the West, reformers 
such as Afghani and Abduh called for a “Renais- 
sance’’, which, for them, meant a return to the 
original sources of the Holy Message and the 
selective integration of certain European social 
contributions. 
The great debate on the ways and means of 
coming to grips with the modern world was 
open. It has continued, on an ever-increasing 
scale, right up to the present day. . Nh 
29

## [Page 30](083091engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

30 
\ 7" 
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
  


### 83070: Sieyès, Herder, Goethe: universality and national identity

Universality 
and national 
identity 
  
BY ALAIN FINKIELKRAUT 
Herder and the German Romantics 
contested the universalist concept of the 
nation which France proposed to the 
rest of Europe in 1789 on the grounds 
that each people had a unique “soul” 
Goethe was the only thinker of his time 
to go beyond this contradiction between 
the universal and the specific when be 
affirmed that all cultures can aspire to 
universality. 
Sieyes, Herder, Goethe 
   
  
¢ 
Te nation,” wrote the Abbé Sieyes, “is a 
group of associates living under a common sys- 
tem of laws and represented by a single legisla- 
ture.”! In making use of the term “associates” 
he wiped out with a single stroke of the pen the 
traditions of a thousand years and consigned 
France’s national history to the waste-paper 
basket. The division of the people into “Three 
Estates” was abolished—there were no longer 
nobles, priests, judges, commoners or peasants, 
but only people enjoying the same rights and sub- 
ject to the same responsibilities. With a word 
Sieyes pronounced the end of the hereditary sys- 
tem; anyone who claimed special legal status 
merely on the basis of ancestry was thereby ex- 
cluded from the body of the nation. 
Contradicting its own etymological roots, the 
revolutionary nation (the word “nation” comes 
from the Latin “nasci”, meaning “to be born”) 
thus uprooted individuals, redefining them in 
terms of their humanity rather than their birth. 
It was not a question of restoring a collective iden- 
tity to human beings without status or social 
moorings; on the contrary, it was a matter of 
releasing them from all specific restrictive bonds 
and making a radical affirmation of their au- 
tonomy. 
The nation: a free 
and voluntary association 
Not only were they freed from the shackles of 
their ancestry but also from the spiritual power 
LA 
- 
\ 
3 
R
a
b
 
R 
SR
E 
A
N
 
\ 
Ra L 
d N 
Between 1795 and 1799 
‘France was governed by the 
Directory. Executive power 
was in the hands of 5 
Directors elected by a 
“Council of Ancients”. 
Above, Emmanuel Joseph 
Sieyes (1748-1836) wearing 
his Director’s uniform. 
La Liverté (1793-1794) by 
Nanine Vallain. 
Brandishing the pike and 
red bonnet of the sans- 
culottes in one band and 
bolding the Declaration of 
the Rights of Man in the 
other, she treads the chains 
of slavery underfoot.

## [Page 31](083091engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 83070: Sieyès, Herder, Goethe: universality and national identity

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TL 
Hy pe 
ar 
- 
7. 
TF ORPTHI 
' -p ay Lg 
N 
Ta a” 
wT 
x A 
x 
bra 
3 
aN 
» 
K 
L
A
P
T
 
4 
. 
t 
¥ 
>, 
’ 
} 
: 
u
e
 
fe
 
+ i
bd
 
i
t
 
a,
 
Wa
ge
 
in
 
m
e
r
g
e
 
r
d
 
h
E
 
Sh
a 
a 
A
L
 
RI
N 
. 
1
 
A, 
u 
BA
 
LY,
 
B
a
 
- 
A
l
 
- 
i
 
- 
ge 
‘ 
M 
. 
B
r
 
: 
: 
r
h
 
ip
 
FV
) 
pn
 
v
e
 
ow
 
A
 
Th
 
TT
 
T
r
e
e
 
A 
SE
 
ew
 
D
A
T
S
 
T
T
R
 B
e
 
el
 
i 
A 
I 
A
 
L
E
 
a
t
,
 
e
l
 
=
 
r
e
 
dn
 
E
E
 
e
h
 
A 
a 
L
U
 
STER
N 
N
R
 
KX
 
I 
a 
R
Y
 
E
R
 
Ar
 
ea 
e
R
e

## [Page 32](083091engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 83070: Sieyès, Herder, Goethe: universality and national identity

32 
Goethe (centre) surrounded 
by German writers. From 
left to right: Wieland, 
Lessing, Klopstock, Herder 
and Schiller. 
  
ALAIN FINKIELKRAUT, 
French philosopher and 
writer, is a professor at the 
Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, 
and director of Le Messager 
européen magazine. An 
English edition of his La 
défaite de la pensée has 
appeared under the title 
The Undoing of Thought 
(Claridge Press, 1989). 
which had until then ruled over them. Liberated 
from God and from their sires, they were under 
the tutelage neither of heaven nor heredity. Asso- 
ciates and not subjects, they were, as Sieyés put 
it, represented by the same legislature. The source 
and legitimacy of the power to which they sub- 
mitted lay in their decision to live together and 
to create institutions that were common to all. 
The exercise of that power, its limits and its 
nature, were defined by z pact. In short, the 
government was a property belonging to the 
whole nation and of which princes were never 
more than “ministers and trustees who held it 
in usufruct”. If a king misused the authority con- 
tractually delegated to him and treated it as pri- 
vate property, the nation, as Diderot had already 
indicated in the Encyclopédie, was entitled to 
release him from his oath as though he were “a 
minor who had acted without full knowledge of 
the facts”? In other words, power no longer 
originated from heaven but from below, from the 
earth, the people, the union of wills that consti- 
tuted the collective nation. 
The concept of the “nation”, therefore, burst 
upon the historical scene in opposition to both 
the privileges of the nobility and royal absolu- 
tism. The social hierarchy was based on birth and 
the monarchy on the divine right of kings. In 
place of this view of society and this conception 
of power, the French Revolution substituted the 
image of a free and voluntary association. 
Herein, for the conservatives, lay the origi- 
nal sin, the fatal presumption of the revolutiona- 
ries. In coming together with the aim of 
establishing a constitution, they believed that 
they were reaffirming the primordial pact from 
which society had sprung. They took the social 
contract as their authority to establish rule by 
assembly. The defenders of traditional ways, 
however, responded that there had never been 
such a contract; a citizen, they maintained, did 
not belong to his nation by virtue of the decrees 
of his own sovereign will. This notion was no 
more than a chimera. 
Herder: universal values 
vs. diversity 
If the philosophers challenged the power of cus- 
tom, it was because they respected abstract, time- 
less principles. They did not hesitate “to ride 
roughshod over prejudice, tradition, seniority, 
popular consent, authority, in a word, all that 
rules the minds of the masses”? because, with 
Plato, they placed the Good above all that exists. 
To back up their assessment of the established 
order they referred to an absolute standard, an 
invariable, compelling notion of right. The 
counter-revolutionaries, unwilling to follow them 
to these heady heights, found their spokesman 
in the German philosopher Herder. 
Instead of testing facts against idealist stan- 
dards, Herder showed that these standards them- 
selves were nothing more than acts with a source 
and a context. He replaced Goodness, Truth and 
Beauty in their original local setting, removing 
these eternal verities from their comfortable posi- 
tion in the heavens and bringing them down to 
the tiny patch of earth on which they were born. 
There are no absolutes, Herder declared; there 
are only local values and fortuitously-formed 
principles. 
Throughout history, or at least from Plato 
to Voltaire, human diversity has been weighed 
and judged in the court of values; Herder placed 
all universal values in the dock and had them tried 
and condemned by human diversity. 
It took the crushing defeat of the Prussian 
army by Napoleon at the battle of Jena in 1806 
and the napoleonic occupation to trigger the real 
acceptance of these ideas. Germany, a piecemeal 
agglomeration of petty principalities, regained its 
sense of unity when faced with an all-conquering 
France. Glorification of the collective identity 
assuaged the mortification of military defeat and 
the degrading subjection it entailed. The nation 
compensated for the humiliation it was experien- 
cing by the rapturous discovery of its culture. 
“Teutonomania’ helped the German people to 
forget their country’s impotence. The universal 
values proclaimed by France were challenged in 
the name of a specific “Germanity” and poets and 
jurists believed it to be their mission to attest to 
this ancestral German spirit. The jurists vaunted 
traditional solutions, customs, maxims and 
sayings that formed the basis of Germanic law, 
a collective work forged by the instinctive, un- 
voiced spirit of the nation. The poet’s task was to 
defend the national genius against the infiltration

## [Page 33](083091engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

of foreign ideas, to cleanse the German language 
and to replace words of Latin origin with others 
that were purely Germanic, to uncover the 
buried treasury of popular songs and, by reviv- 
ing them, to recapture the fresh innocence and 
perfection of a folklore which sang in unison of 
the specific individuality of the people, untar- 
nished by contact with outside influences. 
The philosophers of the Enlightenment de- 
fined themselves as ‘‘reason’s peaceful law- 
makers”.* Advocates of truth and justice, they 
propounded the equity of ideal law against 
despotism and abuses. For the German Roman- 
tics everything was the reverse. Jurists and writers 
took as their first target the notions of universal 
reason and of ideal law. Their task was not to 
fight against prejudice and ignorance; it was to 
give expression to the irreducible particularity of 
their culture, the unique soul of the people, 
whose guardians they were. 
Art, the bond of universality 
On 31 January 1827, Goethe, then at the height 
of his fame and in the evening of his life, was talk- 
ing to his faithful friend Johann Peter Eckermann 
about a Chinese nove] he was reading and which 
struck him as quite remarkable. Whereas he had 
expected the book to be overwhelmingly strange 
and picturesque, he had found in it affinities with 
his own verse epic Hermann und Dorothea and 
with the novels of the English writer Samuel 
Richardson. He was surprised not by the book's 
exoticism, but by its lack of it. He was intrigued 
by the fact that this text, a lone fragment from 
a far-off, little-known land, was not a curiosity. 
Through this unlikely contact between himself, 
a patriarch of Europe, and this Chinese novel, 
through the strange feeling of familiarity it 
evoked in him, through this bond stretching 
across a gulf of differences, he became aware of 
the capacity of the mind to overstep social and 
historical boundaries. Rooted in a particular soil, 
anchored in an epoch, dated and placed, men 
could still escape the fatality of their specific 
situations. The divisions between them were not 
irrevocable. There were places—i.e. books— 
where mankind could overcome its fragmenta- 
tion into a myriad of localized mental attitudes. 
Dazzled by this realization, Goethe immedi- 
ately drew his conclusions from it. Since litera- 
ture was capable of vanquishing or transcending 
differences of time, race, language and culture, 
then literature should set to work to do so. This 
opportunity became for him an ideal. This uto- 
pia, this somewhere beyond time and place, be- 
came his true vocation. Only those books which 
went beyond questions merely of “when” and 
“where” were of any value. 
Goethe had learned from Herder that for 
man, language, environment and history were not 
secondary attributes or ornaments added to his 
fundamental nature. He was very much aware 
that no one can be freed by decree from the par- 
ticular circumstances of his or her birth. For him, 
the ethnic group into which a person is born is 
not a fortuitous aspect but a constituent element 
of that person’s existence. Yet Goethe, and this 
is the essential point, refused to make a virtue of 
necessity. That we were the issue of a particular 
tradition and were formed by being part of a par- 
ticular nation was a fact to which, henceforth, 
no one could be blind. In no way should this be 
considered as a “value”. It was a reality which 
should be recognized but not worshipped. Breath- 
ing the same air as the other members of their 
tribe, born, like everyone else, into a divided 
world at a particular time in history, artists could 
not claim right away to have achieved universal- 
ity. They instinctively shared the common way 
of seeing and judging things and their personali- 
ties were, at first, in no way different from those 
of the collective personality which was the source 
both of their initial ideas and the words in which 
they expressed them. Yet this was not a reason 
to exaggerate their rootedness in a place or a lan- 
guage or to raise it to the level of an absolute. 
Like Herder, Goethe recognized the con- 
straints on the mind that arose from its being 


### 83070: Sieyès, Herder, Goethe: universality and national identity

rooted in a particular community. Unlike Herd- 
er, however, he called upon art not to reinforce 
this dependence but to transcend it. A writer’s 
works should go beyond the Volksgeist and not 
be the expression of it. Human culture should un- 
der no circumstances be reduced to being the sum 
of specific cultures. This is why Goethe called 
upon poets, artists and thinkers to break out of 
the national framework to which Herder and his 
followers demanded that they should confine 
themselves. 
Towards a world culture 
In his conversation with Eckermann, Goethe re- 
mained calmly confident, maintaining that time 
was working towards the emergence of a world 
literature. Nationalist fervour was declining as the 
memory of the trauma of the napoleonic con- 
quest became blurred and as political romanticism 
went into what seemed like an irreversible 
decline. Furthermore, a world economic market 
was coming into being which would put an end 
to national isolationism. Henceforth, no segment 
of humanity could live out its history under 
wraps, sheltered from the entanglements of the 
world economy. Once impermeable barriers 
were becoming porous and it seemed that it 
would not long be possible to exclude works of 
the mind from the generalized commerce in 
commodities. 
History, as we know, was to give a more 
capricious turn to events... n 
Pr Vs   
  
The oath on the Riitli 
(1780), by the Swiss 
Romantic painter Jobann 
Heinrich Fuseli (1741-1825), 
portrays a legendary episode 
in the liberation of 
Switzerland. 
1. Qu'est-ce que le Tiers-Etaté, 
P.U.F. publishers, Paris, 1982. 
2. Denis Diderot. Article on 
“Autorité Politique” inthe 
Encyclopédie. 
3. Diderot. Article on 
“Eclecticisme” in the 
Encyclopédie. 
4. Sebastien Roch Nicolas 
Chamfort (17402-1794), quoted in 
Le sacre de l'écrivain by Paul 
Bénichou. José Corti publishers, 
Paris, 1973. 33

## [Page 34](083091engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 83071: The Republican dream

34 
The republican 
dream 
In a famous speech delivered at An- 
gostura in 1819 at the opening of the 
Congress of Venezuela, Simon Bolivar 
set forth the principles which underlay 
his political action and his loyal attach- 
ment to a republican régime based on 
liberty and equality guaranteed by a 
constitution. Extracts from this impor- 
tant text are given below. 
Te continuation of authority in a single in- 
dividual has frequently been the downfall of 
democratic governments. Repeated elections are 
essential in popular systems, because nothing is 
more dangerous than allowing the same citizen 
to remain in power over a long period of time. 
The people become accustomed to obeying him, 
and he becomes accustomed to commanding 
them; this is how power is usurped and tyranny 
takes root. The freedom of the Republic must be 
jealously safeguarded, and our citizens should just- 
ly fear that the same magistrate who has governed 
them for many years might come to rule them 
for ever... 
A healthy diet of freedom 
Freedom, says Rousseau, is a most succulent dish, 
but one that is difficult to digest. Our frail fellow- 
citizens will have to build up their strength long 
before they are able to digest the life-giving 
nutrient of freedom. Will they, with their limbs 
stiffened from such long enchainment, their sight 
T A ESTE i ae 1. NEL 
3 ) Rp 3 
\ 
+ SAN 
Ss 
enfeebled by the darkness of their dungeons, and 
their spirit crushed by pernicious servitude, be 
able to stride firmly toward the august temple of 
freedom? Will they be able to gaze unblinkingly 
into its splendid rays, and inhale the pure air 
which surrounds it?... 
Notwithstanding such painful reflections, I 
am overwhelmed with joy at the great steps 
which our republic has taken in embarking on 
its noble course. Imbued with purpose, inspired 
by love of justice, aspiring toward perfection, it 
has, with the separation of Venezuela from the 
Spanish nation, recovered its independence, its 
freedom, its equality and its national sovereignty. 
By constituting itself as a democratic republic, it 
has proscribed the monarchy, distinctions, nobil- 
ity, exemptions, privileges; it has proclaimed hu- 
man rights and endorsed freedom to act, think, 
speak and write. These eminently liberal meas- 
ures can never be praised enough for the purity 
which inspired them. The first Congress of 
Venezuela has inscribed in the annals of our legis- 
lation, in ineradicable letters, the majesty of the 
 
TAs 
The 35-year-old Simon 
Bolivar is shown beside an 
allegorical figure of 
America in this painting 
by Pedro José Figueroa.

## [Page 35](083091engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 83071: The Republican dream

people expressed in all its dignity, with the ratifi- 
cation of a social act such as which will ensure 
the happiness of a nation.... 
The sovereign principle 
of equality 
Does not the Spirit of Laws state that these should 
be suited to the people making them, that only 
by a pure coincidence may those of one nation 
meet the requirements of another, that the laws 
should be suited to the country’s physical condi- 
tion, its climate, the quality of its soil, its situa- 
tion, its extent and its people’s way of life; that 
they should conform to the degree of freedom 
that the Constitution can tolerate, to the religion 
of the inhabitants, their interests, commerce, cus- 
toms and traditions? This is the code which we 
should consult, and not that of Washington... 
Let us remember that our people are neither 
European nor North American; they are a com- 
pound of African and American elements, rather 
than an emanation of Europe, as even Spain it- 
self is no longer entirely European because of its 
African blood, its institutions and character... 
The citizens of Venezuela all enjoy, by virtue of 
the Constitution, the interpreter of nature, per- 
fect political equality. Whereas equality may not 
have been a guiding principle in Athens, France 
and America, we ourselves should affirm it in 
order to remedy the distinction which apparently 
exists. 
My opinion, legislators, is that the fundamen- 
tal principle of our system depends directly and 
exclusively on equality being established and prac- 
tised in Venezuela... Nature creates men unequal 
in disposition, temperament, force and character. 
The laws correct this difference because they 
place the individual in society in such a way that 
education, industry, the arts, services and virtues 
may give him a fictitious equality, properly called 
political and social. It is eminently felicitous in- 
spiration to have gathered all the classes in one 
state, the diversity of which has grown with the 
propagation of the species. By this step alone, 
cruel discord has been torn up by its roots. How 
many jealousies, rivalries and hatreds have been 
thus avoided! 
The lessons of history 
We must have equality in order to reshape, so 
to speak, the human species, with its political 
opinions and public customs, into one single 
whole. Then, fixing our gaze on the long road 
that lies before us, we must devote our attention 
to the dangers to be avoided. History should be 
our guide on this journey... 
And moving from antiquity to modern times 
we find England and France the cynosure of all 
the nations and providing eloquent lessons of ev- 
ery kind in the realm of government. The Revo- 
lution of these great peoples, like a radiant 
meteor, flooded the world with such a profusion 
  
  
   
of political brilliance that every thinking creature 
has been made aware of what man’s rights and 
duties are and what constitute the vices and vir- 
tues of governments. Everyone today can appreci- 
ate the intrinsic value of the speculative theories 
of modern philosophers and legislators... 
Legislators, it is fitting to recall what the elo- 
quent Volney says in his preface to The Ruins of 
Palmyra: “To the nascent people of the Spanish 
Indies, to the generous leaders who guide them 
to freedom: may the errors and misfortunes of 
the ancient world teach wisdom and happiness 
to the new world.” The lessons of experience, 
therefore, should not be lost; the consequences 
of Greece, Rome, France, England and America 
should instruct us in the difficult science of creat- 
ing and conserving our nations with their own 
just, legitimate and, above all, fitting laws. We 
should never forget that the excellence of a 
government does not lie in its theories, in its form 
or in its mechanisms, but rather in its appropri- 
ateness to the nature and character of the nation 
for which it is devised. n 
  
1789 
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
Scene from Bolivar (1943), 
an opera by Darius Milhaud 
to a libretto by Jules 
Supervielle. The décor of this 
1950 Paris Opera production 
was designed by Fernand 
Léger. 
35

## [Page 36](083091engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 83072: Poetry, freedom and revolution

Russian poetry, from Pushkin to Osip 
Mandelstam, exalts the love of liberty. 
It thus has a natural place in the great 
debate opened up by the French 
Revolution... 
Poetry, 
reedom and 
revolution 
SI ¢ 3 GIN) 2 LU € 3) BTN 21 29 A BY AY 
  
  
   
       
   
    
The Moscow Kremlin at the 
    
h beginning of the 19th 
i century 
hn 
. 
Pusrkin (3rd seated figure 
36 from left) at a literary 
banguet given by a bookseller

## [Page 37](083091engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 83072: Poetry, freedom and revolution

F AR from the tumult of the streets of Paris in 
the fateful year of 1789, lay Moscow, rather like 
a small country town with its steep streets glit- 
tering with golden domes and crosses. Moscow, 
that highly orthodox and patriarchal capital city, 
before the fire of 1812 still had reminders at ev- 
ery turn of days long before Peter the Great. 
In the entrance hall of the aristocratic man- 
sion of Piotr Alexandrovich Soymonov, in- 
numerable candles gave off a festive glow. They 
were the work of the daughter of the house, a 
sensitive and intelligent little girl, not quite seven 
years old. Her father was surprised—why all these 
candles? She told him the reason: “In honour of 
the storming of the Bastille and the release of the 
poor prisoners!” 
This little girl did not, however, throw in her 
lot with the Jacobins. Sofia Petrovna (1782-1857), 
whose married name was Svechin, belongs to the 
history of nineteenth-century Catholicism. She 
eventually left Russia because of her religious con- 
victions, and for decades her Paris salon was a 
meeting-place for the cream of the Catholic in- 
tellectual élite: the liberals Montalembert and 
  
4 
Lacordaire, the Spanish traditionalist Donoso- 
Cortés, and many others. 
With her phrase “the release of the poor 
prisoners” the child went straight to the point 
and hit on what was to be the central theme of 
Russian life and culture for the next two centu- 
ries. Barely a year after the storming of the 
Bastille, and not unconnected with the fear and 
panic spread by the events in France, the writer 
Aleksandr Radishchev was arrested because of his 
book Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow, 
which, like the Revolution itself, was a radical 
postscript to the philosophical thought of the En- 
lightenment. On the road to exile, Radishchev 
wrote the following lines, full of black humour: 
To blaze a trail where none has trod before 
For the fiery daredevils of the written word, 
For the pure in heart, for Truth, I go in fear 
To Siberia, to prison and to chains. 
His premonition was correct. The trail was 
blazed for many like him, and along it marched 
a succession of new “daredevils of the written 
word”, to use his blunt, old-fashioned expression. 
This, too, is one of the hallmarks of Russian cul- 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
“Madame Svechin as a 
child”. Sofia Petrovna 
Soymonov (1782-1857), the 
wife of General Svechin, 
left Russia for France in 
1816. 
37

## [Page 38](083091engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

38 
  
This portrait of the French 
poet André Chénier was 
made in prison by Joscph- 
Benoit Suvée 10 days before 
Chénier’s execution. 
 
ture. A century later, the journalist Vladimir 
Korolenko declared that at the gates of heaven 
every Russian writer would be asked how many 
years he had spent in prison for the sake of truth. 
And his contemporary, the literary critic Ven- 
gerov, wrote a book with an eloquent title: The 
Heroic Nature of Russian Literature. From the ar- 
rest of Radishchev to the repeated exiles of Push- 
kin, the conscription of Pozhelayev and the 
jailing of Dostoevsky, to the execution of 
Gumilyov and the fate of other twentieth-century 
writers condemned to the camps, the line runs 
clear and unbroken. 
The example 
of André Chénier 
The Russian people saw the poet primarily as a 
martyr. How many Russian laments have been 
composed, from Pushkin to Osip Mandelstam, 
on the exile of Ovid? But the Roman poet was 
the victim of the Emperor Augustus, and his fate 
was less tragic than the fate of those involved in 
the greater tragedy arising from the tangled web 
of the Revolution and the rifts caused by its in- 
trinsic contradictions. 
One poet of 200 years ago, who in the Rus- 
sian poetic tradition founded by Pushkin is im- 
bued with the martyr’s special significance, is 
André Chénier, the great poet of revolutionary 
France. Chénier, the citizen-poet, was inspired by 
the Revolution and condemned to death by the 
Revolution, which sent him to the scaffold just 
before the end of the Terror as a last expiatory 
victim to be swallowed by the abyss before it 
closed as in the ancient legends. Such a man was 
André Chénier, or “Andrei” Chénier, as Push- 
kin called him in the fashion of the day, to be 
imitated by twentieth-century poets such as Osip 
Mandelstam and Marina Tsvetayeva. In Rus- 
sianizing his name, Russian culture adopted him. 
Familiarity with the work and ultimate fate 
of Chénier, both in France and abroad, had to 
wait until 1819, when the first collected edition 
of his poetry was published. And scarcely six 
years later, the year of the Decembrist uprising 
in Russia (1825), Pushkin wrote the long poem 
André Chénier. At the time, throughout Europe, 
tears were being shed over Byron's death; and yet 
Pushkin, for whom Byron had meant so much, 
neglected his memory to answer the call of 
Chénier, who had entered the kingdom of the 
dead “from the blood-stained block”, “in terri- 
ble days”. 
At the heart of the poem lies Chénier’s 
monologue before his execution. Pushkin’s voice 
is in total unison with that of his hero, empha- 
sized by the fact that Pushkin quotes from his 
own writings in the course of the monologue. 
There is no serious divergence of views between 
the two men, as Pushkin explains briefly and elo- 
quently in his notes on the poem. A poet, sim- 
ply because he is 2 poet, is bound to love Liberty, 
and in particular that aspect of freedom which 
the Revolution proclaims as essential: 
I salute you, my star of light! 
I rendered glory to your celestial face 
When, like a spark, it rose, and you were born 
in the midst of the storm, 
I rendered glory to your sacred thunder 
Scourging the foul citadel, 
Scattering in cinders and shame 
The ancient, arrogant power... 
Pushkin rejoices that ‘‘arrogant power” 
should be held up to scorn, and welcomes 
resistance to “absolutism”. But when the sover- 
eign is laid low and those who have vanquished 
him are about to mete out his punishment, the 
poet, because he is a poet, can no longer see him 
as the sovereign and the enemy and is forced to 
see him as a human being. Pushkin recounts how, 
according to Henri de Latouche, André Chénier’s 
first publisher, Louis XVI sent a serene and dig- 
nified letter to the National Assembly, request- 
ing the right to appeal to the people against his 
death sentence. That letter, signed on the night 
of 17-18 January 1793, was composed by André 
Chénier.

## [Page 39](083091engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

Poetry condemns 
the death sentence 
The guillotine had already put in an appearance 
as the “criminal cleaver” in a profoundly subver- 
sive poem of Pushkin’s youth, entitled “Liberty”. 
No poet can ever freely approve a death sentence 
because the very soul of poetry, which is Liberty 
itself, cannot survive in the spiritual atmosphere 
generated by such sentences. Or so Pushkin fer- 
vently believed. 
A century later, pleading for the pardon of 
several condemned prisoners, Mandelstam sent a 
selection of his verses to Nikolay Bukharin with 
the note: “Every line of these poems cries out 
against what you intend to do”. He thus echoes 
a sentiment which inspired a line of Pushkin’s 
poem Exegi Monumentum, in which Pushkin in- 
cludes among his merits as a poet the fact that 
“He sought pardon for the fallen”. Poetry can- 
not breathe in the atmosphere of death sentences. 
To grow accustomed to it, and consequently to 
become one with it, is possible only for “litera- 
ture” in a very limited and altogether odious sense 
of the term. Fundamentally, poetry condemns 
the act of condemnation, and at a stroke it con- 
demns “literature”. 
Later Mandelstam said: “There were two 
Cheénier brothers. The younger, who was con- 
temptible, belonged wholly to literature, and the 
elder, sentenced to death, pronounced sentence 
on that literature”. Thus the tradition of Russi- 
an culture remains true to itself, and the thread 
is unbroken from Pushkin to Mandelstam. 
There have, of course, been Russian poets 
who have renounced Pushkin’s creed. The 
greatest of these apostates was Vladimir 
Mayakovsky, a poet whose stature is undeniable. 
But willingness to celebrate violence spells sui- 
cide for poetry, and is followed, as a logical con- 
sequence, by the suicide of the poet himself... 
For Marina Tsvetayeva, who also inherited 
the mantle of Pushkin, the figure of Chénier in 
the years of the Civil War was an absolute 
paradigm: 
André Chénier has gone to the scaffold, 
And I am alive, and this is a great sin. 
We must not forget that Pushkin’s *‘creed” 
took shape against the backdrop of the French 
Revolution, and that it was inspired above all by 
the example of Chénier. A return to Pushkin 
meant, inescapably, a return to Chénier, whose 
monologue in Pushkin can be summed up as fol- 
lows: the fervent love of Liberty as the ideal driv- 
ing force behind the Revolution brooks no 
compromise, even under the threat of the Ter- 
ror; but the Terror must be condemned precise- 
ly in order to safeguard that driving force. 
Chénier criticized the Revolution, not from 
the outside, but from within. He took as his 
starting-point the principles of the Revolution it- 
self, and used its own language, for he had felt 
joy at its advent, and never denied that joy after 
all his disenchantments. For Pushkin, this lent 
great moral strength to Chénier’s criticism and 
added much weight to his example. And the en- 
tire Russian poetic tradition of the love of liberty 
followed Pushkin in his veneration of Chénier 
as the bard who sang not of Tradition, but of 
Liberty. 
Mandelstam’s poem on the death of Commis- 
sar Linde, known to readers of Doctor Zhivago 
as Commissar Hintz, is a remarkable hymn of 
devotion to Chénier; but whereas in Boris Paster- 
nak’s novel the circumstances of this death are 
related with a great deal of realism and not 
without irony tinged with sympathy, in Mandel- 
stam they are described with a passion that is 
perhaps unexpected so long after Chénier’s exe- 
cution: 
Through civil torment in the dreadful years, 
Aflame with noble wrath against the foe 
You stride, a citizen, fearless, free and true, 
Wherever Psyche beckons you to go. 
And while the people, jubilant, may weave 
For other men their wreaths of laurel, now 
Russia will gladly brave the pits of bell 
To lay at last her blessings on your brow. 
The cadence of the Revolution 
Russian awareness of the French Revolution has 
always had a musical quality, a certain harmo- 
ny. It is no mere chance that the Russian 
nineteenth-century work in which the subtle 
wrath of the citizen comes closest to the French 
revolutionary tradition is neither a political 
pamphlet, nor a philosophical treatise, but some 
personal memoirs in which the most direct 
threads run between the conflicts of the soul and 
the contradictions of the Revolution. 
That work is My Past and Thoughts 
(1861-1867), by the journalist and political thinker 
Aleksandr Herzen. “Herzen, whose tumultuous 
political thought will always have the cadence of 
a Beethoven sonata’, Mandelstam said of him. 
This harmony alone saves the debate from being 
conducted in a single dimension in that it draws 
the contradictions together, if only fleetingly, 
into a persuasive unity, according to Hegel’s prin- 
ciple that “truth is the whole”. | 
SERGEI SERGEEVICH 
AVERINTSEV, 
Corresponding Member of 
the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, is a leading Soviet 
specialist in ancient and 
medieval cultures and the 
author of some 100 
published works, including 
a study of early Byzantine 
poetics (1977). 
  
The Russian writer 
Aleksandr Radishchev 
(1749-1802) 
Vv

## [Page 40](083091engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

  The concepts of the Enlightenment were 
late introduced into Japan in the 
who 
made a major contribution to the 
Japanese democratic movement. 
nineteenth century by Chomin, 
 
 
Chomin admired the ideas of 1789, but 
“revolutionary of the disapproved 
drama’ 
. 
a
 
han) 
A
 
: 
a
 
R
p
 
N
E
E
 
N
T
 E
R
 
ou X
e
 
a
 20 
be” 
pe 
A
 
o
n
 
e
f
 
“
a
 
R
A
S
T
A
 
ITY 
=X 
V
T
 
X
e
 
H
E
 
W
Y
 
e
R
)
 
        
     
R
E
 
ne 
+) 
e
o
 
T
l
 
RAH 
A
D
 
= 
Wow. 
N 
a 
FAVE 
Spud 
C$ 
F
E
E
L
S
}
 
S
a
 
NFAY 
RES G5 
R
E
T
R
 
AY 
ae woof 
8
 
a
a
)
 
& “
m
r
 
5 
8¥5 
.
 
o
g
 
a Eh 
W
E
A
 
S
a
a
d
 
co 
S
E
T
 FEA 
S
E
E
S
 
5
 
RES 
ELL 
: 
a
t
 
P 
: 
a
 
b
o
I
N
 
i 
A
Y
E
S
 
5 
R
m
 
G9 
4 
s
h
o
e
 C
I
)
 
S
E
R
 
s 
g 
> 
ak 
le SE 
R
 
ot 
T
E
T
 
SF.E o
H
 
i 
Ral x
 
We 
S
R
N
 
I
 
pe 
2
5
 
—
 
. 
E
A
 
a
s
 
E
m
o
 
A
 
SE 
T
g
 
I
 
—
 
R
o
 
. 
ol Shred Wen lA 
0 
s
m
 
Ar 
MR 
ES 
—
_
—
—
 
 
 
Revolutionary allegory in 
honour of Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau 40

## [Page 41](083091engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

  
\ 
AN IDEA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
  


### 83073: Chomin: the Rousseau of the East

Chomin: 
The Rousseau 
of the East 
SD GN 3 6 IAD @LN UB J. 
  
Tie Japanese writer, philosopher and politi- 
cian Nakae Tokusuke (1847-1901), more widely 
referred to by his nom-de-plume, Chomin, which 
means “‘a thousand million men of the people”, 
is best known for his remarkable translation of 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s Social Contract. 
In fact, he made two translations of the book: 
the first into the standard Japanese of the day, 
which he wrote on his return from France in 
1874, and the second into classical Chinese, the 
language of scholars, which he completed be- 
tween 1882 and 1883, at the height of the move- 
ment for liberty and the rights of the people. His 
contemporaries called him “The Rousseau of the 
East”, a nickname that has stuck. 
French studies 
Born in 1847, at Kochi, capital of the fief of Tosa 
on the island of Shikoku, Chomin learned French 
at Nagasaki, where he was sent with a bursary, 
and then at Edo (now Tokyo), where he became 
a pupil of Murakami Eishun, the father of French 
studies in Japan. It seems likely that he read Mon- 
signor Daniel's Abrégé chronologique de Ubistoire 
universelle (‘Brief Chronological Outline of 
World History”) while studying under Muraka- 
mi, who was to publish a translation of it in 1871. 
The year 1868 saw the collapse of the 
Tokugawa Shogunate and the restoration of Im- 
perial rule, and it was during the first year of the 
first Meiji era (Meiji means, literally, “enlightened 
rule”) that Chomin was admitted to Mitsukuri 
Rinano’s private school. Mitsukuri was the first 
Japanese teacher of French to visit France, hav-  

## [Page 42](083091engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 83073: Chomin: the Rousseau of the East

42 
  
  
The Emperor Napoleon III ing the previous year accompanied Prince 
and royal visitors to the 
1867 Paris Universal 
Exhibition. At right, the 
brother of the Japanese 
emperor. 
SHINYA IDA, 
of Japan, is a professor of 
literature in Tokyo. His 
doctoral thesis, on Nakae 
Chomin and France, was 
published in 1987. 
Tokugawa Minbu’s diplomatic mission to Paris 
on the occasion of the World Exhibition. It is 
very likely that Chomin read Victor Duruy’s 
Histoire de France (“History of France”) whilst 
at this school, since Mitsukuri quotes this work 
in his Banxoku-Shinshi (“History of Modern 
Times”), published in 1871. It is reasonable to as- 
sume, therefore, that Chomin’s interest in Rous- 
seau and the French Revolution dates from this 
period. 
Discovering 
the ‘philosophes’ 
The decisive period in Chomin’s life was his stay 
in France in the early days of the Third Repub- 
lic, when the country was still suffering from the 
ravages of the Franco-Prussian War and of the 
Commune. Selected as one of the scholars spon- 
sored by the Japanese Government to accompa- 
ny the diplomatic mission headed by Iwakura 
Tomomi, in December 1871, he remained in 
France for two years. 
Little is known of his life during this period. 
He scarcely mentions it in his writings and refer- 
‘ences to it by his follower and biographer Kotoku 
Shusui are both brief and vague. “Although he 
was sponsored by the Ministry of Justice, my 
master nevertheless studied philosophy, history 
and literature, and I have heard that he skimmed 
through many history books.” 
Our research on articles translated and pub- 
lished in the Seiri-Sadan (“Political and Moral 
Science Review”), founded by Chomin and his 
followers, indicate that while in France he prob- 
ably discovered the eighteenth-century philosophes 
(Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau, Mirabeau and 
Condorcet) and the radical political writers 
(Barni, Naquet, Jules Simon, Laboulaye and 
Vacherot). Since passages from L’Histoire 
parlementaire de la Révolution Francaise 
(“Parliamentary History of the French Revolu- 
tion”), by Buchez and Roux, appear in transla- 
tion in the Review, it can be assumed that this 
forty-volume work in octavo format was among 
the “many history books” that Chomin 
“skimmed through”. 
Rousseau reaches Japan 
On his return to Japan in June 1874, Chomin 
found his fellow countrymen in a state of fer- 
ment. Two former ministers, Itagaki Taisuko and 
Goto Shojiro, both, like Chomin, from Tosa, had 
just launched the Jiku-Minken-Unao (“Movement 
for Liberty and the Rights of the People”). It was 
at this time that Chomin translated Rousseau’s 
Social Contract (Min yaku-Ron), thus placing a for- 
midable weapon in their hands. At the school of 
French he had established (Furanau-Gaku-Sha, 
later Futsu-Gaku-Juku) he gave commentaries on 
Rousseau in his classes and the militants of the 
movement, most of them young, passed the 
manuscript of his translation from hand to hand. 
“Weeping, we read the Min"yaku-Ron by Russo”, 
wrote one of these young men in a poem writ- 
ten in Chinese; at the same time, a Prefect for- 
bade the officials of his Department to read 
Rousseau. 
In May 1875, Chomin was appointed secre- 
tary to the Senate and assigned to the research 
department. For a long time his role in this new 
institution remained obscure. Following exami- 
nation of the Journal of the Senate, it is now 
known that he had already been appointed secre- 
"tary when the drafting office of the Constitution 
was set up. He was, therefore, at the very heart 
of the team preparing the draft constitution, 
although in a relatively lowly capacity, since this 
process involved comparing the constitutions of 
different countries as and when they were trans- 
lated into Japanese from the French jurist 
Edouard-Julien Laferriére’s book Constitutions 
d'Europe et d’Ameérigue (“Constitutions of Europe 
and America”). 
At the outset, this draft constitution, com- 
pleted in mid-October 1876, provided for only 
one legislative chamber, the Senate. How then 
did it come about that, by the end of the year, 
it included plans for the creation of a Chamber 
of Deputies? We do not know whether Chomin 
had a hand in this sudden change in state policy. 
However that may be, he left the Senate shortly 
afterwards, in January 1877. 
Mention should be made of the presence in 
the drafting office of Kawazu Sukeyuki, who 
alone among Chomin’s colleagues could read 
French. In September 1876 Kawazu began pub- 
lishing his complete translation of Auguste Mig- 
net’s Histoire de la Révolution Francaise (1824; 
“History of the French Revolution”). Thus 
Rousseau and the Revolution were both involved 
in the drawing up of the Japanese draft constitu- 
tion, which is considered to be more liberal in 
many respects than the Constitution eventually 
adopted.

## [Page 43](083091engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 83073: Chomin: the Rousseau of the East

The spirit 
of the French Revolution 
The second (1878) and third (1880) amendments 
to the draft constitution were definitively reject- 
ed by the government ministers Iwakura Tomo- 
mi and Ito Hirobumi, who dismissed them 
scornfully as being mere “translations” or “re- 
hashes” of European and American constitutions. 
Meanwhile, in April 1881, Chomin and his 
friends founded the daily newspaper Toyo jiyx 
Shimbun (“Liberty of the Orient”). The move- 
ment for the rights of the people was now at its 
zenith. In his editorials, Chomin repeatedly called 
for the immediate convocation of a National As- 
sembly which, like its French revolutionary 
counterpart, would be empowered to draw up 
a constitution. He stressed the need for “rigorous 
reasoning” and “firmness of will”. He counselled 
his young readers against “inflammatory 
speeches” or “blind, violent action”. For him it 
was not a question of doing “what France had 
done before”, but of “seeking its spirit rather 
than imitating its actions”. 
If the French Revolution was to be ‘“‘imitat- 
ed” only in its “spirit”, what other path was there 
to follow? Paradoxically, the one taken by the 
British. Since, according to Rousseau’s theories, 
the British monarchy was compatible with the 
nature of the Republic, Chomin preferred it to 
the French Republican system. Whilst thus ad- 
vising calm and moderation, he did not fail to 
point out that a revolution could break out even 
in Japan, if the “high ups”—members of the 
court, ministers and nobles—persisted in exercis- 
ing their authority without regard for the rights 
of the people. 
Japan on the brink 
of revolution? 
In October 1881, feeling itself threatened by the 
rise of the popular movement, the government 
oligarchy took the initiative, promising, in the 
name of the emperor, to grant a Constitution by. 
1889 and establish a Diet for the year after. 
In February 1882, at the time when Ito, who 
had been entrusted with the task of drawing up 
the Constitution, was about to leave on a study 
mission to Germany and Austria, Chomin found- 
ed his Political and Moral Science Review. The first 
issue opened with the Declaration of the Rights 
of Man of 1793 and in the second Chomin be- 
gan the serialization of Rousseau’s Soca! Contract, 
both of which he had himself translated into clas- 
sical Chinese. 
Chomin’s History of the Two Reigns in France 
before the Revolution (Kakumei-zen-Furansu-Nisei- 
Kiji, December 1886) was published three years 
before the promulgation of the Imperial Consti- 
tution, the drafting of which was then approach- 
ing its final stage. In compiling this work Chomin 
drew mainly on histories of France by Victor 
Duruy and Henri Martin. But why did he stop 
  
I nauguration of the first 
Japanese railway line at 
Yokohama (1872) by 
Emperor Mutsubito 
 
before 1789 instead of writing, as one might have 
expected, a history of the Revolution itself? 
Chomin himself provided the explanation 
when he revealed a clear dichotomy in his ap- 
preciation of the French Revolution. On the one 
hand the Revolution was for him “an unheard- 
of event in the annals of history which highlight- 
ed the causes of liberty and equality and which, 
by transforming the situation of the European 
states, succeeded for the first time in basing po- 
litics on the lofty principles of philosophy”. On 
the other hand, he saw “from the moment of the 
convocation of the States General, the seeds of 
growing conflict between the court and the peo- 
ple, conflict which inflamed passions and led to 
extremes and excess”. Primarily a philosopher 
rather than a historian, he was more interested 
in “the causes of the Revolution” than in its ac- 
tual unfolding, the ferocity of which he found 
unbearable. 
Chomin likened the French Revolution to “a 
great drama” of which philosophers such as Mon- 
tesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau and the rest were 
“the authors” and in which the great revolution- 
aries such as the Abbé Sieyés, Mirabeau, 
Vergniaud, Robespierre and Danton were “the 
actors’. 
Yet how could the actors have staged “the 
great drama” written by the authors? Only with 
the backing of “public opinion, without which 
the undertaking would have had no future and 
would have ended up crushed by the mighty 
power of the court”. The final message that Cho- 
min leaves with us is surely this: addressing his 
words “to those who foster a high ambition wi- 
thin the nation” he reminds them of the vital 
necessity of “forming public opinion”. This is 
the key to everything. n 
\ 
43

## [Page 44](083091engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
    


### 83077: China: rethinking the Revolution

China: 
rethinking 
the Revolution 
  
Reform or revolution? This was the 
dilemma faced by Chinese: élites in 
the nineteenth century. The example of 
the French Revolution was at the core 
of their debates.  
Ix China, the influence of the French Revolu- 
tion was not immediately felt, and it was only 
a century later that the ideals of 1789 were ex- 
plicitly voiced. 
There were geographical as well as sociolog- 
ical reasons for this time-lag. In the days of sail- 
ing ships, a despatch took at least eight months 
to reach Peking from London. Lord Macartney, 
head of the first official British mission to 
China, left Portsmouth in September 1792, and 
did not reach Peking until August 1793. 
The imperial court where he was received had 
already heard of the events in France, and 
rumours of the upheaval caused by the Revolu- 
tion made anything new subject to suspicion. At 
the height of its power and prosperity, China had 
no need to think of change. The country had a 
stable social structure, with no bourgeoisie, no 
ideological contention, no political opposition. 
If the peasants were unhappy, they were not yet 
Guangun, emperor of 
China (1875-1908). 
Influenced by the reformer 
Kang Youwet, he wished to 
 
. modernize the country but organized. In China, the time was not ripe for 
the Empress Dowager Cixi reform, stil} less for revolution. 
(Tz’u-hst) soon put a stop to During the nineteenth century pressure for 
44 his plans. social and political change began to mount.

## [Page 45](083091engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
Peasant unrest (from the White Lotus uprisings 
in the 1790s, to the Taiping insurrection of 
1850-1864), foreign aggression (from the First 
Opium War with Britain of 1839-1842 to the 
French expeditions of the 1880s), economic 


### 83077: China: rethinking the Revolution

decline and widespread corruption, continuous 
population growth—all these factors sapped the 
foundations of the Middle Empire. The crisis be- 
came acute on the eve of the twentieth century 
following defeat at the hands of Japan. 
Such were the conditions in which Chinese 
élites began to study the French Revolution in 
the hope of finding solutions to their own 
problems. 
Monarchs who lose 
the people’s confidence 
The first significant commentary inspired by the 
French Revolution was written by the reformer 
Wang Tao (1828-1897). In his Compendium on 
France he wrote: “Does the calamitous violence 
of republican government always lead to such ex- 
cesses? When the rebel parties, in their cruel fury, 
  
  
  
  
do not shrink from committing regicide, where 
are a country’s laws? What has happened to the 
rulers of nature? It is as if Heaven and Earth had 
been reversed and the world was upside down... 
In all of history surely there has been no rebel- 
lion worse than this. And yet, at the origin of 
these calamities, we find the inability [of the 
monarch] to conciliate the masses and win the 
confidence of his subjects. Presuming upon their 
high position, these monarchs fail to identify with 
popular fortunes. And mounting resentment is 
enough to bring about the demise of royalty... 
Such being the case, can rulers do as they please 
and behave irresponsibly?” 
Wang Tao condemned the rebels but held the 
king responsible for the calamity because he had 
alienated himself from the people. This was a les- 
son that rulers should draw from the Revolution. 
The stirrings of reform 
The tide for radical change rose higher in the 
1890s and a generation of reformers emerged, 
with Kang Youwei (1858-1927) and Liang Qichao 
Peasant rising in a 
Chinese village (print 
dating from around 1895) 
45

## [Page 46](083091engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

46 
(1873-1929) in the forefront. Kang won the con- 
fidence of the Emperor Guangxu (but not that 
of the Empress Dowager), and dreamt of reform- 
ing the Empire “from the top”. True to the clas- 
sical Chinese tradition of using the past to serve 
current policies, he was nevertheless an innova- 
tor in that he used the history of a foreign coun- 
try to convince the emperor and the court. 
In the preface to his Account of the French 
Revolution, dedicated to Guangxu, Kang uncon- 
ditionally condemned the excesses of this ‘“‘bloo- 
dy revolt”: “There has never been anything more 
disastrous than the atrocities of modern revolu- 
tion.” His censure of Louis XVI was no less se- 
  
vere: ‘‘Divine right is not granted permanently. 
Only by virtuous means can you keep it; other- 
wise, it will be taken from you. Louis XVI's 
promise to grant a constitution did not come 
from his own initiative but was given under pres- 
sure. His hesitation and oscillation, his initial 
recourse to arms and later disbandment of his 
guards, and finally his appeal to foreign interven- 
tion and flight to Varennes, stirred up the indig- 
nation of the people to such an extent that he 
was sent to the guillotine and scorned by the 
world.” 
Kang felt that popular feelings should be 
calmed rather than excited, because the populace, 
“once aroused to action, is like a rock rolling down 
a steep hill; nothing can halt its course. “It may 
have been possible for a single person to tyran- 
nize an ignorant mass. But once the people real- 
ize that the world is made for all and not just for 
a few, they envy the rich and strive for power 
and prestige.” 
Kang conceded that all modern constitutional 
governments originated in the French Revolu- 
tion: “In spite of its aberrations and tyrannical 
violence, it was aided by the trend of the times 
and the spirit of the people. Like a huge storm 
sweeping aver and transforming the great earth, 
it was indeed something frightening. As there has 
not been anything as grandiose in the annals of 
political change, it may also serve as an example.” 
According to Kang Youwei, the obvious les- 
son was that a reform programme should be 
launched from above and a constitutional monar-   
From lef: 10 right: Kang 
Youwei; Madame Roland; 
Liang Qichao 
ZHILIAN ZHANG, 
of China, is a professor of 
history at Beijing 
University. President of the 
Association for the Study of 
French History, a member 
of the International 
Commission on the History 
of the French Revolution, 
and editor-in-chief of a 
general history of France, 
his published works include 
an essay entitled From the 
Gauls to De Gaulle. 
chy be established before the rebellious people 
took matters into their own hands and imposed 
radical changes from below. 
Kang’s contemporary Liang Qichao was one 
of the first writers to introduce the ideas of the 
Enlightenment to the Chinese. In his Life of 
Madame Roland, he called the Revolution “the 
Mother of European Civilization”; but he repeat- 
edly cited the alleged final words of his heroine 
on the scaffold: “Oh, Liberty, what crimes are 
committed in thy name!” He rejected oppression 
and revolution in the same breath. He was an ad- 
vocate of “destruction without bloodshed”. He 
warned the conservatives in high places that to 
  
ignore the aspirations of the people would lead 
to a new outbreak of the Terror. At the same 
time, he made clear to the “pushers in low places” 
that if they unleashed the passions of the masses, 
the result would be a blood bath and anarchy, 
as in France. 
The reforms proposed by Kang and his fol- 
lowers, although mild, were not accepted by 
those in power, Six reformers were decapitated. 
Kang was obliged to flee to Hong Kong, while 
Liang sought refuge in Japan. The attempt at 


### 83077: China: rethinking the Revolution

change was nipped in the bud. 
Bloodshed, the price of liberty 
A reaction was bound to assert itself from the 
revolutionary camp. Not only in China, but also 
in Japan where many radicals took shelter fol- 
lowing the failure of the reforms. A torrent of 
pamphlets and political papers imbued with the 
ideas of 1789 appeared. In the first decade of the 
twentieth century, the French Revolution be- 
came the model for the struggle against feudal op- 
pression. 
A radical interpretation of the French Revo- 
lution emerged from the writings of the revolu- 
tionists. Rebutting the counter-revolutionary 
ideas of Kang Youwei, they stressed the necessi- 
ty of propagating in China ideas of Enlighten- 
ment and revolution. They exalted the spirit of 
sacrifice and recourse to violence. They appealed 
to men and parties to unite. For the first time, 
the names of Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau,

## [Page 47](083091engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### IGNORE

  
Turgot, Helvétius, Sieyés and Fourier were on 
the lips of Confucian scholars. Journals published 
commentaries on the Declaration of the Rights 
of Man and of the Citizen. Several versions of 
the Marseillaise were circulated. 
Criticizing as ridiculous the notion of *“des- 
truction without bloodshed”, the revolutionists 
upheld, on the contrary, that the success of the 
revolution depended on violence and sacrifice. 
Ready to give their lives, they vowed “to sacrifice 
themselves for the rights of the people and to buy 
liberty with bloodshed”. Was that not how 
despotism had been abolished and natural rights 
restored in France? A staunch revolutionist from 
Hunan exclaimed: “Have you not known the af- 
fairs in France, the homeland of the Social 
Contract, the battlefield of freedom? All was ac- 
complished through violence. The Revolution of 
1789 was indeed tragic and violent; those of 1830 
and 1848 were no less so. The guillotined head 
of the King was paraded through the streets of 
Paris, while the throngs of people cried out Vive 
la liberté! Thrice have they driven away 
their king, fourteen times have they changed their 
constitution—always with much bloodshed. Yet 
France has become a strong nation.” 
But how was the unity of the revolutionary 
movement and its leaders to be preserved? The 
Chinese revolutionists expressed great admiration 
for the Jacobin Club which appeared to them as 
a “driving force of the Revolution”. But they no- 
ticed with regret that political and personal rival- 
ries between Girondins and Montagnards, then 
  


### 83077: China: rethinking the Revolution

between Dantonists and Robespierrists, finally 
led to the downfall of democracy. A revolution- 
ary patriot, Liu Yazi, drew an analogy between 
the disputes of leaders in the French Revolution 
and the quarrels of leaders in the Taiping Heaven- 
ly Kingdom, as a warning to his comrades. 
Thus the long debate on the virtues and 
crimes of the French Revolution gradually rein- 
forced the conviction of those who believed that 
China needed revolution, not piecemeal change. 
A great ‘social laboratory’ 
A new generation of revolutionary leaders came 
to the forefront. Many of them discovered their 
calling while listening to accounts of the storm- 
ing of the Bastille. In June 1920, a twenty-two- 
year-old Chinese youth wrote these lines for a 
classmate who was leaving to study in France: 
On your return, you will 
Hoist the Flag of Liberty 
Sing the Song of Independence 
Fight for the Rights of Women 
And seek for Equality 
In the great social laboratory. 
The author’s name was Zhou Enlai. | 
  
The Empress Dowager 
Cixi (1835-1908) in 1903, 
at centre of photo 
47

## [Page 48](083091engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

48   


### 83079: The Spirit of '89

The spirit of 
89 
BY TAHAR BEN JELLOUN 
I it possible to dispense with revolution and its violence, its terror 
and its achievements? Is it normal to think that human rights and 
democracy bear the stamp of a time and locality specific to one social 
and historical setting? Is it logical thus to deny them their principal 
quality, their universality? How is it possible to import consumer goods, 
cultural debris and weapons from Europe and at the same time to re- 
fuse to import principles that are as important as flour or sugar? There 
are those who accuse Europe, which wants to generalize respect for 
human rights and the establishment of democratic political systems, 
of wanting “to perpetuate colonial domination”! 
What was revolutionary in the achievements of 1789 was their 
universal aspect. The human condition may vary from continent to 
continent, but there is everywhere and at all times a need for these 
same rights. The abolition of slavery was not a minor affair of concern 
to a few wretched serfs. It concerned the whole of humanity, without 
exception. 
We on the sidelines—‘inhabitants of the suburbs of history... the 
uninvited guests who have come in through the servants’ entrance of 
the West, intruders who come to watch the spectacle of modernity just 
as the lights are about to go out. Always late, we were born when his- 
tory was already running out...” (Octavio Paz)—look with envious, 
ambitious eyes at the memory of others, trying to cleanse the history 
of the Revolution of its faults, its injustices and its ugliness. Of the past 
two centuries of French history we wish to remember only the pains- 
taking work and the patient advance of the rights inscribed on the col- 
lective mentality of man, whether he be from here or elsewhere, and 
with all his differences and similarities. 
Yet the road travelled by human rights has been stained with the 
blood of European wars and of colonial brutality and then by the hu- 
miliation of man through the violation of his cultural and religious 
values. It is as though, to fashion and consolidate itself, Republican 
France had to pass through a phase of barbarism. We remain attached 
to principles. We cultivate the historical memory, short though it may 
be, with its baser moments expunged, so that respect for mankind may 
become a right with which no government will be able to compromise. 
This right should be inscribed on the very heart of the body politic 
by the force of its universality. 
If this is achieved, perhaps children will no longer be victims of 
famine, drought, disease, work or prostitution. Perhaps men and wom- 
en will no longer have to suffer the humiliations of poverty or be held 
hostage to fanaticism and intolerance which like to make people be- 
lieve they can provide answers to serious problems. 
For all of this “our thirst for consolation can never be slaked” (Stig 
Dagerman), nor our desire for coherence satisfied. We want to cry out: 
“stop selling arms while at the same time celebrating human rights and 
the bicentenary of the Revolution! Be consistent: the prosperity of some 
cannot be built on the misery of others! Crimes are being committed 
_while you sing the praises of democracy.” 
1789 is a memory that belongs to the universal heritage; it is in- 
scribed in all of us. We are born with this memory, that is, with the 
hope of liberation. Many die without ever having known it. = 
La Batalla (“The 
Battle”), oil on canvas 
by the contemporary 
Argentine painter 
Ana Eckell 
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN, 
Moroccan writer and 
journalist, was awarded 
the Goncourt Prize in 
1987 for his novel La nuit 
sacrée, an English 
translation of which is 
scheduled for publication 
later this year by 
Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich. 
He
 
ls
 
E
E
 
S
e
a
n
 
  
  
 

## [Page 49](083091engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

 
 

## [Page 50](083091engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

+ 
   
- 
No
 
 

## [Page 51](083091engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### 83083: An Idea and its destiny

    
L ~- 1789 
AN IDFA 
THAT CHANGED 
THE WORLD 
An idea 
and its 
destiny 
BY FRANCOIS FURET  
The French Revolution proclaimed the 
principles of liberty and equality as 
universally valid, but the application of 
these abstract notions in different societies 
has inevitably led to tensions and 
compromises. Today, 200 years later, 
these issues are more topical than ever. 
In this interview with the Unesco 
Courier, the noted French historian 
Frangois Furet, whose work has opened 
up new perspectives on the Revolution, 
examines the concept of the universality 
of man and his rights in the world 
context. 51

## [Page 52](083091engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### 83083: An Idea and its destiny

52 
  
La République (1794), 
earthenware statuette by 
Joseph Chinard. With ber 
right hand, the figure 
unveils a tablet inscribed 
Droits de I'bomme 
(“Rights of Man”). 
‘PREVIOUS DOUBLE PAGE 
 
“The Storming of the 
Bastille”. 18th-century 
French school 
Tee French Revolution was an attempt to 
legislate in the name of universality. Its aim was 
the emancipation not only of the French but of 
all mankind. To this extent it was an event that 
was not merely of national but also of interna- 
tional scope, not simply a political but also a 
philosophical revolution. 
One of the ambiguities of the revolutionaries’ 
ambition to emancipate humanity springs from 
the fact that their vision of the world was very 
eurocentric. When the French spoke of the 
universal, they meant by that the bulk of Europe 
together with the European appendix consisting 
of the newly-independent former British colonies 
of America. This was the extent of their horizon. 
The whole of the nineteenth century con- 
tinued to be marked by eurocentrism, even for 
men like Marx, who spoke of the universe whilst 
thinking of Europe. Between Britain, Germany 
and France everything was covered. Even within 
Europe it was better not to go too far south or 
too far east so as not to mar the concept of univer- 
sality. There can, then, be no doubt about it, the 
French Revolution legislated in the name of Eu- 
ropean man. 
Ambitions bordering on folly 
There is, however, another sense in which the 
notion of the universal must be understood: its 
abstraction. There is nothing tangible about 
universality; it is an abstraction just as universal 
man is abstract man. The Revolution declared 
that man had no reason to enter into society un- 
less that society guaranteed him the autonomy, 
the liberty and the rights which were his before 
he entered into the social contract. In other 
words, for the Revolution, the essence of man 
is his liberty, his autonomy and the fact of his 
acceptance only of laws imposed by himself. So- 
ciety must guarantee to each individual all the 
rights that are his by virtue of his status as a man. 
This is an extraordinary ideal, completely gener- 
al and therefore entirely abstract. 
Thus these rights are formal, abstract and 
deduced as it were from the natural state of man. 
The ambitions of the Revolution, as we can see, 
bordered on folly, since they were in contradic- 
tion with the true state of society and of man. 
Therein, in large part, lies its tragedy: in the enor- 
mous contradiction between the universal rights 
it proclaimed as being inherent in the status of 
man and the actual state of society with its poor 
and its rich, its dominators and its dominated. 
Equality: dream or reality? 
Born of the Revolution, modern democracy has, 
over the past two centuries, been marked by the 
permanent tension engendered by the affirmation 
of abstract, universal rights and the experience 
of the reality of rights imperfectly achieved. Take, 
for example, the notion of equality. This too, 
naturally, is an abstract notion, since people are 
 
not equal: both nature and society only turn out 
individuals who are unequal, whereas the ambi- 
tion of society is to produce individuals who are 
equal. Are they not equal as citizens? 
Absolute political and social equality implies 
absolute despotism. The only hypothetical situ- 
ation in which people could be strictly equal 
would be one in which a single person is placed 
over all the others to force them to maintain their 
equal status. Not a very enviable situation! 
Liberty always produces inequality. This is why, 
more and more, we are obliged to see the state 
as a compensatory mechanism for the correction 
of certain inequalities. It seems to me that the hall- 
mark of a free society is the maintenance of the 
difficult, uncertain balance between the growth 
of the state and the liberty of the individual. 
In the past 200 years there has not been one 
example, not even among the most liberal socie- 
ties, of a diminishing state. Look, for example, 
at the United States, France, or the United King- 
dom. All these states are growing. Why? In the 
name of equality, because each time that a new 
right is given to a section of the citizenry, a new 
state organism has to be created to guarantee that

## [Page 53](083091engo.pdf#page=53) 0

### 83083: An Idea and its destiny

right. The advance of equality is necessarrily 
linked to growth of state mechanisms, with all 
that this entails in the way of contradictions be- 
tween the area of state intervention and the area 
left free to individual initiative. 
The rights of the citizen 
or civil war? 
As the world became more universal, particular- 
ly through the processes first of colonization and 
then of decolonization, the constituent tension 
of the French Revolution, between the formal 
and the real, the universal and the particular, 
again came to the surface. The democratic move- 
ment can be identified with the struggle to reduce 
these tensions. Is the Declaration of the Rights 
of Man and of the Citizen anything other than 
a declaration of a permanent state of civil war 
whose purpose is to allow people to become what 
they are not—that is to say equals? The dynamic 
of democratic societies has consisted essentially 
of the progressive integration of those excluded 
from equality. And each action in this direction 
is the cause of new tensions. 
Les femmes des trois 
ordres (“Women of the 
Three Orders”), a 
revolutionary print 
showing a peasant woman 
burdened with a nun and 
an aristocrat. 
Planting a “tree of 
liberty” to the 
accompaniment of the local 
band, in the presence of the 
mayor and members of the 
National Guard. Gouache, 
18th-century French school 
 
     53

## [Page 54](083091engo.pdf#page=54) 0

### 83083: An Idea and its destiny

54 
  1. Indian women demonstrating for 
their country’s independence, around 
1930. In the centre, hands linked in 
front of her, is the wife of Mahatma 
Gandhi 
2. Members of the Kuomintang 
(“National People’s Party”) of China, 
founded by Sun Yat-sen, in the Paris 
workshop of sculptor Paul 
Landowski, around 1930. 
Landowski’s statue of Sun Yat-sen 
was erected at Nanking. 
3. Sad Zaghlul (1857-1927), founder 
of the Wafd national party in Egypt, 
speaking around 1920 at a Cairo 
demonstration calling for the 
withdrawal of British troops. 
4. Procession in Moscow on the 
50th anniversary of the October 
Revolution of 1917 
5. Troops of the revolutionary 
leaders Pancho Villa and Emiliano 
Zapata ride into Mexico City, 
December 1914. 

## [Page 55](083091engo.pdf#page=55) 0

### IGNORE

   
In the France of 1848, for example, the 
problem of the right to work was raised and the 
question was asked as to whether property was 
aright and, if so, how far it was compatible with 
equality. These are very real contradictions. 
Property is clearly a right since without it man 
is marked out to become a victim of the state. 
But if property is too unevenly distributed it cre- 
ates such great social inequality that it eliminates, 
for very many, all hope of exercising that right. 
Here we have a clear example of the contradic- 
tions resulting from the Declaration of 1789. 
This tension, which was the vehicle of all that 
constitutes the historic value of the Revolution, 
ended up by spawning criticism of the Revolu- 
tion. A current of thought developed which re- 
jected the ideology of rights as being abstract, false 
and merely a cover for an iniquitous society and 
a mask for bourgeois individualism. 
In 1917, a revolution broke out in Russia 
which aimed to go beyond these contradictions. 
Basing itself on a critique of the rights of man, 
its objective was to replace the abstract by the 
tangible and formal democracy by the dictator- 
ship of the proletariat. It wanted to resolve the 
problem of inequality by abolishing the law of 
the market-place and the liberty of the individual. 
A strange but necessary 
compromise 
Thirty years later, the world found itself in a cu- 
rious situation. At the end of the Second World 
War, the two conflicting concepts of 1789 and 
1917 were obliged to come to terms with one 
another. 
Among the victors in the war were lined up, 
on one side the democracies of Western Europe 
and America, more than ever attached to the con- 
cept of human rights after the victory over 
nazism, and on the other the Soviet Union, which 
had been created on the basis of the opposite 
postulate. And the two sides were obliged to 
come to an understanding. 
Together they had just established the Unit- 
ed Nations system and they had to find some 
common ground. This was to be the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed in 
1948. The Declaration was the outcome of an odd 
but necessary compromise, largely negotiated by 
the French jurist René Cassin on one side and 
the Soviet diplomat and lawyer Andrey 
Vyshinsky on the other. The result was a reflec- 
tion of their dialogue—a balancing game between 
two opposing conceptions. It was, nevertheless, 
based on a humanistic and democratic ideal, since 


### 83083: An Idea and its destiny

the United Nations was founded on the negation 
of nazism, that is to say on the notions of law 
and liberty. 
In order to achieve an agreement, the 
Western jurists had to agree to the introduction 
of so-called “real” rights. The Declaration of 1948 
contains, for example, the notion of the right to 
a minimum necessary for life. It was, indeed, an 
extremely difficult notion to make a reality in 
the poorest countries, and the inclusion of the 
right to an adequate standard of living as a hu- 
man right only served to underline the precari- 
ous nature of these rights. 
At the prompting of the Soviet camp there 
was also a great debate on whether or not the 
right to property should be excluded from hu- 
man rights. This was clearly not possible from 
the standpoint of the Western powers. Finally, 
the Universal Declaration of 1948 bears the stamp 
of the contradictions that hovered over its birth. 
Its text was meant both to prescribe norms and 
to be concrete, to be both universal and specific. 
But the more specific definitions you include in 
the notion of universality, the more you reduce 
its scope. Four decades have gone by since the 
Declaration was proclaimed, but the debate goes 
on and continues to develop over the contradic- 
tory ideas that are woven into it. 
‘We must think of ourselves 
as free and equal’ 
For example, there is the great argument as to 
whether liberty and equality are fact or fiction. 
It is true that people are free and equal to the ex- 
tent that they are no longer subjugated or reduced 
to slavery. They are free in body and mind and 
free to follow their personal interests and to come 
to agreements between themselves. On the other 
hand, this liberty and equality are limited, indeed 
compromised, in so far as they conceal social, cul- 
tural and individual inequalities and situations in 
which one class is exploited by another. 
In this sense it can clearly be seen that there 
is something false in the notions of liberty and 
equality. But from there two conclusions are 
open to us. It can be said—and this is my personal 
position—that it is true that we are not all free- 
and equal, but we have to think of ourselves in 
society as being both free and equal. And the fact 
that we are obliged to think in this way changes 
the fabric of the social world and creates that ten- 
sion of which I have spoken and that dynamic 
that is inherent in democracy. 
On the other hand, we can come to the 
Marxist conclusion that, since liberty and equal- 
ity are no more than lies, we must go beyond 
them, abolish the system that is based on them 
and bring about a society radically different from 
that of 1789. Since modern democracy is merely 
a bourgeois dictatorship in disguise, we should 55

## [Page 56](083091engo.pdf#page=56) 0

### 83083: An Idea and its destiny

56 
replace the power of the bourgeoisie by the pow- 
er of the proletariat. In this way, since the 
proletariat is not an exploiting class, we shall free 
society and mankind of all exploitation. 
The emergence 
of the individual 
What seems to me to be inaccurate in this view 
of things is the equation of modern democracy 
with the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. This is 
not historically true. The French society of 1789 
was neither very bourgeois nor really capitalist. 
The point that I have made in my books is pre- 
cisely that the French Revolution cannot be con- 
sidered merely as the rise of the bourgeoisie. The 
Revolution marks, above all, the emergence of 
modern individualism, a process much more all- 
embracing than the emergence of a class, since 
it transforms the entire social fabric in which the 
bourgeoisie is but one element, even if, little by 
little, this element is beginning to dominate the 
rest. 
Evidence that individualism is not simply a 
bourgeois quality comes from those countries 
that have eliminated the bourgeois economic dic- 
tatorship and where the demand for individual 
liberty continues to exist. In the Marxist socie- - 
ties of today, the notions of human rights, of the 
market-place and of formal democracy are return- 
ing to favour. In other words, the concept of bas- 
ing society on the rights of the individual, far 
from being a bourgeois lie, is a genuinely univer- 
sal notion which fulfils a universal hope. There 
will never be true equality between all people, 
but the idea of equality will always be there on 
the horizon. That is what we have to live with. 
That is what makes things happen. 
The controversy between formal democracy 
and class dictatorship is, however, far from be- 
ing over, if only, perhaps, because the message 
of the class struggle has got across better than that 
of democracy in many non-European societies. 
For historical reasons, criticism of rights has been 
more successfully propagated than the concept 
of rights. The concept of rights was taken with 
them by the colonizers and imposed by the gun. 
The rights were those of the victors and it was 
natural that they should be seen by the van- 
quished as a cover for their domination. 
In many non-European countries it might be 
said that there was a spontaneous upsurge of 
Marxism in the twentieth century, because the 
Marxist critique was, if one can put it that way, 
inscribed on the very experience of the peoples 
of those countries. Or rather, the non-universality 
of rights was inscribed on their flesh. The 
colonists brought with them both the concept of 
rights and the critique of that concept. To the 
peoples they colonized, the critique seemed the . 
better founded of the two, since it coincided more 
directly with the reality they were living through 
and offered a possible justification for the violence 
of their resistance. 
I am, of course, talking in terms of general 
tendencies. In terms of what actually happened 
things were not so clear-cut. At the time of the 
colonial shock these societies were essentially pre- 
individualistic—the individual was still closely at- 
tached to family, tribe and community. But the 
colonists introduced the individualist view of the 
world. As a result one world was superimposed 
on another, one tied in to traditional links of 
solidarity, the other turned towards the ideolo- 
gy of modern democracy, one society dominat- 
ed by the tribal chiefs and village headmen, the 
other, superimposed, spreading the word of 
universal suffrage. 
From all this was to emerge the Revolution- 
ary Institutional Party in Mexico, the Wafd na- 
tional party in Egypt, the Kuomintang in China, 
and the Congress Party in India. These were liber- 
al options whose practical achievements remained 
limited, which is why this phase was overtaken 
by another dominated by the ideology of the class 
struggle and revolution. Recently, however, there 
seems to have been a swing back to the idea of 
rights and democracy. 
The democratic dynamic, 
a dynamic of conflict 
In those places where it had been thought possi- 
ble to draw a line through the rights of the 
modern individual, an often tragic economic sit- 
uation has arisen. The pre-capitalist structures 
were broken down, but since they have not been 
replaced by capitalist market structures, dramat- 
ic difficulties have been experienced. Sometimes 
it has not even been possible to provide enough 
food for the inhabitants of the towns, or even 
for the peoples of the rural areas. The produc- 
tivity of labour has been destroyed and, as Marx 
rightly pointed out, the productivity of labour, 
the capacity to create wealth, is one of the sanc- 
tions of history. Without these attributes and 
without taking into consideration man’s relation- 
ship with nature there can be no history. 
People are beginning to become aware that 
there is no such thing as an historical short cut. 
After the communal society we have to go 
through the stage of the individualistic society. 
We have to come to terms with its tensions. 
We have to accept that modern societies are 
conflictual societies, and live with the fact 
that the democratic dynamic is a dynamic of 
conflict. 
Beyond a certain point, that raises the ques- 
tion of the governability of modern societies. 
French society, to take one example, is not easy 
to govern. As soon as a new tension arises, every- 
one takes to the streets. That is what liberty is 
and modern society has to learn to live with it. 
This 1s, perhaps, one of the biggest hurdles to be 
overcome in any society—not to cling to certain- 
ties, but to accept uncertainties, the unforeseen 
and the risks the future holds. 
 
“Rouge: de Lisle singing 
the Marseillaise for the 
farst time.” Painting by 
Isidore Pils, 1849. Rouget 
de Lisle, an Engineer 
captain, composed the 
words and music of what 
later became the French 
national anthem while in 
Strasbourg in 1792.

## [Page 57](083091engo.pdf#page=57) 0

### IGNORE

  
The price of freedom 
What conclusions, therefore, can we come to 


### 83083: An Idea and its destiny

about the fate of the ideas of the Revolution af- 
ter 200 years? Its basic ideas seem to be gaining 
ground, yet the difficulties they face if they are 
to be put fully into practice are immense. 
In the Western societies in which these ideas 
have long been accepted, a number of negative 
aspects are starting to appear. It is true that these 
are countries in which it has become pleasant to 
live, because they have found an acceptable 
balance of sorts between the liberty of the in- 
dividual and action by the state. But this balance 
has been achieved at a very high price. People are 
losing interest in community affairs and are less 
and less involved in public affairs and the 
problems of others. There is less and less solidar- 
ity. All this is very negative. People seem to be 
looking after their own interests and this leaves 
a great void and a general feeling that something 
is lacking in life. 
  
Elsewhere in the world, individual aspirations 
concerning liberty and the concept of human 
rights are making a strong come-back and are ad- 
vancing on all sides. Yet how are these countries 
going to escape the dilemmas specific to com- 
munal societies and find answers to the problems 
of the productivity of labour? These are questions 
that still await reply. 
I should like to conclude by expressing the 
hope that the celebration this year of the bicente- 
nary of the French Revolution will be a great 
learning experience and will cause people every- 
where to become aware of the real issues and ten- 
sions related to this event. May it help, despite 
all the differences and all the contradictions that 
exist in the world today, to advance the idea of 
the universality of humanity and of human rights. 
n 
  
FRANCOIS FURET, 
French historian and writer, 
is director of the Raymond 
Aron Institute in Paris. 
Among his books translated 
into English are Interpreting 
the French Revolution 
(Cambridge University 
Press, 1981) and In the 
Workshop of History 
(University of Chicago 
Press, 1985). He has 
recently published La 
Révolution 1770-1880 
(Hachette, 1988) and, with 
Mona Ozouf, a critical 
dictionary of the French 
Revolution (Flammarion, 
1988). 
57

## [Page 58](083091engo.pdf#page=58) 0

### IGNORE

58 
  
— 
Iti 
42nd YEAR 
Published monthly in 34 languages and in braille 
y Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
31, rue Francois Bonvin, 75015 Paris, France. 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Arabic edition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Documentation: Violette Ringelstein (Tel: 45 68 46 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions: Solange Belin 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet, Mouna Chatta, 
Majda Dalal, Claudie Duhamel 
Selection in braille in English, French, 
Spanish and Korean: Marie-Dominique Bourgeais 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Sri Ram (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Abdul Manaf Saad (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwa (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-croat, 
Slovene: Bozidar Perkovi¢ (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J). Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Manni Kossler (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larrafiaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Bengali: Ahmed Hedayet (Dhaka) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Manager: Henry Knobil (45.68.45 88), Assistant: Marie- 
Noélle Branet (45.68.45.89), Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése 
Hardy (45.68.45.65), Jocelyne Despouy, Jacqueline Louise- 
Julie, Manichan Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassard, 
Mohamed Salah El Din, 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (45.68.45.64), 
Accounts: Liliane Tasch (45.68.45.66), Special projects: 
Ricardo Zamora, Shipping: Hector Garcia Sandoval 
ADVERTISING 
Publicat: 17, Boulevard Poissonniére, 75002 Paris, 
TEI: 40.26.51.26 
Sales director: Benoit Rusier 
Advertising director: Daniéle Michelet 
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
1 year: 126 French francs. 2 years: 234 FF 
Developing countries 
1 year: 99 French francs. 2 years: 180 FF. 
Binder for a year's issues: 62 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted 
providing the credit line reads ‘Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, 
plus date of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor 
Signed articles reprinted must bear author's name. Non-copyright 
photos will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be 
returned unless accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the opinions of Unesco or those of 
the editors of the Unesco Couner. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Couner staff The boundanes on maps 
published in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or 
acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations, The Unesco Courier is 
produced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche by: (1) Unesco, 7 
Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, (2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48100, USA; (3) N.C.R. Microcard Edition, Indian 
Head, Inc, 111 West 40th Street, New-York, USA; (4) Bell and 
Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, US A 
All correspondence should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-chief 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) - DEPOT LEGAL . C1 - JUIN 1989 
Photocomposition: The Unesco Couner 
Photogravure impression 
Maury Imprimeur SA, ZI route d'Etampes, 
45330 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 NO6.1989 OP -89.1-469 A   
i 
  
  
The Editors wish to thank 
Mr. Nicolas Langlois 
for his valuable contribution 
to the new editorial conception and design 
of the Unesco Courier   
GLOSSARY 
Ancien régime: the political and socal system of France before the Revolution of 
1789. 
Estates General, also called States General: the representative assembly of the 3 
Estates or orders of the realm: the clergy, the nobility, and the Third Estate, which 
represented the majority of the people. The Estates General met on 5 May 1789. 
The deputies of the Third Estate led in the formation of the National Assembly, 
signalling the end of representation based on the 3 traditional orders. On 9 July 
1789 the National Assembly proclaimed itself the Constituent Assembly, after it 
had claimed the right to produce a constitution for France. The Legislative 
Assembly was the Parliament which sat from October 1791 to September 1792, 
when 1t was replaced by the National Convention, which governed until October 
1795. Among the first acts of the Convention were the formal abolition of the 
monarchy and the establishment of the Republic (September 1792). The Directory 
was the régime that replaced the National Convention (1795-1799). 
Committee of Public Safety: government body that gained virtual dictatorial 
control over France during the Reign of Terror (September 1793-July 1794). 
Dantonists: followers of the revolutionary leader Georges Danton (1759-1794). 
Girondins: moderate republicans, many of them from the Gironde département, 
overthrown in 1793. 
Jacobins: members of a radical political club founded during the Revolution. Closely 
associated with Robespierre during the Terror, the Jacobin Club was closed in 1794. 
It took its name from its meeting place in a former convent of the Dominicans, 
who were known in Paris as Jacobins. 
Montagnards (“Mountain Men”): radical deputies in the National Convention who 
controlled the government during the climax of the Revolution in 1793-1794. So 
called because they sat on the higher benches of the Assembly. 
Robespierrists: followers of Maximilien Robespierre (1758-1794), the Jacobin leader 
who came to dominate the Committee of Public Safery. 
Sans-culottes (“without knee breeches”): term originally given to the ill-clad 
volunteers of the Revolutionary army; later applied generally to the ultra-democrats 
of the Revolution. 
Sections: the 48 divisions into which Paris was organized for administrative 
purposes in 1790. 
 
PHOTO CREDITS 
Cover: © Georges Servat, Paris, Back cover, pages 18-19, 27 (below), 28: © Bulloz, Paris. Page 5: R. Melhoul © Sygma, Paris. 
Page 7: de Wildenberg © Sygma, Paris. Page : D. Hudson © Sygma, Paris. Page 10: Brigitte Salom © Unesco Courier. Page 
12: © Mount Vernon Ladies Association, Va,, USA. Pages 12-13, 16 (above), 16-17, 23, 46 (centre), 52-53: © Edimédia; Musée 
Carnavalet, Paris. Pages 13 (right), 14 (1): Asbl FAC-AP/Sprl Lefebvre et Gillet, Brussels. Page 14 (2): © IPS, Paris. Pages 
14 (3, 4), 18 (left): © National Portrait Gallery, London. Pages 15 (1, 2, 3), 16 (centre), 24-25, 27 (above), 30, 32, 38, 42, 
43,54,(1, 2, 3, 5): © Roger Viollet, Paris. Page 15 (4): © RMN, Musée de Versailles. Pages 16 (below), 40: All Rights Reserved. 
Pages 20, 21: © Duval-Carrié, Paris. Pages 22, 24 {left), 40-41, 44, 45, 53 (below): © Edimédia, Paris. Pages 26, 37 (right), 
39: Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris. Page 31: © Musée de la Révolution Frangaise, Vizille, France. Pages 33, 52: © RMN, Paris. 
Page 34: Orofioz © Artephot, Paris. Page 35: © Agence de Presse Bernand, Paris. Pages 36 (below), 37 (above): © APN, 
Paris. Page 46 (left & right): Chinese edition of the Unesco Courier, Beijing. Page 47: © Edimédia; Freer Gallery of Art. 
Pages 48-49: © AIAP/Bibliothéque des Ans, from Unesco: 40 Artists; 40 Years; 40 Countries. Pages 50-51: © Roger Violley 
Musée de Versailles. Page 54 {above left): © ESA, Paris. Page 54 (4): Bruno Barbey © Magnum, Paris. Pages 56-57: © Lauros 
Giraudon; Musée Historique, Strasbourg.

## [Page 59](083091engo.pdf#page=59) 0

### IGNORE

  
1988 AT UNESCO. NEW OPENINGS. 
      
     
1988 AT UNESCO 
NEW OPENINGS 
   
    
    
    
    
       
   
       
   
  
      
      
Focus uTeRacy: BASIC EDUCATION 
my Adw- 
    
  
   
Cg. SE aT 
~ Afortnightly. Featurearticleson major Keywords, as described Focus articles highlighting 
chronological news ~~ componentsofUnescos  onthefirstpage.formng particular aspects of the 
round-up coveringthe activities. describingwork  partofanmnovative. Organization swork froma 
world. the overall United in 1988. managementand  expermentalenqury different. more personal 
Nations family and Unesco. ~ reform aspects ofthelifeof ~ system for respondingto angle. a 0 
designed to place Unesco's the Secretarial, public readers desretoknow 
achilles withinabroader  facillies and prospects 
  
   
     
    
      
    
   
     
     
  
re fa   
= = 
"A new publication 
~ Unesco has just brought out a new information document entitled ‘1988 at Unesco: New 
Openings’. presenting the general objectives of the Organization. its activities last year and 
~ the new directions it is taking. 
Designed to reflect the fresh approaches and reforms underway in the Secretariat, its 
56 pages give a wealth of facts, figures. photographs and data on Unesco's work. The 
intended readership is wide. ranging from the general public to experts, governments and 
the media. , ae 
~ Thisbrochure shows particularly. that many of the items atthe top of the world's agenda. 
today. come squarely within Unesco’s scope. and that the Organizations setting resolutely 
to the task of offering good answers to the most pressing questions. q 
~ '1988at Unesco: New Openings is available in English and French. A Spanish 
is due out shortly and other language versions are envisaged. 
    
    
    
      
   
   
version 
     
      
   
  
The Inspectorate General 
Unesco 
7. place de Fontenoy 
75700 Paris

## [Page 60](083091engo.pdf#page=60) 0

### IGNORE

  
DECLARATION 
DES DROITS DE LHOMME ET DU (CITOYVEN., 
Decretes par la Convenuon Naconale en 1-03 
  
     
  
      
    
      
          
        
       
     
  
  
weeepies pu le Peuple Francas . 
  
    
  
  
   
 
    
  
     
 
           
  
   
   
c
A
 
T
A
N
 
Py
 
Bw
) 
+ B
s
 
i. 
: 
— a : Ly . : NNN TRE RT LAS PREAMDULE x\ ~~ A Laid) Hl j : (fd ; . . . 3A . . ’ . orn QF b, —_— =. A Le pewjde francs, convamen que Youbli of La dor we dost devorys qe des poses thacte Woot 1 v 1 ¥ 7 ie wiepris drs droits naturcs de Fhowoe, {oat y went ot endowment wee chairs los pcs forvent 4 3 ¥ | . {1 A 4 cr tee {rles cardes des imnalhiec he dn monde, » veiotu { cre propovticandes an Adil et utiles als loosed, 0h 3 y h a a : de vpole dans wae deivlaration (olemanelle ors dooits {% . 3 4 XVI d =k coeds of malicnabies, abn (Joc fons les alovens, ponsasd con - 7 Le drat de prop vd oft celin qu sppartient atoul coven W ~ 3 . | # jer {aus ocdie Yew actos dn Com wencinont svee le Lat Ae 0 dejounr of de difpoler A fo oF de tes lacus, de les reveuna, dn . oo towte mflifuton (oeule, ue (o Ladies Jrusnis oppruaey of evilis frwit de fon travel ot de loo Bdeihre \! E or 4 » par a fyrmanue abu que le pruple wt fompones Aven! dea your fos 3 xvi . - 1 - bales de ih hbotd of de (oa baubiens, le wagiflret la regle de fo de- 0 Nut gore de travail, de cnltre, de commerce ue pont core iuterdit a | 5 / y i! : vous, le Iegilafons Tobit de GB wllion . © hod ! Nuduttre des cxtovens. J id A od ’ Ku conieqirnee, d prodase en predenece de Etre Ampoduc, la deeds = . xvi 31 - : v ralion fuivente des deorts de Moose of du citgyen . Tout Lamune peut ogager {oa fervores don tora ; wae] we pot fe vender “3 k ARTICLE PREMIER m fare veudn, Sa perfoios ool pus ve propect’ alicuable La Ja ue reeou ' Sl 5 > Le bat de la loaded oft le boohewr commmnn . wos! past de Amuetbiote’, d oe pout exdle peas eugagesent de fom ot de 10 g 42 3 i Le governement of wiles poor garantie » owas by jondanee de " recamniiauce utee Thame qu trevalle of eck qa | maplee. 4 | a - i [EN dros uatorely of ingredoviptbles : xix . 3 . n a Nul ne peut core prove de bs smondre porn de fa propeicte {ana don 4 Pr 1 Con deonte (out 1egafird, La libat, la lhrete, Wa propre. or rosleutoment, is ce nell losique la neectte pe bliqoe, epnlewout cand » <1 o 5 - mn. 7 3 tate iexige, of lous la condition dune joie ot prealable ate : $ : T i Ton dew Lowsmes fond dg por la afore of devant be ln 2 had . XX. M . 4 
a Iv Nal contabwnon we prot fre cable que pons Fathte gmevale. Tous | N+ ) La in ofl Vexprelion ne of {olomuclie dels veloute’ gruerele; cir ol fos catoverss ont dren de conconrie a Udabhilement des cnotibubians y : \ ba wane pour fons, lot qu'elle protege, fou quirdie praille, rie or pew dex frevaller fomplor, ot de sen bare render Compete. : z ordomiey que or qu ofl jufle of wlie ale (ood: die or ponl dreads e XXr1 F 3 que oo qui foi ofl wedibie, Los {econrs publics faut ane dette (verde. La foeiédd doit bs (ohiilbaec ¥ OL Vv. amx crtovens salbemreny, {oat en leur wr ant do travel, font en adn - 4 or Tons les otovens out penned adodbibles anx ovaplois publics Les 8 rout les moras dealer 4 conx qu {ont boos deat de travaller. peuples hibves ue covaobnt dates moat de pretitronces dacs jours | Xxu 
Actions que fee vertus of los talons, 
Vi 
La herds’ ofl ie pouvoir qu appufient a Thaaoe de laice fond re 
qm ue nmt pas ans deontn danfroi lle . pow pruscipe In aathire 
pony regle a pudbiec; pow Lapve gode fa lo; La laude soonvale ofl Ais 
celle ynaxone : me fins a avd or gue fu me weve par gn ot ool fort : 
   
 
Uinftrnrton ofl le beloin de tons. La loot doit Grandes de tat foo pone 
few progrés dels radon poldiqor, of nice Nulbuction ab potcodetoas ics of 
w xxi 
ye. 
la guorsnie facile rondiile dans Lactioa de tong pour aberera charm ba pal’ 
Groer ln condorvation de fos dooms: cette geamtie repole (ir la lomversmetd 
xx 
a
n
 
ol
 
a
 
   
   
    
   
    
    
   
   
  
      
   
mn « EB 
I+ drort deromateller {3 pence et {oa opiuions, dou pov la yore dela f : 
prebae, {on de towte entice wanicre, be deot de al emibley piles, le 
Libre exveveree des cobten ne peaveat ie mtovbi(a 
La nerd die dduouror ors dyots apple on ba predones onde lowerar 
vecout dn dedpotidine . 
 
   
   
   
    
   
    
  
        
   
   
   
    
     
   
Hw
 
- - 
Ie oe peat exiles, 13 les lasites des bonetions peltames ac four pos Harem 
détrrmmenparia lo, tia rdpout aldo de tons lea fooctounes poll pron; 
XX dl 
La Somveramcte relide dans le people File ofl ane of wdivitilde mpeel’ - 3 3 eriptible ctimnshenahle - A 
xxvi a 
73 . 
3 
. 
   ne T
r
 
* 
     
   
   
      
     
   
   
   
    
   
   
   
     
   
    
   
     
    
    
    
   
      
   
   
    
    
           
   
    
   
   
    
    
[Fs VILL. Ancone portion da people ne peat exoreer la porbdanes dn peuple on - : hy : La tiretd combate dans 1a proveetion acvordce peril ad » chown . Ger; nuns chaque focfion du fomorain sfiewbliée, doit jour da drow dex 3 A at ’ Ar les wenliees pone a cadervation de (a peviouur, de bow doonts ot de pruuer 4a voloute sve nue catiere fbertd a 5 | at J fs progrictes. 3 ) tm AREY Yor 3 Ty Fj x Que tant mdavde qu wlorperost la louverametd {oir a Vindlant nie & ¥ 
ES | : La doi dou poten [I Am publique ot wdmwadardle ronte top ! mort par los bounces bees. vis i 
| prebiion de ceux TT gowverment . Un peuple » tonjours le drat de revoir, de rvélormer of de Auager {a : ™ 
5 : " X. 0 ’ coniltetinn. Une graces ac abopror i {es lotx bes grurvahons fai <7 "SE Nod ue deat voter arene, wyele, m defen ™ denis Irn can Acteyum - § © Rt - A Unimpen 3 5 : nés par ln don, ot felon les Lovaas qiclic a predenites i ot ritorve wap- hace coven sum droit eg de cvnronnir a be borat de la lot, ol 4 : x pelle on aid pa Vmntooie de a loi dot obiar a Vflanet A Le vould com Is monmnation de fos meadetalres ou de fox agens. : -~ = a 
sable ba eelilance 
a . XXX 2 . ER nr 
yy PAG par oa Felt WE. » Lew Fone tioms publique out ecu. feuspareives; ceva yon ’ : . f Tent eet Exerc’ conten kane bare Se ton. =f Bin los Sxmes veut Sie wie adevben commu des difhuctfions em comune des reeomponkes, J | 
Ti a qe ule ddtaroune “lt alates of wn mn gue sda route beqacd on ums coma dew une ERIE } J 
fed vundeort Yexdentor por ba vaclener «de dro de le repundiey parla fore. hy Low Ate des msndataires dn peuple of do fos ue dovwent ja - by Le Xn. . ye mss ce wapinia . Nol aia le drout de (6 préteu plas ivialalide que ie Conx a {oli cvtevouend ,expedimorrat , Lirncraont, exdenieronent ) 
tre entree ertovens | 
   
    
   
on ferment exronter des artes arbitcoates, Soul ronpald ww rl domerast 
cle Pras Pr
t 
. _
 
\ 
th
 
xXxxu 
Le deat de prdfouter des potions anx dcépolitaces de lsasoris polbdiqoe : A® ! 
im 
    
   
    
   
§ i1
iF 1 
ue peat on anc car Sore mtordit, {nfpeada ai lanite 
     
   
    
     
       
       
 
       
    
i . i . xin F [ Toot hotone cant predmud nmocout pega a ce asl wi che’ deca 20 i xxxu 
| Ye 4) oe cunpalide, ool Juge inddpenlable de aerdter, toute ani Lavi res Eopprefbion oft a cotquenen des aires Aronty de Mouume. NE 
v perost pas acelin pow sallaver 4c a prviouue, dol ofr fever « 
Hove oppeclvon contre de corps {ocwul, lor wu’ foul de low ue - bees ofl aptund Hl va oppreliion routre dager wemabre ladque lo 
corps foo 
: 
- 
: 
: 
: 
. 
ment repre pocladon. 
1 
oft opp. ' 
XXxw. 
Quand. le Gomvrruement viole les droits dn peapte, Tindarrertion —— 
5 
H 
        
. XIN. 
Nel ue dou etre ORE pm, (W aprea avour He endruda on kegabauod 
’ 
appelle’of qn ou vera dane ba prosadguce antoncuromest an dit. 1a lon 
qm preset les dedite commas avant qu rile cxf al (evolves Cyraamae Ls het 
retroactl douse a la lon feront van evaane 
E
E
E
]
 
   
rl por fe pemple, of pour uname partion da prope 13 Gerd des 
dionts ot be plus wdisponlalle Are devoars 
or p———— ee —
: 
-  