# [064331](064331engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](064331engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

4 od 
& le 
¥ 
 
 
    
 

## [Page 2](064331engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

O £ 
~
 
A
L
D
 
v 
    
   
   
%    
S
R
N
R
 
O
N
 
  
     
  
     
   
l
a
 
XN
 
Xd
 
ON
O 
S
O
N
G
 
I    
| 
. 
THE FOUNTAIN OF LIFE, an illustration from an Ethiopian religious manuscript. The fullest and 
most varied expression of Ethiopian art is found in the illuminated manuscripts of this African Christian 
kingdom. Striking examples are now published in a Unesco World Art Series Album (See p. 30).

## [Page 3](064331engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

‘mCourier 
Contents 
No. 12, 
PUBLISHED IN 
EIGHT EDITIONS 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
American 
Japanese 
  
COVER PHOTO 
 
In a long life filled with 
creative literary and arlistic 
activities and occupations, 
Rabindranath Tagore also 
found time for extensive 
travel as an Ambassador 
of Goodwill, seeking to 
promote International under- 
standing. Here, wearing a 
garland of roses, he was pho- 
tographed Jn Teheran, capita! 
of Iran, on the occasion of 
his 71st birthday, In 1932, 
© Rabindra-Sadana, Visva 
Bharati, India. 
DECEMBER 1961 
14TH YEAR 
Page 
4 
12 
17 
18 
22 
26 
27 
28 
30 
33 
34 
HOMAGE TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
For the | 00th anniversary of his birth 
By Vittorino Veronese 
PORTRAIT OF A MAN 
By Satyajit Ray 
REBEL WITH A UNIVERSAL CAUSE 
He named his school “Abode of Peace” 
By Humayun Kabir 
A LITTLE-KNOWN REALM 
OF HAUNTING SONGS AND MELODIES 
Tagore, a composer unshackled by tradition 
By Philippe Stern & Arnold A. Bake 
THE ENCHANTMENT OF LINES 
REVELATIONS OF A NOBEL PRIZE IN LITERATURE 
By Mahmud Shah Qureshi 
READINGS FROM TAGORE 
WORLD HOMAGE TO A UNIVERSAL MAN 
THE ART OF ETHIOPIA’S PAINTER-SCRIBES 
A new Unesco art album reveals little-known masterpieces 
By Abbé Jules Leroy 
THE TUMULTUOUS HISTORY OF ANCIENT NUBIA 
A Soviet archzologist retraces 3,000 years of Nubian history 
By Boris Piotrovsky 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
(M.C. 61.1.164 A) 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
Gordon Behrens 
Associate Editors 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin   
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition ;: Yeniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Amin Shaker (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Scientific and Cultural 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin july and August when 
itis bi-monthly (1 issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Rustian, German 
Arabic and Japanese. In the United Kingdom it it distributed by H. M 
Stationery Office, P. O, Box 569, London, 5. E. I. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads "Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editor: of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
The Uneaco Courier ie indexed monthly in The Readara’ Gulde to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilion Co.,, New York. 
Annual subscription rates: U,S.$ 3,00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 
New Francs or equivalent. Single copies [/-stg. 30 
cents (U.S.) ; 0.70 New Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7+, 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.  

## [Page 4](064331engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

a a Are 


### 64276: A Centenary tribute to Rabindranath Tagore

A centenary tribute to 
RABINDRANATH 
TAGORE 
svar Tagore, philosopher, educator, novelist, poet and painter, is 
without challenge one of the greatest and most noble figures of modern 
times. Not only was he awarded the rare honour of the Nobel Prize for Literature, but 
he also won the distinction far more rare, less spectacular but much more significant, 
of having his works translated into different languages by writers of equal glory, Nobel 
Prize winners in their own right, such as André Gide in French and Juan Ramon 
Jimenez in Spanish. 
India today does not celebrate merely the thinker and writer. Above all, India reveres 
Tagore's generous, universal soul, open to the problems not only of his own land but 
of the world, the son of the Maharshi Debendranath Tagore, who had been one of the 
guiding spirits of the Brahma-Samaj. For one of his greatest works, the monumental 
novel Gora, Rabindranath was to choose as theme the trials and problems of this 
movement. It is not merely by chance that Unesco, among its many undertakings 
towards the celebration of Tagore's Centenary, has decided to publish the first French 
translation of this very novel. For in this book the poet stresses with great fervour 
and by moving scenes depicted with all his skill as a writer, his zealous devotion to the 
ideal of a casteless world, a world without cruel, irrational discrimination between 
one human being and his fellow men. His hero, Gora, cries out: “It is you who are 
my mother. The imaginary mother whom | long sought during my wandering and 
vagabonding was sitting at home, waiting before my own room. You have no caste, 
you make no distinction between men, you know no hatred, you give flesh to nothing 
but the good that is in all of us. It is you who are India.” And then come these words 
of Gora, which one might well apply to Tagore himself: “No longer is there opposed 
within me the Hindu, Moslem and Christian. Today all foods are my food.” For indeed, 
Tagore took nourishment from what all the world had to offer, and his message of 
mutual understanding and tolerance is directed far beyond the boundaries of India, 
to all cultures and to all men. A message of freedom too, not merely freedom for 
oneself, but for all: “He who wishes freedom for himself”, he affirmed, yet fears 
freedom for his neighbour, is not worthy of freedom.” 
lt is only fitting that the entire globe should unite with India in rendering solemn 
homage to a man whose glory ennobled indissolubly both his own country and the 
world. 
Writing days after Tagore’s death in August 1941, Jawaharlal Nehru said : “Both 
Gurudey and Gandhiji took much from the West and from other countries, especially 
Gurudev. Neither was narrowly national. Their message was for the world.” Tagore 
was in truth a living link between East and West. And so he willed it. His entire life 
he fought against narrow distrust of foreign cultures. He had faith in the fruitfulness 
of cultural intercourse and friendship. With this message he was and remains a Guru 
to Unesco, and it is both fitting and imperative that Unesco’s homage to Tagore should 
join that of the rest of mankind. 
VITTORINO VERONESE 
Message from the Director-General of Unesco, to the 
Tagore Centenary celebrations in Bombay in January. 
atrat ir ore ier TT rm 5 OE 3 " um a ee Te I. RE ———_., . i ye N gt FOR w= NA 7 Tg ae Sn 7 od TARRY Sa

## [Page 5](064331engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
RABINDRANATH TAGORE WITH A GROUP OF STUDENTS IN THE SCHOOL HE FOUNDED AT SANTINIKETAN IN 1801, 


### 64279: Portrait of a man

PORTRAIT OF A MAN 
by Satyajit Ray 
This year the world celebrates the birth, one hundred years 
ago, of one of India’s greatest figures, Rabindranath Tagore. As 
part of the commemorations organized in Tagore’s honour, 
the Indian Government asked Satyajit Ray to produce a 
documentary film on the poet, his background and his contri- 
bution to the arts and international understanding. Satyajit 
Ray is one of India’s leading film directors. His best-known 
film, Pather Panchali, received the * Most Human Document” 
award at the Cannes Film Festival in 1956, and Aparajito won 
the Venice Film Festival grand prize in 1957. THE UNESCO 
COURIER wishes to thank the Films Division of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, for 
permission to reproduce the text of Mr. Ray’s commentary for 
his just completed film. The article below is copyright 
and may not be reproduced without prior permission. 
O: August 7, 1941, in the city of Calcutta, a man 
died. His mortal remains perished, but he left 
behind him a heritage which no fire could consume. 
It was a heritage of words and music and poetry, of 
ideas and of ideals, and it has the power to move us today 
and in the days to come. 
We, who owe him so much, salute his memory. 
Founded in the year 1690 by an Englishman named Job 
Charnock, the city of Calcutta, one hundred years ago, 
was a thriving metropolis. As the capital of India, 
Calcutta was the seat of government. 
In the northern part of this sprawling city, in the area 
known as Jorasanko In Chitpore, was the family resi- 
dence of the Tagores. The Tagores had an Impressive 
lineage. It dated back to the first group of learned 
Brahmins that came from Kanauj and settled In Bengal 
in the 8th century. One thousand years later, Pancha- 
nan, a descendant, came to the new city of Calcutta and 
found a lucrative position with a British shipping com- 
pany. His grandson Nilmoni added considerably to the 
family fortune and bullt the house at Jorasanko in 1789. 
The peak was reached, however, with Nilmon!’s grand- 
son, Dwarkanath, one of the most brilllant and colourful 
figures of the 15th century. Dwarkanath Tagore combin- 
ed cultured sophistication with largeness of heart and a 
rare degree of business acumen. Coal, sugar, indigo, 
export, banking, newspapers, there was no end to his 
enterprise—and he succeeded In all. If his earnings were 
fabulous, so were his spendings. 
Although a Hindu and a Valshnab, Dwarkanath defied 
the ban of Brahmin orthodoxy and twice went to England. 
There he had an audience with Queen Victoria, dlscus- 
slons with Gladstone, and dinner with men like Dickens, 
Thackeray and Max Muller. 
Before his death In England, Dwarkanath had written 
a letter to hls eldest son Debendranath reproving him 
for neglecting the family’s business affairs. For some 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
LT
 
FR
ab
in
dr
a-
8a
da
ra
, 
Vi
sv
a 
Bh
ar
at
 
5

## [Page 6](064331engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 64279: Portrait of a man

PORTRAIT OF A MAN (Cont'd) 
Growing up in a family 
of scholars and artists 
years past, young Debendranath had been developing ten- 
dencles which might well have distressed his father. 
It began in a burning ghat. The last rites were being 
administered to Debendranath’s grandmother. Not far 
away, on the river bank, sat Debendranath. Like many a 
rich man’s son, he had been leading a wayward life. But 
tonight, he was overcome by a strange feeling. Wordly 
possessions seemed to lose their meaning for him. 
This led to a period of profound disquiet, followed by 
a ceaseless quest for the meaning of existence in the 
great source books of the East and West. He read the 
materialist philosophers of modern Europe—Locke, Hume, 
Bentham and others—whose ideas were so much in vogue 
among the students of the time. Then he learnt Sans- 
krit and read the Mahabharata. But peace of mind 
would not come until one day he chanced upon a torn 
page of a Sanskrit book. There was a sloka in it which 
sald: God 1s supreme and all-pervading. Be content with 
what He gives. Do not covet another's wealth. 
H1s happened to be a page of the Ishopa- 
nishad, edited by Raja Rammohun Roy. 
Rammohun had been a close friend of Dwarkanath’s. As 
a boy. Debendranath had a deep and silent admiration 
for the man. But the greatness of the Raja’s vision and 
the magnitude and nobility of the tasks he had set before 
himself, were beyond the boy’s comprehension. The Raja 
lived in times when India's spiritual heritage was being 
submerged in ritual and superstition. 
Rammohun advocated Western education for Indians 
because he wanted the new ideas of the West to spread 
in the country. But he also wanted us to respect what 
was old and true in our own heritage. His own study of 
the Upanishads had led him to the monotheistic bases 
of Hinduism, which he sought to spread through writings 
and lecturers. 
His work was left unfinished by his death in England. 
And now Debendranath inspired by the two lines of 
Sanskrit text, went on to prove himself to be his true 
spiritual son and heir, 
Debendranath suffered soclal ostracism for preaching 
the monotheistic faith that he called Brahmolism, but to 
his followers—and there were many—he was Maharshi, 
the Great Sage. 
When Rabindranath was born, the Maharshi was 
45 years old. His wife Saradamoni was 33. Rabin- 
dranath was the fourteenth child. The eldest was 
Dwijendranath—poet, philosopher, mathematiclan. The 
second son Satyendranath was a Sanskrit scholar who 
translated the Gita and Meghdoot into Bengall verse, 
went to England and returned as the first Indian member 
of the Indian Civil Service. The fifth son Jyotirindranath 
was a born musician, translated Moliére and Sanskrit 
dramas into Bengali, and wrote and staged some of the 
most popular Bengali plays of his time. Among the 
daughters was Swarnakumari, the first woman novelist 
and the first woman to edit a literary journal in India. 
Indeed {t was a household which hummed with activity. 
At the age of seven, Rabi was sent to school. He 
went to four schools and hated them all. But to say that 
he lacked education would be wrong, for his third brother, 
Hemendranath, saw to his studies at home, and it was 
all done by the clock. 
Rabl was 13 when his first book of verse, Kabikahini, 
came out. When Rabi was 16, Dwijendranath brought 
out a literary magazine called Bharati, and Rabi found 
an admirable platform for his literary activities. His 
essays included pleces on European poets like Dante and 
Petrarch whose acquaintance Rabi had already made 
CONT'D ON PAGE 8 
 
 
  
THE TALENTED FAMILY into which Tagore was born 
proved a potent factor in the flowering of his genius. His 
grandfather went to England in defiance of contemporary 
conventions. His father was a leader of revolt against ortho- 
doxy in his championship of the Brahmo faith and among 
Rabindranath’s brothers and sisters were a scholar, a poet, a 
musician and the first woman to edit a literary journal in India. 
It was a household which hummed with activity. Above left, 
- » oI CREA IY TY N 
h » Nn 7 ; 

## [Page 7](064331engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 64279: Portrait of a man

  
Pabindranath in 1881, aged 20, in the role of Valmiki in 
his opera Valmiki Prativa (Countenance of the Great Sage 
Valmiki) at its first performance in the Tagore home in 
Calcutta. Above, photo taken after a family presentation of 
Tagore’s play, Phalguni. From left, Abanindrath, Samaren- 
dranath and Gaganendranath, all nephews of Tagore, Willie 
Pearson, an English friend, and Tagore himself. Below right, 
Tagore and his bride, Mrinalini Devi. Below, Tagore’s parents. 
  o 
All photos © Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati 
 

## [Page 8](064331engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 64279: Portrait of a man

PORTRAIT OF A MAN (Cont'd) 
Philosopher, educator, novelist, poet & painter 
in the llbrary of his elder brother Satyendranath. 
Satyendranath’s wife Gnanadanandini, who had been 
staying in England with her two children, was a remark- 
able woman who had been persuaded by her husband to 
come out of orthodox seclusion. Rabi set out for 
England in the summer of 1879 and jolned Gnanadanan- 
dini at Brighton. If the plan was to provide the boy with 
a proper education, it came to nought. For Rabi returned 
a year later without completing his course of studies at 
London University. 
While In England, Rabl had become acquainted with 
Western music. Some of the tunes he had learnt found 
their way into’ the enchanting opera Valmiki-Prativa. 
There were other tunes, however, which had thelr origin 
in classical Indian ragas, used for the first time in an 
operatic context. 
Valmiki-Prativa was performed in the Tagore residence 
with Rabindranath himself in the role of the bandit- 
turned-poet. The rest of the cast too was composed of 
members of the Tagore famlly, all gifted with varying 
degrees of talent, 
Aor those who saw and praised this perfor- 
mance was the greatest literary figure of the 
time, Bankim Chandra Chatterjl. A year later, when 
Rabindranath’s Sandhya-Sangeet was published, Bankim- 
chandra personally congratulated the poet and acknow- 
ledged his pre-eminence among the rising writers of the 
day. 
At the age of 22, Rabindranath married Bhabatarini 
Devi: the old-fashioned name was later changed to 
Mrinalinl. Two months before the wedding Rabin- 
dranath had received a letter from his father in which 
he was asked to prepare himself to look after the family 
estates, After a period of initial training in the Estate's 
Offices In Calcutta, Rabindranath found himself in the 
very heart of rural Bengal, In the area of the river Padma. 
. With a worldly wisdom unusual in a poet but character- 
istic of the Tagores Rabindranath in later life set out 
in a practical way to improve the lot of the poor peasants 
of his estates and his varied work in this field is on 
record. But his own gain from this intimate contact 
with the fundamental aspects of life and nature, and the 
influence of this contact on his own life and work are 
beyond measure. 
Living mostly in his boat and watching the life through 
the window, a whole new world of sights and sounds and 
feelings opened up before him. It was a world in which 
the moods of people and the moods of nature were 
inextricably interwoven. The people found room in a 
succession of great short stories, and nature, In an out- 
pouring of exquisite songs and poems. Dominant was the 
mood of the rains, exultant and terrible. 
In 1901, Rabindranath was 40 years old. His already 
enormous output of poems and plays had been gathered 
in one blg volume. It comprised 21 books and included 
Sonar Tari, his first masterpiece. 
The same year, 1901, marked an event of a somewhat 
different nature. In 1862, one year after Rabindranath 
was born, the Maharshi had acquired some property in 
Bolpur, in the district of Birbhum in West Bengal. The 
property was made over to a board of trustees, and the 
deed specified that the place was to be used for medit- 
ation on the Supreme Formless Being. According to the 
Maharshi's wishes, a seat of prayer and a temple of wor- 
ship had been built, and close to the temple, a residence 
which was called Santiniketan—the Abode of Peace. 
Rabindranath had been worrying about the education of 
his children, and he decided to start an experimental 
educational institution in Santiniketan. It was to be a 
school but not like the schools that had been the night- 
mare of his own childhood. It was to be like the forest 
hermitages of classical India. 
But to bring it into being was not an easy task. For 
one thing it cost money and Rabindranath had to sel], 
among other things, the copyright of his books. His wife 
added her bit by selling her wedding ornaments. Three 
months after the school was opened, she was taken IIL 
Two months later, she died. For Rabindranath it was 
the beginning of a series of personal tragedies. 
Nine months after his wife’s death, his second daughter 
Renuka passed away. The hardest blow of all came four 
years later. The youngest son Sam], who took after his 
father in many ways, fell a victim to cholera when he was 
only 12. 
It was in the midst of these bereavements that Rabin- 
dranath participated in one of the greatest political 
upheavals in the history of India. In December 1903 was 
published the decision of Governor-General Lord Curzon 
to split up Bengal into two provinces. The idea was to 
create a separate province with a Moslem majority, which 
would induce a rift between the two malin religious groups 
and thus avert the possible growth of a united front 
against the Government. 
But in proposing the Partition, Curzon merely fanned 
the flame of patriotism that had been smouldering in the 
minds of certain visionaries all through the period of the 
renaissance in Bengal. These men now came to the fore 
and led the millions to rise in a protest. The series of 
stirring patriotic songs which Rabindranath composed 
for the occasion were sung in processions in the streets 
of Calcutta with the poet himself in the lead. 
On October 27, 1905, the Partition became an accom- 
plished fact. In a form of protest that only a poet could 
concelve, Rabindranath turned the Black Day into a mass 
festival of Rakhibandhan—the tying of the band of 
friendship. 
But the Swadeshi movement was fated to grow and 
assume a character which was not possible to foresee in 
its early stages. While admitting the bravery and patriot- 
ism of those who killed or were killed in a reckless bid 
for freedom Rabindranath could not condone terrorism. 
He stated his credo in clear terms. The path of violence 
was not for India. Good could come only out of con- 
structive work carried out In a spirit of tolerance. 
He had himself followed up his retirement from the 
political scene by undertaking the work of rural welfare 
in his estates. And there were other activities: he was 
teaching at school, editing journals, and engaging himself 
in almost every conceivable form of literary activity. 
HAT his own countrymen now regarded him 
as their leading man of letters was proved by 
his 50th birthday celebrations in Calcutta. Sponsored 
by the Bengal Academy of Letters and attended by 
thousands, it was a unique literary manifestation in India. 
But to the outside world, Rabindranath was still an 
unknown name. 
The object of Rabindranath’s visit to England in 1912 
was to study the educational methods of the West and 
also to acquaint the West with his work at Santiniketan. 
He happened to carry with him on this occasion a note 
book containing his own English translations of some of 
his poems, mainly from Gitanjall,. He showed these 
translations to the English painter William Rothenstein 
who had met the poet on an earlier visit to India. 
Rothenstein was so impressed that he sent a copy of the 
translation to the great Irish poet William Butler Yeats. 
Introducing the poems to a gathering of English writers 
and intellectuals, Yeats said: “I know of no man In my 
time who has done anything in the English language 
to equal these lyrics. Even as I read them in these literal 
English translations, they are exquisite in style and 
thought.” 
Gitanjali was published in England in the same year. 
There has rarely been another instance of a poet galning 
world fame in like manner. The Nobel Prize came in 
1913 and knighthood in 1915, while war was raging in 
Europe. Touring the United States and Japan In 1916, 
Rabindranath made eloquent appeals for peace. He felt 
that world peace could be achieved only through 
CONT'D ON PAGE [0 

## [Page 9](064331engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 64279: Portrait of a man

  
    
  
KINDRED SPIRITS: In 1921 Tagore met the great French writer and thinker Romain Rolland for the first time. Desplte the barriers 
of language the two men reached such a degree of sympathetic understanding that Tagore wrote to one of his friends: “Of all the 
men | confronted in the Occident it was Romain Rolland that struck me as the nearest to my heart and the most akin to my spirit.” 
In 1926, when Tagore was again travelling in Europe he sat and talked with Rolland in the latter's garden at Villeneuve In 
Switzerland where the photo below was taken. Above, Tagore with the famous German theologian and educator, Paul 
Geheeb, in 1930. Paul Geheeb, who died last year aged 90, founded the Oldenwald School Germany, as well as the 
Ecole d'Humanité at Goldern, in Switzerland. Paul Geheeb's ideas have inspired educators in many other countries. 
Photos (©) Rabindra-Sadana, Viiva Bharati 
a. -

## [Page 10](064331engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 64279: Portrait of a man

  
  (©) Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bha
ra
ti
 
TWO GREAT MINDS and two great humanists were confronted 
when Tagore met Albert Einstein during a visit to Berlin in 1930. Tag- 
ore's humanist ideas found an echo in the best minds of Europe and 
some of its great men became his closest friends. Other Europeans 
came to India ‘and worked devotedly for the poet and his cause. 
No nation can he proud of isolating its life & culture 
intellectual co-operation between nations. He said, “The 
call has come to every individual in the present age to 
prepare himself for the dawn of a new era, when man 
Shall discover his soul in the spiritual unity of all human 
eings.” 
Pursuing this noble idea of International co-operation, 
Rabindranath gave the school at Santiniketan a new 
status and a new name. “Yatra Visvam Bharati Eka- 
nirham”—Where the world makes home in a single nest— 
this was the motto of Visvam Bharati, the World Uni- 
versity, which was Inaugurated in December 1918 with the 
aged philosopher Brijendranath Seal presiding. 
While peace had been restored in Europe, in Indla there 
was unrest. The occasion was the Rowlatt Bill, designed 
to suppress all political movements. If dashed India’s 
hopes of gaining the self-government that the British 
rulers had kept promising through the war years. 
Dominating the Indian political scene at this time was 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. As a barrister in South 
Africa, Gandhi had fought for the rights of the Indians 
living in that country. As a protest against the Rowlatt 
Act, Gandhi launched a movement of passive resistance. 
But the masses misinterpreted the movement and follow- 
Ing a rumour of Gandhi's arrest, violence broke out in 
many parts of the country. As a result of this the 
Government started taking repressive measures out of all 
proportion to the magnitude of the violence. 
In the Punjab, martial law was declared. In charge of 
the troops at Amritsar was Brigadler General Dyer. On 
the first day of the month of Vaisakh, a crowd gathered 
in Jalllanwallabagh, as it had done every other-year. It 
was a peaceful crowd. But Dyer was taking no chances. 
10 Machine guns rattled. 
The news of the Amritsar incident was suppressed by 
the Government, but detalis of it {filtered through to 
other parts of the country and even to the Abode of 
Peace. 
Rabindranath rushed to Calcutta. But the Defence of 
India Act was still in force and no leaders would support 
him in a plea for a meeting of protest. 
At four o'clock on the morning of May 30, Rabindra- 
nath finished writing a letter. It was addressed to the 
Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, and it was published in the 
newspapers. Condemming the Government for the 
killing at Jalllanwallabagh, Rabindranath concluded by 
saying: “And I for my part wish to stand, shorn of all 
special distinctions, by the side of my countrymen whd 
for their so-called insignificance are liable to suffer 
degradation not fit for human beings. And these are the 
reasons ‘which have painfully compelled me to ask your 
Excellency to relieve me of my title of knighthood.” 
The next ten years of Rabindranath’s life were filled 
with ceaseless activity. The urge to travel, and the 
necessity to collect funds for his university, took him to 
all parts of the world and the West as much as the East, 
welcomed him with open arms. 
Wherever he went, he spread the message of peace and 
stressed the Importance of intellectual co-operation 
between nations. He said: “We ought to know that isol- 
ation of life and culture is not a thing of which any 
nation can be proud. In the human world, giving is 
exchanging, it is not one-sided.” 
His great humanist ideas found an echo in the best 
minds of Europe, and some became his close friends. 
In the meanwhile, the institution at Santiniketan had 
come a long way from its modest beginnings. Its scope 
for studies had greatly increased. There was Kalabha- 
wan for the study of painting, under masters like 
Nandalal Bose, who was himself a pupil of Abanindranath,

## [Page 11](064331engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 64279: Portrait of a man

B
s
 
: 
2      
   
» 
Of
fi
ci
al
 
So
vi
et
 
Ph
ot
os
 
EN - 2 
{ . - 4 
Ah 
; Bi. ry - a Ta 
destroyers of interdependance.”. 
 
THE QUEST for the unity of man in the midst of diversity led Tagore to travel to the farthest corners of the world. “Uniformity Is 
not unity,” he once said ; “only those who are different can unite. Nations that wipe out the Independence of other nations are the 
He was the first great Indian In recent times to embark on a cultural mission for 
restoring contacts and establishing friendship with peoples of other countries. Above, in 1930, Soviet citizens gather to 
greet Tagore in Moscow and youngsters crowd around him as he visits a centre of the “Pioneers” children's organization. 
a nephew of the poet. The Sangeet Bhawan which 
neglected no brand of Indian music had also grown under 
Dinendranath, another of the poet’s nephews. Special 
provisions had been made for conducting oriental studies, 
and scholars came from abroad and stayed to lecture for 
study and research. Such men were Moriz Winternitz 
from Austria, Sylvain Levi from France, Victor Lesny 
from Austria, and Sten Konow from Norway. 
But there were some Europeans who did even more 
than that. Charles Freer Andrews, a missionary who was 
present at Yeats’ reading of Gitanjali, and William wWin- 
stanely Pearson, who had also met the poet in England, 
came to the Ashram in its early days—drawn by the 
poet's personality—and stayed on until their death, 
working with a selfless devotion to the poet and his cause 
that few Indians could equal. Leonard Elmhirst was 
another Englishmen who was drawn by the poet's person- 
ality, came over to Santiniketan and took charge of the 
Santiniketan at Surul, two miles away. 
The poet’s last European tour began with a visit to 
Oxford where he delivered the series of Hibbert lectures 
which were later published as The Religion of Man. 
It was also on this last tour that Rabindranath went 
to Soviet Russia for the first time. On the eve of his 
departure from Moscow he told his hosts: “You have 
recognized the truth that in extirpating all speclal evils 
one has to go to the root, and the only way to it is through 
education.” In Russia as well as in other places that he 
visited on this tour, Rabindranath held exhibitions of his 
paintings. At the age of 70, Rabindranath had found a 
new outlet for his creative urge. 
In 1931, the leading citizens of Calcutta united In an 
appeal to observe the poet’s 70th birthday. It was 
celebrated in a manner that was truly worthy of the 
occasion. The Golden Book of Tagore was a testimony 
to the love and reverence that the intellectuals of the 
world bore for the poet. Its sponsors consisted of three 
Europeans and two Indians. There was Romain Rolland 
from France, Albert Einstein from Germany, and the poet 
Kostes Palamas from Greece. One of the two Indlans 
was the scientist Jagadish Chandra Bose, the other was 
Mahatma Gandhl. 
The last years of the poet's life were spent largely In 
his beloved Santiniketan. He had a cholece of small 
houses built for him, for he never liked to stay In the 
same house, or even in the same room for long. It was 
In a way symbolic of the refusal to get into a rut which 
had marked hls whole life. In his writings he was now 
producing some of hls most mature, original and striking 
works, and these Included text books and nonsense 
rhymes for children, not an unusual occupation for some- 
one who had loved and understood children all his life 
and done so much to mould them for a better future. Ills 
health was falling but calls of duty, which he was ever 
ready to answer, gave him little rest. 
On May 7, 1941, Radindranath was 80 years old. Three 
months later, he was to leave the Ashram, never to 
return. He would be taken to his ancestral house in 
Calcutta, fatally ill. 
Rabindranath attended his 80th birthday celebrations 
in Santiniketan in spite of his failing health. For the 
occasion, he had composed a message—his last message 
to the world. It was called Crisis in Civilization. It 
concerned Itself with the state of the so-called modern 
clvillzation, a civilization that was being shaken to its 
very roots by barbaric wars of aggression. 
In the course of the message, Rabindranath said: 
“I had at one time believed that the springs of civiliza- 
tion could Issue out of the heart of Europe. But today, 
when I am about to leave the world, that faith has 
deserted me. I look around and see the crumbling ruins 
of a proud civilization strewn like a vast heap of futility. 
And yet, I shall not commit the previous sin of losing 
faith in Man, I shall await for the day when the holo- 
caust will end and the alr will be rendered clean with the 
spirit of service and sacrifice. Perhaps that dawn will 
come from thls horizon, from the East, where the sun 
rises. On that day will unvanquished man retrench his 
path of conquest, surmounting all barriers, to win back 
his lost human heritage.” 
11

## [Page 12](064331engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 64281: Rebel with a universal cause: he named his school 'Abode of Peace'

BR, WN J
. 
= 
STELE UNDER A TREE with Tagore, at the age of 
44, seated beside it, marks the lonely spot where his 
~ father stopped to meditate while going on a pilgrim- 
age towards the Himalayas. Here years later, Tagore 
created his experimental school which won world 
Abd hu: 1 y 
Santiniketan—the Abode of Peace. 
LY 
 

## [Page 13](064331engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 64281: Rebel with a universal cause: he named his school 'Abode of Peace'

He named his school 
‘Abode of Peace’ 
REBEL WITH 
A UNIVERSAL 
CAUSE 
by Humayun Kabir 
 
AGORE belleved—and everyone who ponders the 
question must believe with him—that educa- 
tion 1s the foundation of society: that the teachers of 
today are the arbiters of the destiny of soclety of to- 
morrow and the day after. How men are trained, what 
ideals they imbibe: what type of character they develop, 
what knowledge is imparted to them: what are the dls- 
ciplines through which they go; what is the way in which 
their mind is formed—these are the things which ulti- 
mately shape the destinies of man. 
Tagore's {deal of education was at the same time 
revolutionary and traditional. He had the wisdom to sce 
that revolutions are successful only if they grow out of 
the past. A revolution which seeks to break away 
completely from the past, a revolution which totally 
denies tradition, ultimately defeats itself. Revolutions 
are successful only when values of the past are re- 
discovered and reshaped to meet the needs of changing 
imes. 
Tagore was an educational revolutionary in both theory 
and practice. His own experience—he left off formal 
schooling quite early in life—convinced him that the 
routine of the school, in particular the dull imposition of 
textbooks and subjects in which the child is not interest- 
ed, is more a hindrance than a help to the unfoldment 
of its spirit. He realized that the child’s mind does not 
blossom in that way. From his own experience Tagore 
learnt that education divorced from social life and 
cultural tradltions, and, more Important still, bereft of 
contacts with nature became for the child an imposition 
and a burden. 
Tagore held that education must allow the child to 
develop in the context of nature. He believed that the 
sweep of the earth and the expanse of the sky, the 
guietness of the evening and the promise of the morning, 
the beauty of the stars and the radiance of the sun must 
permeate the personality of the child. Gradually they 
must become a part of his being so that there may be 
harmony in his inner nature as there Is harmony in the 
outside world. 
Tagore knew that there are plenty of clashes and 
conflicts in life, but he held that there Is a larger harmony 
in which the smaller clashes and conflicts always find 
reconciliation. We must strive to attain the same 
harmony among our faculties. Tagore taught that the 
intellect should be developed along with the emotions and 
HUMAYUN KABIR is minister for Scientific Research and Cul- 
tural Affairs of the Government of India and a former Minister 
jor Civil Aviation. A distinguished writer and educator, Pro- 
jessor Kabir was president of the All-India Education Con- 
Jerence in 1955 and of the Indian Philosophical Congress. All- 
India Writer's Convention in 1956. His many works include : 
Men and Rivers, The Indian Heritage, Education in New India, 13 
Science, Democracy and Islam, and Immanuel Kant.   
© Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 14](064331engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 64281: Rebel with a universal cause: he named his school 'Abode of Peace'

A UNIVERSAL CAUSE (Cont'd) 
Far-seeing pioneer of modern education 
the volition, and all these aspects should grow 
harmoniously through activity of many kinds. 
Tagore did not believe in any narrow or rigid 
educational formulae. His conceptlon of education was 
in broad human terms. In his system, art had its place 
along with mathematics and science. He believed, and 
he tried to carry out his bellefs in his school, that all 
aspects of the child’s personality must develop harmon- 
lously. He was one of the earliest among modern 
educational thinkers to emphasive activity as an 
essential principle of education. 
Many of his ideals have been shared by educational 
thinkers in all countries of the world, but Tagore’s 
special contribution lay in the emphasis on harmony, on 
balance, on all-slded development of the human 
personality. He felt that if any aspect was submerged, 
It would warp the entire human outlook. For Tagore 
beauty had to be moral, and morality had to be imbued 
with the spirit of beauty. The pursuit of truth, beauty 
and goodness was the end of human life and the purpose 
of education was to train men and women to seek, 
recognize and achleve them. 
Tagore established Santiniketan as a school in 1501. 
He started with hardly a dozen pupils and one of them 
was hls own son. It was natural that Tagore’s son should 
come to study in his own school, for he was not one 
of those educational politiclans who talk much about new 
systems but send thelr own children to traditional schools. 
Tagore’s son came to Santiniketan because Tagore believed 
in it, but some of the other pupils came because they had 
proved mlisflts In the existing schools. In the beginning, 
recrults to Tagore’s school were sometimes the neglected 
children of the family, and yet these very children have 
turned out to be some of the most distinguished sons of 
modern India. In its short life of sixty years Santiniketan 
has given us a Chief Justice of India, Chief Ministers and 
Minister of States and Judges of the High Courts, great 
educatlonists, scientists, artists and phllosophers. 
AGORE believed that every individual has In 
him or her the seed of divinity. Every man 
has the promise of greatness if only we know how to 
develop his potentiality. Santiniketan has justified hls 
faith and proved that if the educational approach be 
right and imaginative, and if there he a spirit like 
Tagore’s to inspire and guide, there is no height that the 
individual may not reach. It is only because we do not 
recognize our powers, only because we allow our person- 
ality to be warped by lesser considerations, that human 
beings do not grow. One word of caution is however 
necessary. A Socrates or a Kalldasa, an Ibn Khalidun 
or a Rabindranath Tagore Is rare, even in the best of 
circumstances but given the proper education and envi- 
ronment, everyone can become a useful and creative 
member of the community, a member who contributes as 
much, as he receives, a citizen of whom any country can be 
proud. 
These are the educational ideals which Tagore 
preached; the ldeal of harmony among the different 
subjects, of harmony among all aspects of the personality, 
with a proper emphasis on emotions, intellect and volition 
of harmony of man with nature. These ideals of Tagore 
are now the common currency of the educational world. 
I have sometimes felt that if Tagore had only formulated 
his educational ideals and carried them out in 
Santiniketan, he would have been honoured as one of 
the greatest educational thinkers the world has known in 
the last 100 years. 
Tagore did not believe in blind conformity. He always 
protested against what he called Achalayatan, the 
Institution which has become immobile, customs that have 
become out-moded, beliefs that have become dead. 
Schools which do not allow the free development of the 
mind were for him prison houses and not centres of light. 
Tagore revolted against rigidity and believed that it is 
only through change, only through a forward march that 
the values of the spirit can be maintained. 
14 Every country, every community has its own peculiar 
culture, its own peculiar needs. Every age, every period 
has its own requirements. Tagore held that our pro- 
grammes must change with changing times. Values are 
eternal but their expression in institutions, traditions and 
practices must change if we are to remain true to their 
spirit. 
One of the things of which modern India is proud, one 
of the things in which we have great hopes—pride in 
what has been achieved, hopes in the promise they hold 
—1is what we call the community development pro- 
gramme. This programme has become a symbol of hope 
in our villages, and it is not accidental that it flows out 
of what Tagore taught and did. More than sixty years 
ago, Tagore sald that the greatest misfortune of modern 
India is that Shree (grace and beauty) has left the 
villages. 
Modern culture has become predominantly urban. The 
very word “civilization” suggests that it has always had 
something to do with cities, but in the modern age 
concentration on cities has become even greater. 
Throughout the world there is today a drift of the abler 
and more enterprising men and women, men and women 
of will and vision, away from rural areas to the towns. 
In consequence, village life becomes steadily more 
impoverished and the gap between the town and the 
village continually grows. In spite of the admonitions of 
many great men—of Ruskin some 100 years ago, and of 
Tolstoy, and Gandhi in the present century—nobody goes 
back to the village. 
Tagore saw the answer to their problem more than sixty 
years ago. He said that this vicious circle can be broken 
not by admonitions, not by speaking in lyric terms about 
the beauties of village life, but by improving the villages 
till they again become the home of culture and grace. 
If we can change the pattern of rural life and make 
the villages more like towns, if the great gap which exists 
today between village and town is gradually overcome, 
then and then only will the drift to the town stop. 
Villages today do not have the health services, the 
communication and the social amenities and the hundreds 
of other things which make the town such an attractive 
place for young men and women. Tagore said that able 
men ‘will stay In villages only when village life is re- 
constructed to provide educational facilities, health 
services, improved communications and adequate and 
wholesome water supply. Able men and women will 
stay in the villages only if there are opportunities for 
the fullest development of their personality. The pro- 
TAGORE'S BELIEF that education is the foundation of society led him in 
190) to create an experimental school at Santiniketan. It was given a new 
status and a new name—Visva Bharati, the World University—in 1918. Be- 
low, Sylvain Levy, the French orientalist and close friend of Tagore, lecturing 
at Santiniketan in 1923, with Tagore listening intently in the background. 
   

## [Page 15](064331engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 64281: Rebel with a universal cause: he named his school 'Abode of Peace'

© Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati 
gramme of rural reconstruction that India has undertaken 
today, the community development programme which is 
being accepted also by other countries of the world, Is a 
direct outcome of Tagore’s teaching. 
It 1s I think true to say that after 3,000 years, the 
Indian village is today on the march. For almost 3,000 
years our agriculture had hardly changed, our ways of 
living in the villages had hardly changed, and the little 
changes that had taken place were often for the worse. 
6,000 years ago we had in Indla the great civilization of 
Harappa and Mohenjo Daro. This civilization was marked 
by a pattern of planned towns with planned streets and 
drainage which would compare favourably with some of 
the most modern towns of Western Europe and America. 
But during the last 3,000 years something happened 
which changed things for the worse. We in India lost that 
knowledge and energy so that today conditions of sanita- 
tion in rural areas are such that the less we speak about 
them the better. 
V zee housing is so poor that we are ashamed 
of it. Roads, water supply and other social 
services in the villages are completely inadequate. Misery 
and squalor, poverty, ignorance and disease continued for 
over 3,000 years, but in the course of the last ten years— 
since India became free—a massive effort is being made 
to remove these evils. We are today seeking to revive the 
old spirit of Initiative and enterprise and bring back 
conditions of new life to rural areas. We aim to bring 
water to villages where there was no supply before, to 
transform old and traditional methods of agriculture and 
develop new roads and civic centres, in a word, build a 
new system of rural economy and rural life. 
It will come as a surprise to many that this Is a 
programme which Tagore spelled out some 60 years ago. 
Sixty years ago, around Santiniketan where he started 
his school, he drew up the first blueprint for the recon- 
struction of village life. And it Is remarkable that he 
sought to carry out the programme by evoking the 
interest and the initiative of the villages himself. The 
work which began on a very small scale grew till in 1921 
it developed into the Rural Institute at Sriniketan through 
the help and co-operation of an enlightened English 
friend and admirer. 
Even before the advent of the twentieth century, 
Tagore had declared that there can be no question of 
economic regeneration or political freedom for India, 
there can be no questlon of raising the standard of life 
of the people and building a new humanity in Indla, 
unless the villages changed. He pleaded that we must 
create conditions so that the villages may again become 
creative, and rural people find satisfaction in life. Ie 
pointed out that there is a close link between economic 
and cultural life, between political and moral urges. 
The Indlan people will again become creative only when 
thelr soclal and economic problems have been solved. 
Tagore declared that political bondage Is merely an 
external symptom of an Inner disease. He held that it 
Is a mistake to fight political bondage on a merely political 
programme. Such attempts, he said, are doomed to fall. 
When Indians regain their character and develop moral 
purpose and aesthetic perceptions, when they begin to 
strive for economic self-sufficiency and personal dignity, 
political bondage will drop like the slough off the snake's 
back when the winter is past. 
I wish to refer to one other element in Tagore's 
economic ideal. He was no obscurantist and knew that 
the day of the machine had come. 1e loved handicrafts 
and knew that some of the most beautiful things have 
been made by manual labour, but he also knew that in 
the modern world, there is no alternative to the machine 
If we are to provide necessary goods and services for 
millions of human beings. Al that Tagore wanted was 
that the machine must be the slave of man, not his 
master. Subject to this condition, he accepted the 
machine freely and without any mental reservation. 
The economic pattern which one Is seeking to develop 
in Indla today Is in conformity with this ideal of Tagore. 
It is an economic pattern In which heavy Industry will 
grow side by slde with consumer industries, a pattern in 
which certaln trades, certain industries will be under 
public control and management, but side by side there 
will be other spheres of economic activity where private 
enterprise will have freedom and initiative. 
Tagore Is largely responsible for the growth of a 
universal outlook In modern India. We live in an age 
when great differences divide great nations, when sharp 
conflicts reach down to the bases of soclety, when 
philosophical, religious and moral differences threaten 
the future of man. Catastrophe can be averted only if 
we learn to tolerate differences and develop an attitude 
of respect for and acceptance of diversity and change. 
Borrowing the language of Buddhism, we have called the 
principle underlylng such an attitude the principle of 
Panchsila. We may call it co-operation, we may call it 
co-existence, but In fact it Is nothing but another name 
for the basic principle of federalism, in which there is 
recognition of the dignity of every unit and of loyalty to 
the whole based on loyalty to the unity of society. 
(Address dellvered in Rome In June, 1961.) 
GANDHI AND TAGORE differed greatly in physical appearance, personal 
habits and in general outlook. At several moments of crisis in India’s political 
history, the two had disagreed over the course of action to be taken. But these 
were on the surface; their deeper affinity transcended ali occasional barriers. 
Below, Mahatma Gandhi Is received by Tagore at Santiniketan In 1940, Courtesy Christine Bossenec 
  

## [Page 16](064331engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 64283: A Little-known realm of haunting vocal music and melodies

  
Tres tres tié,lrés lent, J_g9 
Jali i Bi? Lh La 
 
 
  
  
  
                
  
oN ne Ee wt feb 1 5 ss Git =r Cet a Giese a 
me —gher po -re. megh jor me — che an - dhar ko 
WOT waaay FEELIN a Friar ie 
  
-— 
  
In the role of the blind singer in his play *'Phalguni’ (Cycle of Spring), Tagore plays an Indian stringed instrument. Top of page 
and below, extracts from score of one of Tagore's songs with Bengali lyrics taken from the volume called “Twenty-six songs of R. 
Tagore” prepared, by Arnold A. Bake and Philippe Stern and published by Librairie Orientaliste Paul Geuthner, Paris 1953. 
EE 
1 TE ZR SS —— 
Lely Sint T |  , 
PR she__ me-gher__  pd-re megh jo!me — che an _ dhar_ 
 
  
 
 
  
    
                   

## [Page 17](064331engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
   
  
+ 
*%) 3 
x 
J ——l Eo 
—— 
x 
!               
i TE   e a =. she a_-may— : 
\ ot? “ Gn LT Aa TS a Ee A a ee BAT CE Ea {== MT Te al 
RT rr ER RR SRT ry 
  
  
© Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati 
LE
 
A
S
I
N
 
 
  
 
 
   
           
O
T
 
R
R
 
AS
 


### 64283: A Little-known realm of haunting vocal music and melodies

A LITTLE-KNOWN 
REALM OF 
HAUNTING SONGS 
AND MELODIES 
by Philippe Stern and Arnold A. Bale 
|: Is not always known in the West that Tagore 
was not only a poet, but a musician as well. 
In his work, Indeed, poetry and music cannot be separat- 
ed. Songs form an important part of his creative work 
and In these words and melody complete each other. 
In his Reminiscences, he writes: “...I am always 
reluctant to publish books of the words of my songs, for 
therein the soul must needs be lacking.” And again, 
speaking of a Baul song: “Besides, the best part of a song 
Is missed when the tune is absent, for thereby its move- 
ment and its colour are lost and it becomes like a butterfly 
whose wings have been plucked.” (Indian Folk Religion. 
Creative Unity.) 
Tagore’s works have reached us without the music, and 
moreover the original has been modified. The “Poet,” as 
his disciples called him, did not think it necessary to 
preserve in the English version composed by himself the 
repetitions and refrains which give so much charm to the 
Bengall text. He has rendered the ideas to the neglect of 
the spontaneity, the directness and vitality of their 
original form. 
From the musical point of view, Tagore stands at the 
meeting-place of three different influences: that of 
European music, that of classical Hindu music (an 
extremely sophisticated one, bound by strict rules) and 
thirdly that of the popular religious music of Bengal. 
It Is not without a struggle that Tagore managed to 
throw off the influence both of European and of classical 
Indian music, so that he might Immerse himself in the 
popular music of his own country and pick up the great 
mystical traditions of Bengal which are carried on in his 
own work. 
One has only to glance at his Reminiscences to feel the 
"musical atmosphere in which he was steeped. Indians of 
traditionalist tendencles appreciated music, but Its 
practice was locked down on and left to professionals, 
Not so however In the vast home of the Tagore family. 
One of the family wrote books on music, the father of 
the poet composed religious chants, and one of his 
brothers a national hymn. Another brother, Jyotirindra, 
used to remain for days at the plano, arranging the old 
classical melodies, according to his fancy, while the poet 
and a friend endeavoured to compose lines to these same 
tunes (Reminiscences). 
PHILIPPE STERN, Chief Curator of the Musée Guimet in 
Paris, is an archeologist who, after a meeting with Tagore, 
became intensely interested in his music and prepared, with 
Arnold Bake, a volume called “Twenty-Siz Songs of Rabindra- 
nath Tagore” (Librairie Orientaliste Paul Geuthner, Paris), from 
the text of which this article has been adapted. ARNOLD 
BAKE, of the Netherlands, is a noted Orientalist and professor 
of Sanskrit at London University. 
  
CONT'D ON PAGE 20 
17

## [Page 18](064331engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
(ov 
   
a "ng a i 
Ilustrations © Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati 


### 64286: The Enchantment of lines

“People often ask me about the meaning of my pictures”, wrote Rabindranath Tagore. «I 
remain silent even as my pictures are. It is for them to express not to explain. They have 
nothing ulterior behind their own appearance for the thoughts to explore and words to describe 
and if that appearance carries its ultimate worth then they remain, otherwise they are rejected 
and forgotten even though they may have some scientific truth or ethical justification”. In 1928, 
at the age of 67, Tagore, to use his own words, “fell under the enchantment of lines” when he 
discovered that his hand was moving automaticaiji across the pages of his manuscripts trans- 
forming the scratches and erasures into designs. For the next 12 years of his life he gave full rein 
to this irresistible urge and produced nearly 2,800 paintings. Although he used all kinds of 
paints and produced coloured chalk drawings, pastels, and later dry-points and etchings, Tagore’s 
preferred medium was liquid colour. He often used ordinary fountain-pen ink and when this 
was not available, he crushed flower petals and used them as pigments. He rarely used a brush, 
disdained an artist’s palette and instead, worked with a cloth soaked in colour, the back of a 
fountain-pen, his thumb, a stick or, more often, a knife. As these illustrations show, Tagore’s art 
was peculiarly his own, and though he held his first exhibition in 1930, Rabindranath Tagore the 
Painter has until recently remained practically unknown. (An illustrated article on his work 
figured in the issue of The Unesco Courier, “Famous Authors as Artists”, in August 1957). 
  
SAHA RTH ND | 
VY AEH NES sfai a, 
5 was eri ran 38 ; 
 19

## [Page 19](064331engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 64286: The Enchantment of lines

## [Page 20](064331engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 64283: A Little-known realm of haunting vocal music and melodies

REALM OF SONGS & MELODIES (Cont'd from page 16) 
Musician unshackled by tradition 
Young Rabindranath also-tried to set to music the 
poems of Chakravartl whose enthusiasm and creative joy 
were such that “the expressiveness of his voice made up 
for what it lacked in execution.” And “on moonlight 
nights, pacing round and round the extensive terrace 
overlooking the river,” Rabindranath Tagore composed 
for the first time melodies for his own songs. He had 
had no technical training in music. Urged by their 
youthful enthusiasm and curlosity, immersed in this 
musical atmosphere, nothing seemed impossible to the 
poct and his companions: they wrote, sang and acted 
plays. 
European influences were welcome in those days. 
Whereas today the striving is against external influences 
and towards a national culture, it was agalnst a narrow 
and oppressive traditionalism that certain iiberal, rich 
and respected families like the Tagores rose up in those 
days. European harmonization, damaging to Indian 
music because it distorts it, was for instance, applied to 
certain songs of the poet’s father by one of the latter's 
granddaughters, who was given a diamond pin as a reward, 
such was his satisfaction. Rabindranath had sung foreign 
airs at school without understanding them; later, as a 
youth, he sang Beethoven's “Adelaide.” When he came 
back from a visit to England, where he had been interested 
in, though a little disappointed by, Irish melodies, his 
manner of singing had become so westernized that his 
familly exclaimed in astonishment: “What is the matter 
with Rabi’s voice? How funny and foreign it sounds!” 
Tagore was now entering his twentieth year, The 
melodies he inserted for the first time in one of his dramas 
Valmiki Prativa, and which were so essential to it, that 
speaking of them in his complete works, the author 
declared one could not judge the play without them, were 
thus the result of the most varied influences, some being 
bullt on a classical mode, others composed by his brother 
Jyatirindra, and finally some being of European origin. 
Later however, Tagore’s powerful personality asserted 
itself, and he threw off both the Western influences of his 
childhood and youth and that of Indian classical music. 
Western influence still appears fleetingly in his songs, 
but so intimately blended with Indian melodic phrases 
  
that their tonality is not altered, only enriched with a 
novel hue. It should be noted that Tagore never liked 
polyphonic music. 
As for classical Indian music, which is itself connected 
with Mohammedan music, Tagore never followed the strict 
rules which bind the musician in a network of precepts. 
This often compels the creative faculty, bound in a rigid 
frame, to develop in depth. But on the other hand it 
may iead—especially at the present day—to a dry, stiff 
and lifeless form which turns the remarkable qualities of 
classical Indian music into as many failings. 
Ornaments, beautiful in themselves, and necessary to 
monodic music, abound to the point of suffocating both 
words and melody; flexible and varied rhythms detach 
themselves from the whole and focus the interest, 
becoming the pretext for a contest between the drummer 
and the musician he is accompanying; the rigas, which 
gave such moving effects of atmosphere and colour by 
their strict scales, by their few dominant notes, by other 
notes which are left out or lightly suggested, by the 
differences between their ascending and descending 
movements, by their prescribed ornaments and pro- 
gressions, now sometimes became a tyranny. 
Being connected with the hours of the day or the 
seasons, with certain feelings, or even with visual forms, 
these imperative formule gradually became little more 
than the pretext for a certain virtuosity, that of unlimited 
development within a stereotyped frame. In this classical 
music, composer and performer no longer seem to exist 
separately. The musician receives and observes the 
traditional outlines, and his task is to develop them, 
recreate them, and enrich them with his improvisations. 
His pride therein is legitimate, for in this art which is 
never rejuvenated and never written down, he represents 
the whole value of music. 
Tagore’s achievement as regards the classical music has 
been, as with everything else, that of breaking fetters. 
His whole life-work is imbued with that appeal to freedom 
and simplicity, to the spontaneous and youthful élan 
which no convention can bind. The things to be 
destroyed are the hollow forms and the veneration given 
to them. Hence the wrath of the old-fashioned musicians 
MUSICAL DRAMA. Ra- 
bindranath Tagore grew up 
in a home whose atmosphere 
was inherently musical and 
all his work is imbued with 
melody, harmony and 
rhythm. It has even been 
said that a play by Tagore is 
little more than a setting 
for his songs, of which he 
wrote more than 2,000. 
Left and right, scenes from 
Chitra, one of Tagore’s 
great dramatic masterpieces, 
which was presented with 
special musical accompani- 
ment at Unesco House last 
year, in a new French trans- 
lation by Georges Fradier. 
Photos D. Berretty-Unesco

## [Page 21](064331engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 64283: A Little-known realm of haunting vocal music and melodies

brought up against a new kind of music which does not 
pretend to replace their own, but which introduces the 
composer as quite distinct from the performer, which 
rejects rigid rules, and reverts to the simple melodic 
contour of popular song that the professional musicians 
held in such scorn. 
In his reaction against both classical Indian and 
Western musle, Tagore finds his source of inspiration in 
the mystic poetry and folk-songs of Bengal. Thus he 
never was the “creator ex nihilo” that the Western world 
sometimes imagines him to be. To see him as he really 
is, rooted in his own soil, steeped in an age-long popular 
tradition which culminates with him, is not to belittle 
him. 
In Tagore’s music can be found certain modes and 
certain rigas; these he sometimes uses so fantastically 
that he scandalizes the votaries of classical Indian music. 
His style is a simple one, and yet the melodic contour 
is not harsh. It is softened by numerous ornamentations: 
guttural sounds, light, barely suggested appogiature and 
discreet poriandos. These never obscure or clog up the 
musical phrase, but rather emphasize it by rendering it 
softer and more pliable. 
Equally simple are his rhythms, especially as compared 
with those of classical Indian music or Kirtan, and they 
seem to grow ever simpler as Tagore finds himself. They 
are strict, flexible, and the beat is usually marked by a 
snap of the fingers which is the only accompaniment of 
this delicate music. 
Music plays a great part in Tagore’s life. In his Remi- 
niscences he recalls his childhood and youth steeped In 
music, of long hours spent in a drifting boat while the 
poet sang and his brother accompanied him on the violin, 
of days spent at the plano or on the terraces, composing 
songs. 
In his later years, he found the same atmosphere at 
Santiniketan, the school he founded to give a simple, 
human education in contact with nature. Here the day 
began and ended with the singing of Tagore’s poems by 
choirs of children. Other songs celebrated festivals. At 
the frequent evening gatherings music had the place of 
honour. 
The Bengali system of notation is a recent and 
incomplete one, what it conveys by means of letters is the 
mere skeleton of a song; the ornamentations and details 
are practically left out; it is little more than a memor- 
andum which can only be of use to one who ls nlready 
familiar with the melody. Oral tradition alone ensures 
the survival of songs. Tagore knew his meniory to be 
poor and sometimes he even wished to forget previous 
works so as to be free to create Iresh ones: therefore when 
he had composed a new song, he used to sing it to his 
nephew Dinendranath, thanks to whose excellent memory 
the song was saved from oblivion. Sometimes the poet 
had to learn hls own songs afresh from Dinendranath, 
whom he called “the treasure house of all my songs.” 
(Cycle of Spring.) 
Tagore was quite consclous of the value of his own 
musical compositions. “I have introduced,” he once said 
“some new elements in our music, I know. I have 
composed five hundred new tunes, perhaps more. This 
Is a parallel growth to my poetry. Anyhow, I love thls 
aspect of my activity. I get lost In my songs and then 
I think that those are my best work; I get quite intoxicat- 
od. I often think that, if all my poetry is forgotten, my 
songs will live with my countrymen, and have a perma- 
nent place... All the same, I know the artistic value of 
my songs. They have a great beauty. Though they 
will not be known outside my province, and much of my 
work will gradually be lost, I leave them as a legacy,” 
wrote Rabindranath Tagore, 
A play by Tagore is often little more than a setting for 
the songs. The very titles of hls books often suggest 
music, for instance “Sharps and Flats.” 
As often in Asian musle, the songs of Tagore will not 
suffer harmonization. The most Important things they 
offer, it seems, are continuity of melodic line, delicacy, 
suppleness, intervals other than those of the temperate 
scale, inflections drawn out which melt Into tenderness, 
nostalgia (of which Krishna's far-off flute Is the poctic 
symbol). Everything which contributes to thelr value is 
destroyed if they are encased in the frame of too simple 
a rhythm, too much cut-up, with too insistent a beat, it 
they are to become mechanical in order to glve them 
emphasis. 
It is thus my fervent hope that a tradition will remain 
which will keep allve for us—sung by a single voice and 
practically without accompaniment—the tenderness, the 
supple, delicate and penetrating nostalglc charm of 
Tagore’s real songs, perhaps the most precious, moving 
part of his work. 
  
 

## [Page 22](064331engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 
  
© H. Roger Viollet, Paris 
A MoNG the modern thinkers of the Indo-Paki- 
stan subcontinent Tagore Is undoubtedly 
the most widely known to Western intellectuals. The 
reason is obvious: he himself translated his exquisite 
thought into English just as other writers rendered it in 
divers tongues. 
The award to him of the Nobel Prize in 1913 was probab- 
ly of little importance in the West, but for the Oriental 
intelligentsia its effect was considerable. It was not 
Tagore—a poet of the East or of Asia, of India or of 
Bengal—who was honoured, but rather a regional 
literature which, although the most developed among its 
Indian contemporaries, remained unnoticed by the world 
until this dramatic recognition of its maturity. 
In fact, since the early nineteenth century Bengal 
spurred by the impact of Western civilization was heading 
towards a Renaissance, reflected particularly in its 
literature. Now, after eight-hundred years of a 
predominantly agrestic character, Bengali literature 
acquired a fresh sophistication. 
The literary efforts of Ishwarchandra Vidyasager, 
Michael Madhusudhan Dutt, Dinabandhu Mitra, Tekchand 
Thakur, Bankimchandra Chatterjl and Mir Musharraf 
Hussain not only satisfied the new Bengal middle class 
but are still regarded as the classics of its literature. 
Bengal had already adopted Western literary forms 
which it employed to give a new vitality to Indlan 
thought. Born in one of the families of Calcutta which 
was active in furthering this Renaissance, Tagore directly 
understood that it was his task to create a synthesis bet- 
ween old and new, between Eastern thought and Western 
expression. This mission he brilliantly discharged. 
HE living avatar of the Bengali Renaissance, 
Tagore naturally drew his inspirations from 
its old literature, from its religious and folk songs and 
Sanskrit classics, but he also remained assiduously aware 
of modern Western thought. 
what did Tagore add to this rich heritage in the course 
of a literary career protracted for more than sixty years? 
MAHMUD QURESHI, Pakistani writer and poet in the 
Bengali language, is professor of Bengali literature at 
Chittagong Universily, Pakistan. 


### 64288: Revelations of a Nobel Prize in literature

REVELATIONS 
OF A 
NOBEL PRIZE 
IN LITERATURE 
by Mahmud Shah Qureshi 
Bronze bust of Tagore 
made by Jacob Epstein. 
He wrote more than one thousand remarkable poems, 
more than two thousand enchanting songs, nearly two 
dozen plays, eight novels, eight or more volumes of short 
stories in addition to several travel books and essays on 
literary cultural, political or linguistic subjects. 
Besides his humanitarian or educational services, 
Tagore’s paintings (1) and the abundance and variety of 
his work evoke for Bengali critics the three universal 
geniuses: Leonardo da Vinci, Goethe and Victor Hugo. 
Every one has his personal predilection for Tagore as 
poet or prose writer. Nevertheless his prose writings 
such as the memorable short stories in Galpagucha, 
novels like Gora, Choker-Bali, Ghare-Baire (The Home & 
The World), Shesher Kabita (The Last Poem) are epochal 
events in Bengall literature. The rich personality of 
Tagore, his warm human sympathies, his narrative gifts 
are to be found only in his short stories. 
D ERIVING inspiration from Tagore, the novelist 
Sharatchandra Chatterji was to give a new 
orientation to the craft of fiction writing. Sharatchandra 
and his followers had the signal advantage of greater 
intimacy with the Bengal middle class and thus could 
depict the insistent reality of its sufferings and joys better 
than Tagore whose aristocratic upbringing constituted in 
this respect a serious obstacle. . 
Among others who gave or are giving new directions to 
Bengali prose literature, a few important names may be 
mentioned: Pramatha Chowdhury (a great connoisseur of 
French literature who exhorted Bengall prose writers to 
follow French literary precedents) Rajshekhar Basu, 
Bibhuti Bhushan Bondopadhyaya (author of Pather 
Panchali, and Aparajita), Banaphul, Tarashankar, 
Humayun Kabir, Annada Shankar Roy, Manik 
Boudopadhyaya and Kazi Abdul Wadud. 
In the domain of the novel and short story, Bengali 
literature seeks to attain a level comparable with that of 
the West. Yet it must be admitted quite frankly that 
the greater part of its corpus lacks major stature because 
of a certaln sentimentality and an unduly restricted vision 
o} e. 
(1) It is still a matter of controversy whether Tagore started 
painting at the age of 65 or 10. 
  
CONT'D ON PAGE 24 

## [Page 23](064331engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 64288: Revelations of a Nobel Prize in literature

o~ 
oN 
 
 
Tagore at work in his study in 1931, the year he celebrated his 70th birthday, © Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati

## [Page 24](064331engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 64288: Revelations of a Nobel Prize in literature

REVELATIONS (Cont'd) 
Renaissance 
of Bengali letters 
Let us return to Tagore. This time let us observe the 
mystery-world of his poetry. All Tagore’s life constituted 
an Immense creative effort to communicate his most 
sublime intuitions to the world. The manifold variety 
and profound depth of his poetic universe are so 
remarkable that it seemed he was “redeeming the debt of 
the world,” a world which induced all the anguish and 
ecstasy of creation. It Is not enough to have read 
Gitanjali or Balaka (The Swan) to understand this 
mysterious world; it is also necessary to read the poems 
that reflect the different phases of his poetic career. 
In addition to his personal experience and the associa- 
tion of his great father, Debendranath, who had a 
profound understanding of the Persian mysticism, it is 
the influence of the Upanishads which left the decisive 
imprint upon his poetic vision—his love of nature, search 
for truth and for humanity; to him these are nothing but 
the characteristic signs of the Infinite. 
This quest for the Infinite, as revealed in the Upanishads 
—“Bhumaiva sukama mnalpe sukhamasti” (Beatitude 
reposes in the Infinite, not in the Finite)—became the 
motto of his poetic philosophy. It is astonishing to 
discover that Tagore’s patriotism, under the influence of 
the Upanishads, was frequently at variance with public 
opinion. His predecessor Bankimchandra sald: 
Do not forget that love of one’s counlrymen ranks 
above all religion. 
Rabindranath wrote: 
Build high the throne of your nation 
But remember it is not higher than truth 
If you really love your country, 
You must not rise above it, 
Not place your country above humanity. 
In his last years Rabindranath understood that with all 
his philosophical pretensions and poetic illusions he was 
inhabiting an ivory tower and suddenly felt the need to 
draw closer to plebeian reality. Now he wrote: 
Sweet is the earth, sweet the dust of it, 
I've taken it in my heart, 
This great hymn 
Is the precept of my life. 
Day after day, I've received 
The gift of the truth, 
And its sweetness has no end... 
Or, 
On the shores of Rupanarayan 
I awoke 
And I realized the world 
Is not a dream. 
I beheld my image 
In letlers of blood. 
And I came to know myself 
Though profound wounds 
And through countless sufferings... (2). 
Although Balaka had been written in a new style and 
published before the First World War, Tagore realized 
that all he had written before then was highly conven- 
tional. Thus, with the changing situation, he started 
writing prose-poems on unconventional but quotidian 
subjects. 
This new direction Tagore gave to Bengali poetry by 
his later writings served as a model for the young writers 
while the writers of his generation were still imitating 
his earlier style. Because of their conventional style and 
poor poetic techniques they were soon eclipsed by the 
brilliant achievement of Tagore. 
Nonetheless two poets—Satyen Dutt and Mohitlal 
Majumdar (also a great critic)—deserve particular men- 
tion. Satyen Dutt, besides his innumerable poems on 
nature and patriotism which reveal extraordinary metrical 
24 (2) The French version of the last poems of Tagore, trans- 
lated by Mahmud Shah Qureshi and André Guimbrétiére was 
published in the Revue Générale Belge, June, 1961. 
£7 il £5 FX 
/ ! 
Drawing by I. Ross, Rumanian National Commission for Unesco 
© Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati 
en PNP 
| Br CS <r HYD oT 3 anaes werk LE, 
NNR A GR AW Fee NACI LE 
he Aa Uhh FCT ART AEA” 
E bre Spor dryer or! 
fs Joking gl OE Sey ~ ir ~ are = Sr sr 
hk fom 
NSA sie aon a BVTY pve apy — 
ov ANXRW A%, y2d = ror : 
4 4 : - . . A % ONT —~ 
\ lid O83 AE re oy ey 
RU GF AND) ~  35VY OOF Faring rrr 
TOWNE NE I thi 
RY TE THOT gr 
§ STE rey” Wr Eopae amber pfx Vi PY a0E MING WY af rr ayer : 
ay ar NTH HRY 2 IRT nr QA 
OF vox v7 —  vmber. ws 200 — 23 
CHRON, NF ~ vl AT IIE — Ake Ca & {Sp 
   
   
   
   
  
" “A Ar J 74 
NI alsa UWL MAY xr Any 
ro ANT Fe i 
wr ly mG msir YI& J — had, HAE O2E (rary 
WAY VI ROX mFS 3 dir yy ~ J hate 
Wo SYR nT AT eB Se 2 a [ao 
oe. Sa 47 rile Lo RFs si or 
ES Cres > an; Ai ed 
RITE FIV NOT TY fe e 
Toy ht vi BROT 3 scale Td IPN J1E2e ra    
  
   
i #4 Pres 1 
® it 5 ; 
Lon Ll Ey 
RPL 
Ae tab 4 
i 
 

## [Page 25](064331engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 64288: Revelations of a Nobel Prize in literature

   
© Rabindri-Sadana, Visva Bhatati 
A GREAT DAY in the life of Tagore was the laying of the foundation stone of Visva Bharati, the inter- 
national university which grew from the school Tagore founded in 1901 at Santiniketan, as an experimant 
with only twelve pupils, including his own son. Photo above, was taken in 1921 at a Visva Bharati ceremony 
and shows, seated from left to right, Sylvain Levi, the French Orientalist, Tagore, and scholars who colla- 
borated closely with him including, foreground, famous philosopher Brijendranath Seal. Left, a striking 
portrait of Tagore drawn by I. Ross and taken from ‘Tagore in Rumania’, a selected bibliography published 
this year by the Rumanian National Commission for Unesco. The poet went to Rumania In 1926 during 
a long trip through Europe when he visited Italy, France, England, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Czecho- 
slovakia, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria, before crossing the Danube into Rumania. Below left, the first extant 
manuscript written by Tagore aged 17. It is a Bengali poem in which the young poet calls on the muses. 
skill, translated more than five hundred poems from 
different languages retaining all of their initial flavour 
and content. His translations of Victor Hugo, Ezra Pound, 
Verlaine, Maeterlinck, Baudelaire, Valéry, etc. preserve 
the original rhyme and rhythm yet offer the savour and 
qualities of true Bengali compositions. Satyen Dutt also 
re-introduced many Arabo-Persian words which are 
currently used in modern society or once were in medie- 
val literature. This gave new vitality to poetry, particular- 
ly in the passionate poems of Mohitlal Majumdar. 
The new literary fashion reached its height with the 
advent of a soldier-poet, Nazrul Islam, who accomplished 
a synthesis between the revolutionary tradition of Islam 
and the cult of Shakta (worship of the god of power). 
These two thought currents are absent in Tagore, yet, 
with the true generosity of genius, he acclaimed young 
Nazrul. Indeed, Nazrul set off a veritable explosion in 
the halcyon sweetness of Bengali poetry. The new 
awareness which he reflécted quickly gained the attentive 
respect of the young writers. Thus he expressed himself 
in his famous poem Vidrohi (The Rebel): 
I am a rebel, a hothead, 
I do what my heart desires, 
Good, bad, true or false 
I grapple with Satan himself 
I welcome death with a song... 
I am the rebel, weary of struggle 
Still I will not rest till the day 
The aggressor’s sword be sheathed 
In the field of battle 
And the cries of the oppressed 
No longer rend the air, etc. (3). 
In addition to a great number of poetic works, short 
stories and journalistic writings, Nazrul composed more 
than three thousand songs which are still extremely 
popular. 
Jivanananda Das and DBuddhadeva Bose, two great 
modern poets, derived their first inspiration from Nazrul. 
The genius of Tagore, in fact, offered an insuperable 
challenge to the young writers of the thirtles. yet thanks 
to the example of Nazrul and to the new poetic creations 
of Tagore, they finally articulated a mature poetic idiom 
which is still in vogue. Western symbolism certainly has 
occupied a prominent place in the new poetry. DBishnu 
Dey, Sudhin Dutt and Samar Sen are names indissolubly 
linked with this movement. Besldes these examples, 
Amiya Chakravarty in the tradition of Tagore, Jashi- 
muddin (4) in the folklorique style and Farrukh Ahmad 
in the footsteps of Igbal (5) added new chapters in the 
history of Bengali poetry. 
In spite of that, whether in day-to-day activities or in 
intellectual pursuits, the Bengalis still remain dazzled by 
the luminous achievement and magnificent personality of 
Tagore. For the Bengali intelligentsia of India and 
Pakistan, perhaps Tagore’s greatest contribution lies in 
the universal intellectual citizenship this achievement has 
so lavishly conferred upon their literature. 
(3) Luce Claude Maitre in “Les Poétes Rebelles du Bengale” 
(Revue Europe, May, 1954), dealt with Nazrul and some other 
young poets. 
(4) Two poems of Jashimuddin have been translated into 
French by Jacques Stepowski. An English translation under 
the title, The Field of Embroidered Quilt was published by 
Ozxjord University Press. Another book will constitute a 
Unesco Translation Project. 
(6) Muhammad Igbal (1873-1938) is the greatest Urdu poet 
and most original thinker of Pakistan. 
25

## [Page 26](064331engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 64289: Readings from Tagore

26 
 
READINGS FROM 
To celebrate the centenary of Rabindranath 
Tagore’s birth In 1861, Unesco arranged 
this year for the translation and publication 
of six books (sce boxed bibliography). 
On these pages we publish passages from 
A Tagore Reader just issued by the Mac- 
millan Co., as part of the Unesco Collec- 
tion of Representative Works—Indian 
Series. The reader offers a compreliensive 
view of Tagore’s writing including passages 
from his books on travel, his letters, short 
stories, dramas, autobiographical sketches, 
conversations with famous people includ- 
ing Einstein, fables, philosophical medita- 
tions, art and literary criticism, cducation 
and sclections from his poetry. 
* 
From ‘A Sojourner 
in Japan’ 
When I took my seat at early dawn on 
a mat by the window, I realized that not only 
arc the Japanese master-painters but they 
have reduced the whole of man’s life to 
an art. 
* 
From Letters 
to a Friend 
But by nature all men are dwija or 
twice-born, first they are born to their 
home, and then, for this fulfillment, they 
have to be born to the larger world. Do 
you not fee! yourself that you have had 
your second birth among us? And with 
this second birth you have found your 
true place in the heart of humanity. 
* 
From ‘Pathe O Pather 
Prante’ 
Something is taking shape throughout the 
universe and through all eternity. We 
feel the impact of it in the pain of our 
hearts. The stage at which man has arrived 
in the march of civilization has been 
attained by the creative endeavours of 
countless millions of unknown individuals, 
the history of whose personal struggles lies 
merged in oblivion. Whatever abides in 
creation is the momentary handiwork of the 
countless many who have passed away. 
Those architects of creation, those that are 
gone, are functioning within me—the thing 
called “I" only furnished them with a 
sort of prop. The scaffolding of a house 
in construction may be necessary today; by 
tomorrow when there is no trace left of 
it, no one will miss it. The completed 
building never sorrows for its lost scaffold- 
ing. The point is that as I pace this path 
1 feel that much of the construction going 
on within me is being stored in the 
treasury of Man's creation, with the signa- 
ture of my name obliterated. 
From ‘My Life’ 
In regard to music I claim to be some- 
thing of a musician myself. I have composed 
many songs which have defied the canons 
of respectable orthodoxy, and good people 
are disgusted at the impudence of a man 
who is audacious, because he is untrained. 
But I persist, and God forgives me because 
I do not know what I do. Possibly that 
is the best way of doing things in the 
sphere of art, for I find that people blame 
me, but also sing my songs, even if not 
always correctly... 
In the night we stumble over things and 
become acutely conscious of their separate- 
ness, but the day reveals the unity which 
embraces them. And the man whose inner 
vision is bathed in consciousness at once 
realizes the spiritual union which reigns 
over all racial differences, and his mind no 
longer stumbles over individual facts, 
accepting them as final. He realizes that 
peace is an inner harmony and not an 
outer adjustment, that beauty carries our 
assurance of our relationship to reality, 
which waits for its perfection in the 
response of our love. 
* 
Conversation 
with H. G. Wells 
Tagore: The tendency in modern civili- 
zation is to make the world uniform. 
Calcutta, Bombay, Hong Kong and other 
cities are more or less alike, wearing big 
masks which represent no country in parti- 
cular. 
Wells: Yet, don’t you think this very fact 
is an indication that we are reaching out 
for a new world-wide human order which 
refuses to be localized? 
Tagore: Our individual physiognomy 
need not be the same. Let the mind be 
universal. The individual should not be 
sacrificed. 
Wells: We are gradually thinking mow 
of one human civilization on the founda- 
tions of which individualities will have 
great chance of fulfillment. The individual, 
as we take him, has suffered for the fact 
that civilization has been split up into 
separate units, instead of being merged 
into a universal whole, which seems to be 
the natural destiny of humankind. 
Tagore: 1 believe the unity of human 
civilization can be better maintained by 
the linking up in fellowship and co-opera- 
tion of the different civilizations of the 
world...” 
* 
From ‘A Vision of India’s 
History’ 
...We have come to know that what 
India seeks is not the peace of negation 
or of some mechanical adjustment, but that 
which is in goodness, and in truth of perfect 
TAGORE 
union... The true prayer of mother India 
is: 
He who is one, who is above all colour 
distinctions, who dispenses the needs 
of men of all colours, who compre- 
hends all things from their beginning 
to the end, let Him unite us to one 
another with that wisdom which is the 
wisdom of goodness. 
* 
On Education 
When races come together as in the 
present age, it should not be merely the 
gathering of a crowd; there must be a bond 
of relation, or they will collide with each 
other... 
The object of education is to give man 
the unity of truth. Formerly, when life 
was simple, all the different elements of 
man were in complete harmony. But when 
there came the separation of the intellect 
from the spiritual and the physical, the 
school education put entire emphasis on the 
physical side of man. We devote our sole 
attention to giving children information, not 
knowing that by this emphasis we are . 
accentuating a break between the intellect- 
ual, the physical and the spiritual way of 
life... 
The child learns so easily because he 
has a natural gift, but adults, because they 
are tyrants, ignore natural gifts and say 
that children must learn through the same 
process that they learned by. We insist 
upon forced mental feeding and our lessons 
become a form of torture. This is one of 
man’s most cruel and wasteful mistakes. 
We rob the child of his earth to teach 
him geography, of language to teach him 
grammar. His hunger is for the Epic, but 
he is supplied with chronicles of facts and 
dates. He was born in the human world, 
but is banished into the world of living 
gramophones, to expiate for the original sin 
of being born in ignorance. Child-nature 
protests against such calamity with all its 
power of suffering, subdued at last into 
silence by punishment, 
* 
On Art and Literary 
Criticism 
A fight has been going on for a long 
time around the saying, “Art for Art’s 
sake,” which seems to have fallen into 
disrepute among a section of Western 
critics. It is a sign of the recurrence of 
the ascetic ideal of the puritanic age, when 
enjoyment as an end in itself was held to 
be sinful. But all puritanism is a reaction. 
It does not represent truth in its normal 
aspect. When enjoyment loses its direct 
touch with life, growing fastidious and 
fantastic in its world of elaborate conven- 
tions, then comes the call for renunciation 
which rejects happiness itself as a snare. 
I am not going into the history of modern 
art, which I am not at all competent to 
discuss, yet, I can assert, as a general truth, 
that when man tries to thwart himself in

## [Page 27](064331engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 64289: Readings from Tagore

  
  
his desire for delight, converting merely 
into his desire to know, or to do good, then 
the cause must be that his power of feeling 
delight has lost its natural bloom and 
healthiness. 
* 
From ‘Thoughts’ 
The true universal finds its manifestation 
in the individuality which is true. Beauty 
is universal, and a rose reveals it because, 
as a rose, it is individually beautiful. By 
making a decoction of a rose, jasmine, and 
lotus, you do not get a realization of some 
larger beauty which is interfloral. The true 
universality is not breaking down the walls 
of one’s own house, but the offering of 
hospitality to one’s guests and neighbours. 
* 
Children are living beings—more living 
than grown-up people who have built shells 
of habit around themselves. Therefore it 
is absolutely necessary for their mental 
health and development that they should 
not have mere schools for their lessons, but 
a world whose guiding spirit is personal 
love. It must be an ashram where men 
have gathered for the highest end of life, 
in the peace of nature; where life is not 
merely meditative, but fully awake in its 
activities; where boys’ minds are not being 
perpetually drilled into believing that the 
ideal of the idolatry of the nation is the 
truest ideal for them to accept... where the 
sunrise and sunset and the silent glory of 
stars are not daily ignored; where nature's 
festivities of flowers and fruit have their 
joyous recognition from man; and where 
the young and the old, the teacher and 
the student, sit at the same table to take 
their daily food and the food of their 
eternal life. 
* 
We are like a stray line of a poem, 
which ever feels that it rhymes with another 
line and must find it, or miss its own 
frlfillment. This quest of the unattained is 
the great impulse in man which brings forth 
all his best creations. 
* 
Our greatest men have shown immense 
respect for mankind in their expectations. 
* 
The old is prudent but is not wise. 
Wisdom is that freshness of mind which 
enables one to realize that truth is not 
hoarded in caskets of maxims, it is free 
and living. 
* 
We come nearest to the great when we 
are great in humility. 
* 
If you shut your door to all errors truth 
will be shut out. 
* 
The false can never grow into truth by 
growing in power. 
* 
Man’s history is waiting in patience for 
the triumph of the insulted man. 
WORLD'S HOMAGE 
TO A UNIVERSAL MAN 
ANY countries marked the anniversary of 
Tagore’s birth throughout the year with 
special radio and television programmes, 
lectures, conferences, exhibitions, new trans- 
lations of the poet's works, and essay contests 
in the secondary schools. Participating count- 
ries, in addition to those listed below, were 
Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Nepal, the 
Netherlonds, Mexico, Poland, Rumania and 
Uruguay, 
BRAZIL issued a Tagore commemorative 
stamp; trensloted several of Tagore's works 
into Portuguese, the books being distributed 
without charge to libraries and cultural centres 
in Brazil and neighbouring countries. New 
recordings of Tagore songs by Brazilian artists 
were made ond given to libraries. A Tagore 
in Brazil exhibition held in Rio de Janeiro 
early in 1961 is now on tour in Brazil. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA: The committee for the 
Tagore Centenary arranged an exhibition on 
Rabindranath Tagore and Czechoslavokia at the 
Naoprstek Museum in Prague, organized a con- 
ference at Prague’s Municipal Library, put on 
concerts of Czech music composed for Tagore's 
poems and translated much verse and prose. 
FRANCE: On November 25, the Bibliotheque 
Nationale in Paris opened a comprehensive 
exhibition on Tagore featuring rare documents, 
photographs, a special painting section. The 
complete collection of Tagore's works in Ben- 
gali were shown to the public along with trans- 
FROM UNESCO'S COLLECTION 
OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS 
Indian Translations Series: 
Gora by Rabindranath Tagore. 
French translation by Marguer- 
ite Glotz and Pierre Fallon. 
Published in 1961 by Ed. Rob- 
ert Laffont (Paris). 
A TAGORE READER, anthology 
edited by A. Chakravarty, Mac- 
millan, New York {$6,50), Lon- 
don. (45/-) 
Poems oF KaBiR—translated by 
Tagore—To be republished by 
Macmillan, London. 
In preparation: 
CHorx De Contes (Selected 
Tales) of R. Tagore. Being 
translated into French by Mlle 
Bossenec. To be published by 
Editions Gallimard. 
POEMES ET SOUVENIRS D'EN- 
PANCE de Tagore. Translated by 
Mille Bossenec and Mr. Balbis. 
Republished with 
Unesco’s Endorsement: 
Baraka (Cygne) by Rabindra- 
nath Tagore. French transla- 
tion by P.J. Jouve and Kalidas 
Nag. Editions Stock, Paris.     
lotions of his works in French ond other lan- 
guages. The exhibition continues until De- 
cember 17... 
Other celebrations were held in Poris at the 
Musée Guimet, the Ecole des Longues Orientales 
and by the Comité France-Inde and in Lille, 
GERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC): Tributes 
to the great Indian poet began with a cele- 
bration in Cologne organized by the Deutsch- 
Indische Gesellschoft under the auspices of 
President Heinrich Liibke. Other cities pre- 
sented such plays os The Post Office, Socrifice 
and The Red Oleander, and an exhibition of 
Tagore’s paintings. 
INDIA: 1961 has been Tagore year through- 
out India. One of the highlights of mony 
commemorative ceremonies in Tagore's own 
country was the International Literary Seminar, 
organized in New Delhi with the participation 
of Unesco, devoted to Tagore's immense in- 
fluence on both Orient and Occident. A mela 
(fair) for Togore—the traditional Indian way 
of honouring poets—was held in November and 
emphasized the cultural life ond folk art of 
West Bengal... An All-India Bengali Literary 
Conference was held in co-operation with 
Unesco at the beginning of this year devoted 
to Tagore, the organization's first president. 
The session was opened by Prime Minister 
Nehru. Representatives of 23 countries attend. 
ed discussions on philosophy, religion, rural 
reconstruction and other fields in which Tagore 
was engaged. 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC: A Tagore week 
was observed in November with visiting Indian 
scholars invited to lecture. Works of Tagore 
in Arabic were published and an exhibition of 
the poet's painting displayed. 
UNITED KINGDOM: A Tagore Foundation 
lectureship was established at the London 
University School of Oriental and African 
Studies providing for three to four lectures on 
Tagore each yeor in the summer term. In 
England also the dance-drama Shyema was 
produced with a full Indian cast and was such 
a success in London that it went on tour in the 
provinces and was recorded. 
USA. A Tagore chair of literature was 
established for a distinguished Indian scholar 
or public servant to visit the US. yearly to 
lecture ot one the following universities: 
Chicago, California (Berkeley), Harvard, Michi- 
gan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, The Asia 
Society, the Library of Congress ond the New 
York Public Library oll arranged special exhib- 
itions. A Tribute to Tagore evening was held 
at Town Hall, New York, with the American 
poet, Robert Frost, as principal speaker. Times 
Square, N. Y., was officiolly named Tagore 
Square for a day. 
US.S.R. The Russians have always been avid 
readers of Tagore ond although o 8-volume 
series of his works already existed, this year a 
14-volume jubilee edition of his complete works 
was published. A Russian documentary film 
for the anniversary, produced by S. Boubrick and 
scripted by Soviet paet Mikhoil Matusovsky, 
featured scenes shot in India and the Soviet 
Union, the Tagore paintings shown when he 
visited the U.S.S.R. in 1930, and excerpts from 
a ballet based on his play Chitra, staged during 
the year by the Kuibyshey Opera and Ballet 
Company. 
27

## [Page 28](064331engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 


### 64291: The Tumultuous history of ancient Nubia

THE TUMULTUOUS HISTORY 
OF ANCIENT NUBIA 
by Boris Piotrovsky 
\ D AWN was just breaking and there was a slight 
breeze blowing as we left the enchanting 
island of Philae. The greater the distance between us and 
the island, the more picturesque became its rows of 
columns and the higher its pyramidal pylons rose into the 
air. With every movement of our boat the gloomy cliffs 
took on different fantastic shapes and looked for all the 
world like supernatural beings. But no sooner had the 
first rays of the sun appeared than the visions of dawn 
vanished like a meteor...” 
These words were written more than a hundred years 
ago by A. S. Norov, the Russian orlentalist and states- 
mah who visited Egypt at the beginning of 1835. His 
Journey Through Egypt and Nubia contains colourful 
descriptions of the majestic monuments to the past that 
are scattered between the First and Second Cataracts 
of the Nile, 
When I made my trip from Aswan to Wadi Halfa in 
the Sudan in 1956 to study the archaeological monuments 
in the area that will be flooded by the new Aswan Dam, 
I frequently recalled Norov’s expressive descriptions. 
For a long time only the magnificent Egyptian temples 
attracted the attention of scholars. Then a systematic 
archaeological survey, carried out at the time the first 
Aswan dam was built, revealed the civilization of ancient 
Nubia, a country whose riches constantly attracted 
Egyptian conquerors. 
In the fourth millenium B.C., the formative period of 
the ancient Egyptian state, upper Egypt and Nubla were 
inhabited by tribes with a common culture. 
T. Nubian civilization began to 
develop independently when 
the centre of the Egyptian state 
was moved to the north at the time of the 
Ancient Kingdom. Nubia became an Egyptian border 
region and the pharaohs of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Dynasties 
sent many expeditions there to bring back slaves, cattle, 
gold and ivory. 
These predatory ralds gave way to more peaceful 
relations at a later date, at the time of the 6th Dynasty. 
Although the Egyptian frontier passed through a point 
near Aswan there were Egyptian fortresses farther to 
the south, In the area occupled by the Nublan tribes, 
and their garrisons fought off the attacks of the Bedouins. 
Inscriptions made by the Egyptian nobles Una and 
Huefkhor (middle of the third millenium B.C.) record 
Interesting facts about the Nublans. Una tells how the 
BORIS PIOTROVSKY is Director of the Leningrad Branch 
of the Institute of Archeceology, Academy of Sciences of 
the US.S.R., and a member of the International Com- 
wig Experts for the Safeguard of the Monuments 
0 ubia. 
Pharaoh Meren-ra ordered him to build cargo boats in 
Nubia for the transport of stone: the timber was supplied 
by the rulers of Nubia. Huefkhor’s inscription contains 
fascinating detalis about the “exploration of the road” 
to the land that lay beyond the Second Cataract and 
also about three expeditions that returned from it safely 
with rich gifts. 
N aticeable changes took place in 
the ethnic composition of the 
population of Nubia 
in the latter half of the third millenium 
B.C.; this was due to the infiltration of tribes of Negro 
herdsmen who established a new and independent culture 
and maintained intercourse with Egypt and the Red Sea 
coastal tribes. 
Nubia began to grow stronger in the 19th century B.C. 
the period of the Middle Kingdom, and the Egyptian 
pharaohs sent their troops to subdue the country. 
Inscriptions by Pharachs Amenemhet I and Senusret I 
tell of the stubborn struggle put up by the Nubian tribes 
in defence of their independence and of the cruel treat- 
ment meted out to them by the Egyptians. Egyptian texts 
then began to describe Nubia as “The Land of Kush.” 
Excavations made in various places in the Nile Valley 
have provided enough evidence to enable us to define 
the culture of these Nublan tribes. 
As a result of the Egyptian advance against the north- 
ern frontiers of Nubia, the centre of the Nubian state 
was moved to the city of Napata, near the Fourth Catar- 
act, far to the south. By the time of the 18th Dynasty 
(16th Century B.C.) the Egyptians had reached even this 
distant point. However, they succeeded in subjugating 
only the banks of the Nile and the fortresses they built 
were harassed by raiding tribes of nomads that appeared 
suddenly out of the desert. 
The conquest of the whole of Nubia was completed dur- 
ing the 18th Dynasty: an Egyptian nomarch (ruler of an 
Egyptian nome or province), given the title of “Royal 
Son of Kush,” headed the administration. The famous 
Egyptian conqueror, Tuthmosis III, left a triumphal 
inscription at Napata, the Nubian capital: it tells of his 
victories in Anterior Asia and of the Egyptian subjugation 
of Nubia ta its southernmost limits, as far as the “horn 
of the earth.” This short description tells of the conquest 
of all Nubia: i 
“I, the Pharaoh have all the Nubians as my subjects, 
they work for me as one man and are compelled to pay 
tribute in the form of a host of articles from the horn 
of the earth and an immeasurable quantity of gold from 
Waut. There they build big barges and ships, and in 
addition they pay tribute in ivory and ebony.” The mag- 
nificent temples erected by the pharaohs of the 18th 
Dynasty confirm that they regarded Nubia as their own 
country.

## [Page 29](064331engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 64291: The Tumultuous history of ancient Nubia

The situation remained unchanged throughout the 
19th Dynasty. Rameses II, the most famous represent- 
ative of that dynasty, built a number of splendid temples 
in the first half of the 13th century B.C. in Northern 
Nubia (at Kalabsha, Gerf-Husein, Wadi-es-Sebua and 
Derr). The most famous of all {s the huge temple at Abu 
Simbel. 
The temples built by Rameses II are the last monuments 
to Egyptian rule in Nubia; the decline set in at the end 
of the 19th dynasty. At this time invasions from the 
north increased and although Herihor, the High Priest 
of Ammon, still held the title of nomarch of Nubia under 
Rameses XI, the country was gradually becoming 
independent. This was the beginning of the ascendency 
of the Kingdom of Napata. 
The story of the rise of the Napata Kingdom remains 
unknown to us, for we know the history of Nubia (Ethio- 
pia) malnly from the evidence of conquerors, from 
Egyptian written sources in particular. And, indeed, the 
magnificent Egyptian architectural monuments diverted 
the attention of archaeologists from the anclent 
settlements and burial sites, the less imposing remnants 
of Nubian civilization. 
In the 13th century B.C. the Kingdom of Napata was a 
powerful centralized state embracing the huge territory 
from the First (Aswan) Cataract in the North to the Sixth 
Cataract in the South. Some of the southern nomes of 
Egypt, those to the South of Aswan, fell to Nubia (the 
Ethiopian Kingdom). 
When King Piankhi ascended the Napata throne (circa 
740 B.C.) he took advantage of the internal dissension 
and the enmity between the rulers of the different nomes 
to launch a campaign against the country. He had 
adopted Egyptlan culture and the Egyptian religion and 
invaded the country as its legitimate pharaoh, the wor- 
shipper of the supreme deity, Ammon. 
A. inscription by Piankhi in 
Egyptian has been discovered 
on a granite monument 
near Napata; it describes the victories of 
the Nubian king in Lower Egypt, in particular the capture 
of Heliopolis and Memphis. 
The king issued the following order to his troops on 
their behaviour in Thebes, in the Temple of Ammon: 
“When you reach Thebes and stand hefore Karnak, enter 
the water, cleanse yourselves in the river, put on your 
best linen raiment, lay aside your bows and arrows... 
There is no strength in those who know not Ammon... 
Sprinkle water on his altar. Kiss the ground before 
him.” 
Piankhi's victories were not consolidated, however, and 
when he returned to Nubia, Egypt again split up into a 
multitude of petty nomes. 
The Nubian kings consolidated their power over Egypt 
under Piankhi’s successor, Shabaka, the first pharaoh of 
the 25th (Ethiopian) Dynasty, who had to carry on a 
burdensome war against Assyria for Egypt's independence. 
Piankhi’s son Tcharka also took part in battles against the 
Assyrians on the approaches to Egypt. 
Tcharka became Pharaoh of Egypt in 690 B.C., at the 
time of the fiercest struggle against Assyria. The Nubian 
ruler met with temporary success In the early stages of 
the war but in 671 B.C. Assyrian troops under King 
Esarhaddon invaded Egypt, seized first Memphis and 
then the capital, Thebes. Tirhaka fled to Nubia, and 
Esarhaddon, to mark hls victory, erected a statue of 
Tcharka, brought from Egypt, on the gates of hls own 
capital, Nineveh. 
When the pharaohs of the Salis Dynasty ascended the 
throne of Egypt, relations with Nubla became strained 
and intercourse between the two countries ceased. The 
Napata kings, however, retained Egyptian traditions, 
considered themselves legitimate successors to the phar- 
aohs whose titles they bore, and were burled in pyramidal 
tombs. 
Even this brief survey of the long and ancient history 
of Nubia shows It to have been one filled with conquests 
and destruction, undergoing periods of development and 
decllne. Egyptian written records and art treasures are 
almost the only sources from which the history of this 
rich country may be studied. On the Egyptlan monu- 
ments we come across Images of black Nublan prisoners 
in leopard skins with ostrich feathers adorning thelr 
heads; there are scenes In which they are portrayed 
paying tribute in gold, Ivory and strange animals, But 
the civilization of thls country that brought such rich 
gifts to Egypt has not been studied archacologically. 
Monumental edifices, gems of Egyptlan architecture, 
were erected in northern Nubia and have remained to this 
day, victorious in the great battle against time. 
But in addition to these grandlose monuments to the 
majesty of Egypt, there remain hidden In Nubla the 
relics of the little-known culture of those tribes on whose 
land and by whose hands these magnificent buildings 
were erected. The original and exalted culture of Nubia 
undoubtedly had considerable influence on the history 
of the entire North-East African area; for this reason 
archaeologists and historians must make a careful study 
of the records of the anclent Nublan culture now awalt- 
ing discovery on the site of the future reservolr to be 
formed by the new Aswan Dam. 
  
"Foto-Henreid, Stockholm 
Photo shows King Gustav VI Adolph of Sweden, chairman 
of the Committee of Patrons of the Unesco Campalgn to 
Save the Monuments of Nubia, discussing the progress of 
the campaign with Dr. Mohamed Awad, Chairman of the 
Executive Board of Unesco. It was taken at a special 
session of the Swedish National Commission for Unesco 
attended by the King in Stockholm earlier this year.     29

## [Page 30](064331engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 64292: The Art of Ethiopia's painter-scribes

THE ART OF ETHIOPIA’S PAINTER-SCRIBES 
by Abbé Jules Leroy 
Two years ago, in October 1959, the Unesco Courier devoted an issue to the 
lost past of Africa. At that time, the archaeologist, J. Doresse, sketched a 
brief but evocative picture of the marvelous and legendary history of Ethiopia 
and described the essential characteristics of the Ethiopian personality and 
the way in which it has been formed by geography, ethnic mixtures and the 
often dramatic events of the past. His account of the “Empire of Prester 
John” naturally gave some space to its art. Unesco’s recent publication of 
an album of reproductions of some of the most beautiful of the Ethiopian 
minlatures (1) reveals certain of the specific qualities underlying this supremely 
religlous art which draws its inspiration from the Old and New Testaments 
and the Lives of the Saints. 
E tHropriA Is a land of moun- concentrated. Here, at an elevation 
tain peaks. In fact, it is in of seven to thirteen thousand feet, 
the high plateau region, where one was created and developed a civiliz- 
gasps for breath on wind-swept slopes ation which, from the point of view 
that the life of the nation Is of political and cultural achievement 
Since Christianity was introduced Into the anclent kingdom of Axum (today 
Ethiopia) in the 4th century, art and literature In this country have been almost 
exclusively ecclesiastical, and monasteries and churches have remained until 
recent times the sole guardians of culture. Below, on the Dabra Damo cliff, 
which can be climbed only with a rope, stands Ethiopia's oldest monastery church, 
  
and from that of the artistic monu- 
ments which record its long history, 
has no parallel in all Tropical Africa. 
The monuments which date from 
the earliest period of Ethiopian 
culture, the famous monolithic 
“obelisks” of Axum, as huge as those 
of the Pharaohs, are a lasting tribute 
to the technical mastery that enabled 
these artists of the last centuries 
before our era to cut, decorate, 
transport and erect enormous stone 
blocks. They also cast light on the 
origins ‘of this civilization. Although 
(1) Unesco World Art Series Album: 
Ethiopia, Illuminated Manuscripts, price: 
$18.00; £6.8.0. Published by the New York 
Graphic Society, 95 East Putnam Av- 
enue, Greenwich, Conn. U.S.A. 
Through the arrival of Christianity, Ethio- 
pia shared in the flowering of art in the 
Byzantine world. Monasteries and Churches 
became centres of religious, cultural and 
political development. Ethiopian Chris- 
© 
P. 
Ra
va
si
o 
 

## [Page 31](064331engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 64292: The Art of Ethiopia's painter-scribes

F
O
A
L
,
 
rr
 
. " 
TS
 
* 
  
N
y
 
it has often been erroneously traced 
to Egypt, its real birthplace is the 
kingdoms of the Arabian coast, which 
is only separated from the Abyssinian 
highlands by a narrow stretch of sea. 
Engaged primarily in the spice 
trade, whieh long made Arabia Felix 
wealthy, and trading also in goods 
from Central Africa, these South 
Arabian kingdoms (Hadramut, Saba, 
Mina, Yemen...) obeyed a fundament- 
al rule imposed upon all maritime 
communities. In order to survive, 
they had to establish trading posts 
abroad and, to defend them, colonize 
the surrounding countryside. 
There can be no doubt that this 
historic law governed the foundation 
of the Axumite kingdom. There is 
much evidence to prove the common 
ancestry of the Ethiopian people and 
their neighbours. They do not 
belong to the Negro race. Both the 
color of their skin and their cultural 
traits relate them to the people of 
the Arabian peninsula. From them 
they took their first art, now well- 
known because of archaeological ex- 
cavations in the region of Axum. 
From them they also borrowed their 
Semitic language, Geez and even their 
Sabzean writing. They were not, 
tianity, in common with other Eastern 
churches, has never shown much interest 
in sculpture. The ancient Axumite King- 
dom, however, boasted craftsmen capable 
of producing works like this ornate cross. 
 
7
3
 
C
I
f
w
n
s
 
cn
 
©
 
G 
Ca
yl
a 
 
: 
‘E
th
io
pi
a,
 
l/
lu
mi
na
te
d 
M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t
s
 
F
r
o
m
 
th
e 
K
e
b
r
a
n
 
Ma
nu
sc
ri
pt
. 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
A
l
b
u
m
 
 
however, slow in transforming the 
latter into the admirable Ethiopian 
alphabet which, with its 182 charac- 
ters, Is capable of rendering every 
nuance of pronunciation. As Mr. 
Doresse noted, Ethloplan borrowing 
has never been a simple copying. 
Everything was assimilated and 
transformed, and became the birth- 
right of a united, active people who, 
at one time in their history (the third 
and fourth centuries A.D.), even 
succeeded in imposing their domin- 
ation over the Arabian reglons from 
which their ancestors came. 
No doubt Ethiopia would have 
remained a part of Semitic civillz- 
ation and culture had its destiny not 
been changed by a momentous event 
in the fourth century. This was King 
Ezana'’s conversion to Christianity by 
Frumentius, a native of Tyre in Syria. 
The conversion, which took place 
around 340 A.D., had a double effect. 
It made Ethiopia the first Christian 
state of Tropical Africa. It also creat- 
ed a new mentality, a consciousness 
of being a special race, “chosen” by 
its acceptance and maintenance of 
the religion of Christ, an island in a 
sea of infidels. This frame of mind, 
whose roots are so evident in the 
Judaism which Ethiopian Christianity 
combined with the teachings of the 
New Testament to a greater extent 
than was done anywhere else, finds 
expression in the coronation cerem- 
ony which makes the Negus a kind 
of African Byzantine Emperor. One 
of his functions, according to the 
text of the Constitution of 1955, Is 
in fact, “to defend the Holy Orthodox 
Faith based on the doctrines of 
Saint Mark of Alexandria’ (art. 21). 
This psychology has given the 
Ethiopian Church a privileged place 
in the organization of the State. 
With the Emperor, it is even today 
the real unifying agent of a vast 
kingdom where several ethnic groups 
live side by side and where the large 
number of different languages and 
dlalects could easily fragment the 
country. From this point of view, 
Ethiopla resembles all African coun- 
tries, and has the same need for 
another language to make commun- 
ication possible among its peoples. 
The Imperial proclamations, as well 
as the laws, are now drawn up in 
two languages, Amharic, the language 
of the Court, and English, which is 
thus promoted to the rank of a second 
official language. 
No people has ever written so copiously on parchment as the Ethioplans. Today 
the art of writing and producing books In manuscript is still practised with the 
same traditlonal methods and processes as for centuries past. There are many 
remote churches and monasteries in the mountains where sacred books and 
prayer books are still hand written, Below, miniature illustrating the Nativity. 
  
tntodenchsy. 
  
hiro “N:"5a0 205: 
   
   
' : 
a
 
Ah L Ahab dan 
  

## [Page 32](064331engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 64292: The Art of Ethiopia's painter-scribes

32 
PAINTER-SCRIBES (Cont'd) 
[Hlumination in the medi®val manner 
Historlcally speaking, the Ethioplan 
Church has played a role analogous 
to that of the Latin and Greek 
Churches in the feudal soclety of the 
Middle Ages. In a very real sense, it 
has been the educator of the nation. 
It is In the Church that Ethlopla 
has found its scholars, artists and 
schoolteachers. Although the State 
is employing more and more teachers 
each year to staff the many schools 
it 1s constructing, 1f 1s still not un- 
usual to find some priest or dablara 
providing the ancestral form of 
instruction in country villages. He 
assembles all the school-age popu- 
lation under a shady sycamore at the 
edge of the village. Swaying rhythm- 
ically, the children chant in unison 
the letters or texts he has written 
on the blackboard. The long staff 
he carries Is not just a badge of 
authority. He often uses it to call 
the children to order. For it Is 
difficult to concentrate on the 
complicated Geez letters when 
thousands of the brightly-hued birds 
that enliven the Ethiopian landscape 
are flitting through the boughs over- 
head, thelr song mingling with the 
chorus of young voices. 
The sole function of priest and 
dabtaras has not been the education 
of children. They have also been 
the principal artisans of Ethioplan 
culture as it is expressed in literature 
and art. 
Enrico Cerullli, who is probably the 
greatest contemporary authority on 
Ethiopian literature, provides a 
penetrating study of its essential 
characteristics In his Litteratura 
Etiopica (2nd ed. 1960). These can 
be reduced to three: receptivity, in 
the sense.that the Ethioplans have 
found thelr Inspiration and doctrines 
In Greek, Syrian, Arab-Christian and 
Western sources: ability to adapt 
foreign elements to the taste of the 
country: and, finally, a sort of 
sclerosis, which compels authors to 
shackle thelr work in rigid, unchang- 
ing literary forms fixed by rules 
which nobody dares break. 
HE art of Ethiopia reflects 
the same tendencies. Ar- 
cheeologists became aware of this 
when they discovered the influence 
of the architecture and sculpture of 
the South Arabian founders of 
Abyssinia upon the monuments of 
the Axumite period. But the quality 
of dependence is even more striking 
in the works Christian Ethiopia. One 
sees it in the astonishing rock chur- 
ches, of which the ensemble of Lali- 
bela offers the most remarkable 
examples, as well as In the paintings 
that decorate the walls of churches 
and the pages of manuscripts. 
Of all forms of Ethiopian art, the 
illuminated manuscripts are known 
best. Palinter-scribes have produced 
an incalculable number of them, 
following traditional methods which 
are still current in monasteries and 
at the Court. Beginning in the slx- 
teenth century, many of these books, 
often decorated with brilliantly color- 
ed paintings, have found thelr way 
into large llbraries like those of 
London, Paris and the Vatican. Their 
presence among us makes study of 
their themes, techniques and sources 
much easier, 
N a general way, one can say 
that Ethiopian painting 
exactly reflects the various contacts 
this far-off Christian kingdom has 
had with the rest of the world. A 
first period, as far as can be deter- 
mined at present, seems to be fairly 
recent. These are the works of the 
14th and 15th centuries, the period 
covered by the Unesco albums. Be- 
neath the naive features and the 
often clumsy drawing, analysis reveals 
the influence of Byzantine or Middle 
Eastern art which the Ethiopian 
painters could have known either 
from Imported books or because they 
had seen it when they went on pil- 
grimages to Jerusalem. 
A second perlod begins after the 
arrival of the Portuguese who, at the 
beginning of the 16th century, helped 
the Christians drive out the Moslem 
invaders led by Mohammed Granyeé. 
With this contact, a new style appear- 
ed. Inspired by Western painting, it 
was more linear and elaborate than 
the earlier work. This was the epoch 
of the civilization of Gondar, which 
lasted for nearly two centurles. In 
the course of this long period tastes 
changed, and the imitation of West- 
ern styles became more marked, 
particularly as regards the use of 
perspective and relief, which were 
absolutely unknown before the 
massive penetration by Europeans. 
The penetration, which was much 
facilitated by the opening of the 
Suez Canal and the European policy 
of Menellk and his successors, has 
excercised a pronounced influence 
upon modern Ethiopian painting, and 
particularly upon the work of young 
contemporary artists. While some 
remain falthful to the aesthetic and 
iconographic rules inherited from the 
past, others, trained in the methods 
taught in foreign schools, are 
completely Western in technique and 
style. It is too early to say what 
effect thelr innovations will have on 
the traditional painting of Ethiopia. 
But one thing is sure. It will remain 
true to itself and, as it has always 
done in the past, will once again 
assimilate outside influence without 
losing its own personality. 
A scholar and authority on Middle East 
manuscripts, Abbé Jules Leroy is a former 
director of the Imperial Section of 
Archeeology in Addis Ababa. He is now 
attached to the Centre National de Re- 
cherche Scientifique in France. 
Paintings from Unesco World Art Series Album: ‘Ethiopia, Illuminated Manuscripts’   
 
  
  
o od 
>» - -~ 
* A A 
\F 
* x AYA 
A mh oR 
{ I Y7¥ 
¢ = 
4 
4 \ a \ 
A NR \! ' 
- z ’ 
’ a — ' 
GA Ha 
mm iG 
nF neINT:: 
LUKE THE EVANGELIST. A portrait of St. Luke 
writing the first words of his gospel. Miniature from 
the Kebran Manuscript (early |5th cent). Preserv- 
ed in St. Gabriel's Church in the Lake Tana region. 
~ ¥ » - 
S00 HY PANIENA 
AICI pv , 
TEETER TES 
Tr 
h \ x \ 
ib 
yr 
i 2 
4 - 
3 Y 
} u f \ 
"| HOLE N 
¥ 
CB 
THE ANNOUNCEMENT TO MARY. In this 
stiff, formalized version of the annunciation scene, 
the Virgin is shown spinning. Taken from the manu- 
scripts of the Jahjah Giyorgis gospels (Mid- 15th cent.) 
THE ENTOMBMENT. Here the Ethiopian minia- 
turist has depicted disciples bearing the body of 
Jesus towards a grave depicted as a geometric, 
abstract shape. From the manuscript of St. Arsima. 
2 i . 
iFxrfio PAE INPACP AZ INAS: | 
  
  
      
       
  
  
                                         
Rou 
} 
i 
5 ioe 
[. a 
» = 
i wd PH BABA 
} % Na | =r . 
\ Ht ¢ 
s po pot - ~ 
¥ ye Ne oo Fes BEY BE 
a AL lL ny a T 
- - ~ - 1 . 
: - me 
bh * - -— > “FF 
; i“ : Sa 
| 3 * i F ¥ a 
: = - %, - at 
i d 3 wz “3 
} \ - I Re ERLE 
A 243 y fl 
i i 
“l ; ! 
   
B
o
 
A

## [Page 33](064331engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

AFRICA’S WILD LIFE IN PERIL 
 
Sir, 
The success of the recent Arusha 
Conference must largely be ascribed 
to the change of attitude so clearly 
brought out by the African partici- 
pants themselves toward their unique 
wildlife resources. The earnest desire 
of modern African States to continue 
and actively expand the efforts made 
in the field of wildlife management is 
greatly encouraged by the interest and 
support of international organizations. 
Your Sept. 1961 issue devoted to the 
world’s wildlife heritage, not only 
showed UNEsco’s interest, but the 
excellent choice of the cover photo- 
graphs ably illustrated the fact that the 
Organization understood the problems 
involved “from beginning to end.” 
Your choice of the elephant, as the 
most striking, as well as the most 
adaptable of all animals—after man 
—<could not have been a happier one. 
Gerald G. Watterson 
Secretary-General - TUCN 
Morges prés Lausanne, Switzerland 
Sir, 
Your issue on Africa’s Wildlife in 
Peril (Sept. 1961) was absolutely 
magnificent. As a member of the 
Fauna Preservation Society and as 
“A Friend of L.LU.C.N.” I was delight- 
ed with it. 1 have just ordered four 
more copies to send to some of my 
friends. : 
Dr. T. H. Bassett 
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada 
Sir, 
Having spent two months on safari 
(photographic) in [East Africa this 
winter, I read with much interest and 
understanding Sir Julian Huxley's 
article in the September Courier on 
“Poaching”. The fact of knowing 
beforehand about the systematic 
slaughter by organized commercial 
poachers of the wild game in Africa, 
made me view the relatively few 
remaining animals with wonder closely 
allied to a sense of sadness and 
despair. 
Were these gazelles moving across 
the plains, these rhinos, elephants and 
giraffes who form our last link with 
the prehistoric age, soon to disappear 
from the world, leaving future gene- 
rations with only written and pictor- 
ial records of what Africa once 
meant to everyone who, if only in 
their imaginations, loved and revered 
its great wild life heritage? And the 
new States of Africa, how would 
they develop and progress when 
deprived of one of their main eco- 
nomic revenues? 
Sir Julian speaks of the vital neces- 
sity of the new African governments 
recognizing and supporting their na- 
tional parks to achieve “Profit, Pro- 
tein, Pride and Prestige.” It is signi- 
ficant and depressing to note, in the 
words of Sydney Downey, one of East 
Africa's leading conservationists, in 
connexion with the recent Internation- 
al Game Conference in Arusha, 
Tanganyika that “no member of the 
Kenya Government and no Kenya 
African politician could take the 
trouble to attend.” Obviously at pre- 
sent little help or co-operation can be 
expected in this direction. 
What can be done, then, to prevent 
one of the few remaining wonders, 
not only of Africa but of the world, 
from being totally annihilated through 
ignorance, savagery and greed? Until 
the inexperienced and short-sighted 
African Governments can be shown 
the inestimable value to themselves and 
their countries of this wild life heri- 
tage, it remains the task of world 
organizations and of influential indi- 
viduals, to give aid both in financing 
the upkeep of the National Parks 
(thereby eliminating poaching) and in 
continually educating the African peo- 
ple and their leaders to the realization 
that without this unique inheritance, 
East Africa particularly would lose its 
greatest natural resource. 
If world opinion has been roused 
to save the monuments of Nubia 
(monuments which exist in a country 
already overrich in historical build- 
ings, etc.) surely “the task of saving 
the threatened wild life in Africa” 
should take priority? If this aid is 
not given now, Africa's only living 
monument to the past will be lost 
forever. 
Noreen Curry 
Winnipeg, Canada 
JAPAN MISREPRESENTED 
  
Sir, 
I welcomed the article “Japan 
Misrepresented” having felt for some 
time that there are gross misrepre- 
sentations and thercfore gross mis- 
conceptions taught in schools in the 
subjects of geography and history. 
Particularly is this inexcusable in 
the highly educated countries of the 
western world, where large sums are 
spent on education. Schools secm 
to set a national identity for a 
country, and stick with it regardless 
of changes within that country. 
Colin Jose 
Moose Jaw, Saskatchewam, Canada 
Sir, 
Can you kindly forward the en- 
closed chapter on Japan from the 
textbook Eurasia to Mr. Tatsumi Shi- 
mada, author or the article “Japan 
Misrepresented” in the April, 1961, 
issue of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
Dr. Robert M. Glendinning, the 
Letters to the Editor 
author of Eurasia, and the editorial 
staff at Ginn and Company have 
made every effort to present an 
accurate picture of Japan to school 
children in the United States, 
We will welcome Mr. Shimada's 
evaluation of our material and will 
give serious consideration to all sug- 
gestions which he may have for its 
improvement. 
Robert N. Saveland, Editor 
Lands and Peoples of the World 
Boston, Mass, US.A, 
Ed. note: Tur UNesco CoOURILR 
applauds this initiative of Lands and 
Peoples of the World in seeking to 
present a true picture of Japan to 
U.S. schools and hopes the example 
will be followed by other publishers. 
The text of Eurasia has been for- 
warded ro Mr. Shimada. 
Sir, 
“Japan Misrepresented”—A Look 
at Foreign Textbooks, was very 
interesting. Textbooks with inap- 
propriate pictures were exhibited at 
an Exhibition Hall in Tokyo recently 
and I saw many of them with my 
own eyes. That article reminds me 
that the Japanese themselves may 
misunderstand the real life of other 
nations. Naturally, the mutual 
understanding of all the nations in 
the world must be attained through 
the medium of periodicals of many 
countries. I am much impressed that 
the Unesco Courier took up such 
problems and showed actual mistakes 
with pictures to the readers. However, 
I believe it would have been much 
more effective if you had printed 
those examples with the right pictures 
of present-day Japan. 
Masaharu Inatoml 
Nerima ku, Tokyo 
THE CURSE OF THE ALBATROSS 
AN APOLOGY 
 
Sir, 
In my article “The Curse of the 
Albatross—A Mariner's Myth”, which 
was published in the March 1961 issue 
of Tne Unesco Couricr, 1 did not 
indicate that I was very largely inspir- 
ed, when writing this article, by the 
book entitled “The Wandering Alba- 
tross’ by Admiral Sir William Jame- 
son. I very much regret that I omitted 
to indicate such an important source. 
For this omission } wish to apologize 
both to Admiral Jameson and to 
UNESCO. 
I would be obliged if you would 
publish this rectification in an early 
issue, 
David Gunston 
Denmead, England 
33

## [Page 34](064331engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco Ne 
  
    
  
   
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF UNESCO RESIGNS 
Mr. RENE MAHEU NAMED AS ACTING HEAD 
  
Dr. VITTORINO VERONESE 
HE resignation of Dr. Yittorino 
Veronese as Director-General of 
Unesco and the appointment of 
Mr. René Maheu as Acting Director-Gene- 
ral until the November 1962 session of 
the General Conference were announced 
on November 2. The resignation of 
Dr. Veronese was announced in the follow- 
ing statement made by Dr. Mohamed 
Awad of The United Arab Republic, chair- 
man of the Unesco Executive Board. 
“The Executive Board of Unesco deep- 
ly regrets to announce that it has received 
from the Director-General of Unesco, 
Dr. Vittorino Veronese, a letter asking that 
he be relicved of his post as Director- 
General. Dr. Vittorino Veronese has been 
lately on leave for medical reasons; and, 
although he has fully recovercd his health, 
does not consider jt advisable that he 
should continue to assume the heavy du- 
ties and responsibilities which his post as 
Director-General of Unesco demands. For 
this reason he has asked the Board to 
accept his resignation as soon as possible. 
The Executive Board, while recognizing 
the great services rendered to the Organi- 
zation by Dr. Veronese in the past three 
years. cannot nevertheless, oppose the 
wishes of one to whom it is so deeply in- 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
ph
ot
os
 
Mr. RENE MAHEU 
debted, and has therefore no other course 
but to accede to his wish and accept his 
resignation.” 
The Executive Board then unanimously 
appointed Mr. René Maheu as Acting 
Director-General until the next session of 
the General Conference elects Dr. Vero- 
nese’s permanent Successor. 
Dr. Veronese was born in Italy on March 
1, 1910. After becoming a member of the 
Italian National Commission for Unesco 
he was elected to membership of Unesco’s 
Executive Board in 1952, and became its 
chairman in 1956. He was elected Direct- 
or-General of Unesco in December 1958. 
Mr. René Maheu was born in France on 
March 28, 1905. He graduated from the 
Ecole Normale Supérieure and taught phil- 
osophy at the University of Cologne 
(1931-33), the French Institute of London 
(1933-1939) and the Franco-Moslem Col- 
lege of Fez (1940-42). From 1936 to 1939, 
he served as Cultural Attaché with the 
French Embassy in London, before entering 
military service. Mr. Maheu joined 
Unesco in September 1946, as head of the 
Division of Free Flow of Information. 
In 1949, Dr. Jaimes Torres Bodef, then 
Director-Gencral of Unesco, appointed him 
  | 
as Director of his Office. He was appoint. 
ed Assistant Director-General in July 1954, 
and, with the same rank, Unesco Represen- 
tative to the United Nations in New York 
in November 1955. Mr. Mahen return- 
ed to Unesco Headquarters in December 
1958 and in November 1959 was appointed 
Deputy Director-General by Dr. Vittorino 
Yeronese. 
  
THE UNESCO PHILATELIE 
SERVICE 
NACIONES UNIDAS #i{ti 
U
N
I
T
E
D
 
N
A
T
I
O
N
S
 
S
I
I
N
N
 
S
N
O
I
L
V
N
 
AAA H Fa LAFRIQUE 
  
OBbEAMHEHHBIE HALLIUA 
The work of the U.N. Economic 
Commission for Africa has been com- 
memorated in the stamp above 
which was issued by the United Na- 
tions Postal Administration on Octo- 
ber 24 (U.N. Day) as the fourth in 
its 1961 series of commemorative 
stamps. This U.N. Commission 
seeks to promote concerted action 
for the economic development of 
Africa, including its social aspects, 
especially the standard of living 
of its peoples. The stamp has been 
issued in two denominations: 4 cent 
(blue, orange, yellow and light 
brown) and | | cent (green, orange, 
yellow and dark brown). As the 
agent in France of the U.N. Postal 
Administration, Unesco’s Philatelic 
Service stocks all the United 
Nations stamps currently on sale. 
It also has stamps and first day 
covers issued by many Unesco 
member states to commemorate 
important events in the history. 
of Unesco and the U.N. (inaugura- 
tion of Unesco’s headquarters, 
Human Rights Day, World Refugee 
Year). [Information on items avail- 
able, their price and the methods 
of payment will be sent on request   by the Unesco Philatelic Service, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°.   ho
 T
A
R
 
A
 
e
a
,
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S 
- 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 35](064331engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO 
ART 
SLIDES 
A collection of colour transparencies to make known to the 
public masterpieces of world art which, in spite of their impor- 
tance for the history of art and for the understanding of the 
genius of the nation which created them, are all too often 
unknown. Most of the slides are based on the Unesco World 
Art Series Albums, with which readers of the Unesco Courier 
are already familiar. 
The slides, produced for Unesco by Publications Filmées 
d'Art et d'Histoire in Paris, are of top quality and reasonably 
priced. They are presented in a plastic case for ready projec- 
tion, each series containing thirty transparencies, in mounts 
5 x 5 cm, and an explanatory booklet with text and titles in 
French, English and Spanish. 
The very high standard of colour reproduction makes these 
slides valuable not only to teachers and lecturers but also to 
art lovers everywhere. 
Series now available: 
Il. EGYPT: Paintings from Tombs and Temples. 
2. YUGOSLAVIA: Mediaeval Frescoes. 
INDIA: Paintings from the Ajanta Caves. 
IRAN: Persian Miniatures, Imperial Library. 
SPAIN: Romanesque Paintings. 
NORWAY: Paintings from the Stave Churches. 
MASACCIO: Frescoes in Florence, 
AUSTRALIA: Aboriginal Paintings from Arnhem Land. 
CEYLON: Paintings from Temple, Shrine and Rock. 
NUBIA: Masterpieces in Danger. 
U.S.S.R.: Early Russian Icons. -
—
O
V
E
N
O
 
NA
W 
To be published shortly: 
12. MEXICO: Prehispanic Paintings. 
13. JAPAN: Early Buddhist Paintings. 
14. CZECHOSLOVAKIA: Manuscripts with Roman and Gothic Paint- 
ings. 
Prices vary according to country, but do not exceed the 
equivalent of $10 in local currency. 
In certain countries special agents have been appointed for 
the sale of Unesco Art Slides (see following list)—orders and 
requests for further information should be sent direct to 
these addresses. 
Argentine: Editorial Sudamericana, S.A., Alsina, 500, Buenos Alres. 
Australia: Tradco Agencies, 109, Swanston Street, Melbourne, C. |, 
Belgium: Louis de Lannoy, 22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. 
Denmark: Mellemfolkelight Samvirke, Kronprinsessegade 32 (4), 
Copenhagen. 
France: Unesco, DPV, 7, place de Fontenoy, Paris (VlI*). 
Publications Filmées d'Art et d'Histoire, 44, rue du Dragon, Paris (VI*). 
Rousseau, 6, place Chapou, Cahors (Lot). 
India: National Education and Information Films Ltd., National House, 
Tulloch Road, Apollo Bunder, Bombay |. 
Israel: Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35, Allenby Road, and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv, 
Spain: Libreira Cientifica Medinaceli, Duque de Medinaceli 4, 
Madrid 14. 
Sweden: Svenska Unescoradet, Vasagatan |5-17, Stockholm C. 
Switzerland: Films Fixes Fribourg S.A., 20, rue du Romont, Fribourg. 
United Kingdom: Educational Productions Ltd., East Ardsley, Wake- 
field, Yorkshire. 
All branches of H.M. Stationery Office. 
U.S.A.: Unesco Publications Center, 801, Third Avenue, New York 22, 
N.Y. 
For countries not listed, application should be made to 
National Distributors for Unesco Publications (see list below). 
  
     
 
r
e
l
i
 
’ 4   
  
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU- 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul, — AUSTRALIA, 
Melbourne University Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C. l., Victoria. (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA, 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 50.). — BELGIUM. Office de Publicité S.A., 
[ 6, rte Marg, Brussels. CCP 285.98. NV Standaard- 
Boekhandel, Belgieler |51. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courrier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00 — 
BURMA. Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. (§ 3.00), — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.,, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
— CHINA. World'Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section I, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CUBA. 
Librerfa Econémica, Pre Zayas 505-7, Apartado |13, 
Havana. (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. Artia 
ttd., 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskriftafdelingen, 6 Norregade, 
Kobenhavn K. (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. International 
Press Agency. P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinski. 
(Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris, 7¢. C.C.P, [2598-48. (7 NF). 
— GERMANY. For the Unesco Kurier, Vertrieb Bahren- 
feldar-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P, 
276650 (DM 8). Other Publications: R, Oldenbourg 
Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 145, Munich. — GHANA. 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St., POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom. — GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co., 25. Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P.C. Box 149, Budapest, 62. — INDIA Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay 1; |7 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, |; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asat Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 
[7 Park Street, Calcutta | 6, Scindia House, New Delhi. 
(Rs. 6.70). — INDONESIA, Bappit Pusat ** Permata'", 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35, Allenby 
Road and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1 £ 4.-). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster's Bock Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co, 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, Amman. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. |. Momolu 
Kamara, 69, Front and Gurley Streets, Monrovia, — 
LUXEMBOURG, Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand- 
Rue, Luxembourg. — MALAYAN FEDERATION 
AND SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Ltd., Times 
House, River Valley Rd., Singapore. -—~ MALTA. Sa- 
pienza’s Library, 26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10 =). — MAU. 
RITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, 
Port-Louis, — MONACO, British Library, 30 Bld des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF). — NETHERLANDS. 
N.Y. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhout. 9. The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G.C.T. 
Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Curacao. 
— NEW ZEALAND. Unesco Publications Centre, 
100 Hackthorne Road, Christchurch. (10°-). — NIGERIA 
C.M.5. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174, Lagos. (10 -). — NOR. 
WAY. For the Unesco Courier: A.S. Narvesens Littera- 
  
tur-Tjeneste, Stortingsgt. 4, Oslo, Postboks [1 5(kr. 13 20) 
Other publications. AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Grensen, 
7, Oslo. — PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co., 
Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore, — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 7a, No. TIl-49, Apartado 
de Correos 2018, Panama, DF, (Balboas 3-). — PHI- 
LIPPINES. Philippine Education Co. Inc., | 104 Castille- 
jos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 620, Manila. — POLAND. 
* RUCH *' ul.Wiloza Nr, 46, Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50), — 
PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada Lda, Livraria Portugal, 
Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — RHODESIA & NYASA- 
LAND. The Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, 
Southern Rhodesia. — SWEDEN. For The Unesco 
Courter: Svenska Unescoridet, Yasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); other pubhcations AB C.E. Freitzes 
Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, — 
SWITZERLAND, Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasie 
Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. C.CP. 
1.236. « Courier » only: Georges Losmaz, |, rue des 
Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 11-4811. (Fr. 5 8). 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 
9030, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Manion 9. Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals). — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 lsuckial 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA, Uganda 
Bookshop, 'P.O., Box |45 Kampala, — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA, Van Schak's Bookstore. Libri 
Budding, Church Street, Pretoria. For the Unesco 
Courier: Central News Agency, P.O. Box 1033, Johan 
nesburg. (10-). — UNITED ARAB "REPUBLIC 
(EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. HM, Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, SEL. (10-). — UNITED 
STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 801 Third 
Avenue, New York, 22, N.Y. ($8 500) and (except 
periodicals): Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja 
Kniga, Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslo- 
venska Knjiga, Terazne 27/11, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](064331engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
     
       
        
     
  
; oot ho NYE EIT rin 
ona 17 J) it AU 
LART DANS LA VIE DE LOM: 
  
: 2 re 
LA - DANS LA VIE PE LHOMME 
  
   
  
3 = 1 
» = 2 3 
  
“4 DAS WIEDER 
 