# [074881](074881engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](074881engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
 

## [Page 2](074881engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

- Ne 
- 
y/ 
BU 
‘Golden Buddh A 
a Th Boas ME RA AE us Lal BeAr Er i, ah 
"Hands open in ag s life-size, 18th cent 3uddha from — Burma 
(1.62 metres high) is embellished with gilt lacquer. It is one of the treasures 
of Eastern art displaye 
nd modernized premises of the Musée Guimet, 
in Paris. Founded at Lyon in 1878 by ench industrialist and keen orientalist, 
the museum was transferred to Paris ten years later. it boasts a world-renowned col- 
lection of sculpture and other works of art 
donesia, Thailand, Laos, 
Burma and India), PIS ELTILT PCL CEA LEE 
and Afghanistan, 
works of artist-monks from Tibet and art treasures 
Moderniza- 
tion of the museum, due to be CER R EFA 
display and lighting 
‘techniques which CEIR YG full beauty ¢ f these masterworks fro vient. LOM © 
THi@ ( Re ES  

## [Page 3](074881engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"mCouricr 
  
MARCH 1973 
26TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 14 LANGUAGES 
English Italian 
French Hindi 
Spanish Tamil 
Russian Hebrew 
German Persian 
Arabic Dutch 
Japanese Portuguese 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Annual subscription rates £ 1.30 stg.; $5.00 
(North America); 17 French francs or 
equivalent; 2 years: £ 2.30 stg.; 30 F. Single 
copies: 13 p stg.; 50 cents: 1.70 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, Italian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew, Persian, Dutch and 
Portuguese. For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER," plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the 
Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W, Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- 
tents « Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
* 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 756700 Paris - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Olga Rodel 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim Et Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : Kartar Singh Duggal (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition : N.D. Sundaravadivelu (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Howard Brabyn 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Illustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard 
Research: Zoé Allix 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be eddressed to 
, the Editor-in-Chief 
  
   
  
 
    
THREE FACES OF ART TODAY 
By Jacques Havet 
1. ART IN THE WEST 
A continuous search for new frontiers 
By Mikel Dufrenne 
   
   
NEW REALISM: MORE REAL 
THAN THE REAL THING 
Photo report 
2. ART IN THE SOCIALIST COUNTRIES 
The many facets of Realism 
By Béla Kopeczi 
    COMPUTER ART 
Photo report 
3. AVANT-GARDE AND TRADITION 
IN ASIA, AFRICA AND LATIN AMERICA 
By Mikel Dufrenne 
WHAT'S THE SCORE 
IN THE NEW MUSIC? 
Photo report 
UNESCO NEWSROOM 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
    
T
l
 
hh
o 
Ne
 
3 
- 
19
73
 
M
C
 
73
-2
-2
88
6 
A
]
 
ok 
C
l
l
 
  TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Golden Buddha (Burma) 
l
r
,
 
r
T
 
- 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
G.
 
Fa
ll
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Po
st
er
 
© 
R
o
m
a
n
 
Ci
es
le
wi
cz
 
THREE FACES OF ART TODAY 
Cubism, dadaism, surrealism and other 
forms of modern art “exploded” reality 
and experimented with its component 
parts. A similar, but of course in no 
way identical, phenomenon may be 
occurring today when artists (such as 
Salvador Dali and others) take famous 
masterpieces of the past and transform, 
distort and “toy and tamper” with them. 
Many people are naturally shocked by 
this “sacrilege”. The Polish artist Ro- 
man Cieslewicz, whose work is repro- 
duced on our cover, while adopting the 
same “sacrilegious” approach, sees 
“art attacked by modern techniques and 
the creative machine”, hence he shows 
Mona Lisa shedding a tear of blood. 
The tear in the eye of La Gioconda is 
echoed in the drop of blood on the 
rose thorn in our back-cover illustration. 
E 
f
i
 
E
E
R

## [Page 4](074881engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

Co 
T.. issue is devoted to three studies on 
trends in concepts of art in the world today. 
Examined separately are the arts in the Western 
countries, the arts in the Socialist countries and 
the arts in the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin 
America. 
The articles in this issue are based on a chapter 
on the study of artistic and literary expression to be 
published in a forthcoming Unesco book which 
forms part of a monumental survey on the Main 
Trends of Research in the Social and Human 
Sciences undertaken by Unesco. 
Initiated in 1963, this long-term inquiry of world- 
wide scope has been carried out by Unesco in two 
successive stages. The first part was completed 
in 1970 with the publication of an 800-page volume 
entitled Main Trends of Research in the Social 
and Human Sciences, Part |: Social Sciences 
(Co-edition Unesco-Mouton, The Hague, 1970). 
The volume for Part Il, dealing with social anthro- 
pology. archaeology, history, artistic and literary 
expression, the legal sciences, and philosophy, is 
now in preparation and is scheduled for publication 
(precise date to be announced) in English and 
French editions. 
Each of the chapters of Part Il is the result of a 
broad collective effort carried out on an internat- 
ional scale under the direction of an editor-author 
aided by associate editors from different regions 
of the world. 
The eminent specialists thus responsible for the 
various chapters are: for social and cultural anthro- 
pology, Prof. Maurice Freedman, Oxford; for 
archaeology and prehistory, Prof. Sigfried J. De 
Laet, Ghent; for history, Prof. Geoffrey Barra- 
clough, Oxford; for aesthetics and the sciences of 
art, Prof. Mikel Dufrenne, Paris; for legal sciences, 
Prof. Viktor Knapp, Prague; and for philosophy, 
Prof. Paul Ricceur, Paris. To each chapter is appen- 


### 50650: Three faces of art today

Three faces of art today 
  
Dufrenne analyses the avant-garde and traditional 
concepts of art and literature in Asia, Africa and 
Latin America, on the basis of first-hand contri- 
butions received by Unesco. Professor Dufrenne 
shows how a highly original approach to art and 
creativity is developing in these countries, while 
drawing upon the acquisitions of Western scientific 
thinking. 
Here it is worth noting that the topics presented 
in this issue should of course be considered in the 
light of the broader study of research trends to 
which this picture of artistic evolution is an intro- 
duction. Mikel Dufrenne and his team clearly show 
in their full report that the study of art and litera- 
ture, while acknowledging that it is deeply rooted 
in the lives of individuals and communities, is 
continually striving for more systematic and rigor- 
ous objectivity. 
Based as it is nowadays on a wealth of data 
pertaining to all the cultures of the globe, and 
seeking to understand the artistic creations of all 
cultures according to their own spirit and to 
promote their diffusion, the study of art today 
aims toward a universality that at the same time 
recognizes and respects the diversities and richness 
of all human expression. 
In this sense, the inquiry into current trends of 
research on artistic and literary expressions pro- 
vides a particularly meaningful introduction to the 
evolution and problems of the human sciences 
generally which Unesco has sought to present in 
the Second Part of this vast research project. 
ded an extensive international bibliography. 
The texts presented in this issue have been 
abridged and condensed from the study directed 
Jacques Havet 
General Rapporteur of Part II 
of the Study on Main Trends of Research 
in the Social and Human Sciences 
by Mikel Dufrenne, professor of philosophy at the 
University of Paris. They are concerned essentially 
with the evolution of art in our time, with the 
meaning that artistic and literary expression has 
for modern man and the functions assigned to art 
in present-day societies. 
One conclusion that emerges from this brilliant 
analysis is that the study of art, no matter how rig- 
orously “scientific” its methods, cannot be sepa- 
rated from the art of its time or from contemporary 
life in the various communities and cultures at 
a given moment in history. 
Artistic creation, general (if not always conscious) 
attitudes toward art, and the systematic study of 
art itself (including of course the art of former 
epochs and former civilizations, etc.) are con- 
stantly affecting one another. Perhaps one could 
say that within each culture at a given stage of its 
historical evolution, and in the light of every signi- 
ficant philosophy or ideology, the same basic 
inspiration is at work at all three levels. 
It is in this perspective that Professor Dufrenne 
examines the changes that are taking place in 
the world of art in "Western countries’’, as well 
as their deep sources of inspiration. Béla Képeczi, 
Secretary-General of the Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, discusses art in the Socialist countries, 
its foundations, motivations and evolution within 
the framework of the Socialist concept of a new 
society. In the third article of this issue, Mikel  Ph
ot
o 
Ci
cc
lo
ne
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 5](074881engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

Photo © Yves Caucher, Institute 
of Contemporary Arts, London 
  
A WORLD OF DIFFERENCE in the very concept of art spans these two pictures. Below left, 
“The Banker and his Wife” by the 16th century Flemish artist Quentin Massys (or Matsys). 
With its precise details and true-to-life portraiture, this graceful composition is a marriage of 
colour and poetry. Above, a framed blank canvas hung in a recent exhibition. Visitors were 
invited to draw whatever they wanted on the canvas, the idea being that the blank space is 
an inducement to dream, phantasy and invention. If art is not dead, it has changed its face. 


### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

«ART IN THE WEST 
A continuous search for new frontiers 
by Mikel Dufrenne 
  
MIKEL DUFRENNE, professor of philosophy 
at the University of Paris (Nanterre), is known 
for his writing and research in aesthetics and 
linguistics. Among his works published in 
English translation are “Language and Philo- 
sophy” (Indiana University Press, 1963) and 
“The Notion of the a Priori” (Northwestern 
University Press, 1966). His 2-volume “Phé- 
noménologie de [I'Expérience Esthétique” 
(Presses Universitaires de France, 1967) will 
shortly be published in English by North- 
western University Press. 
0. hundred and fifty years 
ago Hegel announced that art was 
dying. And perhaps art is in fact 
dead. Perhaps that which we call art 
today is another art, designed for other 
purposes and endowed with another 
meaning. 
Traditional art was neither self- 
conscious nor institutionalized. It was 
entangled with scholarship, religion 
and social life. It offered the imme- 
diate expression—immediately ac- 
cepted and understood—of a culture 
which was experienced as a whole by 
the totality of the people. Given over 
to divine worship, it celebrated the 
sacred element which pervaded the 
whole life of the community, uniting 
it and making it meaningful. 
This embodiment of art—an art 
which did not regard itself as such, 
which is only recognized by us now— 
finds expression chiefly in archaic 
societies. It gradually lost its charac- 
teristic features when culture divided 
itself into various institutions and 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](074881engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

WESTERN ART (Continued) 
 
Technology invades the arts 
society broke up into classes, violently 
opposed in various degrees. 
It won its autonomy when the total- 
ity of which it was unwittingly the 
soul disintegrated. Then were the 
words “art” and “artist”invented, and 
art became reflected through the 
artist and affirmed itself as art, refus- 
ing to serve any cause except its 
own. It is easy to see what art lost 
when it won its autonomy. 
In the first place art ceased to be 
sacred: “it lost its mythical and ritual 
force”, as the Italian writer Gillo 
Dorfles expresses it in his study on 
this subject. There are no more 
summits or ecstatic moments to which 
it might give access. Our heroes 
—champions or stars—no longer in 
the main belong to the world of art. 
Our myths are caricatures of real 
myths, placed at the service of adver- 
tising or propaganda. When the viewer 
or the listener becomes a consumer, 
when broadcast music becomes the 
background for prosaic activities, when 
the open space before a church 
becomes a parking area, listening and 
viewing are deprived of any ritual 
character. 
Next, art became depersonalized: 
it too seems to be prey to the curse of 
alienation brought upon man by 
technological civilization. When a 
work passed through the hands of a 
single artisan, that artisan felt that he 
was an instrument of the culture that 
inspired him. Art was truly “popular”. 
By participating in the festivity or the 
particular event, both the individual 
and the creative artist had an oppor- 
tunity of self-expression, 
Today the very meaning of the 
term “popular art” has been debased: 
it no longer designates art of the 
people for the people, but one or the 
other—either art of the people, that is, 
“a certain type of spontaneous handi- 
craft”, as opposed to genuine art, that 
of artists, or else art for the people, 
more frequently called art for the 
masses and to some extent tied up 
with the mass media. 
For the very concept of the people 
has given way to that of the mass. 
Three forms of culture are readily 
distinguishable—"high-brow, middle- 
brow and low-brow™—and mass 
culture is referred to as “mid-cult”. 
With this middle culture, just as 
people are reduced to mass, art is 
reduced to pastime. The “art con- 
sumer” is alienated thereby, but the 
creative artist, who was still able to 
assert his individuality in collective art 
movements, may very well be obliterat- 
ed by impersonal forms of art such as 
those produced by the mass media. 
In the eyes of a public accustomed 
to mass-produced films and television 
serials, the identity of the author has 
lost practically all significance. While 
we know a book by its author, we Ph
ot
o 
© 
An
dr
é 
Mo
ra
in
, 
Pa
ri
s 
know a film or a stage performance 
by the most outstanding name, the 
easiest to identify. It may be that of 
an actor; more often than not it is 
merely that of the leading role; some- 
times it is that of the organizer or 
compére of the programme. In this 
way the individuality of the created 
work is called in question, as is its 
uniqueness. 
H..:- this picture of 
the death of art is too gloomy. Let us 
not succumb too readily to nostalgia 
for the past, unless it gives rise to a 
new art, which would not be just a 
revival of the old. 
“l think | can say”, writes Gillo 
Dorfles, “that the loss of the mythical, 
ritual and poetic character of art was 
a necessary stage, enabling art to 
acquire a new technological dimension 
specific to our own civilization. But 
| also think that in the next stage man 
will be in a position to draw on mythi- 
cal and poetic elements for new artis- 
tic purposes... and that creative art 
will no longer be deprived of the irra- 
tional fantastic.” 
Even now a “genuine popular art” 
might be able to tap new sources of 
meaning and poetry. Not the “degen- 
erate art of the mid-cult”, but graphic 
art and industrial design: arts which 
are perhaps both by the people and 
for the people, if it is true that there 
is in them “a common ground where 
actual participation of the masses is 
united with a kind of spontaneous 
germination of the products of these 
arts”. Pop art seems to have realized 
this inasmuch as it recognizes the 
provoking and yet de-mystifying effects 
of the products of the consumer 
society which it has taken over. 
By breaking its connexions with reli- 
gious, ethical or social values, art has 
gained the power to express a deeper, 
more fundamental relation, which one 
might venture to call pre-cultural or 
pre-historical, of man with the world. 
In this sensée art today has a function 
and force which make it irreplaceable. 
Let us look a little more closely, 
however, at the position accorded to 
art by a technological civilization. 
Paradoxically, the most striking phe- 
nomenon, which we shall therefore 
mention first, is related not to creative 
activity but to the distribution of works 
of art—although it is true that the 
means of reproduction, through a form 
of feed-back, end by affecting pro- 
duction itself. 
We are familiar with the new means 
of presentation, reproduction and dis- 
tribution made available to art by 
modern technology: the extension of 
transport facilities both for the public 
and for the works of art—sometimes 
entire travelling exhibitions—the devel- 
opment of art books, photography, 
diapositives and the film, in turn re- 
produced ad infinitum by popular 
newspapers and television. 
These means, obviously bound up 
with the commercialization of art, make 
the works available to a vast public. 
By these means art is spread all over 
the world and this fact cannot be over- 
emphasized. What we are concerned 
with here, however, is the consequen- 
ces of this world-wide diffusion of art. 
Firstly, some of these means of dis- 
tribution—those which are properly 

## [Page 7](074881engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

Bathrooms 
and 
sculpture- 
objects 
Modern artists in search of 
new forms of expression 
often reject traditional ma- 
terials and techniques. The 
Dancers, below left, are by 
George Segal, an American 
artist who gave up paint- 
ing for the sculpture of 
plaster figures cast in sec- 
tions on living models and 
then assembled and re- 
worked. During the past 
15 years he has been 
seeking to capture ges- 
tures and attitudes seen in 
commonplace surroundings 
(buses, elevators, laundro- 
mats, restaurants or bath- 
rooms). in Segal's “real- 
life” situations the assem- 
bled “environments” are 
authentic and each of his 
ghostly-white human fig- 
ures, enigmatic and anony- 
mous, are nevertheless in- 
dividually distinctive works. 
Right, “Eggs of Neo-fos- 
sils” by Rodolfo Krasno, 
of Argentina, who designs 
his “sculpture-objects” for 
display with music and 
dancing. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Mi
ch
el
 
La
gu
en
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
called the mass media—themselves 
give rise to new arts. Even if we have 
difficulty in believing with McLuhan 
that the medium is the message, it is 
an incontrovertible fact that new me- 
dia give rise to new messages, those 
put out by the “information arts”. The 
television film, for instance, becomes 
a particular genre within the art of film. 
Similarly, “... one believes that re- 
cording methods serve above all to 
conserve, to imprint, to perpetuate 
high fidelity”, writes Pierre Schaeffer. 
“The real importance of electro-acous- 
tics is that it permits one to make 
sounds or again to fix natural sounds, 
to repeat them, to perpetuate and to 
transform them”, 
Secondly, as a result of technolo- 
gical resources, the public has adopted 
a new approach to the arts, or, one 
may say, the works have acquired a 
new presence, considerably magnified. 
It is a twofold phenomenon: either we 
move ourselves, thanks to ever- 
increasing travel facilities, or the works 
are brought to us, either directly as 
live music over the air, or as art works 
in exhibitions travelling across conti- 
nents, or by means of reproductions. 
It has often been said of repro- 
ductions that they are untrue to the 
originals. Malraux showed however, 
that they also reveal unnoticed aspects 
—for example, details or new angles— 
to the extent that they constitute new 
aesthetic objects. 
“Reproduction”, writes the Swiss 
museologist René Berger, ‘is no 
longer simply... a phenomenon of 
repetition, as the belief would have it, 
which draws its tenets from etymology 
or habit; it corresponds to a group of 
numerous and complex operations 
which make it a production... 
“Thus, to take a single example, is 
born the 'multiple’ of which the impor- 
tance is, not only that it does not refer 
to an original but also that it abolishes 
the very idea that such an original can 
exist, each example including, in its 
singularity, a reference to the other 
examples, uniqueness and multiplicity 
ceasing to oppose each other.” 
T. new approach imposed 
by the multiplication of information, 
means that the public itself is multiply- 
ing fast, and can no longer exercise its 
sovereign judgement based on immu- 
table criteria such as those tradi- 
tionally taught. Even judgement be- 
comes experimental and it can only be 
based on studies which are also mul- 
tiple. 
Another implication of the massive 
dissemination of art may be expressed 
by the question: when art is distri- 
buted all over the world does it 
become international? Must one con- 
clude that art can only be handled and 
exported when it has ceased to be 
rooted in a local culture and a tradi- 
tion? Art is international in the same 
way as science, but while it is concei- 
vable that there are no such things 
as Kansas mathematics or Soviet 
biology, can we so readily accept that 
Polynesian fetishes or Spanish baro- 
que no longer exist? Do we not know 
that poetry is in fact untranslatable? 
In this sense certain nationalistic 
reactions are legitimate and seem to 
serve the cause of art, provided of 
course that the particular they exalt is 
capable of being raised to the univer- 
sal. As Marx has already said, the 
miracle of Greek statues is that they 
speak a language we still understand. 
International art is an art which has 
internationalized itself, but one would 
have to distinguish between two modes 
of internationalization. One is the 
expansion of technical processes and 
economic constraints: for example, 
multi-storey buildings have spread like 
a disease all over the world, but so 
also has a certain art of information. 
The other may arise through the pres- 
tige of a certain style, which is then 
truly a style. Now this style origi- 
nated somewhere and it has not 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](074881engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

  8 \ Tre TN } JW ue : L - oT . ra -r yu RE Y = a A TR Y YES 
i Ba . or SO Woy a a I SY NE SR a TB VT TT Hd 
CONTACT, MOVEMENT & LIGHT 
How to incorporate the movement of life into works 
of art is a challenge that 20th century kinetic art has 
tried to meet in different ways: by mechanical, optical 
and scientific techniques, direct use of moving light 
and even electronic devices (see also pages 18-19). 
  
BE
T 
e
d
 
Below, Soto's “Pénétrable”, so named because the 
spectator can physically penetrate the work. It is 
now located on the terrace at the Museum of Modern 
Art in Paris. According to Soto (born in Venezuela 
in 1923) “art is the material representation of the 
immaterial” (la connaissance sensible de I'immatériel). 
“We artists”, he says, “are astounding the world of 
science by our discoveries”. With his "“Pénétrable” 
he rejects the old idea that viewer and work of art 
must stand apart. Constructed of wood, metal and 
  
  
Photo © F. Barton, Paris 
Ll (i i 
WESTERN ART (Continued) 
disowned its origins. Nevertheless it 
has also been capable of receiving and 
assimilating the messages of other 
cultures, as for example in Picasso's 
Negro masks and Olivier Messiaen's 
Hindu rhythmic patterns, 
This world-wide spread of art also 
implies the universalization of taste. 
Works of art do not lose their meaning 
or their power to inspire other works 
when they go abroad, any more than 
the ancient works did when they left 
their own times. The gradual evolu- 
tion or metamorphosis of meaning 
does not entail loss of meaning: a 
Negro mask has a new magic when it 
becomes an aesthetic object in an 
ethnological museum, in the same way 
as a Greek or Khmer temple deprived 
of its original setting and ceremonial, 
reduced to an illustration in an art 
book. 
Art when exported or reproduced is 
not completely uprooted; through it 
the public, and artists in the first place, 
  
establish roots in remote worlds. This 
does not mean that we become 
Negroes at the sight of Negro art, any 
more than the proletariat becomes 
bourgeois by contact with an art which 
was previously the prerogative and 
expression of the dominant class. 
Discovering a new world does not 
mean inhabiting it but widening one’s 
horizon—and perhaps, for the artist, a 
prospect of new adventures. 
Let us see what this vaster if not 
unanimous world has to offer today 
in terms of artistic production. First, 
new means. We are well aware that 
the gradual evolution of the arts is 
governed as much by changes in tech- 
niques as by the mysterious mutations 
in Weltanschauung or “world view". 
This change is multiplied and hastened 
by industrial civilization. Its impact 
on art is such that a certain form of 
music can be called electronic, while 
architecture, painting and the film 
bring to mind innumerable examples. 
Two consequences of this develop- 
ment of techniques should, however, 
be noted. The first is that the relation 
of art to technique is not unilateral: 
technology does not offer art now, 
more economic or more effective 
means. It creates new ends or, if one 
prefers, new styles. 
For example, the standardization and 
pre-fabrication of architectural ele- 
ments may suggest a new conception 
of homes, or groups of buildings. 
Similarly the technique of animated 
cartoons may suggest a new concep- 
tion of the art of photography. 
Then again the technical object may 
have recourse to aesthetics. This 
brings in the whole problem of design, 
of the henceforth deliberate and no 
longer spontaneous cultivation of the 
aesthetic element in everyday objects; 
at the same time we witness the mean- 
ing taken on by poetry when it be- 
comes part of the world's prose, 
In the second place, this is also a 

## [Page 9](074881engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

| rope, the “Pénétrable” displays its amazingly rich 
| variations as soon as one enters it, as the child here 
| on his bicycle. 
Left, “Two Figures VIII", kinetic painting by Frank 
J. Malina, the noted American artist-scientist. His 
| works suggest the revolution of heavenly bodies or 
artificial satellites in outer space. Malina uses electric 
~ light and in certain cases moving discs to animate 
his compositions. 
i 
4 Right, a different approach to movement in art, 
~ “Square Tops” by Weng-Ying Tsai (born in China in 
1928). Trained in traditional Chinese art and later as 
an engineer, he took up kinetic art in 1963. The metal 
stems composing this work undulate to the sound of 
the human voice and seem to be “listening” to the 
spectator. Electronic devices make them sensitive 
  
to light and noise, inciting them to move. 
y 
SL 
Ry a - 44 — LL $ 
wiry vl 
aL E fe : 
  
problem for the artist: What concep- 
tion is he going to have of his activity, 
or of his vocation, when he associates 
with an engineer or himself becomes 
a technician? What kind of initiative 
can he take, or what control can he 
claim over his work, or his part of the 
work, when he has recourse to a 
computer? 
Does he want to be ousted like a 
musical performer condemned to 
unemployment because of concrete 
music? Certainly not; but it is not 
easy to analyse the ruses invented by 
the conscious mind (or indeed by the 
unconscious) when creation is left to 
mechanical devices or when it relies 
on chance, where once it invoked ins- 
piration. Perhaps in this familiarity 
with the technical device, a new men- 
tality is developing which makes the 
artist akin to the engineer as much as 
to the odd-job man. 
It may also happen, however, that 
the artist reacts with some violence 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
An
dr
é 
Mo
ra
in
, 
Pa
ri
s 
to the invasion of our lives by techno- 
logy. that he turns technology against 
itself by parodying it, or that he pro- 
motes an aesthetic of the waste pro- 
duct with the dustbins of our civili- 
zation. Everything depends on the 
way in which he regards this civiliza- 
tion—at least in Western societies. 
At all events we must admit that our 
civilization offers art not only new 
media but also new fields—opened 
up by these same media, moreover, 
and assured of a new audience. 
An allusion has already been made 
to the demand of industry, which is 
considerable today, and in which Dor- 
fles sees the promise of a new pop- 
ular art. One might also refer to the 
advertising arts brought into being by 
a competitive economy, or the propa- 
ganda arts exercised under authori- 
tarian regimes. 
Is it enough to say that advertising 
or propaganda have made use of pre- 
existing arts without converting them? 
  
 
By no means: this is no more the case 
than it was for architecture to go on 
decorating skysgrapers with Corinthian 
pillars or Gothic gargoyles. On the 
contrary, new art forms or new styles 
were invented which in turn influenced 
the traditional forms. 
There is also scope for art in the 
environment itself, and the public took 
up this idea before town-planning was 
even thought of. In fact the dream 
of metamorphosing our surroundings, 
at least our urban surroundings, into 
a kind of Gesamtkunstwerk or perma- 
nent-opera is not new, but it is perhaps 
today that the means appear to be 
within our reach, even if this is not 
clearly realized. 
What constraints are imposed on 
the artist by reason of these new 
powers? He claimed his indepen- 
dence at the same time as the speci- 
ficity of art. What economic and so- 
cial status does he possess in a capi- 
talist society? 
CONTINUED PAGE 11

## [Page 10](074881engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

  
Photo .© Bruno Suter, Paris 
Ph
ot
o 
©@
 
“E
sq
ui
re
”,
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
 
  
 
Pop goes the artist 
or Warhol in the soup 
Ph
ot
o 
Be
rt
ho
mi
er
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Pop art makes use of (and often 
parodies) aspects of the techno- 
logical consumer society, drawing 
inspiration from everyday sources 
such as advertisements, bill- 
boards, comic books, films and 
TV. Above right, one of its Am- 
erican exponents, Andy Warhol, 
depicts himself almost engulfed 
in a tin of soup. Above left, 
painted wooden structure of a 
woman's head is a stereotype of 
fashion magazine illustrations. 
Produced by Luciano Lanata of 
Italy, it was exhibited at Expo-70 
in Osaka (lapan). The goggles 
are a TV screen. Left, “La Bal- 
ance”, a playground for chil- 
dren in a new housing complex 
in the Paris area. Its architect- 
designer describes it as “in mo- 
vement like a heavy sea; wave 
upon wave of paving stones”,

## [Page 11](074881engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

WESTERN ART (Continued) 
Conformity and artistic freedom 
Let us first consider the economic 
status of art. Despite official commis- 
sions or subsidies, art is essentially 
a private business, subject to the laws 
of competition. Its commercialization 
involves the works themselves, their 
sale, their execution, their perfor- 
mance, or their distribution. 
Masterpieces consecrated by time 
are sound investments which give lus- 
tre to museums, the new sites of 
pilgrimage. Even with the more re- 
cent works, however, the market re- 
mains steady once an artist has 
acquired a certain reputation among 
the connoisseurs. When a new name 
or a new school comes up, it does 
not banish the others, except perhaps 
after many years. Speculation is 
confined in practice to unknown artists 
or outsiders, of whom the vast maj- 
ority never manage to make a name 
for themselves, or a living except by 
expedients. 
As for the film industry, while it pro- 
vides a living for large numbers of 
workers, it only enriches a few stars 
and of necessity there are not very 
many well-known film directors. Nor 
should it be forgotten that there are 
probably just as many amateur cam- 
eramen as there are amateur painters 
or unpublished novelists. 
I. is not, however, this 
anonymous multitude which assures 
art's economic vitality; it is rather the 
prestige of those who are talked about 
and who have their followers—clients 
who are not only collectors, for even in 
wealthy countries where a degree of 
luxury is within everybody's reach, 
this clientele is restricted. Neverthe- 
less, just as there exists a mass of 
unknown producers, there is in all de- 
veloped societles an anonymous mass 
of consumers—all those who attend 
museums, read art books, go to the 
theatre or the cinema and listen to 
recordings. 
Even if art does not penetrate the 
world’s prose to the point of metamor- 
phosing it as the prophets of anti-art or 
non-art would have it, art infiltrates 
the leisure activities of the masses. 
Even if it is not a people's ant, it has 
been brought to the people, just as 
it has spread all over the world. 
The ever-increasing place which 
art occupies in our daily lives has 
attracted the attention of the State, 
which is tempted to press it into the 
service of ideologies or politics and 
to keep a constant check on it. 
Hence the question: to what extent 
is the artist free or does he feel free 
vis-a-vis the State? The standards 
and checks officially imposed on him 
are a measure of this freedom... Cen- 
sorship exists everywhere, but it does 
not have the same force and the same 
functions everywhere. One may think 
that the artist is less free in coun- 
tries where there is a State religion 
or a State aesthetic, that he is freer in 
countries where the State merely has 
interests and does not have doctrines 
or recommend a style. 
Things are not so simple, however, 
for we must be careful to distinguish 
between being free, feeling free and 
wanting to be free. An artist who 
conforms to standards and accepts 
supervision may feel free (without 
therefore resembling Spinoza's wea- 
ther vane). The artist who identified 
himself with his city and with his cul- 
ture did not even ask himself whether 
he was free. Similarly, in some coun- 
tries, artists who are particularly sen- 
sitive to social problems see themsel- 
ves as defenders of the policy pursued 
by the State, and even prophets of 
the future which the State has in view, 
to the point of censoring themselves. 
On the other hand, in a country 
where censorship is mild, an artist may 
be affected by all manner of insidious 
constraints imposed by the world 
around him and feel alienated to the 
point of despair or revolt. 
If there is any criterion of an artist's 
freedom at a time like our own, when 
freedom is a subjective requirement, it 
must be sought in the vitality and 
quality of his art, and perhaps too 
in its liberating power. 
The inhumanity of our civilization is 
due in the first place to the fact that 
civilization, when it becomes universal, 
crushes all the distinctive and mean- 
ingful landmarks which were familiar 
ground. Instead of being lived natu- 
rally as a tradition, it ceases to be a 
comfortable suit of clothes made to 
measure and becomes a uniform, 
mass-produced by the workings of im- 
personal laws, imposed on everyone. 
Furthermore, this world turned up- 
side down by the technological revolu- 
tion and by social revolutions is full 
of doubts and contradictions: it is a 
torn world of which no one feels a citi- 
zen, for nationalism has not disarmed. 
The system of production and con- 
sumption, which might tend to unify it, 
actually accentuates the scandalous 
inequality of development and the con- 
trast between wealth and poverty, bet- 
ween waste and famine. 
Within each society also, the gap is 
widening between those institutions 
which are on the move and those which 
are stagnating. Then again our world 
is oppressive or hostile. It turns 
against the individual. It is not sur- 
prising that certain philosophies assert 
that man is dying: he is being enslav- 
ed by material or intellectual systems. 
It is no longer merely the Church or the 
State which thinks for him and forces 
him to accept its reasons; it is reason 
itself, in the hands of all those who 
have the monopoly of discourse. 
Can the artist be said at least to 
feel sustained by a public with which 
he has bonds and to which he is res- 
ponsible? In his approach to the world 
does the artist experience loneliness 
or does he feel given away to others, 
to a public, or even to a people? Then 
again, in his production, is he affected 
by public demand or does he follow 
only his own impulses or a certain 
logic in the gradual unfolding of 
a style? 
The answer to these questions 
should of course take into account not 
only the artist's personality and the 
réle he assigns himself, but also his- 
torical situations, social regimes and 
systems of art production. 
A. all events, whether or 
not they are supported by a public, 
most artists, at least in the Western 
countries, do not usually react to the 
world around them without unease or 
rebelliousness. Their works bear 
testimony~to this. When creative art 
is not an escape for them, as specu- 
lative thought or erudition are for 
others, it is an opportunity for decrying 
everything that mystifies, oppresses or 
alienates the individual—including 
sometimes the very idea of creative art. 
For artists have also lost their nai- 
veté: in the past they were able to 
identify themselves with the city or the 
prince who embodied it; at the dawn of 
history they could be the artisans of an 
immemorial culture and celebrate a 
world in which everything had mean- 
ing. Today this is no longer possible: 
what was formerly spontaneous con- 
sent would be complicity. They cannot 
help but be accomplices, and know it, 
when in order to live, and also to gain 
a hearing, they must take their place 
in the commercial circuit. 
If they do this, can they at least 
claim their freedom? Yes, but they may 
be drawn back into the net. Every 
society has its safety valves to pre- 
vent explosions. Bourgeois society has 
its enfants terribles, monstres sacrés 
or maudits, which do no one any harm. 
Protest is emasculated once it be- 
comes a fashion, pending its inclusion 
in histories of art. 
Conversely, in countries which dis- 
trust it, it is taken more seriously when 
it does occur. The aesthetic charac- 
ter of innovations, in particular, is more 
attentively studied and appreciated. 
In countries which find protest div- 
erting, the game may become danger- 
rous for the ruling class at the stage 
when art finds a wider audience, even 
among those who are ruled. It may 
then produce unforeseen effects and 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
1

## [Page 12](074881engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

12 
WESTERN ART (Continued) 
Shock treatment to ‘free’ the public 
instead of being a safety-valve become 
a detonator. 
Wherever he is free, the artist 
reacts by impassioned research and 
absorbed interest. The first explana- 
tion which comes to mind is of course 
the great variety of means made av- 
ailable to him by industrial civilization 
and also the demands it makes on 
him. Research is then truly technical, 
as it always has been. No trade can 
be plied, even in eventless societies, 
without thought being given to the 
skills involved and without invention 
being called into play. 
B. this frenzied research 
is partly accounted for by commer- 
cialization and competition. In a madly 
competitive market, setting sound in- 
vestments apart, only the latest fashion 
sells wells—the product which is most 
blatantly advertized or shocks the 
public. This is a sufficient explana- 
tion for those who are put off by nov- 
elty and who are apt to decry it as im- 
posture. lt is not sufficient for those 
who want to understand. 
Actually this research is stimulated 
by ceaseless thought that may go so 
far as to negate art and, first of all, 
the artist. Pondering on his status, 
the artist today seems to be retracing 
the path followed from Cennini to 
Vasari, from the state of craftsman to 
that of artist. 
The artist contests his own status 
even more radically when he contests 
the very idea of art. Not that he ne- 
cessarily abandons the quest, as Rim- 
baud or Marcel Duchamp did; but he 
assigns another object to it than the 
beautiful, and he pursues it elsewhere. 
No doubt any creation is a transgres- 
sion, any invention is a challenge to 
tradition. 
Today, however, the transgression 
takes on violent forms: it exalts 
anti-art, art in the making or 
spontaneous art, and it is not easy to 
discern the artist's motives and inten- 
tions. It certainly displays a degree of 
aggressiveness, but against what? 
First, against traditional values: putting 
a moustache on the Mona Lisa, pervert- 
ing music by adding noise to it, paint- 
ing by affixing objects normally cast 
away and choreography by introducing 
everyday gestures, are all ways of re- 
jecting the seemly by declaring it con- 
ventional, 
They are ways of profaning beauty— 
because it Is oppressive once defini- 
tions or models of it are imposed, be- 
cause it goes hand in hand with other 
values now suspect as a result of their 
manner of establishment or their ante- 
cedents (even the defining of beauty 
was once the privilege of a social 
class), perhaps also because this offi- 
cially-accepted beauty has masked or 
excluded other forms of beauty. 
Aggressiveness is then turned 
against the object, not just against the 
aesthetic product, as when some pain- 
ters slash their canvases, but against 
the prosaic objects depicted in dis- 
torted form and devoid of practical 
significance in surrealist works. It may 
also be turned against the beholder, 
who may be given a bottle-rack to con- 
template or a problematical assem- 
blage of morphemes to read. Is this 
not mocking his lack of sophistica- 
tion? 
Refusal of values and of the works 
in which they are invested, refusal of 
the world we know, controlled and po- 
liced, refusal of a public which can be 
domesticated at pleasure: we have the 
impression that the artist wants to play 
and appeals to us to play with him. 
This has often been said and there 
are countless studies on art and play. 
Today, “happenings”, César's com- 
pressions of automobile parts, Tin- 
guely’s machines, Cage's music, and 
kinetic works, invite us to take part in 
a game. We know that the game can 
be serious because of the motivations 
it stirs up, the commitment it presup- 
poses and the effects it produces. 
Such is art: when it claims to be play 
it most urgently needs to be taken 
seriously. 
We believe that contemporary art, 
is a liberation movement, sparked off 
in the first place by the repressive and 
inhuman character of our civilization 
and later by the weight of all that 
artifice has added to nature. 
] HERE are three aspects to 
this liberation movement. 
MW First, the world must be liberated by 
being peopled with new, startling ob- 
jects which are not a comforting re- 
hash of the already-known. Lifting an 
everyday object from its normal sett- 
ing is making of it not so much an aes- 
thetic object as an unwonted object. 
It is also a way of taking us out of our 
usual setting, of surprising us into lett- 
ing go of the object, inviting us to do 
justice to it at last—perhaps because 
previously undiscovered beauty has 
been brought to light. Why not? 
Could not even our civilization be 
rehabilitated in this way? By con- 
structing a caricature of a machine, 
Tinguely gives the machine over to 
nature, and perhaps to poetry. In the 
works where Rauschenberg accumula- 
tes the obsessive symbols of the Am- 
erican way of life is there not tender- 
ness as well as irony? At all events it 
is in this manner that poetry sets words 
free, by lifting them out of prosaic 
syntagmas, and that Cage's music sets 
sound free. 
But are we not then invited to take 
part in a game of fools? Are we not 
abandoning solid ground for the de- 
lights of the imagination? While we 
think we are changing the world, have 
we not merely changed our outlook 
on it? 
WM Before answering this question we 
must admit that contemporary art, in- 
stead of merely taking its audience to 
witness, provokes it and makes it take 
sides more imperiously than ever. It 
wants to free its audience as well as 
the art object, even if this demands 
shock treatment. How? In the first 
place, by enabling it to discover new 
horizons, freeing it from the bonds of 
tradition and prejudice, inveighing 
against the values which enslave it. 
If the traditionalists accuse art of 
mystifying the public, it is precisely 
because it is endeavouring to demys- 
tify it—to the point of “deculturing” 
it, if we can use the word. Today's 
works do not claim supremacy or 
deference. They treat the beholder 
as a friend. What they ask of him is 
that he should associate himself with 
the creation as an actor, as does a 
performer, as does the rambler who 
experiences the architecture of a town, 
as does an audience when it joins in 
the singing of a chorus. 
If such works sometimes appear 
precarious or roughly-assembled, it is 
in order that the partner can finish 
them. Execute, finish—these words 
have a double meaning: this 
is the risk run by contemporary 
art, the risk of dying in order to 
become something else and also in or- 
der that the public may live. 
According to Dubuffet, the sin of 
culture is that it holds that a work of 
art is something to contemplate in- 
stead of something to experience or 
to make. Art only frees us if it is our 
own, and the mission that certain ar- 
tists have assigned to themselves is to 
appeal to our creativeness, not so 
much by giving us a model to imitate, 
as a master does to a disciple, as by 
giving us an example of freedom to be 
lived. 
BW The ruse of culture is that the most 
provocative work is soon commer- 
cialized, the gesture of revolt institu- 
tionalized, the appeal ignored. At least 
the artist was able to free himself. For 
this is what he is seeking in the third 
place, sometimes alone, without re- 
cruiting companions to share his ad- 
venture, without claiming that his free- 
dom calls for that of others. 
Freeing himself always means ex- 
pressing himself, but it does not mean 
making a confession or an exhibition. 
More deeply it means coming out of 
himself and getting rid of the self. 
He must gamble to lose himself, and 
his authenticity is proportionate to his 
abnegation. Hence these strange, in-

## [Page 13](074881engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 50652: Art in the West: a continuous search for new frontiers

  
5 ad SE — 
—- - “J >» _— 
- ~~ -— . — « 
x a = 
fr —_ - ee 
El om He — Pe a i : i 
— — he > Be Ba nee ET — TAT - 
New Realism: 
more real than the real thing 
SAA 
 
NYY YVTTTT 
 
 
« ——y 
   
  
New Realism is an art movement that began in the U.S, in the 
1960s and now has a number of adepts in Western Europe. 
Sometimes termed “photographic art”, it aims to recreate real 
things with more realism and detail than the original. 
Thus, “Artist Seated” (left) by Duane Hanson of the U.S.A. is not 
a real live person but a super-realist sculpture made out of 
painted plastic, polyester and fibreglass. 
glasses and chair are authentic. 
The painting of the giant tyre (above) is by a young Swiss 
artist, Peter Stampfli. Though he has reproduced each element of 
the tyre tread, Stimpfli does not wish to be taken for a Realist 
artist: since 1969 he has painted nothing but oversize motor tyres, 
measuring as much as 6 metres (as in photo). Blown up to this Pa
ri
s 
Only the clothes, 
  
scrutable, anonymous works produced 
by automatic writing, gestural painting 
and aleatory music. (In other words, 
works freed from pre-established 
signs, habits and constraints.) 
This world which the artist inhabits 
and which he opens up to us, is it not 
a hallucinatory world, a refuge from 
harsh realities? When we think that 
we are freeing ourselves and freeing 
the world, are we not exchanging the 
real for the unreal, thought for reverie, 
freedom for caprice? Is not art a 
mirage and a luxury? 
Here certain artists throw light on 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
A
n
d
r
é
 
Mo
re
in
, 
the subject by invoking something that 
goes beyond the real—and all contem- 
porary art is surrealistic in some way. 
Their works do not set the imaginary 
against the real: they disclose a being 
in the state of nature, not torn by this 
opposition because the subject has 
not yet broken away from the object 
in order to domesticate it by means of 
concepts or tools. 
Then the world is what we dream, 
but our dreams reflect the world: the 
world dreams with us and it is the 
world's dreams which art records until 
science rejects them. 
size, the tread pattern takes on an abstract graphic form. 
While in the socialist countries cer- 
tain forms of contemporary art are de- 
cried as symptoms of decadence, in 
the Western countries themselves 
these productions are not always sym- 
pathetically received. Evidence of 
this is provided not only by the public 
which continues to frequent museums 
of classical art, but also by many cri- 
tics or specialists in aesthetics. We 
said at the outset that the old always 
continues to exist alongside the new. 
‘We must not forget this as we empha- 
size the new in an attempt to deter- 
mine its true place and to under- 
stand it. | 
13

## [Page 14](074881engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

14 
2 ART IN THE 
SOCIALIST 
COUNTRIES 
The many facets of Realism 
by Béla Kopeczi 
D.comen: presents 
certain common features in all types 
of countries, but the situation of liter- 
ature and art assumes special charac- 
teristics in the Socialist countries. 
The changes that have occurred in 
means of presentation, reproduction 
and dissemination influence art and its 
function in these countries as else- 
where, but do not necessarily lead 
to the same results as in capitalist 
society. 
The radical changes that have affect- 
ed the economic, social, political and 
cultural structure play a decisive part 
from the standpoints of the develop- 
ment of artistic and literary production, 
the education of the public and the 
use of the mass media. 
In the Socialist countries art has its 
place in that great undertaking that 
Lenin called a cultural revolution, the 
characteristics of which are as follows: 
extinction of the cultural monopoly of 
the former ruling classes; raising of 
the cultural level of the worker and 
peasant masses; creation of a new 
intelligentsia; support from the State 
for the development of the sciences 
and the arts; conscious activity of the 
BELA KOPECZI, Secretary-General of the 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, is an inter- 
national authority on trends in 20th century 
thought in the Socialist and Western 
countries and on questions of cultural policy 
generally. He is professor of French lan- 
guage and literature at the Faculty of Letters 
in Budapest. 
Communist Party and of the Socialist 
State, aimed at achieving these objec- 
tives. This programme implies the 
existence of an art which appeals to 
the broad masses and the democratiz- 
ation of its dissemination. 
Under these conditions, a work of 
art cannot be regarded as an article 
of trade even if, in the present stage 
of evolution, it does retain some of 
the characteristics that this term 
implies. 
Guided by the principle of the 
educational role of art, socialist cultu- 
ral policy endeavours to disseminate 
and to make accessible, through the 
grant of considerable subsidies, the 
loftiest values of past and present. 
This conception of culture can lead to 
an over-simplified didacticism but, 
even in that case, it is hardly possible 
to deny the advantages offered by 
selection based on value judgements. 
The results obtained at the level of 
the dissemination of classical literature 
and art are undeniable; in this con- 
nexion there has been much talk of a 
“conservative” policy, but we con- 
sider, on the contrary, that the “rebirth 
of the classics” has led to a raising 
of cultural standards and to the human 
enrichment of the broad masses. 
The difficulties of choice arise espe- 
cially in connexion with current pro- 
duction, where the demands of politics, 
aesthetic concepts or simple ques- 
tions of taste may lead to erroneous 
judgements. 
Thus products of varying rigidity, 
insignificance or bad taste can be 
disseminated, especially in the field of 
light entertainment, where we find 
certain features of a “consumer cul- 
ture” inherited from the past or Import- 
ed or imitated from Western Europe. 
Whereas in Western Europe the 
artist, even if he regards himself as 
“committed”, frequently lives on the 
fringe of society, in the Socialist coun- 
tries he takes part in the life of the 
community. The commitment of so- 
cialist writers and artists does not 
mean in any way that they are obliged 
to take a stand on matters of current 
political interest, and it does not 
necessarily involve the production of 
illustrative works, as certain opponents 
would have it. 
Nevertheless, if one approves of 
the aims of socialism one cannot 
adopt the same opposing attitude 
which, within a society dominated by 
capitalism, would stem from one’s atti- 
tude as an opponent of that particular 
social order. The commitment of the 
socialist artist is no more than a cons- 
cious identification with the cause of 
the working class, and this stance 
implies the creation of an art that is 
democratic and humanistic in char- 
acter. 
That being said, it must nevertheless 
be recognized that this new attitude 
of the intellectual in the community is 
not easily achieved, for it is subject 
CONTINUED PAGE 16

## [Page 15](074881engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4 - 
- Sovietskoye Foto © APN, Moscow 
Photo Anatoli Garanin 
“Worker and Woman Collective Farmer”, by the Soviet sculptor Vera Mukhina, is an example «15 
Soviet Socialist Realism in art A stainless steel scul pture, 25 metres high, it was first exhibited 
outside the Soviet pavilion at the Paris International Exhibition of 1937. It is now a prominent 
landmark in the Avenue of Peace, in Moscow, against a background of modern apartment buildings.

## [Page 16](074881engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

16 
SOCIALIST ART (Continueqa) 
to the misunderstandings of politics as 
well as to those of the artist, and it is 
often at the mercy of conflicts of an 
objective nature that arise between 
these two spheres of human activity. 
Moreover, it does not necessarily 
follow that an artist living in a Socialist 
country is a Marxist: the problems that 
we have touched on naturally assume 
a different light for those who are not 
Marxist, and the nature of the con- 
tradictions that these artists have to 
contend with is also different. 
It is primarily by their creative activ- 
ity that the writer and the artist take 
part in the building of the new society. 
In this task they are assisted by the 
State, which places orders through the 
intermediary of the cultural institutions, 
establishments or factories and which, 
through the same network of organiz- 
ations, undertakes to disseminate their 
works, 
Government bodies promulgate laws 
aimed at ensuring effective protection 
of the authors’ rights, thus enabling 
a considerable body of writers and 
artists to live solely from their profes- 
sion. The State subsidizes artists’ 
funds which pay out advances and 
grants to their members, deal with 
problems of social security, maintain 
homes for rest and creative work and 
in some countries they may even have 
their own publishing houses, sales net- 
works and so forth. 
Uo the influence of 
social reality and Marxist theory vari- 
ous literary and artistic trends of a 
socialist character have come to light 
during the past hundred years. Some 
consider as “socialistically realistic” 
only those works which extend the 
classical tradition, whereas others refer 
only to tendencies originating in the 
avant-garde of the beginning of the 
century. 
Looking beyond this quarrel bet- 
ween schools, we believe that it is the 
co-existence of these movements 
which, from the beginning, has char- 
acterized the evolution of the new art. 
The novels of Gorky, Alexis Tolstoy or 
Sholokhov, the theatrical schools of 
Stanislavsky, the paintings of Deineka, 
Sarian or Favorsky, the statues of 
Mukhina, the symphonies of Shosta- 
kovich and the ballets of Prokofiev 
prove that it has been possible to 
keep faith with a certain realistic trad- 
ition of the nineteenth century and to 
achieve undeniable successes. 
The poems of Mayakovsky, the films 
of Eisenstein and the theatrical innov- 
ations of Meyerhold, to mention only 
these, are there to show that the 
movement which borrowed from futur- 
ism, expressionism or constructivism 
was also capable of creating durable 
works. 
We find the same tendencies, with 
national variants, among the other 
peoples of the Soviet Union, in the 
other Socialist countries of Central 
Europe, Asia and America, and in the 
works of Marxist writers and artists 
in non-Socialist countries. 
In some countries, such as France 
(Aragon, Eluard) or Czechoslovakia 
(V. Nezval), it is the avant-garde that 
has been predominant; in others (as 
in the case of the German writers 
Bertold Brecht, Johannes Becher and 
Anna Seghers) we observe the co- 
existence of several trends; in some 
others we note an early attempt at 
synthesis (as in the poetry of the 
Hungarian, Attila Jozsef). 
While admitting the importance of 
tradition in the formation of the new 
art, it should not be forgotten that its 
representatives are seeking to assert 
not only continuity but, above all, dis- 
continuity in the evolution of art. The 
socialist artist is searching for novelty 
in themes and forms and, at the 
present stage, we are witnessing 
experimentation in every sector of art 
and literature. 
In a note on literary and artistic 
developments in the Soviet Union, 
Mikhail Alpatov describes the present 
situation in these words : 
“It was towards the end of the 
1950s that a new wave of artistic 
research began to develop, especially 
among the younger generation of 
artists and poets. They were beginning 
again to show an interest in the post- 
impressionists and to rehabilitate the 
Russian art of the beginning of the 
century. Attempts were being made to 
link up with folklore traditions and 
those of ancient Russia. 
“It cannot be said that all these 
searchings have been crowned with 
success. There always remains a dan- 
ger of eclecticism. By imitating fine

## [Page 17](074881engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

Recent 
Soviet 
painting 
In the Socialist countries one 
today finds different approaches to 
art. In most of these countries 
Socialist Realism is the accepted 
artistic method that presupposes 
that art should depict historically 
concrete though changing reality. 
Art in Socialist Realism is consi- 
dered as having primarily an edu- 
cative role to broaden the cultural 
horizons of the people and instil 
in them feelings of humanity and 
internationalism. 
In certain Socialist countries, in 
addition to Socialist Realism, there 
are other methods of art which can 
be said to approach artistic research 
in Western countries. 
Some examples are shown on 
these two pages and the front cover 
(Poland), the back cover (Cuba), as 
well as pages 21 and 23. Here 
we reproduce works by artists of 
the U.S.S.R.: Left, “Young Girl with 
a Little House” by Alexander Tys- 
chler (1962); below, “Clown” by 
Aleksei Anikeenok (1965); right, “The 
Sumgait Synthetic Rubber Factory” 
by Rasim Babaiev, of Azerbaijan, 
Photos © APN, Moscow 
  
examples one risks losing one's 
originality and one's national char- 
acter. ‘But however that may be, the 
faults of the preceding stage are 
disappearing in every realm of art and 
above all in architecture and in the 
decorative arts.” 
Let us add that in the other Socialist 
countries we are witnessing a return 
to certain manifestations of the avant- 
garde in the 1920s and an increase 
in the interest aroused by current 
literary and artistic trends in Western 
Europe. 
True innovation, however, resides 
not in the search for new forms, but 
above all in the search for a new 
content. During revolutionary periods 
socialist art has presented man in his 
struggle to bring about a radical 
change in society. 
Today, at least in some Socialist 
countries, the forms of the combat 
have changed: writers and artists are 
seeking to define the characteristics 
of socialist personality in conditions 
of peaceful construction. What is on 
the agenda is the expression of a 
real humanism—one that takes into 
account the individual and is opposed 
to alienation, depersonalization and 
nihilism, 
As to their basic aims, art and 
cultural policy in the Socialist coun- 
tries are determined by Marxist phil- 
osophy. The two basic ideas that 
govern Marxist doctrine in this matter 
can be summarized as follows: art is 
a reflection of reality and, accord- 
ingly, a means of knowledge; sec- 
ondly, art has a social function, name- 
ly, it must help to change the world. 
These basic notions have been inter- 
preted in very many different ways 
under the influence of social, political 
and cultural development. For an 
CONTINUED PAGE 20

## [Page 18](074881engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
© 
fr
om
 
“T
he
 
C
o
m
p
u
t
e
r
 
in
 
Ar
t”
, 
by
 
Ja
si
a 
Re
ic
ha
rd
t,
 
1 
Lo
nd
on
, 
St
ud
io
 
Vi
st
a,
 
Va
n 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Zo
ra
n 
Ra
do
vi
c,
 
Za
gr
eb
, 
Yu
go
sl
av
ia
. 
No
st
ra
nd
 
Re
in
ho
ld
 
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
,
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
. 
 
 
YUGOSLAVIA. Zoran Radovic’s intricate designs are achieved by the simultaneous transmission 
to paper of the oscillations of two pendulums. It took several years of research before he was able 
to control his “ornamentograph” (the name he has given to his apparatus) and select the forms and 
shapes he wanted to produce. Radovic has succeeded in arriving at a mathematical formula which 
expresses the virtually limitless pattern variations that the ornamentograph can produce. 
JAPAN. Sharaku (or Toshusai) is 
famed in Japan as an actor of the 
No theatre of the 18th century and, 
above all, as an engraver whose works 
consist almost wholly of portraits of 
Kabuki actors. Today, a group of 
Japanese engineers and designers use 
a computer to produce works of art by 
distorting original works while retain- 
ing the spirit of the traditional art forms 
of Japan. Left, five distortions of a 
portrait by Sharaku. 
BRAZIL. This delicate study of a wom- 
an’s face (right) is a computer graphic 
by the Brazilian artist Waldemar Corde- 
iro. Each element of the facial structure 
was “treated” by the computer accor- 
ding to the intensity in the range 
between black and white. The face is 
more easily distinguishable if the photo 
is held at a distance or looked at through 
half-closed eyes. 
COMPUTER ART 
Science and technology today hold a growing fascination for many modern 
artists ; the achievements of science provide a new source of artistic inspiration; 
technological advances have made available to the artist a wide range of new 
materials and working techniques (see photos and captions pages 8-9). On 
this double page we present a few works by artists from different parts of the 
world produced with the aid of electronic computers. 
UNITED STATES. Right, a work by A. Michael Noll, an American 
research engineer who became involved in computer art by accident 
when his microfilm plotter went wrong and produced an unusual 
linear design. Later he took part in the first computer art exhibition, 
in New York in 1965. In this work Noll programmed the computer 
to repeat the same curve 90 times; the resulting composition 
bears many similarities to certain Op Art or serial art creations. 
Photo © Manfred Mohr, Paris, 
  
GERMANY (FEDERAL 3 
REP.). *“ Band Struc- 
tures”, right, by Manfred 
Mohr consists of conti- 
nuous lines produced by 
a computer. One of the 
aims of this kind of work, 
says Mohr, is to demon- 
strate that beauty is not, 
and must not be thought 
of as being, the attribute 
of natural objects only. 
 
TREE BREE BB ner SRR BURERRARE Bent BRa ie SARRER Sosa ls U0 SRRAARAEERE of ARERR AREER BE SR AR SERS AREER BeRRs 
. Bl BERR ann a RRRRRC RAR RRA CRASRR SERRATE os BARES ARERAE ERAEE REN ARARE sean 
AEE Bal cB RRC REER BARERE EXER an . LLL LLL] -a 
ERALAALLEL EEE LL SRE RTL LT EERE » ARAL LL RL I EL RL EE LL I A LL Ba 
ERR ALLEL LE EEL and LL LE LLL EE EERE] Lh SEAR CERRRRR AEE ERE RRRCRARRE 
EE ELE Et TY LE TY 1 LH . SERRRAREE BARES RAEN RARRRARCR AARARE Ee 8 
EEA DLE EEE REEL IR TL AEE LI LB CER Cae REREIRCE CE CREAR BREA CERES 
ERLE EERE Rl 1] BARA BR 50 ABeasl BRERA SARARERRARAR RERRAR RRARE Wr 
ARRAEE REARS A Rasta t BE Res ARARACERARAS CRRARRRRRRS 4 
SE SSRRVERARRARIER:  SERER BR ER CARARRARSS 
CORR EREE BRR REARE ARE Re 
- 
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
    
   
   
   
  
* 
h 
     
bone 
BAER BARCERCARERARER 5. NARRSE ean SRL LLL ELLE IE 
. “- ’ -. "es . » > 
BECRERECEE 16 BER-ES AR 8 RARER SAREE REE Reel se 
Athan il LL LIER LLL REL EE ELE RE LEE TIE LoL DEL EE REE CEL OE IE EEE) 
LAER RRR ARR EE LL LER I LL I LIE BR LR EE DR I Le LA El 
 
  
BERANE SARARER AM El AR EM CR RA em L - . 
BREE AES CARRERE BERR ERRAES CARRE SER BREE SER SRRARERES a» 
CER RERREER CE pee “oR    
    
LL] 
® CARAAREASE BR AER hems 
- LL ARR ERS LLL IES 
ILI PERE I 
  
LUE EL 
L LEER ’ 
N 
  
    
   
BER BRACE 8 PRA RRRRA MER BRIE Tr 
td - ena 
FRREARECARE RARER HC RERR ARERR AR 
BER BAREAAARE BF AMRRARERCARTRERERERE share aL BET LITE PETE TT ETT 
ARLE LL EL RL LL ERE LE LR a LL Lo EE BEY DEE Ll Fo asl ARRAR BAR ARERECEREAAN " 
FRERT REESE RRR ARERR CARE Ae -_o. . RR LLL EE EE LL EE TE EL SLL E Ee 
BARAT Aa saa RE sole ml ar » » al A SERRE SB BREE Reais 2 ARRERIRRRRAR ARAREE AR AR ee 
BARRE 0 ale BRE ARERR a aan ot EE . Labi 1 SES BE REAR BERL S0 AAEAR AR ae 
Sol CRB CETRRAE PRR BERREE FARRER RRR RRRRYERE  CREARRARRAE RA ARE oh a 
BE FREER co RAARARR AREER: 2 2 AARARL IR LL J LiL DEL I BRE RRERRT IER IENS RRCEERT RET PETER RE 11 BEE CT II OT 1 IF 
PEAR Ra alan: BRANES 20 » EEE EET EET ERE SF IF _TTRRE IT CTR NT EEE EEET PENNE J CRRA EEL LIE LL LE 
    
   
  
 
   
  
   
    
   
   
       
  
  
  
BARAAR CARRAR A% WR RCRAERSARY LJ - LEEL LEER ES SERIES LER I FE EE .- i id 
BEAR B08 SAMAR AAERANE HERE -% BF ax xr 0» CERARYEREREATREES "0 a. SEAALERAR ARE 
FARCRR CBAER Res BR car J LJ . LR BN —— -. La SETRARE ARR » 
BERARAE AR ECAERERE cae LEE EE L231 a LL EET -.. TIN Ia 
“as w - LI LL . Laat hdl LL -" ” 
BREE BR AREER BARRE BR oh 0 -h BAe 8» . [| IE BEET I CEE J IY RL TRE EA 
LAR LI EL LEE J SE EE . LEE LJ LA - . - a ARR 
Lat aR BRIER]. BL EL I ». » . fe ER -—"n . . 2 a I - 
tt nd LU La LE LE - J LJ "” “ra . 
ILRI RETR TARE BF LR -—- mw EEE . LIE J .e L DI J we . .-. LJ 
FRAARRRERARELE SERERRRAS AR: * BR» LL IL LIL RE . fm 
PR ARARAR BAR Br BRRREERAE- 8 - 0» - "m2 » aL » LE J 2 BEE 
Lab adtasaast LERNER ES 1 TREES TEEN . LL - LL SR 2 “- “. _oe . “" El 
EAR CARRERA RARER dh . LR BE & sanann me SL PRR . -» 
Le BERELE L L LE ) . . LIE EE LE EE] LER . 
CERR LR CE BEE DEE DE RT FREE CC CTT LB TRE EEE LI 
Shen . ARE LL EE LL EEE ER LL Ll Oe a bo 
CARA RL RL ERE EE a EE EE Ed FEET I ILE DEER REE BENE CEE EIN CLE TT FTE TT RI RR LE ELLE 
ae . . eae LL LIE DE SEERA bat LAR]       
ERTL EL DUI SR RE I ET PETE 
  
    
    
. 
-e . AL IRE) L EER TRE 2 DERRY EE NEE CC FY AEE BEER SE LEE) 
"en LL . AL . LE Ee BE EE EERE Ea I . 
NL RL EE I LE es (BES ft: Il Ih REE Ae 4 AR - L EE - 
Ed didi ad AL LE BARE AREEs + 8 LI A oe eee ba LLL EEL LL) 
a PER ARAN Ae RTE BEARER » EB La Cony SL BEDE DERE TET TERT TT) 
AA LALEL LES LL) 
4 BER AERERs 
a 
FARE AREs Aras + ew aR Een 
ASRL ARLE LL RE EE EE EL BENE EE RET EEE TES SEER T TE IF TIE TN 
CEECRIREE AR BARRA SERRE ARRAN AREER ERR rene 
. SABRE Rel BARE AREE FAR CERCERR CREE A EE SERRA SERENE 
UALR LIE  TRY I LEER EL EERE I EE ERY TEL RRR EL REE EE LE 
  
    
     
      
   
   
 
   
  
   
LEE TL EET EEE TE "LEERY » A LEE ER EERE TRE RL NEE BE aes 
haat LEE DERE DRE ER BE La AL LRT PEDERI CC MO» 
BRARE 0B SRR AR REen LIER TERY I ld Naitl 
El BE REE TEE TE I 1] BRARERESE +00 B08 BRAsrsnl ARAB RRR EA Aan ann (ALI ERE LD adhd l LR] 
ERA EEE LE BEES I ARRAN E al SoBe BF CRANES PARE REAR BR BREA Rime LL 
EE SE LL ERE TET - AERTANEE REARS BERAIRER al oR 8 Bish Baas SRRARANARY     ad 
SERA  ERERARE BE ER 2 2 dhaba sat LLL SEE IE SUE IY 
PRORECE BRERA REARS ERE oh BE ARE BE CREE SRE ee 
. ARERR AR LL RL BR LR LER] 
RRL EE LL EL NT] 
Raa LLL LE at] 
SRL EE E ET 
  
   LE AEE LLL CEEARR LAER ARECR REAR RARER TE SAREE 
WRAR oF BRCRE RRRARREE Sh RRRAR ARR AREAS BR BRERA Es ree 
. . THOME SR EER CERRREE SAREE cr BARRERA RRR A R Bs 
. . 8 RARE B BRRCEE BER BARE BRC IEEE A REAR RARE ARR 
BAR BARES s 0 0 2 0000 MARINARA RE SBR en AL LEER LE IE BREE BEELER ETT) 
- BREE CARERAREE AR ARERR BF BRAARE  BAARRE SR aREs aA LL LE) 
   
. 
CRRA BER EELEERE L LLE L L LLE BERE EE I IR IRE I Lada AL BEL LE 
LR] LAER R S LL 20 J MN s-e 
CARRERE CRRRRR IE AANEE CBRERE CBR EAEE ee 
CRE RRRIIREE CBRE CREE CE BREE Re 
AERRARRART CRIN TARE BRS EABEARIES 
 
  
 
   
    
5 BIRR ARR IRR ERRRAREAR BRL BORE ARERR IANS 
SRRRRL RN ARE ARCANE BRENNER BE MRE CRATERS Aes hen     
   
  
LJ - 
srevEvE TTY Y CAEL LL AEL ARE R 
Photo © W. Cordeiro, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 
  
Photo © from “The Computer in Art”, by 
Jasia Reichardt, Studio Vista, London, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York. 
19

## [Page 19](074881engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

## [Page 20](074881engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

20 
SOCIALIST ART (Continued) 
Where content is more important than form 
understanding of the present debates 
we have to go back to the sources 
and compare what they convey to us 
with the different interpretations that 
have appeared over more than a 
century. 
According to the Marxist view the 
various forms of social conscience are 
the reflections of objective reality, of 
which the knowledge, understanding 
and change are the aims of all human 
activity. Reflection does not mean 
photographic reproduction, but rather 
the building of a model serving to 
bring out—by strictly artistic means— 
the essence of human phenomena. 
The founders of Marxism consider 
that in literature as in art it is realism 
that corresponds to their philosophical 
view. “Realism”, writes Engels, “sup- 
poses, in my view, in addition to accur- 
acy of detail, the exact representation 
of typical characteristics in typical cir- 
cumstances.” 
Realism of this kind is not one 
artistic tendency among others—it is 
considered as a method that makes 
it possible to understand the complex 
relationships that lie behind changing 
reality. 
I. is thus that tha problem 
of the method leads to the theory of 
reflection. This conception was appli- 
ed by critics and historians of art and 
literature in the Soviet Union in the 
1920s and in particular by Anatoli Luna- 
charsky. 
in the application of the theory of 
reflection to the realm of art the 
philosophy of Gyorgy Lukacs is par- 
ticularly notable on account of its 
content and of the widespread interest 
that it has evoked. In Lukacs' phil- 
osophy the influence of Hegel's 
aesthetics matches in addition that of 
the ideas of Marx and Lenin on liter- 
ature. According to this theory artistic 
mimesis consists in an “imitation” of 
reality, made possible by a subjectivity 
pushed to its extreme, which brings 
into relief the essential moments of 
the phenomena from the point of view 
of the evolution of mankind. 
Lukacs distinguishes between artis- 
tic and scientific knowledge. The aim 
of science is to present a reality 
independent of the knowing subject, 
whereas art achieves unity of the sub- 
ject and of the object, which ensures 
its specificity. 
The work of art produces an affec- 
tive and mental shock that Lukacs— 
taking the old term used by Aristotle 
and reinterpreting it in his own way— 
calls catharsis. Catharsis enables 
man to go beyond the stage of indiv- 
iduality to reach that of the generic, 
that is to say, to identify himself as 
an individual with the cause of man- 
kind. 
In the 1930s, writers and theorists 
discussed the correctness of this 
philosophy. Bertold Brecht among 
others took the Hungarian philosopher 
to task for the over-passive character 
of his theory of reflection. For the 
great German playwright, “Realistic 
art is an art of combat. It combats 
false conceptions of reality and im- 
pulses that go against the real interests 
of mankind.” 
Although the majority of Marxist 
thinkers accept the theory of reflec- 
tion, the aesthetic and historic aspecis 
of the problem continue to be discus- 
sed. The representatives of the “great 
realism”, while combating, and cor- 
rectly so, sectarianism, set up as an 
ideal the works of the classical writers 
of the nineteenth century and of their 
followers, the works of, say, Balzac, 
Tolstoy or Thomas Mann. 
The thesis that contrasts this real- 
istic art with anti-realistic art—a label 
under which it was intended to include 
not only bourgeois decadent art, but 
also innovating trends of the revol- 
utionary avant-garde (German expres- 
sionists, Russian futurists, surrealists 
of central Europe, and the like)})— 
implied an unduly simplified vision of 
the true historical process. 
At the present time there are various 
contending philosophies, varying from 
the theory of realism considered as a 
general trend, illustrated by the works 
of the great classics, to the theory of 
“Réalisme sans rivages” ("unbounded 
realism”), which is meant to include 
all the trends of the twentieth century 
and any work of value. This discus- 
sion touches on the very foundations 
of the theory of reflection, since some 
theorists contrast with it, in one way 
or another, myth, activity and subject- 
ivity. 
Marxist aesthetics postulates the 
primacy of the content, while declar- 
ing its dialectical unity with form. 
Here content and form should be 
taken to mean two aspects of the 
work of art that cannot exist indep- 
endently of each other: the content is 
the reflection of the essential relation- 
ships inherent in a subject; form is, in 
the last analysis, the image that 
expresses these relationships and 
ensures communication between the 
creator and the receiver. 
Generally, a distinction is made 
between the inner and the outer form. 
In the novel, for example, the inner 
form is made up of the characters and 
composition, the external form is 
reduced to technique. Marxist aesthe- 
tics gave little attention to analysis 
of questions of form, which has cer- 
tainly harmed its development and 
suggested the idea that it is only 
concerned with the content of works 
of art, especially their political or 
ideological content. 
In The German Ideology, Marx and 
Engels already stated that “it is not 
consciousness that determines life, 
but life that determines conscious- 
ness.” 
One of the forms of this conscious- 
ness is the aesthetic form which is 
linked by a series of transitions to the 
material basis. “Whether an individual 
like Raphael”, write Marx and Engels, 
“is able to develop his talent depends 
entirely on the demand, which in turn 
depends on the division of labour and 
the consequent conditions of men’s 
education.” 
The demand therefore depends on 
the division of labour, i.e, on the 
separation of the various activities that 
lead to one another, a separation which 
gives rise to the birth of classes and 
social strata. This means that in defin- 
ing the demand Marx and Engels 
attribute an important réle to the 
cultural situation of each society and 
of each class or stratum of this 
society. 
M.. aesthetics recog- 
nizes that the relations between the 
artist's class affiliations, his vision of 
the world and his creative activity are 
very complex. 
Writing about Balzac, Engels already 
underlined the contradictions that may 
exist in this connexion: “The fact that 
Balzac was forced to go against his 
own class sympathies and political 
prejudices, that he saw the inevit- 
ability of the end of his beloved arist- 
ocrats and that he described them as 
not deserving any better fate; the fact 
that he saw the true men of the future 
only where they were to be found at 
the time (i.e. among the Republicans 
of the Cloitre Saint-Merri, 5-6 lune 
1832), that | regard as one of the 
greatest triumphs of realism and one 
of the most striking characteristics of 
Balzac in his later years.” 
With regard to Leo Tolstoy, Lenin 
detects similar contradictions, but he 
does not explain them solely by the 
writer's individual vision of the world. 
“The contradictions in Tolstoy's 
views”, he writes, “are not those of 
his strictly personal thinking; they are 
the reflection of the social conditions 
and influences, of the historic tradi- 
tions—complex and contradictory to

## [Page 21](074881engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

  
The explosion 
of Spring 
version of Botticelli's “Primavera”. 
with a multiple mirror-image effect 
Photo © J. Sagl, Prague 
“The world batters, rends apart and re-fashions us; [ felt that this process could be expressed 
in a collage”, declared the Czech artist Jiri Kolar, creator of this “sprung” or 
Kolar's technique consists in cutting an original work in 
vertical (as here) or horizontal strips or in squares and reconstituting it on a vaster scale 
Kolar's collages have earned him the Prize of the Sao 
“exploded” 
Paulo Biennale and were exhibited at the 1969 Salon de Mai and at Galerie La Hune in Paris. 
the highest degree—that determined 
the psychology of the different classes 
and different strata of Russian society 
at the time following the reform but 
preceding the revolution.” 
While stressing the determining role 
of society, Marx did not deny the 
relative autonomy of art in relation to 
economic and social developments. 
In his Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy we read: “In the 
case of art we know that specific 
periods when art has flourished are 
in no way related to the general devel- 
opment of society nor, consequently, 
to the material basis or, in a way, the 
framework of its organization.” 
And Marx wonders—without, how- 
ever, giving us any answer—about the 
causes of the survival of the great 
artistic moments of antiquity; “The 
difficulty does not consist in under- 
standing that Greek art and the epic 
are linked to certain forms of social 
development. The difficulty consists 
in understanding that they can still 
cause us aesthetic enjoyment and are 
considered in some respect as a norm 
and as inimitable models.” 
In taking this standpoint Marx draws 
our attention to the dialectics of the 
relationship existing between the evol- 
ution of art and the evolution of 
society; he warns us in advance 
against any attempt to reduce these 
complex relations to a simple autom- 
atism. 
Inspired by the general lessons of 
Marxism and by the ideas of the 
Russian democratic critics, such as 
Belinsky, Chernyshevsky and Dobrol- 
jubov, and of French positivists such 
as Hippolyte Taine, G.V. Plekhanov 
attempted to prove, in a logical step- 
by-step manner and with the aid of 
concrete analyses of certain works 
and certain trends in French and Rus- 
sian literature, that “any ideology— 
including art and what is called belles- 
lettres—expresses the tendencies and 
inspiration of a given society, or, in 
the case of a society divided into clas- 
ses, of a given social class.” 
This conception, which disregards 
Marx's warnings, profoundly influenc- 
ed Marxist aesthetics for quite a long 
time and gave rise to a school of 
vulgar sociclogism. The sociologists 
who adhered to it established too 
direct a link between the artist's class 
affiliations and his work, and above 
all they stressed the political and 
ideological importance of literature 
and art, 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
21 
  

## [Page 22](074881engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

22 
SOCIALIST ART (Continued) 
 
Ideology and the creative artist 
Invoking the radical change in 
society the representatives of the 
organization  Proletarskaja Kultura 
(“Prolet Kult”), as also those of revol- 
utionary futurism, rejected the heritage 
of the past and advocated the need 
to create an absolutely new art, a pro- 
letarian art. 
“As regards the questions posed by 
culture, we are immediate socialists”, 
declare the proponents of Proletkult, 
* we declare that the proletariat must 
forthwith and without delay create in 
its image socialist forms of thinking, 
feeling and living." The futurist 
Mayokovsky did not say anything 
different, even if he contested the Pro- 
letkult thesis whereby proletarian cult- 
ure can be created only by writers and 
artists with a working-class back- 
ground. 
In 1923, MayakovsKy declared that 
it was necessary to “combat the 
application of the working methods of 
the dead to modern art.” And in 1928 
he attacked the worshippers of the 
past who “under the pretext of educ- 
ation take us in the cemeteries to the 
tombs of the classics.” 
L.. attacked this idea 
vehemently, defending the principle of 
continuity in the realm of culture and 
rejecting the utopianism and illusionism 
of the “leftists”. 
“Marxism”, he states, "has acquir- 
ed world-wide historic importance as 
an ideology of the revolutionary pro- 
letariat due to the fact that, far from 
rejecting the most precious conquests 
of the bourgeois era, it has on the 
contrary assimilated by transformation 
everything precious in the develop- 
ment of human thinking and culture 
over a period of more than 2,000 
years. 
“Only subsequent work on this 
basis and in this direction, animated 
by the practical experience of dicta- 
torship of the proletariat, which is the 
final struggle against all forms of 
exploitation, can be recognized as 
constituting the development of a 
truly proletarian culture.” 
He was thus defending the funda- 
mental positions of Socialist cultural 
policy, but abstained from intervening 
in aesthetic matters. In conformity 
with the standpoints of the central 
committee of the Communist Party of 
the U.S.S.R., Lunacharsky, who for 
a long time was in charge of Soviet 
cultural policy, favoured in the twen- 
ties the development of, and compet- 
ition between, the various movements. 
The defence of the heritage of the 
past was a just cause; dogmatic 
policy, however, made use of it in 
order to condemn avant-garde trends, 
even revolutionary ones, thereby 
limiting freedom of creation. 
It was with a party resolution of 1932 
that the struggle against leftist ten- 
dencies and against avant-garde trends 
began. The proposed aim was to 
organize single associations of writers 
and artists, instead of having extrem- 
ely restive small-size movements, and 
to promote a drawing together of 
creators considered as “fellow travel- 
lers”. In the beginning, this change 
seemed likely to favour cultural devel- 
opment. Later it was realized that 
unity meant uniformization in the ser- 
vice of a dogmatic policy. 
Marxist theory, at the present time, 
lays stress on continuity, but assigns 
a more important réle to innovation. 
According to Marxist aesthetics, a 
work of art is not solely an instrument 
of knowledge (some critics of Marx- 
ism are wrong when they criticize 
those writers for maintaining such a 
view): it serves, in a complex way, the 
conscious awakening of man and there- 
by influences his activity. Within the 
workers’ movement there was very 
early evidence of a utilitarian trend 
that wanted to attribute to literature 
and art a direct educational role, above 
all in political matters.. 
While defending the reason for the 
existence of “political” genres, Marx 
and Engels rejected any kind of over- 
didactic conception of art. “In my 
view”, Engels writes, “a novel that is 
socialist in character, perfectly fulfils 
its mission when, through the faithful 
depiction of real relationships, it des- 
troys conventional illusions as to the 
nature of these relations, shakes the 
optimism of the bourgeois world and 
forces people to doubt the lastingness 
of the existing order, even if the 
author does not directly indicate any 
solution and even if, as the case may 
be, he does not ostensibly take any 
side.” 
In 1905, in an article entitled “The 
Organization of the Party and the 
Literature of the Party”, Lenin defined 
the function of socialist literature in 
the following terms: “Literature should 
become part of the general cause of 
the proletariat, a small cog and a small 
screw in the great social democratic 
machinery, one and indivisible, set 
going by the whole of the conscious 
avant-garde of the entire working 
class. Literature must become an 
integral part of the organized, meth- 
odical and unified work of the Social 
Democratic Party.” 
Much has been said about the 
meaning that Lenin attributed to “the 
party spirit”, i.e., Marxist commitment 
in the realm of art. There are some 
(including Lukacs) who claim that this 
article relates solely to the press 
and that it has nothing to do with 
literature proper; others insist that this 
theory should be applied literally in 
every situation. 
It is certain that Lenin, in 1905, had 
in mind socialist literature in general, 
including belles-lettres. 
After the October Revolution, the 
party spirit meant for him the accep- 
tance of Marxist ideology and service 
in the cause of the proletariat; but he 
no longer insisted that all creators 
should belong to the Party and he no 
longer demanded, as he did in 1905, 
that literature should be rigorously 
subordinate to the demands of the 
current political struggle. 
The relationship between literature, 
art and politics is therefore complex 
and cannot be examined solely on a 
theoretical plane. At any rate, both 
on the aesthetic plane as in the realm 
of the cultural policy of Marxism, there 
are a great many contending stand- 
points. Some insist on the autonomy 
of literature and art in relation to poli- 
tics, while others remain faithful to 
utilitarianism and even to the dogma- 
tism of the past, two extremes rejec- 
ted by the majority of theoreticians. 
Serving the cause of the prolet- 
ariat by artistic means signifies addres- 
sing oneself to the great mass of the 
population and contributing to its 
conscious awakening. This require- 
ment must have as a consequence the 
birth of a literature and of an art of a 
democratic or popular character. 
B. how can this objective 
be attained? After the discussions 
of the 1920s, dogmatic cultural policy 
imposed a certain cultural model, the 
formation of which was also linked 
with the social and cultural realities 
of the Soviet Union, and later of the 
other socialist countries. The chan- 
ges that took place after 1956 (with 
the 20th Congress of the Communist 
Party, three years after the death of 
Stalin) made possible a more refined 
view of the public and of the “folk” 
character of literature. 
In the theoretical discussions of the 
1920s the different trends in socialist 
literature and art—including the avant- 
garde—hailed realism as their auth- 
ority. People spoke of a proletarian 
realism, a dialectical realism, a roman- 
tic realism, etc. Finally, the expres- 
sion socialist realism was adopted at 
the First Congress of the Writers of 
the Soviet Union in 1934. 
Socialist realism as an artistic 
method regards as its aim the reflection 
of the essential part of reality in a 
historically concrete way. It implies 
on the part of the artist adherence to 
a materialist and dialectical concep- 
tion of the world and the undertaking

## [Page 23](074881engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 50654: Art in the Socialist countries: the many facets of realism

Hungarian 
pop art 
Wood carvings by Hunga- 
rian shepherds, decorative 
spiced loaves prepared for 
village fétes, characters 
from popular folk tales, all 
these provide a well of 
inspiration for Hungarian 
artist Mihaly Schéner. In 
his arrestingly original 
works Schéner weds foik- 
lore to pop art, as in his 
“Three Kings", a terra- 
cotta sculpture of a hand, 
the palm embeliished with 
flowers and with three of 
the fingers formed in the 
image of the Magi, Baltha- 
zar, Melchior and Gaspard. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Eg
on
 
Go
tt
l,
 
Bu
da
pe
st
 
to serve the cause of the proletariat 
and of socialism. 
Socialist realism, illustrated by a. 
considerable number of works of val- 
ue, is an artistic phenomenon and not 
a figment of the mind nor the object 
of a simple political directive, as some 
people think. It is true that dogmatic 
policy deformed this theory and that, 
by its “aesthetic norms”, it helped to 
reinforce academic and schematic ten- 
dencies. 
The ravages that were thus caused 
were serious but the theory of socialist 
realism is beginning to benefit from 
the lessons of this evolution, as well 
  
as from those of the development of 
twentieth century literature and art. 
The literary and artistic trends, the 
aesthetic debates and the attitudes 
adopted in cultural policy have given 
rise during this half century, within the 
socialist world and. primarily in the 
‘U.S.S.R., to an abundant theoretical 
literature that is very badly known in 
general and specially in Western 
Europe. 
During a certain period writings 
stamped with the mark of dogmatism 
received fairly wide circulation; for 
some time now we have been witness- 
Ing in Western Europe a renaissance 
of the so-called Russian formalist 
school, confrontations with the works 
of Lukacs or Brecht, etc.; the other 
aspects of this activity seem, however, 
to be overlooked. 
At the present time, thanks to the 
social, cultural.and, in particular, artis- 
tic development, we are witnessing a 
flourishing of a great many movements 
and the development of very open 
discussions between their spokesmen 
in the various Socialist countries, 
where the lessons of the past—inter- 
national and national—have their place 
alongside the emerging forms of new 
trends in literature and art. | 
23

## [Page 24](074881engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

A 
  
by Mikel Dufrenne 
R the developing countries 
culture is being challenged. The basic 
influence affecting all reflection on art 
is, in fact, the confrontation of cultures 
between the West and everything that 
is not Western. 
~ This confrontation has been a 
particularly bitter experience not only 
in the former colonies which have had 
to fight for their independence and 
which have not yet eliminated the 
after-effects of a traumatic encounter, 
but also in those countries whose 
dynamic relationship with the West 
assumes the aspect of peaceful 
competition. How, in such countries, 
are the cultures in this confrontation 
regarded? 
The national culture, first of all, is no 
longer experienced, as it might have 
been, in a kind of happy innocence. 
Because it has been threatened, dis- 
qualified, often half destroyed, it is 
henceforth thought out and desired as 
the instrument of an intransigent and 
impassioned self-assertion. 
If we consider this culture as a value, 
the West may, all unwittingly, have 
contributed to it, not simply because 
it has illustrated the value of its 
own culture, but because—after the 
devaluing of the indigenous culture 
by its conquerors, missionaries and 
teachers—it has, through its artists 
and scholars, succeeded in revaluing it. 
When Picasso becomes an enthusiast 
for negro art, when ethnological 
museums accommodate it and ethno- 
logists pore over it, the African 
rediscovers his art. He sees it with 
a stranger's eyes but not as a museum 
exhibit regarded with lukewarm interest 
or requiring, if it is to be understood, 
a special effort of adjustment: he sees 
it as his own art and that is what he 
wants it to be, 
This is a point on which all con- 
tributors agree: awareness of art is 
linked to what Mulk Raj Anand, the 
Indian writer, calls “the search for 
national identity”. 
This search assumes a scientific 
form in countries which are adequately 
equipped for this purpose, as in India 
where, says Mulk Raj Anand, “the 
most enlightened students have been 
concerned to relate the art expression 
of the past and the present to the 
practice of the arts. This has entailed 
detailed studies of the archaeological, 
anthropological, sociological and formal 
aspects of our understanding within 
the context of art expression. Most 
of these studies are devoted to the 
search for national identity.” 
(Among such studies from India are 
“The Significance of Indian Art" by 
Aurobindo (1951); “Arts and Man" 
by Bardekar (1960); “Comparative 
Aesthetics” by Pamday (1957); “Rabin- 
dranath Tagore on Art and Aesthetics”, 
an anthology edited by P. Neogy 
(1961), and a major study by Mulk Raj 
Anand, “The Birth of Lalit Kala”, due 
to appear shortly in Unesco's new 
international review, “Cultures™). 
Even when this identity is not 
defined by scientific methods it is no 
less passionately asserted. Thus 
Leopoldo Zea the Mexican philosopher 
and Carlos and Magis, the Argentine 
writer, refer to the “search for Latin- 
American genius and for its ability to 
express itself” in Latin America at 
the beginning of the century. The 
Togolese sociologist, Ferdinand Agblé- 
magnon reminds us of the reception 
that the theme of négritude developed 
by Senghor, Césaire and Sartre has 
found in Africa. And Ali El-Rai, the 
Egyptian writer, alludes to the literary 
forms that “particularly suit the 
aspiring Arab soul” 
This unanimous assertion of a dis- 
tinctive spiritual identity is sometimes 
all the more intransigent because it is 
difficult to visualize it clearly and its 
reality is clouded by ambiguity. Do 
the roots of the South American 
peoples lie in Europe or in America? 
At the dawn of the twentieth century, 


### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

AVANT-GARDE AND 
= IN ASIA, AFRICA & LATIN 
according to Zea and Magis, they 
“demanded a return to that reality 
which was previously regarded as 
an obstacle: the particular Creole 
synthesis (the indigenous basis re- 
modelled by the Iberian peoples)”. 
Furthermore, national identity cannot 
be asserted pacifically—it can only 
define itself by opposition—by opposi- 
tion to the western culture which 
always risks alienating it, since it feels 
challenged and menaced in its depths. 
In regard to art the menace is even 
more distinct, since art is more closely 
integrated with daily life. This is cer- 
tainly so in respect of archaic cultu- 
res and is, in any case, exemplified 
by Black Africa. 
This “mixing” of art and life is very 
well described by Ferdinand Agbléma- 
gnon: 
“It is not solely in grandiose events 
or exceptional circumstances that ar- 
tistic expression in Black Africa is pro- 
duced or becomes apparent. It lies 
in the rhythm of daily life, in the desire 
to maintain a constant relationship 
between the cosmic and the real, be- 
tween the exceptional and the banal, 
and the art expressed in everyday ob- 
jects is the most pertinent and strik- 
ing illustration of this, 
"We see, in objects of common 
use—ranging from chairs to scales 
for weighing gold—a series of signs 
and geometrical figures which, apart 
from their scriptural value, represent 
a geometrical and architectural expres- 
sion sought solely for artistic pur- 
poses. To lose the secret of these— 
seemingly modest—sources of expres- 
sion would be deliberate estrange- 
ment from the great traditional schools 
of apprenticeship in artistic expres- 
sion.” 
] HERE is a danger of this 
secret becoming lost as soon as the 
West stamps a new pattern on every- 
day life. What has a particularly cor- 
rupting effect on the genuineness of 
art is its commercialization or, we may 
venture to say, its prostitution. Mulk 
Raj Anand has noted this clearly in 
respect of India: 
“But, whereas in the days of the 
village republic, the craftsman was an 
integral part of society, paid for and 
CONTINUED PAGE 26

## [Page 25](074881engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

TRADITION 
AMERICA 
Dr
aw
in
g 
© 
Ma
lw
an
ka
r,
 
Bo
mb
ay
, 
In
di
a  
Tradition is married to new art techniques in this fingerprint painting by Malwankar, an Indian artist who 
depicts figures, elephants and flying steeds in a manner all his own. These figures are from his cartoon 
film “Swayamvar”, based on the ancient custom of a Rajput princess selecting a husband by garlanding 
the prince of her choice. Malwankar rose from desperate poverty to a successful career as an artist. 
Through his fingerprint painting he evokes the delicate stylized figures of Rajasthani and Mughal miniatures.

## [Page 26](074881engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

26 
ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (Continued) 
Can one deny one’s people and one’s past? 
recognized for his service for the 
community, the artist today is not pro- 
ducing material goods of a specific 
marketable value but cultural goods of 
which the value has yet to be recog- 
nized... 
“Therefore the artist turns to film 
poster work or commercial design for 
a living, or he paints pretty pictures 
with plenty of local colour in them 
which may appeal to a certain kind 
of foreign tourist or procure him a 
patron among the diplomats; or he 
paints decorative pictures for the 
more sophisticated drawing rooms of 
the big cities. 
“There are a very few artists who 
are immune to these peculiar social 
conditions and who seek to answer 
the challenge of their vision.” 
Thus national culture feels itself 
threatened, even when it is marked out 
for a new life—which will only really 
be its own if it accepts the challenge 
that the West has issued. 
How, in turn, is western culture 
seen? The attitude it produces is bas- 
ically ambivalent. This culture is seen 
first of all as something foreign: it is 
the “other”, and this “otherness” is 
even more keenly felt since the 
“other” has too often imposed him- 
self by force. But this culture is also 
regarded as possessing prestige—it 
is allied to the spectacular advance of 
technology, and neither the distrust nor 
the resentment that it may arouse can 
hide the fact of its vitality and power 
of expansion from shrewd eyes. 
‘What is more, it appears as an in- 
evitable line of advance; just as, In the 
developing countries, the economy 
must assume the harness of indus- 
trialization, so the black Orpheus must, 
as Sartre has stressed, sing in French 
if his voice is to carry across fron- 
tiers. 
But the voice is then no longer en- 
tirely his own: “Africans”, observes 
Ferdinand Agblémagnon, “including 
grammarians, admit the impossibility 
of translating certain emotions for 
which words exist in the vernacular 
language of their village... The privi- 
leged persons who succeed in a 
complete break-through of the lan- 
guage barrier are few and far be- 
tween.” 
This culture, furthermore, is not sim- 
ply the “other”, it is also the enemy. 
Must we allow ourselves, then, to be 
haunted and fascinated by it? it some- 
times happens, in fact, that its pres- 
tige is denied and its purpose de- 
nounced, mainly by Marxist militants in 
the Third World. 
In regard to this confrontation of cul- 
tures three solutions are proposed and 
three attitudes adopted. 
The first and the most passive, if 
one may say so, consists in accepting 
or even sanctioning a division which 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Re
nd
 
Bu
rr
i 
- 
M
s
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
rl
s 
tends to impose itself naturally. “No 
developing country can escape a cul- 
tural “dichotomy”, says Shuichi 
Kato, who describes the situation as 
exemplified by Japan at the beginning 
of the century: 
“After the Meiji Reform (1868), 
Japan adopted western political insti- 
tutions (parliamentary monarchy), re- 
taining however the traditional author- 
itarian values of military dictatorship. 
Western technology was systematic- 
ally introduced and heavy industries 
developed in urban areas without 
modification of rural life (e.g. the con- 
tinuation of the exploitation of tenants 
by landowners), without much change 
in the production of a large part of 
consumer goods (e.g. food consump- 
tion and clothing). 
“Around the turn of this cen- 
tury, the educated Japanese, living 
in the rapidly growing cities, worked 
during the daytime in the westzarnized 
industrial and governmental offices 
and went home to spend the evening 
in the traditional way: wearing the 
kimono, sitting on a mat, eating rice. 
Efficiency in western technology dur- 
ing the day and a delicate aesthetic 
life of traditional values in the evening: 
indeed a precarious balance for a 
person. 
“Accordingly, the architecture in 
Tokyo of that time was divided into 
two categories: all public buildings, 
such as government offices, banks, 
railway stations, schools, and large de- 
partment stores, were constructed in 
the “western style” with bricks, stone, 
concrete and steel, while practically 
all living quarters were houses built 
of wood in the traditional ‘Japanese 
style’. 
“This split was also evident in the 
cultural and educational facilities. The 
National Academy of Music was com- 
posed of two separate departments 
  
 
which were totally independent of one 
another: one strictly for traditional 
music and the other for western 
music. 
“The same was true of the National 
Academy of Arts: a department for 
“Japanese painting” and another for 
“western painting”. As a matter of 
fact the Japanese painter of the time 
was obliged to specialize either in 
working in Indian ink and the tradi- 
tional water-colours or with oil on 
canvas. 
“Also in the theatre one either spe- 
cialized in the traditional Kabukl, N& 
and Kyégen or in the ‘New Theatre’. 
The masses were rarely attracted by 
the Kabuki, while the young intellec- 
tuals of Tokyo were witnessing per- 
formances of Shakespeare, Chekhov 
and a few Japanese plays written in 
the ‘western’ style. Except for rare ins- 
tances, actors of the Kabuki never per- 
formed in the ‘New Theatre’ and, 
accordingly, actors of the ‘New Thea- 
tre’ did not play in the Kabuki.” 
This situation, which was that of 
Japan yesterday, prevails today in 
countries which, simultaneously with 
the achievement of independence, 
have set about the process of moder- 
nization. But, because it is artificial 
and difficult to tolerate, it will not last 
any longer than it has in Japan. One 
cannot exist for long on two levels, 
torn between a native ego and a wes- 
tern super-ego. 
As, in particular, this dual system 
has repercussions on social stratifica- 
tion, it is also unacceptable. Partici- 
pation in western culture is the privi- 
lege on an élite, while the people re- 
main necessarily faithful to tradition; 
and this élite—because it is sensitive 
to this fact and feels itself to be res- 
ponsible—experiences a feeling of 
guilt and a sense of treachery: can one 
deny one’s people and one's past?

## [Page 27](074881engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

Japanese 
“catalytic 
agent 
“I sometimes compare tradition 
to a chemical reaction”, said the 
famous Japanese architect Kenzo 
Tange in an interview with the 
“Unesco Courier” (Sept.-Oct. 
1968). “It should act like a cata- 
lytic agent to create something 
new, but the traditional form or 
inspiration should not be visible 
in the finished product.” Below 
left, a garden created four cen- 
turies ago by the poet Sé-ami 
at the Daisenin monastery, Kyoto, 
where monks still rake the gra- 
vel beds in accordance with 
a strictly established tradition. 
Right, the elegant strength and 
soaring lines of a modern build- 
ing conceived by Kenzo Tange. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ch
. 
Hi
ra
ya
ma
, 
To
ky
o 
And so, says Ferdinand Agbléma- 
gnon, “black French-speaking writers, 
whether literally exiles or exiles on 
the spot, regard themselves as cut 
off from the masses and from tradi- 
tional society. They have a sense of 
guilt at living within another culture 
and no longer feel exactly like their 
illiterate brothers who are still in the 
village; this mass becomes, for them, 
the symbol of traditional society.” 
And he adds: “This new African lit- 
erature asks itself if it is only of signi- 
ficance in Paris, London or Washing- 
ton. It deplores being completely un- 
known in Africa itself. Does the artist 
really achieve his goal when the peo- 
ple for whom the work is intended are 
unaware of its very existence?” 
For an artist, furthermore, playing 
the western game does not mean that 
he is sure of winning. Zea and Magis 
have seen this quite clearly in Latin 
America during the second half of the 
nineteenth century: 
“in Mexico, Chile and more espe- 
cially Argentina, leaders of the liter- 
ary and artistic movement sought inte- 
gration with European culture beyond 
the Pyrenees, but this integration en- 
countered particular obstacles, due to 
the circumstances in which the Latin 
American peoples were living and the 
          
deep imprint of the culture in which 
they had been brought up. 
For this reason the tendency for cul- 
ture to become the privilege of the 
minority was, unfortunately, to grow 
more marked while, at the same time, 
the past inspired only a feeling of 
aversion because of its symbolic iden- 
tification with the colony in the sense 
of a synthesis of structures imposed 
by the mother-cities of the Peninsula. 
As a substitute for this past an 
attempt was made to mode! trends of 
thought, as well as literature and art, 
on the pattern of trans-Pyrenean Eur- 
ope. But this substitution failed to 
solve the problem, for the results of 
this adherence—so-called integration 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 28](074881engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (cont'd) 
with the western world—were regard- 
ed by the European artists themselves 
as poor imitations of their own creative 
works. And indeed they were right, 
because the Latin American artists 
did no more than reproduce the same 
themes and use a similar technique; 
these themes were in fact completely 
alien to their world, the world of the 
artists who sought to absorb them.” 
There is, then, a second solution 
which, although finding supporters 
everywhere, will also be seen to be 
impracticable. This is the defence 
and illustration of the indigenous cul- 
ture against western temptations and 
its glorification or even resurrection 
where, in countries which have ex- 
perienced colonial rule, it has been 
at least partially destroyed. 
This project implies the return of the 
creative artist to his people and almost 
always his political commitment to the 
struggle of the people, in which the 
stake is often both independence and 
socialism. In the words of Ferdinand 
Agblémagnon: 
“This commitment has differing de- 
grees and depths according to authors. 
There is the commitment of the artist 
in regard to everyday life which 
means accepting the lot of the writer 
or artist today. 
“Then there is the personal, political 
commitment. Following this trend of 
thought, we can set side by side men 
who, both in origin and destiny, are 
extremely different: we think of Frantz 
Fanon who became the protagonist and 
the hero of the Algerian revolution; 
Stéfan Alexis, killed during the internal 
struggle in Haiti; Christopher Okigbo, 
the Nigerian poet, assassinated during 
* 
  
Islamic heritage of calligraphy 
The search for new art forms linking past with present has, over 
the past decade, been the driving force behind a school of young 
artists in Teheran. The young Iranian painter Zenderoudi, seen 
above in his studio, draws inspiration for his paintings from the 
masterpieces of calligraphy that form the central core of Iranian, 
and indeed all Islamic, artistic tradition. 
- 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
Je
an
-P
ie
rr
e 
Ta
il
la
nd
ie
r,
 
Pa
ri
a 
Morocco’s anti-war artist 
The anguished sufferings of man with all his problems of wars 
and racial antagonisms are the major themes of the Moroccan 
artist Farid Belkahia. Right, “Reflection”, a painting produced 
28 by Belkahia in 1961. While still a young teacher in a town of 
south Morocco (he later became director of the School of Fine 
Arts of Casablanca), his highly personal, clear-cut style soon 
made him famous far beyond the frontiers of his native country.  Ph
ot
e 
© 
M
o
h
a
m
e
d
 
Si
je
lm
as
si

## [Page 29](074881engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

the Nigerian war; Léopold Sédar Sen- 
ghor, the poet-president who is ever 
mindful of his political commitments 
when he tries to reconcile his theory 
of négritude with his country’s imper- 
atives of economic development; 
Mario De Andrade, head of a revolu- 
tionary party engaged in the struggle 
for the liberation of Angola: Jomo 
Kenyatta, who was a prisoner under 
the colonial régime, and so on.” 
Commitment in aesthetic terms— 
the terms which concern us here— 
may also be total. It is accepted 
today, or has been in the past, by a 
proportion of the nation’s intelligent- 
sia. In India, for example: “Some 
part of it consciously fought back the 
alien culture in defence of chauvinist 
nationalism and tried deliberately to 
revive the ancient (‘spiritual’) tradition 
of culture and its artistic expressions 
as against the ‘material’ forms of the 
West,” writes Mulk Raj Anand. 
In Morocco, the appeal for a return 
to the wellsprings is expressed in po- 
lemical terms by Allal al-Fassi, whose 
words Zaghoul Morsy reproduces: “I 
address my appeal to the writers of 
this country, who spend their time ana- 
lysing aspects of human problems in 
the light of foreign creative works... | 
address my appeal to research 
workers so that they may study our is- 
lamic society, its civilization, thought, 
philosophy and literature and no longer 
follow the path of what they learned 
at their French lycée... | am not for- 
getting those who sing of the achieve- 
ments of the socialists and others, and 
of the sacrifices of Guevara and Lu- 
mumba... | ask them to glorify our 
national struggle and Moroccan, Arab 
and Moslem sacrifices.” 
In Black Africa we are aware of the 
reception that the theme of négritude 
has obtained—sometimes expressed 
in violent terms since it represents, 
says Ferdinand Agblémagnon, “a kind 
of cry for liberation.” 
He adds, however: “For some time 
Blacks and non-Blacks have been ask- 
ing themselves about the value and 
ambiguity of this theme and we have 
heard a kind of anti-négritude theory 
put forward." Why this change of 
opinion? 
The reason lies in the fact that the 
search for one's identity cannot be 
reduced to the glorification of the an- 
cestral past. It must look towards the 
future and have due regard for the 
sense of history. Marxist thinkers, 
even if anxious to safeguard national 
identity, refuse to adopt any line that 
runs counter to internationalism. Non- 
Marxist thinkers, such as Laroui in 
Morocco, are just as sensitive to the 
demands of historical circumstances, 
the study of which argues against any 
idea of Utopia. 
The reality of the West is a fact 
which cannot be ignored: “Whether 
we try to refute it, liberate ourselves 
from it or assent to it", says Zaghoul 
Morsy in his comments on Laroui, “the 
West is here with us as a prime fact, 
and ignorance or imperfect knowledge 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
 
  
BY AND FOR AFRICANS OF TODAY. Far from remaining contentedly imprisoned In 
the splendours of the past, African art, in all its “forms, is branching out along a multi- 
tude of bold new paths. Examples of this new burgeoning are : above, “Racing Horses”, 
a linocut on rice paper by the 24 year old Kenyan artist Hezbon Owitl, and, below, a 
colour-wash by the famous painter lba N'Diaye of Senegal. Both as a teacher of art 
and handicrafts and as a painter himself, Iba N'Diaye is involved in a constant struggle 
against the facile perpetuation of a servile “primitivism” in art What is needed, 
he says, is “authentic African painting, by Africans of today, for: Africans of today”. 
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
W
.
 & 
J. 
Ma
ck
ay
 
an
d 
Co
.,
 
Ltd
., 
Ch
at
ha
m,
 
U.
K.
 
© 
o 
® 
c 
© 
2] 
[oy 
a 
x 
[i] 
a] 
© 
> 
o 
a 
zZ 
© 
Ss 
[o] 2 
° 
= 
a.

## [Page 30](074881engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

30 
ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (Continued) 
of it has a nullifying effect on all 
serious reflection and genuinely 
artistic expression.” 
Furthermore, the future of the non- 
Western countries lies along the path 
of Westernization. To reject western 
culture en bloc is to reject develop- 
ment of science and technology as 
well; and what country can expand 
today without industrialization? If it 
accepts this industrialization while re- 
solved to maintain the purity of its 
traditions, will it not lapse into the 
dichotomy described by Kato? 
The sole alternative to intolerable 
duality is synthesis, and it is towards 
a solution of this kind that national 
ideologies are heading today, in full 
awareness, moreover, that it is easier 
to label it than to define and intro- 
duce it. Synthesis is, however, the 
very word that Mulk Raj Anand uses: 
“The study of important problems in 
relation to artistic expression in tradi- 
tional societies, which have received 
the impact of modern industrial cultu- 
res, can only be fruitful if we consider 
the clash between traditionalism and 
modernity as part of a new emergent 
synthesis rather than as research into 
two fundamentally opposed attitudes 
of East and West, which have nothing 
to do with each other.” 
In the case of India, Mulk Raj Anand 
observes: 
“After half a century of affirmation 
of a false myth and the revival of 
ancient and medieval Hindu culture, 
on the parallels of a political myth, the 
intelligentsia has recently begun to 
awaken to the fact that new industrial 
civilization, which it has accepted on 
the social plan, must be absorbed.” 
He adds: 
“And yet very few members of the 
top hierarchy wish to confront the 
contemporary human situation openly 
because the problems of technology 
versus human survival in the West 
have made a good many ideologies 
of the West, from Schopenhauer and 
Max Muller to the Neo-Yogis, con- 
sider Indian mysticism to be the 
answer to everything.” 
This illustrates the phenomenon to 
which we have already drawn atten- 
tion, namely that it Is sometimes west- 
ern thinking that reveals the indi- 
genous culture to itself and gives it 
value. But it still remains for the indi- 
genous culture itself to achieve the 
synthesis of the East and the West. 
Mulk Raj Anand draws our attention 
to the fact that: 
“India has made a distinctive contri- 
 
“The Singer”, 1930, oil painting by the 
famous Mexican painter and engraver 
Rufino Tamayo, now in the National Museum 
of Modern Art, Paris. Rufino’s works, 
painted in brilliant colour and often inspir- 
ed by his country's folklore and traditions, 
are profoundly Mexican, yet they have a 
visual quality which gives them universal 
appeal. 
bution in the synthesis of the European 
forms of the novel and the content of 
Indian life, in the works of Indian- 
English novelists, Raja Rao, Mulk Raj 
Anand, R.K. Narayan, Namala Mardan- 
daya, Attia Hussain, Bhabhani Bhatta- 
charya and several others. 
“In another form of artistic expres- 
sion, the dance-drama, the acceptance 
of a certain aspect of European 
choreography has made various new 
contributions possible from Mrinalini 
Sarabhai, Shirin Vajifdar, Krishna 
Kutty, Parvati Kumar, Shanti Bhardan 
and Maya Rao.” 
Another key-word that we find in 
all writers is the “universal”. To 
overcome antagonism or contradiction 
is to promote the universal. But we 
must realize that this process cannot 
be achieved without sacrifices. Shui- 
chi Kato is very alive to this: 
“With the changing of values, the 
divorce from tradition has become a 
serious problem. Gone are the days 
when people differentiated between 
western ability and the Japanese soul. 
Western ability has become Japanese 
ability. The dichotomy has disap- 
peared. 
“But where can one find the lapa- 
nese soul when the people are driving 
automobiles to air-conditioned offices, 
or tractors in the fields or watching a 
“Western” on television? The Japa- 
nese clothes of today are the same 
styles as those of Western Europe. 
The Japanese now eat the same 
amount of animal protein as most 
Europeans. Most households no longer 
harbour miniature shrines of tradi- 
tional deities or souls. 
“It is true that girls sometimes wear 
kimonos, perhaps on Sunday, but this 
CONTINUED PAGE 32 
4 
 Ph
ot
e 
© 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
Es
t-
Ou
es
t,
 
Br
us
se
ls

## [Page 31](074881engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

    
Te 
EL IE 
-~ q\ ert (Wo or _— 
- / 3 Vd 7 
. { \y ‘o - 
~~ & / / / 
be BO bast A 2 
» In 
 TrreL LL 2 - - s ANNAN ye bev AARA RAR 
durata ¢. 3" 
     
     
 
    
  
 
 
iS 52 is 
Ln heal lef Lane, Hokum, , Slt bod 
a » ~ " "a 
AN | pavf — J nts all) fo 
Your lwal ch. Be tual ' 
Ay ef Loma ~~ Fateny ad 
Chae i bonds anid ; fields mba soy 7 Lhe o& 
bored plissand vals boggy Fe 
30 Larmie whould be a 
dtale ALL for bh dai 
The wwndvs tor should 4b l bewnie     
  
What's the score 
These are not works of modern gra- 
phic art, but musical scores by avant 
garde composers, reproduced here 
for the first time. Above, a thirty- 
second extract from an unaccompanied 
choral work, “Lux Lucet in Tenebris” 
(“and the light shineth in the dark- 
ness”), by the young Uruguayan com- 
poser Sergio Cervetti. The new nota- 
tion enables the composer to indicate 
various intricate African or Balinese 
modulations, etc., and to signal to 
the performers changes of tone, rhyth- 
mic pace and volume. Right, an 
extract from “Sonancias®, a score for 
piano and percussion instruments by 
the Brazilian composer Marlos Nobre, 
The multiple key indications at the 
left make the score easier to read. 
The notations for percussion instru- 
ments differ from those used in classic - 
scores, , The world premlére of “So- 
nancias” took place in Munich, Fed. 
Photos © Michael Romann, Paria 
  
  
 
Rep. of Germany, in 1972, at the 
“Cultures of the World and Contem- 
porary Arts” exhibition, with Uruguay- 
an pianist Susana Frugone as soloist. 
 

## [Page 32](074881engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 50655: Avant-garde and tradition in Asia, Africa & Latin America

J 
ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (Continued) 
Universality, keyword for the future 
is an international phenomenon: Chris- 
tians too find their Christian soul 
only on Sunday. The problem for 
Meiji Japan was the dichotomy of the 
culture; the problem for Japan today, 
especially for artists and writers, is one 
of regaining national identity.” 
Thus Kato demonstrates, not without 
a hint of mockery, that sacrifices are 
reciprocal—in its modernization, pro- 
viding the example of industrialization, 
the West itself has not remained un- 
changed. The advice to the develop- 
ing countries reads thus: to follow the 
‘West is not Westernization but rather 
“planetarization”. And it is in this way 
that what Hegel termed the “concrete 
universal” can come to pass. 
B. not enough attention 
is paid to this demand for universality. 
Kato warns us about this again: if an 
attempt is made, in order to save 
national character, to reduce the syn- 
thesis to a more or less illegitimate 
compromise, beware of monsters! 
“In the 1930s, simultaneously with 
the rising of nationalism, politically- 
inspired architects who had already 
mastered the construction techniques, 
started designing buildings with the 
conscious purpose of emphasizing the 
Japanese national character... The 
conscious search for national identity 
in architecture in the Japan of the 
1930s resulted in the production of 
architectural monsters.” 
From which he concludes: 
“There is no other way out of this 
technological! age. Those who con- 
tinue to speak a local dialect will fall 
into regionalism. Nationalism as a 
major motivation of artistic creation 
will produce only monsters.” 
Does this mean, however, that the 
sacrifice of a particular identity must 
be pursued until its complete disap- 
pearance? By no means, and Kato 
helps us again to understand this: 
“Contemporary architects are no 
longer striving for emphasis of Japa- 
nese character but are simply trying 
to solve problems within the frame- 
work of the international architectural 
grammar of the post-Bauhaus era. Yet 
often enough there appears something 
in their works which could be called 
a sensibility of Japanese perception: 
sense of colour, of form, of surface, 
of line. 
This Japanese character of architec- 
ture when it appears does so in res- 
ponse to the influence of the climate, 
natural surroundings and the tempera- 
ment of the designer and not as some- 
thing conceived as the target of crea- 
tion. If the works of Kenzo Tange 
are Japanese, they are so only in the 
same sense that the works of Le Cor- 
busier are French.” 
Hence his final remarks: 
“The search for national identity 
should not be a conscious motivation 
for artistic creation. National identity 
is something which results through the 
unconscious tradition in the artist from 
his search for the art beyond national 
borders.” 
Art in every country is driven by a 
great number of currents. Two exam- 
ples will suffice. Mulk Raj Anand has 
identified five such currents in India: 
“The phenomenon we see, and which 
has been termed mutation of artistic 
expression, displays several remark- 
able eccentricities— 
® The search for influence from the 
more fashionable styles of Paris, Lon- 
don, New York and Rome. 
® The research into the academic 
realism of the West, borrowed by the 
artists of the late nineteenth century. 
® The persistence of the revivalists of 
the early twentieth century who had 
sought to achieve spirituality in art by 
borrowing the romantic forms of sixth 
century Ajanta and Bagh Buddhist art 
but within the framework of the seven- 
teenth century Mughal miniature. 
® The return to naive and primitive 
expression as a more dynamic form 
of revival. 
® The search for a synthesis between 
the relevant inheritance of myth, love, 
nature and human conflict in new con- 
temporary human forms, this itself 
forming an inner content and thus ex- 
ploding into a new expression. This 
becomes fused into the search -for 
personal authenticity.” 
In Egypt, Ali EI-Rai distinguishes, for 
his part, three schools of poetry: 
“Today, the literary scene in Egypt 
presents all three schools: the tradi- 
tionalist, represented by older poets 
such as "Aziz Abaza and ‘Ali Al-Guindi; 
the romantic, by Mahmoud Hasan 
Isma’'il and Saleh Gawdat among 
others; while a varying blend of social 
realism and modernistic trends charac- 
terizes such younger poets as ‘Abdel 
Muti Higazi, 'Afeefi Matar and Kamel 
Ayyoub, to mention a few names. 
“With varying intentions, forms and 
techniques, we may safely conclude 
that all the above-mentioned trends 
concur in attempting to realize what 
Al-'Aggad and Al-Mazini stated (half 
a century ago) as their goal: the crea- 
tion of a literature that is Arabic in 
language (we may now add: and tra- 
dition), Egyptian in character, and uni- 
versal in appeal.” 
Furthermore, emerging everywhere 
in this diversity, we find a subject of 
major concern reflected in the ap- 
proach of creative artists: as Ali El-Rai 
has pointed out and as Ferdinand 
Agblémagnon states in regard to Afri- 
can literature, art is, everywhere, “the 
search for self and for genres”. Agblé- 
magnon adds: “The search for self 
arises inasmuch as it is necessary to 
rediscover the ancient personality that 
will provide the prop for the emergence 
and full blossoming of the new; a 
search, likewise, for genres and styles, 
because the new language has not 
been totally mastered.” 
It is not surprising that it is to 
literature that this reflection refers. In 
the practice of the non-Western coun- 
tries everywhere, literature is the pre- 
ferred medium, no doubt because it 
facilitates expression of the ideology 
underlying creative work. 
Furthermore, even within literature 
one genre seems, in turn, to have a 
privileged place both because it at- 
tracts a really popular audience and 
because it enables traditional themes 
to be transposed into a modern form 
—the theatre. Ali EI-Rai notes: “Drama 
in Egypt presents an even clearer case 
than that of the novel of the way a 
new form is transplanted into a coun- 
try's rich soil to become, before long, 
a natural product of the land.” 
I. is corroborated by 
Agblémagnon: “We believe that the 
new African literature and the new 
African art will owe much to the thea- 
tre and it would seem that this genre 
has a considerable contribution to 
offer. We find in it all the elements 
usually grouped in the traditional story 
which is a continuous way of inter- 
preting and acting out life. We are 
thus not at all surprised to see that 
the African language theatre is winn- 
ing over a public whose existence was 
unsuspected.” 
But this obviously does not mean 
that other arts, such as architecture 
in Japan or painting in Mexico, are not 
displaying remarkable vitality. Indeed, 
the quotations which we are using 
testify that art and literature are every- 
where very much alive. The fact that 
they may hold aloof from tradition or 
become temporal rather than sacred, 
as Mulk Raj Anand says, does not 
weaken their vigour. 
The western-inspired status that the 
artist has acquired, coupled with the 
individualization of aesthetic experien- 
ce, is giving art a new stimulus and 
what Mulk Raj Anand has to say in 
regard to India is no doubt applicable 
to a number of countries: “The reali- 
zation by the individual of his potential 
in the autonomous arts has introduced 
a completely new factor of struggle 
into a society through and within which 
the fine arts had previously been part 
of ritual.” [|

## [Page 33](074881engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  TTT EET 
BOOKSHELF E | 
1 RECENT UNESCO BOOKS 
  
CULTURE 
BM Cultural Policy in: Bulgaria (by 
Kostadine Popov), Cuba (by Lisan- 
dra Otero, with the assistance of 
Francisco Martinez Hinojosa), Egypt 
(by Magdi Wahba), Iran (by Djam- 
chid Behnam), Italy (by Vincenzo 
Cappelletti) (In the series: Studies k 
and Documents on Cultural Policies) 
(each study 60p or $2). 
—
 
d
e
 
A
 
ES 
EDUCATION 
BM New Trends in Physics Teaching, 
Vol II (1970) edited by Prof. E. Nagy 
(English with French abstracts), 1972 
(£2.70, $9) 
BM Teaching School Physics, by John 
L. Lewis. (A Unesco source book.) 
Co-edition Penguin Books-Unesco, 
1972 (£1.95, $6.50). 
bo
o 
SE
 
a
e
 
SE
ES
 
BM The School and Continuing Edu- 
cation: Four Studies, 1972 (£1.50, $5). 
WM Systems Approach to Teacher 
Training and Curriculum Develop- 
ment: the case of developing coun- 
tries, by Taher Razik. Unesco-Inter- 
national Institute for Educational 
Planning, 1972 (£1.35, $4.50). 
o 
  
BW English in Africa: a guide to the 
teaching of English as a second 
language with special reference to 
the post-primary school stages, by 
G.P. McGregor. (No. 4 in Unesco 
Source Books on Curricula and 
Methods). Co-edition Heinemann- 
Unesco, London, 1971 (£1.50, $5). 
SCIENCE 
 # Annual Summary of Information 
on Natural Disasters, No. 5, 1970, 
1972 (£1.05, $3.50). 
MB Guide to World Inventory of Sea, 
Lake and River Ice. (No. 9 in Tech- 
nical Papers in Hydrology). Unesco- 
IAHS, 1972 (75p, $2.50) 
Teaching Aids in Hydrology. (No. 
Il in Technical Papers in Hydrology), 
1972 (£1.35, $4). | 
MW The Surveillance and Prediction 
of Volcanic Activity, A review of 
methods and techniques. (No. 8 in 
the series Earth Sciences), 1972 
(£4.20, $14). ) 
LIBRARIES 
BW World Guide to Library Schools 
and Training Courses in Documen- 
tation (composite: English - French). 
Co-edition Clive Bingley-Unesco, : 
London, Paris, 1972 (£3, $9). 
MW Bibliographical Services | 
Throughout the World 1965-1969, 
by Paul Avicenne. (In the series: 
Documentation, libraries and archi- J 
ves: bibliographies and reference 
works), 1972 (£2.10, $7) 
ls a eo a : Sad 
    
UNESGORN 
Transistorized world 
Radio sets in the U.S.A. outnumber the 
population (1,412 sets per 1,000 persons) 
reports the latest edition of the Unesco 
Statistical Yearbook (1). Development of 
the transistor has led to a phenomenal 
spread of radio, particularly in the develop- 
ing countries. In Latin America, radio sets 
number from 370 per 1,000 persons (Argen- 
tina) to 60 per 1,000 (Brazil). In Asia, 
excluding Japan, the proportion ranges from 
224 (Syria) to 14 (Pakistan). Though grow- 
ing fast, rates in Africa are still compa- 
ratively low, ranging from 222 per 1,000 
(Spanish Sahara) to 132 (Egypt and Liberia) 
and only 4 per 1,000 (Zaire). 
(1) 1971 edition, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
75700, Paris; £11.65, $35, 140 F. 
Earthquake mission 
in Nicaragua 
A two-man Unesco mission has gone to 
Managua, Nicaragua's earthquake-stricken 
capital. Dr. Enzo Faccioli, an Italian struc- 
tural engineer, and Dr. Cinna Lomitz of 
Chile, professor of seismology at the 
National University of Mexico, will work 
with the Nicaraguan authorities and a team 
of Mexican engineers and scientists. They 
will help to select the best sites for the 
reconstruction of the city, in terms of 
future earthquake risks. 
Unesco honours 
Byelorussian poets 
Unesco, last November, marked the 
90th anniversaries of the birth of two great 
Byelorussian poets, Yanka Kupala and 
Yakub Kolas, at a ceremony in Paris 
attended by Mr. René Maheu, Director- 
General of Unesco, and Mr. Piotr Abrassi- 
mov, Soviet ambassador to France. Bet- 
ween them Kupala and Kolas were largely 
responsible for the revival of Byelorussian 
literature. The Government of Byelorussia 
has erected a memorial in Minsk, capital 
of the Republic, and has issued two com- 
memorative medallions in their honour, and 
is publishing new editions of their complete 
works. 
Meteorology centenary 
The centenary of the creation of the 
International Meteorological Organization is 
being celebrated this year by the World 
Meteorological Organization under the title 
“IMO-WMOQ Centenary”. Set up in 1951 
As a UN. Specialized Agency, WMO took 
over the functions of IMO, which was 
founded after the First International Meteo- 
rological Congress in Vienna, in 1873. 
Between them, the two organizations have 
worked for 100 years to encourage the 
development and application of meteorology 
as a science and to promote international 
collaboration in meteorology. 
‘Firdausi’ awards 
by Iran and U.S.S.R. 
Iran and the U.S.S.R. have Jointly created 
a number of prizes for outstanding works 
in science, literature and art which contri- 
bute to friendship and mutual understanding 
between the two countries. The awards 
  
  WSRUDN 
are named after Abdul Kasim Firdausi, the 
renowned 10th century poet of Tajiko- 
Persian origin and author of the Persian 
epic “Shah-nama” (see “Unesco Courier”, 
October 1971). The prizes will be awarded 
every two years to two Soviet and two 
Iranian citizens. 
Link for a world 
science data system 
Unesco and France have set up an inter- 
national register of scientific periodicals, 
yearbooks and other serial publications. 
Named the International Serials Data 
System, it is housed at the Bibliothéque 
Nationale in Paris, and forms part of 
Unisist, Unesco's world science information 
system. It will help researchers to locate 
data on senal publications more speedily 
and will set up a network between libra- 
ries, publishers and international organi- 
zations. 
Aid for Venice 
Britain's “Venice in Peril Fund” is paying 
for the restoration of two famous monu- 
ments in Venice: Sansovino's Loggetta 
(the loggia at the base of the Campanile 
in St Mark's Square) and the church of 
San Nicolo dei Mendicoli. Another recent 
contribution to the Unesco-sponsored inter- 
national campaign to save Venice is a fund- 
raising exhibition of original prints contri- 
buted by 123 Italian artists, held in Varese, 
northern Italy. 
Philae hieroglyphics 
to be recorded 
An Austrian Egyptologist, Professor Erich 
Winter, is to record and prepare for 
publication the more than 500,000 hiero- 
glyphic inscriptions on the temples of 
Philae on the Nile. The work has been 
commissioned by the Austrian Government 
as a contribution to the Unesco-sponsored 
international campaign to preserve the 
monuments of Philae, the island inundated 
when the Aswan dam project raised the 
level of the Nile. The buildings are to be 
dismantled and re-assembled on the nearby 
island of Agilkia. 
Flashes 
  
BM A new micro-filming device developed 
in the U.S.A. can record 625 book-sized 
pages on a single sheet of film no bigger 
than one book page. 
BM Two new typefaces (named “Unesco-TI" 
and “Unesco LI") for printing in the Thal 
and Lao alphabets have been developed by 
the Unesco-aided Tokyo Book Development 
Centre. 
BM Asia’s population in 2000 A.D. is expect- 
ed to top 3,500 million (total world popula- 
tion in 1970), according to a U.N. Economic 
Commission for Asia and the Far East 
report. 
MB One third of all books published in the 
Soviet Umon are textbooks, now published 
in 52 of the 100 or so languages of the 
U.S.SR. 
33

## [Page 34](074881engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
  
  
BEAUTY IN BOOKS 
Sir, 
Congratulations on your admirable 
number dealing with the Art of the 
Book and new discoveries of ancient 
treasures in China (December 1972). It 
was of outstanding interest, a pleasure 
to read and a joy to behold. 
L. Dallex 
Paris, France 
ADVENTURE IN MUSIC 
Sir, 
| read with interest your photo report, 
"Art from the Sound of Music” (Nov- 
ember 1972). This method of using 
sound as stimulation for visual creation 
is far from new | practised it with 
emotionally maladjusted children during 
the last war. There was one difference 
in method. Music was played while 
the children painted, and the piece 
repeated as seemed desirable during 
the time they were occupied. 
Results were remarkable in terms of 
colour and rhythm, But most of all to 
be noted was a greater sense of orga- 
nization and control which certainly 
emerged, 
Since that time | have prompted stu- 
dents doing teaching practice with me 
to use the same idea. It would appear 
to produce good, lively, adventurous 
results. 
L.G. Jerromes 
Art Dept., Stroud Girls’ 
High School, U.K. 
ITALY'S "WORKING CLASS’ 
STUDENTS 
Sir, 
Among the extracts from the book, 
“Letter to a Teacher”, published in 
your June 1972 issue, a passage refer- 
ring to Italian university students (pages 
15-16) states: 
“Selection reaches its goal. ‘Daddy's 
boys' constitute 86.5 per cent of the 
university student body; labourers’ sons, 
13.5 per cent. Of those who get a 
degree, 91.9 per cent are young gen- 
tlemen and 81 per cent are from 
working-class families (ltalian Statistical 
Yearbook 1963, tables 113-14)." 
As this refers to figures from surveys 
carried out by Italy's Istituto Centrale 
di Statistica | have to point out that the 
statements made are incorrect, being 
based on misinterpretation and misrep- 
resentation of the data in the relevant 
tables for the 1960/61 academic year. 
In the statistics on first-year univer- 
sity students, the author of “Letter to 
a Teacher” has taken into account, as 
far as the social and economic class 
of fathers are concerned, only sons 
of “lavoratori dipendenti”, blue-collar 
wage-earners (6,301) and unpaid family 
workers (150), totaling 6,451 and 
accounting for 13.5 per cent of the total 
(47,802). He has deduced from this 
that sons of working-class fathers 
account for only 13.5 per cent while 
the rest (85.5 per cent) are “daddy's 
boys”. 
Apart from the unflattering implica- 
tions of the words “daddy's boys" 
—whether in Italy or elsewhere—the 
 
Letters to the Editor  
conclusion is basically false since the 
term working-class must be taken to 
include not only wage-earners but also 
the self-employed, such as craftsmen, 
shopkeepers, owner and tenant-farmers 
and so on, whose sons at university 
number 12,292 and make up 25.7 per 
cent of the total. In other words the 
percentage of students coming from 
working-class families (wage-earners 
and self-employed) in 1960/61 was 39.2 
per cent. 
Even this figure must be regarded as 
an underestimate since the working- 
class should also include certain cate- 
gories of white-collar workers who 
statistically fall into the executives and 
white-collar workers group. Similar 
considerations apply to graduates. 
From these facts and in view of the 
changes that ‘have taken place since 
1960, it is reasonable to assume that 
Italian university students from working- 
class families now account for about 
half the total. This has been confirmed 
by a special survey of first-year uni- 
versity students, also carried out by 
the Istituto Centrale di Statistica. This 
survey shows that in 1967/68 47.3 per 
cent of first-year students belonged to 
working-class families (self-employed, 
wage-earners and unpaid family workers 
combined). 
These comments should correct any 
wrong impression your readers may 
have gained regarding the university 
student situation in Italy. 
Luigi Pinto 
Director-General 
Istituto Centrale di Statistica 
Rome, Italy 
IDEALS AND PRIORITIES 
Sir, 
I read with great interest but also 
with some feeling of displeasure your 
articles on the philosophy of Aurobindo 
and the cultural city of Auroville (Oct- 
ober 1972). 
The efforts for internationalization 
and the spread of culture connected 
with Auroville are commendable; so is 
the design and architecture of the 
majestic “Sphere of Unity”. 
But how much will all this cost? The 
“Unesco Courier” frequently reminds 
us about the problem of world hunger, 
and when | think about the people of 
India and the problems many of them 
have to even subsist, | cannot help 
feeling exasperated by this grandiose 
extravagance. 
| also wonder how many Indians will 
benefit from the cultural influence of 
Auroville when for many the major pre- 
occupation is where the next bow! of 
rice is coming from, 
Mlle Castel 
Nice, France 
ANIMALS IN PERIL 
Sir, 
As an international orgamzation con- 
cerned with the protection of nature 
against the growing dangers of pollu- 
tion, could not Unesco launch a 
campaign to promote action for the 
safeguard of animals and against their 
systematic extermination. There are 
many associations for the protection of 
animals which would join in such a 
concerted effort, and numerous news- 
papers have recently added their voices 
to warn against the increasing threat 
to animal life. 
Despite the opening of parks and 
reserves, the protection of animals is 
still largely theoretical and certainly 
ineffective in Western Europe as in 
other parts of the world. 
Claude Lambert 
Epinal, France 
PEACE IN THE MINDS OF MEN... 
Sir, 
Looking over “A 21-Point Program- 
me for a Global Strategy in Edu- 
cation” (your November 1972 issue), | 
found many references to what can be 
subsumed under the category of know- 
ledge and skills, but not a word about 
attitudes. 
I wish to challenge the educators of 
the world with the question, “Know- 
ledge and skill for what?” Does not 
the great danger of annihilation of the 
human race from war come from the 
highly literate nations with their formid- 
able technology of weapons, including 
guided (or misguided} missiles? Is there 
not a need for better character rather 
than for more knowledge and skill? 
Should we not set our sights on such 
goals as ‘world-mindedness and world 
brotherhood and loyalty to humanity? 
Has Unesco forgotten the slogan of 
its founders—*Since wars begin in the 
minds of men, it is in the minds of 
men that the defences of peace must 
be constructed.” Surely this is a 
matter not only for education but for 
science and culture as well. If we do 
not know how to develop attitudes and 
understanding for peace let us direct 
our scientific resources in that direction. 
Theo. F. Lentz 
Director, St. Louis Peace 
Research Laboratory, U.S.A. 
FROZEN ASSETS 
Sir, 
Why not take eggs and sperm of 
animals and freeze it so that, if a spe- 
cies becomes extinct, it can be brought 
back to life again when we have obtain- 
ed an ecological balance? 
Malcolm Samuel (14) 
Wetherby, U.K. 
UNJUST COMMENTS ? 
Sir, 
As a teacher | was struck by the 
extremely critical assertions in your 
issue devoted to failure in school and 
the social background of students 
(June 1972). Today's teaching system 
is far from perfect and calls for chan- 
ges and adjustments to meet the needs 
of the modern world. But this is no 
reason for openly condemning the 
teaching establishment as a whole 
which, after all, has helped to make 
us what we are. These accusations 
of incompetence and partiality are by 
no means fully justified, but the fact 
that they are publicized by an organi- 
zation which claims to be objective 
gives them all the more force. 
Eliane Audoly 
Blois, France 
 
  Im
p,
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S,
 
— 
Dé
pa
t 
lé
ga
l 
C 
1 
— 
Fé
yr
ie
r 
19
73
 
— 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in
 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 35](074881engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

TWO UNESCO 
CATALOGUES 
OF COLOUR 
REPRODUCTIONS 
® Up-to-date listings of reproductions 
of world-famous works comprising a 
broad international selection. 
i Paintings selected on the basis of 
fidelity of reproduction, significance 
of the artist and the importance of 
the original work. 
M Each painting printed in black and 
white with full details (in English, 
French and Spanish) of the original 
work and of the reproduction (size, 
price, name of publisher). 
 
  
a 
| 
CATALOGUE OF REPRODUCTIONS OF PAINTINGS PRIOR TO 1860 
9th edition, revised and enlarged. Nearly 1,400 paintings listed 
501 pages - $9.50 - £2.85 -38 F 
CATALOGUE OF REPRODUCTIONS OF PAINTINGS 1860 TO 1969 
9th edition, revised and enlarged. Over 1,500 paintings listed 
549 pages - $8.50 - £255 - 34 F 
Where to renew your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
— AUSTRALIA. Publications : Educational Supplies 
Pty. Led, P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; 
Periodicals: Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post 
Office, Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub-agent, United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division 
Sth floor, 134/136 Flinders St, Melbourne 
(Victoria), 3000, ($ Aus 3.60) — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*,Arbercergasse 1-7, 1051, 
Vienna (AS 110). — BELGIUM, “Unesco Courier” 
Dutch edition only : N.Y. Handelmaatschappij 
Keesing, Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. 
(250 F belges). French edition and general Unesco 
publications agent : Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du 
Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 3380.00. — BURMA. Trade. 
Corporation N° (9), 550-552 Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
— CANADA. Information Canada, Ottawa, (Ont.) 
($ 5,00). — CYPRUS. “MAM”, Archbishop Maka- 
rios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia, — 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA, S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 
{permanent display): Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1. For Slovakia only : Alfa Verlag - Publishers, 
Hurbanovo nam. 6, 893 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — 
DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd., 6, Norregade, 
1165, Copenhagen K. (Dan. Kr. 27.00) — EGYPT 
(ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for Unesco 
Publications, N° 1 Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir Square, 
Cairo; Librairie Kase El Nal, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. 
(IL.E. 35). ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box 2996, Addis Ababa.— FINLAND, Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki (Fmk. 13.90). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 7-9, place de Fontenoy, 
75700-Paris. C.C.P. 12598-48 (17 F). — GERMAN 
DEMOCRATIC REP. Deutscher Buch-Export und 
Import Gmbh, Leninstrasse 16, 70! Leipzig. — FED. REP. 
OF GERMANY All publications: Verlag Dokumentation, 
Postfach 148, Jaiserstrasse 13, 8023 Miinchen-Pullach. 
For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) Bahrenfelder- 
Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 
(DM 16). — GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot 
Ltd., P.O. Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd., 
P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape Coast, The 
University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — 
GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — GREECE. 
Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, Athens; Librairie 
Eleftheroudakis, Nikis 4. Athens. — HONG-KONG. 
Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon, — 
HUNGARY. Akadémiai Konyvesbolt, Vici wu. 22, 
Budapest V; A.K.V. Konyvtirosok Boltja, Népkoztirsasig 
utja 16, Budapest VI, — ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson 
& Co., H.F,, Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — INDIA. 
Orient Longman Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard Estate, Bom- 
bay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna 
Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2;B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road, New 
Delhi 1; Sub- Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New 
Delhi: Publications Section, Ministry of Education 
and Youth Services, 72 Theatre Communication 
Building, Connaught Place New Delhi 1. (Rs. 18,75). 
— INDONESIA. Indira P.T., Djl. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 
37, Djakarta. — IRAN. Iranian National Commission 
for Unesco, Avenue Iranchahr Chomali No 300, 
B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, 
Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, Uni- 
versity of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — IRELAND. 
The National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, 
Dublin 4. — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly 
Blumstein’s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street 
Jerusalem. (24 LL.) — JAMAICA. Sangster’s Book Stores 
Ltd.,, P.O. Box 3.., 101 Water Lane, Kingston. — 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd, P.O. Box 5050, Tokyo 
International 100-31(Y {,440).— KENYA. TheE.S.A. Ltd., 
P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — KOREA. Korean National 
Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — 
KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O. Box 
2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA. Cole and Yancy Bookshops 
Ltd.,, P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — LIBYA. Agency for 
Development of Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 34- 
35, Tripoli, — LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. — MALAYSIA. 
Federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, Jalan 
Riong, Kuala Lumpur, — MALTA. Sapienza’s Library, 
26 Kingsway, Valletta. — MAURITIUS, Nalanda Com- 
pany Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis (Rs. 17,45). — 
MONACO. British Library, 30, Bld des Moulins, Monte- 
Carlo, — NETHERLANDS. “Unesco Courier’ Dutch 
edition only : N.V, Internationale Uitgevers-En 
Handelmaatschappij Systemen Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 
71-75, AmsterdamZuid. (fl. 17.50). Agent for all Unesco 
publications : N. V. Martinus Nnhoff, Lange Voorhout, 
9, The Hague. — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. 
G. C. T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant). N, 
V., Willemstad, Curagao. N, A, (NA fl. 7. 80) 
— NEW ZEALAND. Government Printing Office, 
Government Bookshops at : Rutland Street, P.O. Box 
5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, 
Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857, Hamilion: 
Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave 
Street, Private Bag, Wellington (§ 3.00). — NIGERIA 
The University Bookshop of Ife, The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O, Box 284; The University Bookshop of 
Nsukka, The University Bookshop of Lagos. The Ahmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY, All 
publications : Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl 
Johans gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: A.S, 
Narvesens Litteraturtjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6(K,23,00).- 
PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco 
Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O,, Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazaar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree, 
Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad. Pakistan Publications Book- 
shop, Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi. Mirza Book 
Agency 65 Shahrah Quaid-e-azam, P.O. Box 
N°, 729, Lahore-3 — PHILIPPINES. The Modern 
Book Co.,, 926 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 
632, Manila D-404. — POLAND. All publications : 
CRWN PAN Palac  Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw. 
For the Unesco Courier only : RUCH, ul. 
Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Ltda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon (Esc. 105), 
— SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Times 
House, River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOUTHERN 
RHODESIA, Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd, 67 Union 
Avenue, Salisbury, — SRI LANKA. Lake House Book- 
shop, Sir Chittapalam Gardiner Mawata P.OB. 244 
Colombe 2. (Rs 25). — SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications: 
A/B CE. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, 
Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Courier : Svenska FN-Forbundet, Box 150 50, 
$-104 65, Stockholm (Kr. 18). — SWITZERLAND. 
All publications : Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse, 
Zirich. Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, 
Geneva 11, C.CP. 12-236 (Fr. S. 16.-). ~ TAN- 
ZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es- 
Salaam. — THAILAND. Suksapan Panit, Mansicn 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (71.00 baht). — TURKEY. 
Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. 
— UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.C. Box 145, Kampala. 
— SOUTH AFRICA. All publications: Van Schaik’s 
Bookstore (Pty). Led. Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. 
Box 724, Pretoria. For the Unesco Courier (single copies) 
only: Central News Agency P.O, Box 1033, Johannesburg. 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.l.,, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham, Bristol (£1,30).—UNITED STATES. Unetco 
Publications Center, P.O. Box 433, New York, N.Y. 
10016 ($ 5). — UWU.S5.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugosiovensia 
Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zaluzba Slo- 
verije Meseni Trg. 26, Ljubljana,

## [Page 36](074881engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

A graphic example of today’s hard-hitting Cuban revolutionary poster art which 
~ has developed since 1959. Many of Cuba‘s leading painters and graphic artists now 
devote their talents to poster designing. This poster of a rose, a thorn, a drop of blood 
is the work of a young Cuban artist, Alfredo Rostgaard, and was produced for the 
Havana * Festival of Protest Songs in 1967. It was originally made by the artist 
~ in bright and vigorous colours. Here it has been interpreted in duotone. if 
Poster * La Casa de las Americas *'. Havana, Cuba 
 