# [074639](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

5 . 
7% ay * 
- 
4 IN 
Tan 'd ’ — : 
I 
_— : EF - 
“nd 
os 
- 
a a 
ed 
- 
3 
0 b 3 “
=
 » : >»
 
4 
~tl 
~~ CULTURAL 
L 
DANCING 
IMPORTANT 
RAV.  
 
- * 
» 
|] 
» 
- 
- 
a 
A 
i 
e
s
 
i 
¥ 
28 I 
. 
pf
 
a”
 
L
L
 
v&
 
. 
] 
a
 
5 
Ts
 
f
n
 
" 
3 
3 
F
E
 
ey
 
1
h
 
r
s
 
y 
¥ 
>
 
i 
A 
oe
 
J]
 
i 
. 
2
 
’ 
E 
‘ 
i 
> 
> » id 
. 
    Tema § E - o y o € z R 
oo
» © ? 3 5 x 5 
be
 
of
 
VOLUME IV — 
AE ee Sl da 
I), =~ NOVEMBER  
 
aN - 
Tadd JEL   =
 
S
 
\/ 
No. 195 
& 
l
L
 
b
e
 
GR
 
StH 
1 
A
F
Y
T
U
I
R
.
 
ruvl, 
A 
nr TI 
NO. 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
  
i soz Hl i 
EDITORIAL OFFICES : 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kléber, PARIS-16 
* 
Editor-In-Chief : S. M. KOFFLER 
EDITORS 
English edition : R. S. FENTON 
French edition : A. LEVENTIS 
Spanish edition : J. DE BENITO 
* 
All reproductions authorized 
* 
imprimerie GEORGES LANG 
11, rue Curial, Paris. 
  
MC. 51. 1. 54. A, 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) 
costs only S1.50 U.S.* or 5/- or 200 
French Franes. 
Write to our agent in your country 
listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris-16e, 
France. 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana, 
S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos Aires. 
Australia : H.A., Goddard Lid, 255 a 
George Street, Sydney. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27 Gra- 
ben, Vienna 1. 
Barbados : S.P.C.K. Bookshop (Regional 
Office Caribbean Area), Broad Street, 
Bridgetown. 
Belgium : Librairie Encyclopédique, 7, 
rue du Luxembourg, Brussels I 
Bolivia : Libreria Selecciones, Av. 16 de 
Julio 216, Casilla 972, La Paz. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua 
Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio 
de Janeiro. : 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 
551.3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box™222, 
Rangoon. 
Indo-China : K. Chantarith, C.C.R., 
38, rue Van Vollenhoven, Phnom-Penh. 
Canada : English speaking : University 
of Toronto Press, Toronto. French 
speaking : Benoit Baril, 4234, rue de 
la Roche, Montréal 34. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The 
Associated Newspapers of Ceylon, 
Lid, Colombo I. 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 
924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 
9a, 1791, Bogota. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, OReilly 455, 
Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, « Narodni 37, 
Prague 1 } 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6 Norre- 
gade, Copenhagen. 
Ecuador : Casa de la Cultura Ecuato- 
riana, av, Mariano Aguilera 332, 
Casilla 67, Quito. 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan, Four-’ 
nisseur de la Cour, 118, Rue Emad 
el Dine, Cairo. 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
France : Librairie Universitaire, 26, rue 
Soufflot, Paris (5¢). . 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie In- 
ternationale, Athens. 
Hungary + Kultura, P.O.B. 149, Buda- 
pest 62. 
India : Oxford Book and Stationery Co., 
Scindia House, New i. } 
Bombay and South India : Vidya- 
bhavan Granthagar, Chowpatty 
Road, Bombay 7. 
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp and Ce 
NV., Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Israel : Leo Blumstein, Book and Art 
Shop, 35, Allenby Road, Tel Aviv, 
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc., 6 Tori-Ni- 
chome, Nihonbashi, Tokyo. 
Lebanon : Librairie Universelle, Avenue 
des Frangais, Beirut. 
Malaya and Singapore : Peter Chong 
and Ce, P.O. Box 135, Singapore. 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo 
Sierra 16, México D.F. 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout 9, The Hague. 
New Zealand : Whitcombe and Tombs, 
Ltd, G.P.O. Box 1526, Welling‘on. 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 
7, Oslo. : 
Pakistan : Thomas and Thomas, Fort 
Mansions, Frere Road, Karachi 3 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Peru, 
S.A., Giron de la Union, Lima. 
_ Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 
Portugal : Publicacdes Europa-America, 
Ltda, 4 Rua da Barroca, Lisbon. 
Spain : Aguilar S.A. de Ediciones, Juan 
Bravo 38, Madrid. 
Sweden : AB. C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov- 
bokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stock- 
holm 16. 
Switzerland : French speaking cantons : 
Librairie de l'Université, 22-24, rue de 
Romont, Fribourg. German specking 
cantons : Europa Verlag, Rémi- 
strasse, Ziirich. 
Syria : Librairie Universelle, Damascus. 
Thailand : Suksapan Panit, Arkarn 9, 
Raj-Demnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, 
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik's 
Bookstore, Ltd., P.O. Box 7%, 
Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : HM. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.IL 
United States of America : Columbia 
University Press, 2960 Broadway, 
New York. 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacion Cien- 
tifica pura la America Latina, Unesco, 
Bulever Artigas 1320, Montevideo. 
*Outside of the United States, $ 1. 
Signed Ta ITIT-T I$ S12 J {1 
opinions of the authors and do 
not necessarily represent the 
opinions of Unesco or the 
editors of the COURIER. 
_ from 1941 to 1945 has been organized. 
. of great sacrifices, 
  
 
NOVEMBER (951 
Young Yugosiavs greet M. Torres Bodet, Unesco’s Director-general, during his visit to an orphans’ home at 
Zagreb, in the People's Republic of Croatia. 


### 74637: Cultural development on a regional basis

In Belgrade, Ljubljana and Zagreb, M. Torres Bodet sees success of 
CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT ON 
A REGIONAL BASIS 
rawing on the wealth of their individual cultures and traditions, the peoples of Yugoslavia are today making 
D a determined effort to develop the educational, scientific and cultural resources of their country. 
Each of Yugoslavia’s six federated republics, for example, organizes its primary, technical and higher 
schools, its academy of arts and sciences, and its research laboratories, which, while fostering the culture of 
the people they serve, are designed to meet the social and economic needs of modern life. 
This cultural decentralization, which is co-ordinated by the Council for Science and Culture of the Federal 
People’s Republic of Yugoslavia, has been accompanied by a series of measures to make education generally 
available for the bulk of the people, and to provide generous financial allowances for the development of cultural 
institutions. 
When M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of Unesco, visited the cities of Belgrade, Ljubljana and 
Zagreb recently as the guest of the Yugoslav Government, he was able to measure the extent of these efforts 
and appreciate the practical results of the constructive collaboration between Yugoslavia and Unesco. 
Torres BODBET's visit began in Belgrade, seat of the 
M Federal! Government, where the Yugoslav National 
* Commission for Unesco avas set up early this year. 
Severely damaged during the war, and in particular by 
bombing attacks in 1941, the capital of the new Yugoslavia 
is in the process of being rebuilt. On the ramparts of the 
ancient citadel, which down the centuries has occupied a 
strategic site between the rivers Danube and Sava, an exhibi- 
tion commemorating Yugoslavia's resistance and liberation 
It tells, simply and 
effectively, the story of a courageous four vears' struggle 
waged by people who showed themselves capable of the 
greatest sacrifices for the sake of their freedom. 
Belgrade's university, which has always filled an important 
role in the polifical and intellectual life of the country, 
continues to maintain this tradition through the intensive 
studies and research carried out within its walls. It was 
here on September 28 that the Yugoslav National Commis- 
sion for Unesco held its first meeting under its President, 
Professor Sinisa Stankovie. 
Welcoming M. Torres Bodet, Professor Stankovic declared: 
“Our country has joined Unesco because it is inspired by 
a sincere wish to help the development of intellectual co- 
operation between peoples and states. 
“Yugoslavia’s independence and freedom to develop 
according to her own ideas have only been won at the cost 
The maintenance of this independence 
and freedom is-—today more than ever—Yugoslavia's su- 
preme task. , 
“This country has been transformed into an enormous 
workshop to build up a new future; but we are firmgly con- 
vinced that this task will be accomplished above all by 
fighting actively to safeguard and maintain peace. 
“Fighting for peace means fighting for the truth; fighting, 
by education and science, against war psychoses and hate 
among peoples; fighting, in fact, for mutual understanding 
and respect as well as for international collaboration which 
allows the different peoples of the world, great or small to 
"develop freely their own national cultures.” 
At the same meeting, M. Torres Bodet outlined the basic 
rineiples which guide Unesco and the goals towards which 
i works. 
“Unesco takes care not to be guided in its actions by a 
philosophy of uniformity”, he said. “It is not the expres- 
sion of any one faith, or mode of thought, or way of civil- 
ization. It is rather an ensemble of means of action for 
realizing cerlain practical aims. These aims—peace and 
general prosperity—and these means—the development of 
education, science and culture through international collabora- 
tion-—correspond to some of the deepest aspirations of the 
peoples. : 
INCREASING LIFE’S VALUE 
{1 p= or who, indeed, would not desire to dwell in security. 
F improving by means of intellectual and moral co- 
operation the conditions in which they live? It is 
then, only with these aims in view, and by means 
such as these, which are common to all mankind, setting 
aside particular ideologies, that Unesco carries on its work. 
On the other hand, the universalist character of its missions 
is clearly not to be denied. 
“If I were to sum up the programme of Unesco in a few 
words, I should sav that it aims at increasing the value of 
human life through educativn, science and culture. 
«Secondly, as man cannot live in isolation, it seeks to 
assist every couniry’s progres awards a better way of life 
through the augmented capacities of fully-educated citizens. 
“And lastly, taking into account the dependence of one 
country upon another, which makes collective isolation as 
impossible and suffocating as individual solitude, Unesco 
tries to create or develop the intellectual and moral con- 
ditions of international collaboration in peace, mutual assist- 
ance, the liberty of the peoples, and equality of rights.” 
During his two days’ stay in the capital. M. Torres Bodet 
was received by Marshal Tito; Mr. Edvard Kardelj, Foreign 
Minister: Mr. Rodoljub Kolakovie, President of the Federal 
Council for Science and Culture, and other leading figures 
in the political and cultural life of the nation, fhcluding 
M Viadislav Ribnikar, a member of Unesco's Executive 
oard. 
M. Torres Bodet then travelled to Ljubljana, capital of the 
People’s Republic of Slovenia and a city which is proud both 
of its rich cultural heritage and of the advanced stage of 
industrialization it has reached. This modern progress has 
been aided by the work of the city’s institute of technology 
—visited by the Director-General-—whose laboratories have 
contributed to the economic and social progress of the whole 
country. 
Yugoslavia's reconstruction and progressive industriaii- 
zation has created a need for a growing army of specialized 
workers. This is a problem which the institutes of techno-, 
logy, whose numbers have greatly increased since the war, 
are helping to solve. 
Unesco has already turned its attention to this acute 
problem, a partial solution for which may be found by the 
setting up under the Technical Assistance Programme of a 
modern documentation centre and a scientific library in 
Yugoslavia. 
During his visit to Ljubljana, Unesco's Director-General 
was welcomed by Mr. Boris Ziherl, President of the Council 
for Science and Culture in the Slovene People’s Republic. 
He also visited an exhibition commemorating the 400th anni- 
versary of the printing of the first Slovene Book. 
INTERNATIONAL CONTACTS 
XN the City of Zagreb the Director-General visited the Aca- 
demy of Arts and Science, set up by the Croat people in 
the middle of the 19th century. From ils very founda- 
tion this institution played, in the field of culture and 
literature. a leading part in the liberation and political uni- 
fication of the Yugoslav peoples, and today it continues to 
hold a vital place in the intellectual life of Croatia. 
Under its aegis, a series of institutes and laboratories to 
carry out specialized work of direct importance to the 
industrial and economic development of the country has 
been set up since 1943. 
Visits to the Institute which carries out research into 
problems of workers’ health, as well as to the Physics 
Institute of the Unjversity, showed the Director-General the 
important part which Croatia can play in the service of the 
Yugoslav peoples. Similarly, in the Zagreb Academy, the 
Croat people, have a modern centre of artistic and cultural 
life. One of the best examples of the vitality of this present 
day culture is the work of the great sculptor Mestrovic. 
Many of his sculptures are to be found in Zagreb's Museum. 
Allied to the effort awhich Yugoslavia is making to build 
its new social order is a firm wish to co-operate inter- 
rationally. Yugoslav intellectual circles attach the greatest 
importance to the contacts and intellectual exchanges which 
Cnesco can help to establish in all its fields of aclivity. 
Already they are participating in the work of several 
organizations set up undér Unesco's auspices such as the 
International Theatre Institute and the Internalional Council 
of Museums. Yugoslavia is turning more and more to 
Unesco for help and technical advice. In this connection 2 
mission of experts mayv be sent to assist in the restoration - 
of one of the most ancient and noble monuments of medieval 
Yugoslavia—the church of St. Sophia in Macedonia. 
Yugoslavia's scientists, scholars and men of letters are 
clearly showing their wiliingness to associate themselves 
with all Unesco's efforis which can contribute directly to 
the maintenance of peace and the development of inter- 
national understanding.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### 74637: Cultural development on a regional basis

NOVEMBER 195! 
YUGOSLAVIA'S UNIVERSITIES AR 
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
E GUARDING 
TRADITIONS WHILE SERVING MODERN NEEDS 
hroughout centuries of in- 
vasion and oppressive outside 
influences, the peoples of 
Yugoslavia have retained a deep 
attachment for their own (tra- 
ditions, languages and cultures. 
The history of their universities 
is a reflection of this struggle 
between culture and war, which 
might easily be symbolized in the 
story of the first Yugoslav 
printing works. Shortly after 
this was set up at Cettinje in 1493, 
the town was attacked by the 
Turks —and the people of Cettinje 
had to melt down the type to make 
ammunition. 
If, even in recent times, Yugo- 
slavia had an unduly high illiteracy 
rate, this was probably because its 
inhabitants were more often called 
upon to take up arms to defend 
their country than to study and 
“work for its development. But, 
even after the worst devastation, 
they have always found strength 
and courage to rebuild on the 
ruins. 
Nowadays, the Yugoslav univer- 
sities can at last fulfil the aims of 
those who founded them and then 
“often fought hard to keep them 
in existence. They link respect 
for the rich cultural traditions of 
each republic with the task of 
instructing men and women in the 
modern techniques of which the’ 
nation has need. 
Success has meant valiant effort 
and heavy sacrifices. After the 
second world war, it was not only 
the universities of Yugoslavia that 
-had to be reconstructed, but its 
entire schooling system for 
eighty per cent of the schools had 
been destroyed. Now, not only 
the universities have been rebuilt, 
but many new institutes of higher 
studies have been set up. 
Before the war, there were three 
universities in Yugoslavia, with 21 
faculties and eight centres for 
higher education. Now there are 
five universities, with 42 faculties 
and 25 attached centres. The 
number of students has risen 
from 17,734 in 1938 to 60,000 in 
1950. 
Shut by an empire 
study of the history of 
Yugoslav universities shows 
that they have some common 
characteristics. The oldest, which 
~ were founded by the religious 
orders, had to fight for centuries to 
maintain their right to teach in 
their own languages. Those most 
recently established are constantly 
trying to link traditional studies 
—>philosophy, theology, law—with 
technical instruction. 
The University of Ljubljana, 
founded by the Jesuits in 1595, is 
the country’s oldest. Originally 
confined to faculties of theology 
and philosophy, it was not until 
the setting up of the Illyrian Pro- 
vinces (1809-13) that it began to 
extend. It was in this period that 
the “central schools” first came 
into being. A period of general 
instruction was substituted for 
philosophy, and this was followed 
by four or five years of higher 
studies. Later, when the *“se- 
condary school” was separated 
from the “academy”, a university 
in the real sense of the word was 
formed, with five faculties : philo- 
sophy, natural sciences, medicine, 
law and theology. 
But, after the fall of Napoleon, 
Slovenia once again was incor- 
porated into the Austro-Hunga- 
rian Empire, and the higher 
studies of the University of Ljub- 
Ijana were cut down to what they 
had been before the French ré- 
‘gime. In 1848, despite Slovene 
pleas for a university in their 
capital, the imperial government 
closed Ljubljana’s schools of 
higher studies, and education was 
concentrated in the German- 
language areas. The fight for the 
setting up of a Slovene university, 
however, continued right up to the 
end of imperial domination. In 
1919, after the collapse of the Cen- 
tral Powers, the Slovene univer- 
sity got back its prerogatives, with 
four faculties (philosovhy, law, 
technical instruction and the- 
ology), and a school of medicine. 
Reconstructed and re-organized 
after the second world war, the 
university of Ljubljana now has 
four faculties : philosophy, natu- 
ral sciences and mathematics, law 
and economics. The technical fa- 
culty has become an institute of 
technical studies with six facul- 
ties : architecture, civil engineer- 
ing, electrical engineering, ma- 
chine construction, chemistry, 
mines and metallurgy. The faculty 
of medicine is divided into two fa- 
culties : medicine and stomatology. 
Autonomous institutes, outside the 
university, have taken over instruc- 
tion formerly given by the faculties 
of theology, agriculture and forest- 
ry. Its scope therefore is very va- 
ried, but its modern techniques 
have not meant any lessening of 
respect for Slovene traditions and 
culture. 
State aids 60 per cent 
fter Ljubljana, Zagreb is the 
Al oldest of Yugoslavia’s uni- 
versities. It was in 1632 
that the Jesuits started to 
widen the scope of their Zagreb 
school by adding theology and 
philosophy to the curriculum. 
On September 23, 1669, the 
Emperor Leopold I accorded the 
rights and privileges of an inde- 
pendent university to the Academy 
of Zagreb—privileges already en- 
joyed by those of Cologne and 
Prague. This meant the rector 
had the right to confer the degrees 
of doctor, licentiate and bachelor, 
and that these degrees would be 
recognized elsewhere. But, in 
practice, the university could only 
partly avail itself of these rights. 
In 1773, at the suppression of 
the Jesuits, the Academy of Za- 
greb was placed under the autho- 
rity of a bishop. Three years la- 
ter, the Academy of Sciences was 
set up by order of the Empress 
  
Maria Theresa. In 1848, however, 
this Academy of Sciences was sup- 
pressed, and the Faculty of Phi- 
losophy dissolved. Only the Facul- 
ty of Law continued to function, 
as an independent juridical acade- 
my, and from 1853 to 1860 lec- 
tures were given in German. It was 
not until 1874 that a university 
was established again in Zagreb, 
with three faculties : philosophy, 
theology and medicine. 
Today, the University of Zagreb 
has ten faculties, compared with 
seven before the war. The number 
of students has risen from 6,436 
in 1939 to 16,000 in 1950. Sixty 
per cent are assisted by State 
grants, and the annual influx of 
new students is such that the 
building of a vast university city 
has been undertaken. 
Respect for diversity 
elgrade University was, at its 
B origin, a secondary school in 
Kragujevac. Founded in 
1838, it was transferred to Bel- 
grade in 1841. In 1863 it became 
a centre for higher education with 
three faculties (philosophy, law 
and technical instruction) and in 
1905 it was designated as Belgrade 
University. Of all the Yugoslav 
universities Belgrade suffered most 
in the second world war. Out 
of 174 institutes, seminaries and 
laboratories, 72 were completely 
destroyed, while another 58 lost 
half their installations and col- 
lections. 
It was largely thanks to the ef- 
forts of the students themselves 
that the University of Belgrade 
has since, not only been recon- 
structed, but also enlarged. Once 
again, the need to expand and to 
facilitate studies and technical re- 
search has led to wide changes in 
its structure. In 1948, the tech- 
nical faculty was separated from 
the University and made into a 
higher education centre which 
ranks as a university. It is com- 
posed of the faculties of architec- 
ture, civil engineering, electrical 
engineering, machinery construc- 
tion, mines and technology, geolo- 
gy. Today the faculties of medi- 
cine, pharmacology and stomato- 
logy are being reorganized, and 
will soon be formed into a School 
of Medical Studies. Over 25,000 
  
 
  
students now attend the Univer- 
sity. 
The reform of the old Yugoslav 
universities, which was under- 
taken at the same time as their’ 
postwar reconstruction, answered 
the need for extending and improv- 
ing the technical instruction that 
they could give. It is this same 
need that has led to the foundation 
of new universities, and the estab- 
lishment in each of the Yugo- 
slav republics of an independent 
cultural centre. Thus, in the same 
way as Ljubljana is the Slovene 
University, Zagreb the Croat Uni- 
versity, and Belgrade the Serbian 
one, so Skoplje is the University 
Centre of Macedonia, and Sarajevo 
that of Bosnia — each of them 
deeply steeped in the traditions and 
cultural lives of the people they 
serve. Respect for this diversity 
has also led the Yugoslav Govern- 
ment to set up schools for many 
linguistic minorities. Thus, Ru- 
manian, Czech and Slovak children 
living in Yugoslavia receive in- 
struction in their own languages. 
Entry will be difficult 
he progressive elimination of 
n illiteracy and the economic 
progress made by the country 
have caused a number of students 
to increase three-fold since the 
war, thus raising serious problems. 
Entry to the universities, there- 
fore, will shortly become. .more dif- 
ficult, and examinations will aim 
more and more at restricting en- 
try to those who show themselves 
most likely to benefit from the 
instruction. 
These then are Yugoslavia’s uni- 
versities. Built and maintained 
over the centuries with courage 
and perseverance, rebuilt or newly 
established despite every diffi- 
culty, they show the attachment 
of their founders to their own 
cultures. Since the last war, the 
enthusiam which has led teach- 
ers and students to join their 
efforts in constructing—sometimes 
with their own hands—Ilaborator- 
ies and libraries, university cities 
and faculty buildings, is further 
proof of the courage and faith 
with which the Yugoslavs are 
making their ancient country into 
a modern one. 
  
  
 
Medical students listen as Professor Andrija Stampar, President of the Faculty of Medicine at Zagreb and President of the 
Yugoslav Academy of Science and Art in Zagreb, gives a lecture in the University of Zagreb.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 
FOLKLORE 
EVENT 
UGOsLAVIA is one of the few European countries 
where folklore is not something to be revived 
on special occasions, but a prominent feature 
of everyday life. 
The Yugoslav villager considers it quite normal 
to sing or dance over his daily joys and sorrows. 
He can express his joie de vivre in humorous 
dances, work dances, miming dances, his unhappi- 
ness in combined song-dances. He can display his 
vigour in the so-called “deaf” or “mute” dances, 
which have no musical accompaniment, 
NOVEMBER 1951 
IS AN EVERYDAY 
IN YUGOSLAVIA 
by Georges Fradier 
shuttle. Then there is the sostarska, which imi- 
tates the shoe repairer as he sews, drills and drives 
in the nails. In Macedonia, the metalworker is 
represented in a dance which shows the cleaning 
of copperware with the feet before it is tinplated. 
The work of the farm has also inspired the 
poetry of the dance. Six singing youngsters drag- 
ging a plough which bears a couple of festooned 
pine trees will pretend to dig three furrows in 
is stripped from a birch tree in a ceremony honour- 
ing the spirit of Spring. 
The origin of the ritual dances goes back into 
the distant past, and in certain cases — such as 
the rusalia—they are a reminder of pagan 
cults. Some still bear traces of ancient customs 
which called for sacrifices. 
No people and no era is without its romantic 
dances. The Yugoslavs have their wedding dances, 
which imitate the ceremony and the preparations 
for it, and the young bride going to her new home. 
But all these vary widely froin 
one region to another. Yugo- 
slavia’s cultural heritage has 
come under Greek, Turkish, even 
Russian influences; yet, the na- 
tional obstacles which her moun- 
tains present have, to a large 
extent, resulted in each area 
retaining its own original and 
different folklore. 
Musical traditions in the towns 
for instance, are quite different 
from those in the country. Urban 
folklore is mainly homophonic, 
while that of the rural areas is 
polyphonic. These local va- 
riations are also found in dance 
steps. In the mountains, where 
the shepherds are usually alert, 
their dancing is nimble. In the 
plains, it is more *“heavy’— 
nearer to the soil, so to speak. 
Serene, tenacious 
HE Yugoslavs, it is said, are 
| serene and tenacious: cer- 
tainly these qualities are 
reflected in the oro dances. 
These dances will often have a 
sung accompaniment, which can 
vary from plaintive chants to 
(what is more usual) the most 
joyful of rhythms. At other 
times, musical accompaniment is 
played on instruments made by 
the peasants with tools they use 
in their daily work—flutes and 
drums in Bosnia and Hercego- 
vina, gusle violins in Monte- 
negro, gajde bagpipes in Croatia. 
The art of making these instru- 
ments has been handed down 
from father to son. But changes 
INTERNATIONAL MUSIC COUNCIL WILL ISSUE 
‘GUIDE BOOK" FOR LOVERS OF FOLK MUSIC 
I NTEREST in folk music is becoming increasingly widespread. ‘While some people find 
in it something of the spirit of life in pre-industrial times, others are attracted 
by the musical richness of folk melodies from which so many modern composers 
have drawn inspiration. 
Though they cannot be classed directly with the concert-going public, such people do, 
however, represent the strongest group of opponents to mass produced melodies and 
pseudo-jazz. 
Never satisfied with their own often too arbitrarily defined national folklore, these 
enthusiasts feel the urge to explore the wider avenues of the world's musical folklore. 
They like, for example, to compare a Scottish song with one from Iceland, or a French 
ballad with a chant from the Russian steppes. Yet, in their desire to come closer to the 
things that attract them, they meet with all sorts of difficulties, 
Today one rarely comes across collections of folk music, and those that exist generally 
cover a few selected areas or are intended only for specialists. Moreover their authen- 
ticity is by no means assured. In any case the writing down of folk songs presents 
many problems, especially svhen their essential characteristics lie in the vocal inflexions 
of the singer. Yet, despite such difficulties, the International Music Council is publishing, 
with Unesco’s help, an international collection of this type of music compiled by leading 
specialists, which should be especially useful for the teaching of folk music in schools. 
As a teaching aid, however, no bock or published text can replace a recording of 
authentic folk music. The value of these records. unfortunately, varies considerably, 
and it is generally impossible for the public to verify their genuineness. 
It is true that valuable work is being done by such institutes as the Library of Congress 
in the United States, le Musée d'Ethnographie in Switzerland, and the Musée de 'Homme - 
in France. Up to the present, however, no international authority has ever offered to 
provide lovers of folk music with a complete and accurate catalogue. 
This situation is now to be changed by a recent decision of the International Music 
Council. At its conference at Opatija, in Yugoslavia, the Council decided to compile a 
catalogue of all authentic folk music recordings made to date both by commercial com- 
panies and scientific institutions, 
Unesco is supporting this initiative, avhich complements its own past work in this 
field. Under the Organization's auspices, for example, the International Music Council 
is publishing a World Collection of Recorded Folk Music, the first album of which was 
received with enthusiasm by experts at the Opatija conference. 
Others deal with courtship, affec- 
tion and elopement. 
War, too, is an inevitable 
theme. A favourite dance recalls 
the exploits of a princely hero. 
Another, probably dating from 
the 16th century, tells of Turkish 
raids into Croatia, and is a form 
of defiance against the con- 
queror. 
The kolo, which originated in 
the centre of Serbia—so rich in 
folklore—is the most widely 
known dance, although its steps 
vary greatly in the different pro- 
vinces and villages. But the kolo, 
like another Yugoslav dance, the 
lessé, always remains a collective 
dance. 
In each of these, the leader 
plays an important réle—and, in 
Macedonia, an indispensable one. 
It is he who starts and finishes 
the dance, and orders the change- 
over from one movement to an- 
other, like the leader of a quad- 
rille. He may separate himself 
from the others to perform spe- 
cial steps; for he is not only the 
best dancer, but also a person of 
note, worthy of this honour and 
the responsibility it brings. 
The extraordinary vitality of 
the Yugoslav dance-—-the most 
expressive and richest form of 
a centuries-old culture—surprised 
foreign visitors at the recent 
Opatija festival. Every Yugo- 
slav republic chose . from the 
remotest villages the" groups 
which were considered most 
worthy to represent their art. 
More than 700 men, women and 
are creeping in: instead of using these instruments, 
more and more people now go to the shops in the 
towns to buy accordeons. 
The Yugoslav dances to express the most varied 
of emotions or circumstances. Sometimes his 
dances are transformed into pantomimes, with 
humorous digs at the individual or at people in 
general. Drunkenness and laziness are typical sub- 
jects for this satire in dance which easily becomes 
a play or comedy. 
An infinite variety of dances deal with his many 
crafts. In Slovenia, for instance, he likes the 
thalecka polka, a survival of the weavers’ country 
fetes. A handkerchief which the dancers pass 
underneath their knees represents the weavers 
front of a house, and wish the owner of the house 
good luck and an abundant harvest. Evil spirits 
of winter, darkness and illness flee before the 
youthful strength of the “ploughmen,” who repre- 
sent the good spirits of spring, light and health. 
In Serbia, masked dancers perform magic rites 
called koleda, as they dance around platters contain- 
ing the products of the soil to frighten off evil. 
‘Magic’ is dying out 
uT Yugoslavia’s magic and ritual dances, which 
B are reserved for special feasts, appear to be 
dying out, although they have lost nothing of 
their liveliness and freshness. In Slovenia, for 
instance, during the ritual dance of St. George, bark 
children took part in the festival, which was 
acclaimed by the critics as something of un- 
forgettable beauty and passionate interest. 
To preserve their artistic traditions in all their 
true anthenticity, every village has its own folk- 
lore group, while the youth societies and the trade 
unions have brought together over 50,000 dancers 
in the towns. There are also professional groups. 
In Yugoslavia, folk dancing therefore is not just 
something reserved for special occasions. It has 
kept its vitality, fostered by the creative imagina- 
tion of the people. It is something that is spon- 
taneous and improvised. There can be few 
countries where folklore has such enthusiastic 
support. 
  
AFTER 500 YEARS, 
MOSLEM WOMEN 
YUGOSLAVIA NOW 
SHED THEIR VEILS 
Since the end of the war, social legislation in 
Yugoslavia has been progressively aimed at 
removing inequalities in status between men and 
women. This year, the promulgation of a law 
abolishing the wearing of the veil by Moslem 
IN women was an important step in efforts to 
help these women to take a more active part in 
the social and economic life of the country. 
Whole districts of Bosnia-Hercegovina and of 
Macedonia are completely Moslem in culture 
and population. These peoples, however, are 
not a Turkish minority left behind after 500 
years of Ottoman rule, but the descendants of 
Southern Slavs who embraced Islamism during 
 
this period. The effect of this law prohibiting 
the wearing of veils-—a custom which has set 
Yugoslav Moslem women apart for some 500 
years — is illustrated above in the photographs 
of one woman member of the country’s 1,600,000 
Moslem people. Until this year, Miss Hanka 
Zeko, village school teacher at Katcharevo, in 
the province of Kosmet, had to wear the 
faredjia or veil whenever she went out (1). 
After the passing of the Government decree, 
Miss Zeko, without her veil for the first time, 
gives a geography lesson in the classroom (2), 
and leads playtime games 
courtyard beside the minaretted mosque (3). 
in the school

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

NOVEMBER 1951 Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
    
 Te he TN nF. rl Cini ) 
- —— ¢ - 
-~ - NN at Hd, . 
ER ARNEFE Wr PSR Ee Soa) xis 
A young man joins village girls from Macedonia in na struga ducan, one of the most popular dances of this region. 
  
    
  
- ” -— | 
     
- net pg i. 
SES SY TY ay uh 
ATI Sadr a ih + Na ad en 
Lightness characterizes this dance performed by the Rumanian minority. 
F
l
 
S
e
d
 
é 
’ 
s
h
i
e
d
 
hy
, 
4 
= 
Sa
u 
S
F
 
[
V
5
 
a
g
 
a 
S
S
 
. - “2% 
=
.
 
  
The Slavonic kolo is a colourful round dance full of movement. The tchifte tchantche is a popular dance in Bitolj.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 74643: Libya: the United Nations helps a new state to prepare for independence

L | 
  
THE UNITED NATIONS HELPS A NEW STATE 
TO PREPARE FOR INDEPENDENCE 
NEW nation will be born on Jan- 
uary 1, 1952, when the three pro- 
vinces of a former Italian colony 
will be united as the independent State 
of Libya — the first country in history 
to be created by a world organization. 
Since World War II, Cyrenaica and 
Tripolitania have temporarily been 
administered by the United Xingdom 
and the Fezzan by France. The future 
status of the three regions was finally 
settled in November 1949, when the 
United Nations General Assembly, without 
a dissenting vote, recommended that 
Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan 
“shall be constituted an independent, 
sovereign State.” 
Politically, Libya is well on the road to 
shouldering the responsibilities of State- 
hood. A provisional government was 
established by the Libyan National 
Assembly in March, 1951. This Assembly 
also recommended that Sayed Mohamed 
Idriss El Sennusi, the Amir of Cyrenaica, 
should become the constitutional monarch 
of the new country, the United Kingdom 
of Libya. 
But national viability requires more 
than a pelitical constitution. Mr. Adrian 
Pelt, who has been United Nations 
Commissioner in Libya since January 
1950, has continually emphasized that 
the United Nations has an equally great 
responsibility in providing Libya with 
the technical assistance it needs to 
develop a sound economy and set up 
efficient governmental machinery. 
The immensity of this task is express- 
ed in his reports. The three regions of 
Libya total 1,150,000 inhabitants living on 
1,750,000 square kilometres, but much of 
this lang is desert. The country’s 
average per capita income is a mere- 
$35 a year. 
Mr. Pelt summed up Libya as 
r 
“an 
  
underdevelcped area with a marginal 
agricultural economy, basically handi- 
capped by inadequate rainfall and poor 
soil.” Irrigation, dry farming, and 
animal husbandry in the coastal regions, 
however, can support Libya once she 
possesses the knowledge and skills needed 
to work land in these regions efficiently. 
This need raises serious educational 
problems. From 1942 to 1946, no schools 
were open in Libya. Even today, the 
elementary school population of the 
entire region is only 39,000 (and no more 
than a few hundred children attend 
secondary schools). Mr. Pelt reported that 
Libya’s minimum requirement is school- 
ing for 100,000. 
This deficiency, coupled with antiquat- 
ed agricultural methods and heavy war 
damage, led him to write: "Unless means 
are found to improve the agricultural 
techniques of the country and to bring 
in new capital investment, there is a 
grave danger that the Libyan economy 
will sink back toward a pastoral economy 
of nomadism, with inevitable social and 
political consequences which may jeo- 
pardise the very existence of the State.” 
In July 1950, at Mr. Pelt’s request, a 
United Nations mission surveyed Libya 
to ascertain in what ways the United 
Nations Expanded Programme of Tech- 
nical Assistance for Economic Develop- 
ment could help the creation of the new 
State. On the recommendations of this 
mission, a programme was drawn up 
showing the means by which the United 
Nations and its Specialized Agencies 
could begin furnishing aid. 
This called for international experts to 
begin work in Libya in such fields as 
public finance, education, agriculture, 
viticulture, irrigation, wool production, 
electric power and social welfare. 
Free elections were a novel experience for the people of Libya, some of whom are 
shown here in animated discussidn during polling at Tobruk (Cyrenaica). About 
80 per cent of Cyrenica's townsmen and 66 per cent of tribesmen voted. 
A meeting of the National Assembly of Libya, taking place un 
Asa'd Al Alem. The three territories are represented equally, 
A study of public finance in Libya has 
already been published, and the United 
Nations experts are now advising on 
specific problems. In the field of vital 
statistics, a sample census of three 
selected tribes has been conducted, thus 
giving the region reliable demographic 
statistics — a prerequisite for any sound 
economic development plan. 
In the field of education, Unesco was 
given a specialized réle. Working in 
co-operation with the British administra- 
tion of Tripolitania, it has set up a 
technical training centre to prepare 
young Libyans for posts in the new 
government. 
This centre, in which 230 students 
were enrolled during its first year of 
operation, does not aim much higher 
than supplying the foundations — the 
clerks, the typists and the secretaries — 
needed for an efficient civil service. 
Unesco is also awarding fellowships to 
enable Libyans to study abroad and 
prepare themselves for higher adminis- 
trative posts in their country’s new 
government. 
In addition, Unesco has begun to 
establish another centre in Libya design- 
ed to train primary school teachers and 
to produce the teaching materials they 
require. This centre is also intended to 
furnish specialized personnel to attack 
the problem of illiteracy, of which Libya 
has a high percentage. 
In all, more than sixty experts have 
been sent to Libya by the United Nations 
and its Agencies and nearly 50 fellowships 
and scholarships have been awarded. 
This aid has been described by 
Mr. Pelt as “one of the most constructive 
and most useful examples” of how the 
United Nation’s technical assistance 
programme for underdeveloped regions 
can operate. 
 
A citizen of the new United Kingdom of Libya. 
This Tuareg from Fezzan wears the litham or 
shawl muffler, which is wound round the mouth 
to keep out the blown sand of the desert. 
der the chairmanship of the Mufti of Tripoli, Mohammed Abdul 
each by 20 delegates: the Cyrenaicans at left, theTripolitanians 
at right and the Fezzanese in the foreground. 
 
“RR Bae. 18 & 
black races. 
  
  Sab IN EEE E— 
' oy Es i 
INE LE- ee 
EErPIIE RN ! 
} 
fr 
_-_ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
d Tak 
» 4 . 
’ - 
’ bed 
/ a TT 
~~ ! 2 
/ a 
/ 
~ ] Jisis 8 A 
 
FEZZAN 
Greatest area, fewest people 
HE Fezzan is bounded on the west by southern 
Algeria, southern Tunisia and Tunisia, on the 
south by French West Africa and French Equa- 
torial Africa, on the east by Cyrenaica and on the north 
by Tripolitania. It is a vast depression, with an area 
of some 800,000 square kilometres, enclosed within pla- 
teaux which isolate it from the sea-—some 500 to 600 kilo- 
metres distant—and from the neighbouring lands. 
Within the depression lie three oases—Sebha, Brak and 
Murzak—around which is grouped the non-migratory 
population. Widely scattered and thinly planted 
palm groves are also to be found in the Zelaf. . 
The population of the Fezzan is estimated at 50,000, 
of which one-fifth are nomads or semi-nomads. The 
non-migratory population is found within the depres- 
sion; on its fringe and beyond live the nomadic or semi- 
nomadic peoples. In the north these are tribes of fair- 
skinned stock with a strong Berber influence. In the 
south, in the foothills of the Tibesti and in all the area 
as far as Fort Lamy, Tebbous of Hamitic origin are to 
be found. In the Tassili, in the west, there are sections 
of the Berber Confederation of the Tuareg-Adjer, who 
are scattered between Timbuctoo and Nigeria. 
Ethnically, the non-migratory population of the 
interior is mixed, containing elements of both fair and 
They live among palm trees, cultivating 
wheat, dates, barley, millet and sorghum. This popu- 
lation can be divided into two groups; three-quarters 
are very poor, deriving their livelihood from the harsh 
and unremitting labour with which they irrigate small 
lots of land; the remaining quarter might be described 
as the middle class of the country, living in relative ease. 
These are the landowners, traders and officials. 
The subsistence economy of the Fezzan, based upon 
an oasis palm-garden culture, is handicapped by the 
difficulty of obtaining water and by primitive methods 
of irrigation and cultivation. The depressed economic 
situation is reflected in the under-nourishment of the 
population and the annual emigration, which further 
aggravates the problem of manpower. 
The chief resource of the Fezzan is the date palm. 
Estimates of their number vary considerably, but most 
of them are wild and uncultivated, and it is probable 
that not more than 1,000,000 date palms are product- 
ive. The date crop, of about 15,000 tons annually, 
is in excess of local needs, and the surplus is bartered 
for oil and barley with the nomads or exported by cara- 
van or lorry. The poor quality of the crop, together 
with the transport cost to markets, limits its export 
value. Local production of grain is insufficient to 
meet the requirements of the population and must be 
supplemented by imports. The meagre grazing sup- 
ports few animals. 
In the three principal valleys of the Fezzan, a water 
table of varying depth makes it possible to increase the 
area of irrigated land, either by open wells in the areas 
where the phreatic folds are near the surface or by 
flowing wells from the artesian level. Open wells, in 
the present stage of technical development, can only 
be exploited by traditional methods, efforts to introduce

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 74643: Libya: the United Nations helps a new state to prepare for independence

  
  
     
petroleum pumps having proved a failure. Artesian 
wells, which do not require the labour of men and beast, 
not only relieve the pressure on the utilization of man- 
power, but also provide for a greater area of irrigable 
land in proportion to expenditure. 
The condition of the serf-like jebbad or drawer of 
water, bound by a system of contracts to the proprietor 
and receiving only a share of the harvest, has been pro- 
gressively improved during the French administration, 
The lot of the jebbad and the entire population can be 
improved by the further distribution of newly irrigated 
lands, continued supervision of the harvesting and stor- 
age of crops and maintenance of the security of the 
non-migratory population against raids by nomads. 
The only known mineral resource of commercial value 
is natron (sodium carbonate), the annual export of 
which is less than 100 tons. There is no industry; 
rudimentary handicrafts have only limited local import- 
TRIPOLITANIA 
Main asset — farming 
HE existing administrative division between Tripo- 
litania and the Fezzan was agreed between France 
and the United Kingdom for the duration of the 
occupation of Libya. Tripolitania, by this definition, 
extends over some 250,000 square kilometres between 
Tunisia and Cyrenaica. The greater part of its area is 
desert. The widely settled parts of Tripolitania consist, 
first of the narrow coastal belt of oases between Misu- 
rata and Zuara, which contains 60 per cent of the popu- 
lation of the territory, and, secondly, of the northern 
edge of the Jebel, a broken plateau running north-east 
from the Tunisian frontier to Homs, where it intersects 
the coastal belt. The Jebel is separated from the coast- 
al area by a wedge of steppe, and south and west of 
the Jebel this merges into semi-desert and desert country 
suitable only for pastoralism and the shifting cultivation 
of barley. The total area of productive land varies 
with the annual rainfall, but only about 1.6 per cent of 
the total area is devoted to static farming. This area 
is, however, generally well-watered and offers a fertility 
in striking contrast to the greater part of Libya. 
The population of Tripolitania is estimated at 800,000. 
The indigenous population, numbering about 730,000, 
. is Arab with a considerable admixture of Berbers, of 
whom some groups in the western part of the country 
have retained their distinction of community and their 
language, and continue to follow the schismatic Ibadite 
rite. Arabs and Berbers live amicably together in spite 
of past differences. All are Moslems; the religious 
followers of the Senussi Order have been estimated at 30 
per cent of all Moslems. } 
The urban population is about 165,000. Some 105,000 
Moslems live in the towns, mainly engaged in handi- 
crafts and small trade. Most of the rural population 
are settled farmers living in the coastal oases and in the 
Jebel. Semi-nomads are numerous, both in the Jebel 
and in the steppe areas bordering the oases. Inasmuch 
as many of the non-migrating population combine 
pastoralism and shifting cereal cultivation with static 
farming during parts of the vear, it is impossible rigidly 
Meni. 
to classify the population by numbers according to the 
ways of life. The wholly nomadic population is much 
less important than in Cyrenaica and is found principally 
in the Sirtica and Ghibla areas. Only among the nomads 
and a few of the hill tribes exists the closely knit tribal 
structure which characterizes Cyrenaica. In the more 
prosperous and populous coastal area the tribe is grad- 
ually giving way to a village and town society. 
The minorities comprise about 45,000 Italians, 13,000 
Jews, 2,000 Maltese and 400 Greeks. The level of the 
Italian community has, as far as possible, been main- 
tained numerically by the British Administration at the 
point to which it had fallen at the end of the war. The 
Italians, about half of whom are town dwellers, have 
large commercial and agricultural interests which had 
been developed during Italian rule. 
The Jewish minority, now almost exclusively urban, 
has been rapidly diminishing in the last 18 months 
because of emigration, largely to Israel. This exodus 
has reduced the Jewish community from about 29,000 
in 1948 to 13,000. The rate of emigration has recently 
slackened. 
The economy of Tripolitania is based principally oun 
agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries, with esparto 
grass and rough handicrafts as auxiliary resources. 
Olives, barley, citrus fruits and grapes, which cover a 
considerable area of the coastal belt, are the principal 
crops. The Moslem population of the coastal belt lives 
chiefly by gardens and palm groves, cultivating market 
crops and fruit tress irrigated from wells operated 
mostly by animal power. Some Arabs have, however, 
undertaken farming on a larger scale. In the northern 
part of the Jebel olives and other fruits are grown in 
important quantities and tobacco, which is a monopoly 
of the British Administration as it was of the Italian, 
is grown with some success, although it is mostly of 
inferior quality. In the steppe and semi-desert sheep 
and goats are pastured and barley cultivated by scratch 
ploughing. 
The Italian community outside the town is chiefly 
engaged in the cultivation of olives, citrus fruits, vines, 
almonds, and, on a lesser scale, wheat. The Italian 
farms, both private concessions and para-statal settle- 
ments, represent a remarkable feat of pioneering and 
land reclamation, which, chiefly owing to the comparat- 
ively long period of immaturity of the olive tree, has 
only recently begun to demonstrate its full productive 
value. Indeed, many of the plantations will not bear 
fully for some years to come. They are, however, the 
greatest economic asset of the territory, an asset which 
can easily be lost if constant care to prevent erosion and 
other deterioration is not maintained. Both the con- 
cessions and the cettlements were assisted by the con- 
siderable tax exemptions, subsidies and credit facilities 
accorded to agriculture by the Italian Government. A 
certain unbalance is becoming apparent in their finan- 
cial position as a result of the gradual expiration of these 
facilities, and it is likely that some measures will be 
needed in order to maintain them, since production and 
markets are not yet proportionate to the capital and 
maintenance outlays. 
After two years of serious droughts in 1947 and 1948, 
the territory has enjoved good harvests, and export- 
able surpluses of agricultural products have increased. 
© CYRENAICA 
  
wrt 
at os sl 
Problem No. 1 is water 
YRENAICA extends over 700,000 square kilometres. 
It lies between the Western Desert of Egypt on 
the east and Tripolitania on the west. On the 
south, it reaches to the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and the 
mountain wilderness of the Tibesti, in French Equatorial 
Africa. Its area is almost entirely desert, which is 
rainless throughout the year. In the north, however, 
a low plateau of limestone hills benefits from rainfall 
adequate for the profitable cultivation of cereals and 
fruit. A number of fresh-water springs are also to be 
found in the hills, which support a considerable vegeta- 
tion. This plateau is fringed by a narrow coastal belt, 
where the rainfall again declines. The plateau grad- 
ually falls away to plains in the south and east, which 
provide pasture over a considerable area and where 
barley is grown, as the rainfall permits, year by year. 
In the few oases of the southern desert, date palms and 
some vegetables are grown. 
The population of Cyrenaica is estimated at 300,000, 
the overwhelming majority of which are Arabs. There 
is a Jewish minority of some 200, reduced from 4,500 
in 1948, and small Maltese and Greek communities. 
Except for a few priests and nuns, the Italian pre-war 
population left the country before its final occupation 
by the Allied Forces. 
The town-dwellers number some 85,000. The rural 
population consists mainly of semi-nomadic tent- 
dwellers, mostly inhabiting the coastal plateau where 
they cultivate their barley and herd their animals. On 
the plateau tribal boundaries are well defined and nomad- 
ism consequently severely restricted. In the desert 
fringes to the south of the plateau the vagaries of the 
rainfall necessitate a greater latitude of movement, but 
it is only a minority which leave their habitat on the 
plateau to find grazing and cultivate in the desert. The 
rural population is organized in tribes, among whom the 
land is divided. The main tribes (Sa’adi) hold their 
land by right of conquest dating from the Arab invasion 
in the 11th century. In addition, there are dependent 
groups (Marabitin) who have attached themselves to 
the powerful Sa’adi tribes. All the Bedouin claim pure 
Arabian extraction, but there is undoubtedly an admix- 
ture of Berber stock, especially in the oases to the south 
of the plateau. 
The economy of Cyrenaica is handicapped by the 
lack of natural resources and the underdevelopment of 
its land and water. It is based on the raising of live- 
stock which is carried on, together with the shifting culti- 
vation of barley, by the majority of the rural population. 
On the northern plateau, however, and in some parts 
of the coastal belt, wheat is grown by modern mothods, 
and olives, vines, apricots, and other fruits thrive to- 
gether with market vegetables. The development of this 
area is actively encouraged by the Ministry of Agricul- 
ture. : 
Information given in these pages regarding the yeography, 
population and economy of the three regions of Libya, is taken 
from the report of the United Nations Commissioner in Libya to 
the United Nations Secretary-General.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 NOVEMBER 1951 


### 74644: Teaching of collective security aided by UNESCO pamphlets

TEACHING OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY 
AIDED BY UNESCO PAMPHLETS 
nations ultimately depend upon the 
thoughts and feelings of individual men 
and women everywhere on earth — and educa- 
tion remains an indispensable means for 
developing such individual attitudes of aware- 
ness and co-operation. 
The authority for this view is Professor A. 
Appadorai, formerly of Madras University in 
India, one of the world’s most distinguished 
experts and educators in the field of inter- 
national relations, and author of a pamphlet 
entitled Collective Security, one of three on 
the subject prepared for Unesco and just 
published by the Organization as part of its 
vigorously continuing efforts to explain and 
make widely known the principles and activ- 
ities of the United Nations. 
“The relevant attitude to be cultivated,” the 
Indian educator explains, “consists of two ele- 
ments: first, the attitude of ‘live and let live’, 
a sense of tolerance and cha- 
P gacE and collective security among all of Unesco’s General Conference in Paris 
in July 1951 declared moreover “that, if 
there is to be widespread understanding of- and 
popular support for United Nations action, 
there must be adequate education regarding 
specific acts of aggression and breaches of the 
peace, as well as the actions taken by the 
United Nations to maintain and restore the 
peace”. (The full text of this resolution is 
published on this page.) The Executive Board 
and the Director-General were authorized to 
provide “widespread understanding” of United 
Nations action to maintain or restore peace 
whenever the Security Council or the General 
Assembly took such action. 
“History”, says Professor Appadori in 
analyzing the meaning of collective security, 
“is in large measure a record of man’s efforts 
to achieve greater security together with per- 
sonal freedom. War, with the aid of science, 
has come to mean total annihilation, Clearly, 
international affairs. In preparing his work for 
Unesco, he consulted with the Royal Institute 
of International Affairs in London and the 
Institute of Pacific Relations in the United 
States. 
Dr. Dupuy was President of the International 
University Federation for the League of Na- 
tions and of the Executive Committee of the 
World Federation of United Nations Associa- 
tions; a member of the French Delegations to 
the San Francisco Conference and five Gen- 
eral Assemblies of the United Nations. He is 
the author of many works on international 
affairs including San Francisco et la Charte 
des Nations Unies. 
Professor Francovich has filled high politica: 
and diplomatic posts in addition to his work 
as an educator. He is the author of El Mundo, 
el Hombre y los Valores and of other books 
in the fields of history and philosophy. 
The three writers agreed, in consultation 
with officials of the United Na- 
tions and Unesco, on the main 
rity, a recognition that the very 
existence of a diversity of cul- 
tures.contributes to the increase 
of human happiness; and, se- 
cond, the attitude of non-vio- 
lence, that is, the recognition 
ACTION IN THE SERVICE OF PEACE 
Resolutions adopted by the Unesco General Conference 
outlines of the form and content 
of the pamphlets they would 
prepare. Within the general 
framework thus established, 
each author was given freedom 
to develop the subject as he 
that a- bellicose attitude is not 
something inherent in man, but 
that man is by nature a social 
unit capable of living in neigh- 
bourly friendliness and love.” 
Parallel with Professor Appa- 
dorai’s pamphlet, written in 
English, Unesco has published 
two companion works, one in 
French prepared by Dr. Jean 
Dupuy, Secretary-General of 
the French Association for the 
United Nations, and one in 
Spanish by Professor Guillermo 
Francovich, Rector of the San 
Francisco Xavier University of 
Sucre, Bolivia. Their titles are 
L’Etablissement de la Sécurité 
Collective and La Seguridad Co- 
lectiva Internacional. 
Foundations of peace 
HEIR preparation and pub- 
lication by Unesco stems 
directly from the Con- 
stitution of the Organiza- 
tion, for the view of Professor 
Appadorali, shared by Dr. Dupuy 
and Professor Francovich, that 
collective security depends upon 
the attitudes of individual men 
and women, links directly with 
the statements in Unesco’s basic 
Charter that: 
“Since wars begin in the 
minds of men, it is in the minds 
of men that the defences of 
peace must be constructed... the 
education of humanity for jus- 
tice and liberty and peace are 
indispensable to the dignity of 
man and constitute a sacred 
duty which all nations must 
fulfil in a spirit of mutual 
assistance and concern... peace 
must therefore be founded, if it 
is not to fail, upon the intellect- 
ual and moral solidarity of 
mankind.” 
All three pamphlets are de- 
signed to provide teaching aids 
for use in primary and adult 
education, as part of the sup- 
port which Unesco gives in the 
various fields within its compet- 
ence to the struggle of the 
  
at its seventeenth plenary 
HE various Governments repre- 
sented at the Sixth Session of 
the Unesco General Conference, 
conscious of the collective moral 
responsibility which the dangers of 
war place upon them from the 
political, economic and social 
standpoints, solemnly bind them- 
selve to work for peace and peace- 
ful ends. in full and friendly 
trust, complete independence, and 
full equality of rights. 
MAINTENANCE OF PEACE AND 
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY. 
NOTING the resolution “Uniting 
for Peace” of the General Assembly 
of the United Nations, which pro- 
vides that the General Assembly 
may make recommendations to 
Members for collective measures 
for maintenance of pewce and se- 
curity, if the Security Council fails 
to act; 
NOTING the resolution of the 
Economic and Social Council, which 
(1) Requests the Seeretary-General 
: of the United Nations]... to consult 
with the Specialized Agencies as {o 
the specific arrangements they 
might most appropriately make in 
order to provide for the furnishing 
by them of such information and 
for the rendering of sueh assistance 
in the maintenance or restoration 
ot international peace and security 
as may be requested by the Se- 
curity Council or the General As- 
sembly, such arrangements to cover 
action on an emergency basis and 
within the constitutional and bud- 
getary limitations of the agencies 
to meet urgent requests; and (2) 
invites the Specialized Agencies to 
approve arrangements to this end 
as soon as possible;” 
CONSIDERING that acts of 
aggression and breaches of the 
peace constitute direct threats to 
those objectives and to the high 
purposes for which Unesco was 
established; 
meeting on July 11, 195] 
MINDFUL of its responsibility for 
advancing, through the educational, 
scientific and cultural relations of 
the peoples of the world, the object- 
ives of international peace and of 
the common welfare of mankind for 
which the United Nations Organiza- 
tion was. established; 
BEARING in mind that, if there 
is to be widespread understanding 
of and popular support for United 
Nations action, there must be 
adequate education regarding spe- 
cific acts of aggression and breaches 
of the peace, as well as the actions 
taken by the United Nations to 
maintain or restore the peace; 
i. DECLARES that the United Na- 
tions Educational, Scientific and 
‘ultural Organization, on request of 
the Security Council or the General 
Assembly, will co-operate with the 
United Nations in the maintenance 
of international peace and security 
and upon the request of the Se- 
curity Council of the General As- 
sembly will furnish information 
and emergency assistance for this 
purpose within the limits of com- 
petence, as defined by the Constilu- 
tion and in accordance with bud- 
getary provisions; : So 
2. AUTHORIZES the Executive 
Board and the Director-General, 
whenever the Security Council 
finds the existence of a threat to 
the peace, breach of the peace, or 
act of aggression, or whenever the 
General Assembly takes action in 
accordance with the General As- 
sembly Resolution to facilitate, in 
consultation with the Secretary- 
General of the United Nations, 
through educational and other 
appropriate means at its disposal, 
widespread understanding of the 
nature and background of the ac- 
tion taken by the United Nations to 
maintain or restore the peace.   
judged best, in the light of his 
knowledge of the needs of the 
educators and students who 
were to form his particular 
audience. 
‘Germs of conflict’ 
ROFESSOR Appadorai divides 
his 34-page pamphlet into 
four sections: the Meaning 
of Collective Security; the De- 
velopment of the Idea; the 
United Nations and Collective 
Security ; Strengthening the 
Foundations. After tracing the 
history of United Nations steps 
to help solve problems in Iran, 
Indonesia, Greece, Palestine and 
Kashmir, he analyzes the les- 
sons of the Korean experience. 
“Power held in reserve,” he 
says, “has always played an im- 
portant part in international 
politics ; the United Nations can 
be an effective instrument of 
collective security only if the 
statesmen of the powerful na- 
tions are prepared to use the 
power of their States on its be- 
alf. 
“Without a system of collect- 
ive security, there can be no 
stable peace; yet, unless all 
nations accept the system in 
practice, it must be enforced or 
it will fail. But if we can deal 
with international problems by 
reasonable rather than violent 
methods, that will greatly help 
to produce a political climate in 
which the sense of collective 
security can grow”. 
Dr. Dupuy points out in the 
French language pamphlet that 
the concept of collective secur- 
ity has evolved to include social 
security and economic organiza- 
tion. “An international struggle 
should be carried out”, he 
writes, “against unemployment, 
hunger, poverty, illness, ignor- 
ance, misunderstanding; against 
all these defects, all these germs 
of conflict which dictators and 
demagogues can exploit in order 
to seize power”. 
United Nations on behalf of the collective 
security on which a just and durable peace 
depends. From the very start of its existence, 
Unesco has carried out educational activities 
in the light of the judgment that the subject 
of collective security is of such vital import- 
ance to mankind that it demands well- 
informed and objective study. 
The decision that the Organization should 
select collective security as a major theme in 
its educational work was made by the Execut- 
ive Board in September 1950, in the light of 
the action taken by the United Nations with 
respect to Korea, and at the request of the 
Economic and Social Council of the United 
Nations. 
The Board instructed Director-General 
Jaime Torres Bodet to develop “the execution 
of the programme resolutions concerning 
‘teaching about the United Nations and its 
Specialized Agencies, putting particular em- 
phasis on the necessity for collective security, 
based on respect for law, with the aid of con- 
crete examples.” It also authorized him “to 
prepare, in close and constant collaboration 
with the United Nations, both written and 
audio-visual materials for use in schools, adult 
classes and universities”. 
A Resolution adopted by the Sixth Session 
there must be a rule of law among individuals 
within each State. The attempts to establish 
such a rule of law among nations represent a 
continuance and extension of man’s efforts to 
achieve personal freedom.” 
The authors of all three of the Unesco 
booklets point out how, as the culmination of 
a slow and difficult historical process, man’s 
will for peace found its instrument in the 
United Nations. Moreover, the United Nations, 
through its adoption of the Universal Declara- 
tion of Human Rights, became also the 
vehicle for the spread and development of the 
principles of enlightenment and progress. 
Three militant writers 
phlets were not only educational experts, 
but also militants in the cause of collect- 
jive security with long and brilliant records of 
achievement. 
Professor Appadorai is Secretary-General of 
the Indian Council of World Affairs, joint 
General Secretary of the Asian Relations 
Organization, and the author of The Sub- 
stance of Politics, Revision of Democracy, De- 
mocracy in India and of many pamphlets on 
T HE three men chosen to prepare the pam- 
But the essence of the idea of collective 
security which has emerged from the tragic 
experiences of recent years, he stresses, is that 
“freedoms must defend themselves.” Such a 
security “can exist only in the collective effort 
of all States within an international organiza- 
tion. We must really want peace and above 
all be ready to accept on its behalf, each 
according to his means, a share of the burdens 
imposed by its establishment and mainten- 
ance.” 
And Professor Francovich, in the Spanish 
language pamphlet, comes to the conclusion 
that “Force must be the effective and tangible 
contribution of the peoples to the defence of 
collective security; for force will represent the 
irresistible power of the human will put at 
the service of all peoples’ aspirations to a har- 
monious and pacific community.” 
It is as a continuation of Unesco’s vigorous 
efforts to teach and spread awareness that in 
the long run Human Rights can be enjoyed 
only in a world at peace and free from the 
threat of aggression, that the pamphlets were 
conceived, prepared and published. Some 
editorial suggestions were made by the Unesco 
and United Nations secretariats, but the 
authors were free to accept or reject them.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

NOVEMBER 1951 
~ UNITED NATIONS 
  
   
      
FJ 
. & Lo 
L rr » 
$ . 
NA
CI
ON
ES
 
UN
ID
AS
 
Si
u)
 48 
<\ “ES OR , 
“is    &
 
~ 
<
a
 
O
V
E
R
 
N
A
Y
,
 
finding its way into the albums of many stamp collectors who have 
avidly been seeking postage stamps, envelopes and cancellation 
marks related to the activities of the United Nations and its Specialized 
Agencies. Since the celebration of United Nations Day on October 24, 
this “international” stamp collection has been enriched by several new 
items, some of which are reproduced on this page. One of these, “People 
of the World”, is a one-cent maroon-coloured stamp which symbolizes 
the principal races of mankind being released from bondage and looking 
with hope towards the United Nations. Another stamp, “World Unity”, 
is for 20 cents, and shows the United Nations emblem between the hemi- 
spheres of the world, with the words “United Nations” in French and 
Spanish. The first group of stamps issued on October 24 consisted of 
one-cent, one-and-a-half-cent, three-cent, five-cent, 25-cent and one- 
dollar denominations. Five denominations — two, ten, 15. 20 and 50 
cents—will be released on November 16, and four air mail values — six, 
F = several years past, a message of international unity has been 
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 74645: A New message of world unity

A NEW MESSAGE 
OF WORLD UNITY 
ten, 15 and 25 cents — on November 30. The United Nations stamps will 
be used on official communications despatched by mail from United 
Nations headquarters in New York, and on private correspondence sent 
through the headquarters post office. A special philatelic sales office 
will also be opened at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris, where the United 
Nations General Assembly meets this month. Postage stamps have 
already shown their value as a means of spreading ideas and informa- 
tion, and these latest issues will undoubtedly help to make better known 
the ideals and work of the United Nations. Although Unesco has not 
itself issued any stamps its work has been recorded on those issued by 
several countries which include Belgium, France, Italy, the Lebanon and 
Mexico. In Belgium, for example, a new series of three special stamps 
with surtax has helped the work of Unesco’s Rehabilitation Service. In 
France, a cancellation mark which reads : “Through Education, Science 
and Culture, Unesco is serving the cause of Peace” is stamped on 
envelopes by post offices in Paris, Bordeaux, Lyons and Lille.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 NOVEMBER [951 


### 74646: Astronautics: the new science of space travel

ASTRONAUTICS: THE NEW SCIENCE 
OF SPACE TRAVEL 
STRONAUTICS iS a new science. 
It is the science of space 
travel, of flight bevond the 
earth’s atmosphere and of voyages 
to other worlds. Its rapid develop- 
ment during these past few decades 
is bringing a note of hard reality 
‘into the world of mythology and 
fantasy that for centuries has been 
fed by the writing of men who 
dreamed of exploring the realms 
of space. 
It was Galileo who—as in so 
many other cases—Ilaid a foundation 
for this reality. Through his teles- 
cope he saw 400 years ago what 
no other man had ever seen before. 
“It is a most beautiful and delight- 
ful sight to behold the body of 
the moon, which is distant from 
us nearly sixty semi-diameters of 
the earth, as near as if it was at a 
distance of only two of the same 
measures,” he wrote. “And conse- 
quently any one may know with 
“the certainty that is due to the 
use of our senses, that the moon 
certainly does not possess a smooth 
and polished surface, but one rough 
and uneven, and just like the face 
of the earth itself, is everywhere 
full of vast protuberances, deep 
chasms, and sinuosities.” 
Galileo’s telescope bore out the 
theory of Copernicus that the sun, 
and not the earth, was the centre of 
our planetary system; and that 
the earth was only one of many 
planets of its kind. Indeed, Galileo 
was able to discover “four planets 
neither known nor observed by any 
one of the astronomers before my 
time.” 
Arthur C. Clarke, chairman of 
the British Interplanetary Society, 
points out in his new book The 
Exploration of Space, that only one 
writer of ancient times wrote a 
story about travelling to the moon. 
He was Lucien of Samos, who, in 
about the second century A.D. 
told how a man was taken to the 
moon in a waterspout which seized 
his ship when he was sailing beyond 
the Pillars of Hercules! Another 
more recent story of a journey to 
the moon was written just over 
400 years ago, following Galileo’s 
by Maurice Goldsmith, 
discoveries, by another great astro- 
nomer, Johannes Kepler. The hero 
of his story arrived on the moon by 
supernatural means, but his des- 
cription of what he found there was 
based upon the latest scientific 
knowledge of that time. 
Since that day, travel in space 
has provided the theme for innumer- 
able stories. Now however, the 
moon is actually coming within our 
reach. In two or three generations 
the first man may land there, and 
long before then-—perhaps with- 
in a few years—an unmanned 
rocket may have reached the moon. 
We have already contacted that 
planet by radar. A signal has been 
sent across 240,000 miles of space 
and it has brought back an “echo” 
from the moon. The naked eye 
and the revealing telescope will 
no longer be our main means of 
“exploring” the heavens. We shall 
be able to travel through inter- 
planetary space and see the realities 
for ourselves. 
* The instrument which will make 
this possible is the rocket. (It is 
interesting that this seemingly most 
modern of inventions originated 
about 700 years ago in China). 
To leave the earth and to travel 
in space we require to do two basic 
things: first, to devise a means of 
overcoming the earth’s gravita- 
tional pull so that we can get into 
space; and secondly, once there, 
to find a means of travelling around 
in an airless vacuum, which is 
basically what outer space is. 
We are all familiar with the force 
of gravity. If it did not exist, 
neither would we. It is gravity 
which makes life possible for us 
by keeping a thin blanket of air 
tightly round the earth. With in- 
creasing height, however, the force 
of gravity slowly diminishes. At 
250 miles up—the greatest height 
yet reached by a rocket—it loses 
only 10 per cent of its value at sea 
level. But at 12,000 miles up, a 
one-pound weight would weigh only 
one ounce. “It follows, therefore”, 
says Clarke, “that the further away 
r 
' 
Unesco Science Editor 
one goes from the earth, the easier it 
is to go onwards. In terms of 
gravity, leaving the earth is rather 
like climbing a hill which at first 
is very steep but later becomes 
more and more gentle until finally 
it is almost perfectly flat.” 
It was Sir Isaac Newton, the 
English scientist, who first formu- 
lated the laws of gravity. It was 
also he who gave us the clue that 
has enabled us to understand the 
mechanics of travel in space, when 
he said: “For every action there is 
an equal and opposite reaction.” 
To understand what this means, 
take an ordinary sausage-shaped 
rubber balloon and blow it up. 
Then let go of the balloon, and it 
will dart rapidly around until the 
air has gone out of it. What has 
happened is that molecules of 
compressed air in the balloon are 
bombarding the closed front end 
of the balloon—and it is this which 
is pushing the balloon forward. 
That is, the action of the molecules 
in bombarding the front end of the 
balloon is producing the reaction 
of balloon movement. 
This is basically what causes a 
rocket to move. It is essentially 
a cylinder with the back end open. 
It carries along its own oxygen, 
and the chemical reaction causes 
the molecules to move about swiftly 
and to bombard the confined space 
in the cylinder. The molecules 
fly out of the open end. In this 
way, the action of the molecules 
bombarding the closed front end 
produces the reaction that pushes, 
or thrusts, the rocket forward. 
The great virtue of this is that the 
rocket would actually move faster 
if there were no air at all, because 
the air in front tends to slow it 
down. 
The rocket is, therefore, the ideal 
form of space-ship because it can 
generate enormous power for little 
weight or size of engine (for example, 
the V2 was four times as powerful 
as the Queen Elizabeth), and this 
will enable it to overcome the 
earth’s gravitational pull. It will 
also work most efficiently in the 
vacuum of outer space and at high 
flight speeds. 
To escape from the earth a rocket 
needs a velocity of 25,000 m.p.h. 
This may seem utterly fantastic, 
but we should remember that while 
in 1940 the top flight for a rocket 
was under 1,000 m.p.h., in 1950 it 
was nearer 5,000 m.p.h. It is 
certain that there will be great 
developments in the immediate 
years ahead. 
Rocket research is proceeding in 
all advanced industrialized coun- 
tries, for a variety of purposes: 
to assist the take-off of aircraft; 
to propel aircraft at extreme speeds 
and heights (for example, the Ame- 
rican Bell rocket plane was the first 
to fly faster than sound); for high- 
altitude research by instrument- 
carrying projectiles, and for guided 
missiles. So far as fuel is concern- 
ed, it is probable that future rocket 
spaceships will ultimately make use 
of atomic power. 
On the basis of all this work, 
experts declare that within the next 
few decades there will be set up 
in space an “earth-satellite-vehicle,” 
a man-made “planet” in a close orbit 
around the earth. This would circle 
the earth without remaining at a 
constant distance, and would stay 
there indefinitely without using any 
power. 
It could be used, for example, as 
a research observatory beyond the 
atmosphere, for physicists and astro- 
nomers; as an observatory for 
meteorologists who would be able 
to “see” the earth’s weather system 
developing; as a radio relay station, 
which would allow, for instance, of 
world-wide reception of television; 
and, unfortunately, as a military 
base for reconnaissance. 
Since early pioneers began some 
40 years ago to study the theory 
of space flight (Goddard in the 
U.S.A, Oberth in Germany, Esnault- 
Pelterie in France, and Tsiolkovsky 
in Russia), we have made tremendous 
advances. So much so, that man 
may soon be setting out on the 
“roads” to the planets. 


### 74647: Has the universe a future?

HAS THE UNIVERSE A FUTURE ? 
ERHAPS the greatest and most 
persistent riddle in all of 
science is that of the nature 
of the cosmos. Almost inevitably, 
a glance at the night sky with its 
seemingly innumerable stars and 
wispy nebulae bring to the human 
mind such questions as: “What is 
"this universe in which we find our- 
selves? How did it all begin? 
What is its ultimate destiny?” 
By the very nature of such ques- 
tions, definite, positive answers are 
beyond the powers of science. Ne- 
vertheless, from earliest times men 
have pondered the subject of cos- 
mology as it is called—the study of 
the universe as a whole. Such spe- 
culations come not only from theo- 
logians and philosophers but from 
. scientists as well; for it was inevi- 
table that the increasing success of 
physics in explaining our imme- 
diate surroundings should have en- 
couraged attempts to supply a ra- 
tional basis for the more distant 
reaches of our environment. 
In a subject so devoid of land- 
marks as cosmology, one is forced 
to assume the existence of some- 
thing to begin with. In the 
- eighteenth century the German 
philosopher Kant and the French 
mathematician Laplace imagined 
a primordial cloud of gas which 
eventually contracted, shedding 
material to form the planets as it 
did so. The remaining central body 
was assumed to be the sun, our 
own star. This process was presum- 
ably taking place all through 
space to give birth to the cosmic 
population of sun-and-planet sys- 
tems. Early in the present century 
the American astronomer F. R. 
Moulton subjected the contraction 
hypothesis to mathematical scru- 
by Ira M. Freeman 
tiny and found it dubious. He, to- 
gether with geologist T.C. Cham- 
berlin, advanced an alternative 
idea : a universe consisting initially 
of already formed stars moving 
haphazardly through the void. 
When, on the average once in a 
million million years, two of these 
stars happen to pass close to each 
other, great filaments of matter are 
torn from their sides by gravit- 
ational attraction. This material, 
drifting along with each parent 
star, would ultimately condense to 
form planets coursing about it. This 
so-called “Planetesimal Theory” was 
refined and improved by English 
astronomers such as Jeans and Jef- 
freys, and became the accepted doc- 
trine in its field. 
While these close-to-home pro- 
blems concerning mere planetary 
systems were thus claiming atten- 
tion, the relativity theorists had 
been busy with attempts to under- 
stand the structure and pattern of 
the universe as an entity—ques- 
tions having to do with the nature 
of space and time and with such 
ideas as whether or not the uni- 
verse is limited in extent. From 
their intricate. mathematical equa- 
tions they distilled suggestive ideas 
bearing on the inherent curvature 
of space; of a cosmos that is finite 
in extent, yet unbounded; of a uni- 
verse whose members may all be 
fleeing from each other at tremen- 
dous rates. 
In the meantime, observation had 
been advancing, too—not only as- 
tronomical observation, but obser- 
vation of laboratory phenomena 
which might some day contribute 
sturdy props to the structure of a 
truly comprehensive theory of the 
universe. The spectroscope had re- 
vealed the composition, tempera- 
tures and speeds of motion of the 
stars and nebulae within reach of 
our telescopes. Nuclear physics had 
disclosed the source of the lavish 
cutpouring of stellar energy to be 
nuclear condensation of the hydro- 
gen of which stars are, for the most 
part, composed. 
It was shortly before the begin- 
ning of World War II that two 
young Cambridge University ma- 
thematicians, Fred Hoyle and Ray- 
mond Lyttleton, began a collabora- 
tion that was to give science its 
boldest and most comprehensive 
cosmology up to the present time. 
They subjected to mathematical 
analysis the often-proposed idea 
that the stars are formed as.con- 
densationg from a thin cloud of gas 
stretching through all of space. 
The results showed that the fate of 
a star is governed by the extent to 
which it sweeps up and draws to 
itself this wispy matter. As an in- 
cipient star gathers together suffi- 
cient material it becomes hotter 
and hotter and finally (after thou- 
sands of millions of years) its tem- 
perature is high enough to kindle 
the nuclear reaction on which all 
stars must rely for producing their 
energy. What occurs subsequently 
depends on how abundant are the 
cosmic clouds of gas through which 
the star moves. Our sun, as it 
happens, has in the past browsed 
through relatively barren pastures, 
picking up only a few shreds of 
matter and—fortunately for us— 
remaining an average, middle-class 
star. If a star greedily gathers too 
much matter, it heats up at a pro- 
digious rate and soon, after mere- 
ly a few hundred million years, it 
blows up. The Hoyle-Lyttleton 
theory gives a plausible account of 
the manner in which the planets 
might be formed from the debris of 
such an explosion. 
Having put the explanation of 
‘the origin of stars and their pla- 
nets on a reasonable basis, Hoyle 
and Lyttleton turned to a consi- 
_ deration of the mechanism of the 
universe in its entirety. Here they 
joined forces with two colleagues, 
Bondi and Gold, to develop what 
is certainly one of the most revo- 
lutionary of contemporary scienti- 
fic theories, Briefly, they adopt 
the now familiar idea that the uni- 
verse is expanding, and that this 
swelling of space itself finally car- 
ries the distant galaxies of stars 
out of existence entirely. To com- 
pensate for the loss it is assumed— 
and this is the boldest of their 
postulates—that new matter is con- 
tinually being created, atom for 
atom, through all of space. The 
entire picture is one of serene, 
comfortable continuity. But plea- 
sant as it is to contemplate, the 
Hoyle-Lyttleton-Bondi-Gold version 
of our cosmos is assuredly not the 
last word on the subject; for it is 
prchable that theorizing about the 
universe, like the universe itself, is 
something without end. 
If you are interested in reading further 
about Cosmological Theories, write to 
the Division for the Popularization of 
Science, Unesco, 19, Avenue Kleber, 
Paris, for a free bibliography on this 
subject.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

NOVEMBER 1951 
Three stills from the film 
“Bush Christmas’... 
» 
E- 
  
Infra-red photographs taken by Miss Mary Field and other film makers during showings 
can help them to produce films that are really suitable for children, Al the moment when 
the stills shown on the left appeared on the screen, photographs were taken of the unsus- 
pectling audience. Here are shown the children’s reactions to (1) a boy who eats a grub 
because there is no more food ; (2) a tracker who dashes into the river to chase a thief; 
and (3) children out In the open all night, sheltering from the rain, (Copyright, G. B. 
Instructional, Ltd.) 
ENTERTAINMENT FILMS FOR CHILDREN 
by Lady Allen of Hurtwood 
NX our Sepfember issue, devoted to Ghe cinema as a means of international understanding, 
I we published an article entitled “Children’s Films—For Adults Only?” by a French 
writer, Jean Bloch-Michel. As the title suggested, this article mainly dealt with the 
effects of adult films on children. M. Bloch-Michel did not attempt a study of the special 
production of films for children. 
interest and comment from our readers in different countries, 
The publication of this article has aroused considerable 
Lady Allen of Hurltwood, 
Chairman of the Advisory Council on Children’s Films in Great Britain from 1945 to 1950, 
has sent us an article dealing with some of the efforts made in recent years to provide 
better enlertainment films specially made for children in Britain and other countries of 
Europe. 
McLean (Head of Films and Visual Information 
I’ the September issue of the Courier, Mr. Ross 
Division, Unesco) wrote that makers of films 
“all have a common duty fo the world's child- - 
ren, and an opportunity greater than ever before 
lo discharge it, because of the vast challenge it 
presents.” The impact of films on children for 
good or for-evil is becoming widely recognized, but 
the challenge has only been accepted in a few 
countries, Jean Bloch-Michel writes on children’s 
films in the same issue as though no attempt had 
been made to produce entertainment films for 
children. He ignores the pioneer work done by the 
LU.S.S.R., Czechoslovakia, Denmark and the Uniled 
Kingdom. He even makes the error of describing 
the Disney filins as “films meant especially for 
children.” These films are made for the ordinary 
cinema audiences and their unsuitability for 
children is elearly shown in the article. Further- 
more, these films are not available for children’s 
matinées until they have exhausted their commer- 
cial run. Ile asks “What producer aill undertake 
to make a picture which he Knows will not be 
accepted by the usual circuits?” 
Early in the avar, the J. Arthur Rank Organiza- 
tion, aware of the harm done to the sensibility of 
children by seeing old adult films, subsidized a 
department charged with the quite new problem 
of making children's entertainment films. During 
five vears, this group, led by Miss Mary Field. was 
responsible for producing over 220 films — shorts, 
features, a monthly ‘world magazine, fanfasy, 
adventure, musical, historical and what Sir Michacl 
Balcon describes as “feature documentary” or John 
Grierson as “making drama from our daily events, 
and poetry of our problems.” 
It was not long hefore the Advisory Council on 
Children’s Entertainment Films ‘a group appointed 
to wateh and guide this important adveniure, and 
representing all the principal organizations and 
government departments interested in children) 
realized that, apart from entertaining children, they 
had a unique opportunity of showing how children 
lived in other lands. Some of the most popular 
British films were slories made in A\usiralia, 
Germany, Norway, Basutoland and Austria. Child- 
ren of these countries were the actors and in many 
cases spoke their native language. These and the 
English-speaking flims have been shown in coun- 
tries where the language was unfamiliar, and the 
children had no difficulty in following the stories 
We are pleased to publish this article below. 
because the spoken word is only incidental to the 
action. Here then is a tremendous opportunity to 
show children that “foreigners” are in essence 
like themselves, adventurous, clever, warmhearted 
~and normal human beings with whom they would 
rejoice to be. friends. 
Unesco is the body to which we all hopefully 
turn for assistance to develop this fundamentally 
important work. It is not enough to devoic one 
article in one issue of the Courier. Why, for in- 
stance, should not children’s entertainment films 
be included with the newsreels, scientific and 
cultural films in the Unesco-sponsored interna- 
tional conventions soon to be ratified and so assisl 
the free flow of fllins already made and stimulate 
further production? Is there any reason why a 
viewing library should not be established at Unesco 
House, as has already been done for educational 
and welfare flims? Would Unesco convene 2 
small conference of expert and cxperienced per- 
sons to discuss the whole problem and to recom- 
mand the best ways for Unesco to foster and 
guide the making and distribution of children’s 
entertainment films in relation to the needs and 
possibilities in each continent? The implications 
are immense and the interest vivid—so mueh so 
that there is a danger that other hodies outside the 
United Nations may assume international leader- 
ship. . 
EDITOR'S NOTE . 
Children’s films, if certified by the Government of 
the producing country to be of an educational, 
scientific or cultural character, come under the 
duty free provisions of the Unesco Agreement for 
Facilitating the International Circulation of Visual 
and Auditory Material of an Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Character. In addition, the second 
Unesco Free Flow Agreement would allow 
educational, scientific or cultural institutions 
approved by the Goternment of the importing 
country to import such films duty free. The 
subject of children’s films wos the theme of a 
series of film group meetings held in Venice from 
August 16 to 19 at which Unesco was represented, 
and at chich Unesco’s publication Reereational 
Film for Juvenile Audiences serced as a basis of 
discussion. Unesco is at present collaborating with 
an international committee formed in Venice 
during these meetings to pr.pare the first world 
congress on children’s filme, scheduled to be held 
next year in Europe. 
Page Il — UNESCO COURIER 


### 74648: Inter-American Cultural Council plans educational campaign for a continent

TER - AMERICAN 
CULTURAL COUNCIL PLANS 
EDUCATIONAL CAMPAIGN 
FO 
A 
RA CONTINENT 
by Michel Dard 
LEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT, the famous 
19th century German naturalist and traveller, 
who once called Mexico, “the treasure house of 
the world,” was probably thinking of its precious 
metals, its opals, jades and turquoises. 
Today, not only Mexico, but the whole Latin American 
continent is regarded as a treasure house, but of a 
different sort, for its modern riches are the infinite 
possibilities for development which have earned for it 
the name of “the continent of the future.” 
Recently, however, when the Inter-American Cultural 
Council held its first meeting in Mexico, observers were 
struck by evidence of still another form of wealth 
enjoyed by Latin America —its tremendous store of 
spiritual energy. 
This showed itself in determination expressed by 
Conference delegates to develop and share the rich, 
varied and ancient cultural traditions of the continent; 
in the recognition of responsibility for bringing the full 
benefits of human progress to those communities which 
do not yet enjoy them; and also in the stressing of inter- 
American solidarity in face of the world situation. 
The Inter-American Cultural Council is the third of 
the specialized bodies set up by the Organization of Ame- 
rican States (0O.A.S.) which groups all States in the 
Western Hemisphere with the exception of Canada, and 
which works in close collaboration with Unesco. 
Some weeks before the Cultural Council's conference 
in Mexico, Dr. Lleras Camargo, Secretary-General of the 
O.A8. 
closer 
, declared: “Unless the various cultures draw 
together and get to know, understand and respect 
one another, all the other acts of Inter-American co- 
operation will not avail to increase the friendship of the 
peoples, or strengthen the solidarity of the continent.” 
The justification for this “priority of the mind,” as 
it has been called, was clearly expressed by M. Jaime 
Torres Bodet, Unesco’s Director-General, who addressed 
the Council’s opening session. “No man,” he said, 
“will defend with all his heart a fictitious liberty or a 
social order which does not command his sincere 
allegiance, nor a truth which demands of:his intellect, 
and sometimes of his instincts, the denial of is spon- 
taneous and incommunicable sense of culture.” 
«© In the name of an Organization dedicated to the 
conciliation of the peoples of the world through the 
minds of men, I should like to express the hope that 
the Council’s activities may strengthen not merely the 
cultural solidarity of the world, but also the confidence of 
the world in the cultural solidarity of the Americas.” 
The programme drawn up by the Cultural Council 
provides justification for this hope. Made up of some 
fifty resolutions which include projects covering educa- 
tion, literature, art and science, it is broad yet precise; 
ambitious, yet based on a realistic view of the continent's 
needs. 
One of the main problems before the delegates was 
illiteracy. In the Americas, there are some 70,000,000 
people who cannot read or write, and 19,000,000 children 
for whom there are no schools. The adverse effects 
of this situation on the well-being, cultural progress, 
civic life, and agricultural, industrial, and technical 
development of the continent are enormous. 
Delegates also stressed the fact that as long as 
millions of Americans remain ignorant of their cultural 
heritage, the continent will be unable to claim to have 
reached the goals of liberty, hope and peace. 
To meet this challenge, the Cultural Council decided 
to launch a large-scale educational campaign. This 
as M. 
- will go much further than mere literacy teaching, for, 
Torres Bodet pointed out, fundamental education 
embracing basic instruction in civics, home economics, 
agriculture and hygiene must more and more replace 
literacy teaching as such. In this continental effort, 
the aid of governments, employers, trade unions, families,’ 
churches, teachers and pupils, army instructors and 
cinema and radio organizations will be mobilized. 
The Council also urged member states to allocate 
sufficient funds to ensure free and compulsory primary 
schooling for all, for unless these facilities are made 
available, the ranks of the illiterates will continue to 
grow and fundamental education projects will never 
achieve lasting results. 
The Council's programme not only harmonizes with 
that of Unesco, but in many ways represents it on a re- 
gional basis. To combine all efforts and to avoid over- 
lapping of activities, and consequent wastage of resources, 
the Council asked the Organization of American States to 
suggest to Unesco the setting up of a commission 
charged with co-ordinating the work of both Organiza- 
tions on projects of common interest. Through 
agreements and administrative arrangements this could 
lead to the pooling of resources and experiences. 
D. H. Lawrence, who wrote one his finest novels against 
a Mexican background, once compared humanity to a 
giant 
roots 
tree which, having been felled, was lying with its 
in the air. “We must replant ourselves in the 
world,” he wrote. 
In such a task there is a vital need for the close colla-. 
boration of two organizations which represent two reali- 
ties of our time; the effort to achieve a universality of 
the human mind and the need for authentic national 
cultures which are, in the words of Unamuno, the great 
Spanish thinker, “an immanent covenant, a real but 
unrecorded social contract, which is the true inner consti- 
tution of every people.”

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074639engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

This is one of the most 
famous knights in Yugo- A LOST BELIEF 
STILL SURVIVES 
IN THIS STONE throughout the country, 
especially in Serbia, Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina. They were 
slavia — but nobody 
can tell who he was. 
There are thousands of 
built during the 13th and 14th centuries by a sect which has borne. 
various names: - Bogomils, Gnostics, Cathars, Albigenses. Their 
monoliths, often grouped together in enormous cemeteries in remote 
forest or mountain areas, may be decorated with scenes from the 
hunt or the dance, with foliage or with geometrical figures; but for 
the most part they contain a symbolism which archzologists have 
been unable to “translate” with any certainty. Why, for .instance, 
does the bare-headed knight above have a disproportionately large 
hand extending towards a star? Artists cannot agree whether the 
tombs and slabs like this 
- 
sculptural style represents an artistic revolution or a synthesis of 
survivals from the ancient days of slavery. Attempts have been made 
to link it with Nordic motifs, ancient Scythian and Sarmatian orna- 
mentation, Mycenzan spirals, Roman influences, Venetian decora- 
tion, even with long-lost aboriginal lore. Some declare that this 
form of art stems from a conception of the world and of life of which 
we only know from documents left by the Inquisition which tried to 
eliminate it. Its origin certainly lies partly in the conflict between 
the Eastern and Roman churches. Yugoslavia was torn by these dis- 
sensions, and buildings in the architectural styles which each religion 
favoured are to be found in different parts of the country. Later there 
was a tendency to introduce some of the characteristics of the one into 
buildings used by the other. Add to this many other foreign influences, 
and the result has been a school of architecture with monuments that 
have no parallel in either east or west. Yugoslavia's monuments, as 
well as her fine traditions of craftsmanship, music and dancing, are an 
irresistible attraction to all students of her rich and ancient culture.