# [081400](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Publication No. 7 Sf 
VOLUME [Il — N° 5 : PRICE : 10 Cents (U. S.), 6 Pence (U. K.), or 20 Francs (FRANCE). Ist JUNE [950 
  
JAIME TORRES BODET, 
TO THE 5TH SESSION 
OF THE UNESCO GENERAL 
CONFERENCE 
HERE are not many places in the world where one realizes 
so clearly as on the banks of the Arno that wisdom and 
beauty are the twin arches of that invisible bridge which 
leads from the individual conscience — ever rebellious 
against its destiny — to man’s collective conscience, ever in 
search of general progress. This city’s greatest citizen was 
an exile. His DIVINE COMEDY confirms it for us: for free 
men the longing for the lost fatherland is but the aspiration 
to another fatherland that may always be won — humanity 
itsell. . 
Every statue, every picture, that we stop and wonder at 
here, every Florentine stone we look at, would give us the lie 
were we so arrogant as to conceive our mission as a substitute 
for the original creative mission of educators, artists, poets, 
and scholars. Happily, we think no such thing. Our 
Organization does not so mistake its réle. We know that to 
seek to impose uniformity on the infinitely diverse and 
spontaneous life of culture would be illusory. If Unesco should 
attempt to sap the originality and individuality of the different 
national cultures, it would be unfaithful to its very origin, born 
as our Organization was of a free covenant in which the 
representatives of the Governments strove to speak on behalf 
of the peoples. The reason for our existence is not to create 
what none can create by order, by rules and laws. The clear 
intent is rather to serve the creative minds among mankind 
by putting them in more direct relation with the problems 
of the masses, and at the same time to serve those masses, who, 
in the longing of their unsatisfied needs, aspire towards 
education, and through it towards freedom... 
Thus, in clearly recognizing our limitations, we become the 
better aware of our ambitions. There is no Unesco science, 
no Unesco art, no Unesco philosophy. But there are many 
dark places among men; to light up these places requires a 
joint effort on the part of all the different countries : a faith 
which no individual State can furnish, a truth of which no 
State is the sole repository, a wisdom and knowledge which no 
one single State possesses. 
* 
UR greatness will lie in serving. But how? What can 
fifty-six assembled countries do to strengthen peace by 
means of education, science and culture ? What more can 
they do — some will ask than they were doing before they 
joined Unesco ? 
I could not accept such a sceptical attitude. Fifty-six 
countries working together in the pursuit of so lofty an ideal 
can together do infinitely more than each in isolation, within 
its own boundaries and by its own unaided means. 
First of all, countries working together in this manner can 
regularly exchange information, and can agree simultaneously 
to take the most effective measures to surmount or remove 
obstacles to the free flow of culture. 
Again, they can study and try out together the various . 
modern means of helping men to participate actively in the 
progress of the international community. They can undertake 
together to further all steps which may help educators to form 
citizens conscious ef their rights and yet equally conscious of 
their duties towards their fellow-men of every nation, language, 
race and religion. 
Above all, they can infuse a spirit of justice and concord 
in their domestic and foreign policies, so that there may prevail 
between peoples and governments that atmosphere of mutual 
- confidence which is essential for peace. Such an atmosphere 
is indispensable for the success of Unesco’s mission also. Only 
in a world free from the continual threat -of war can culture, 
science and education bear their finest fruits. - 
* 
EAR can corrupt the very aim and essence of education 
and of research. It can distort them entirely to meet the 
demands of another war. It can transform these factors 
of peace into instruments of hate and destruction. Xt is 
thus of the most fundamental importance that governments 
should do everything that lies within their powers, to fight 
against the obsession of war, to act as members of Unesco not 
cnly when they speak at Unesco, but also and still more when, 
outside the Organization, they are taking decisions with regard 
to all those questions which may affect our aims and ideals. 
These are some of the things which fifty-six countries cannot 
undertake separately but which, working together, they could 
achieve. 
This would be a great achievement. Yet it would not be 
enough. If for instance education does not provide equality 
of prospects to all men and women — the same men and women 
who, on the political plane, guarantee collective security with 
their lives — then collective security will rest upon bases 
which are fundamentally unjust, and therefore unstable and 
precarious. So that all countries may provide this equality, 
there exists a sacred duty of reciprocal help, on some aspects 
of which Unesco has already made a beginning. 
According to our Charter, we are an Institution whose 
guiding purpose it is to ensure peace by means of international 
understanding, and to help to promote that international 
understanding by means of education, science and culture. 
These are our ultimate aims. Nothing that we undertake must 
deflect us from them. None the less, if we would not 
have Unesco founder in empty phrases, we must admit that 
peace will not be won by us alone. 
(Continued on Page 10) 
   
  
. y 
ho ~ "   Ro =~ JA 
 
  
3, 
  
  
 
 WUMANITY 1S UNDER NO COMPULSION TO ABDICATE 
h 
_— - - - WC. 
    
 
xe 
The Palazzo Vecchio in Florence. site of the Fifth Session of Unesco’s General Conference.

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 


### 81404: A Hundred groups with a common aim

A HUNDRED GROUPS 
WITH A COMMON AIM 
This is the second in a series of special articles describ- 
ing the work of some of the 100 international non- 
governmental organizations whose co-operation with 
Unesco helps the accomplishment of its programme. 
most of us chanted these words CC ENY-MEENY-MINY-MO... ” > 
E numberles times when we iwere children. Are they, as 
we may think them now, nothing but a meaningless 
children’s litany ? Or do they remain, not simply from 
our childhood, but from the very childhood of man ? 
One theory holds them to be survival of a Neolithic numerical 
system used over 10,000 years ago, but, whatever the origin, their 
equivalents are to be found the world over, in civilizations which 
have no common language heritage. 
It is such curious heritages as these which link us together 
beyond national boundaries and the passage of time and which, 
with songs, customs, dances and dress, make up the world's 
folk-lore. 
As a formal study folk-lore is barely 100 years old, but in that 
time it has become so widely developed that the International 
Commission on Folk-Arts and Folk-Lore--the international body 
formed in 1928 to co-ordinate the activities of folk-lore groups-- 
to-day has nearly 1,000 members in more than 50 countries. 
This year, the International 
Commission, now working with 
Unesco under a system of consult- 
ative arrangements, will produce, 
with Unesco’s help, the first 
volume of a publication on folk- 
lore. Each issue of this publica- 
tion, “Laos”, will deal with diffe- 
rent aspects of folk-lore. In one 
there will be a series of studies 
on masks and their development 
and use in different civilizations. 
Another, for example, will consist 
of comparative studies on gestures, 
and another on lullabies. 
Of what interest are masks, 
gestures and lullabies to Unesco? 
They are such small parts of our 
lives that we take them for 
granted. And it is for this reason 
that they make up the folkways 
or systems which have held 
societies together throughout their 
evolution from pre-history to 
modern times. 
Eventually they form a record 
of what is essential to man in his 
collective and individual life. 
Through comparative studies, 
research workers recognize reli- 
gious, political and language differ- 
ences, not as fundamental, but as 
alternate solutions to the same 
basic problem. 
“ Mo Run Geal Og ” 
o give scholars access to the 
| scientific facts established in 
the century of folk-lore 
research is one of the purposes of 
the International Commission on 
Folk-Arts and Folk-Lore. 
In any field of specialized study 
 i» 
cation, science and cu. ture. 
subscribers, 
French Francs. 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! 
get them to subscribe too. 
Australia : 
Toronto. 
Cuba : 
Czechoslovakia : 
Egypt : 
Hungary : “lbusz” Akademia-u. 1 
India : 
Italy : 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Pera, 
Sweden : 
2960 Broadway, New York 27, N.Y.   Artigas, 1320-24, Montevideo. 
 
The UNESCO COURIER is an international periodical devoted to the work 
of UNESCO and to activities and developments throughout the world in edu- 
Until now some of our readers have been receiving free copies of our 
periodical. In order to permit us to supply the many thousands of new readers 
in almost every country in the world we are undertaking a special drive for 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 US. or 5/- or 200 
Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France. 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana S. A. Alsina 500 Buenos-Aires. 
H. A. Goddard Ltd., 255a, George St., 
Belgium : Librairie encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua Mexico $8-B, Caixa postal 3281, Rio-de-Janeiro. 
Canada : Mr Victor P. Seary, Manager, The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Mr Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 9a, 1791, Bogota. 
La Casa Belga, Sr. D. René de Smedt, O‘Reilly, Havana. 
Orbis, Stalinova, "46, Praha XII. - 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6, Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Librairie James Cattan, 38; rue Kasr el Nil, Cairo. 
France : Unesco Sales Service, 19, av. Kléber, Paris (16¢). Tél. Kléber 52.00. 
Great Britain : H.M. Stationery Office : London : York House, Kingsway (Retail Counter 
Service) : P.O. Box 569, London S.E.I. (Post orders). - Manchester 2 : 33-41 King 
Street. - Edinburgh 2 : 13a Castle Street. - Cardiff 
Bristol 1 : Tower Lane. - Belfast : 80 Chichester Street. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens. 
i 0, Budapest V. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Israel : Leo Blumstein, Book and Art Shop, 35, Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Messagerie Italiane, Via Lomazzo, 52, Milano. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Universelle, Avenue des Frangais, Beirut. 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, Mexico DF. 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Aid. Fondsadministratie, Lange Voorhout 9, The 
ague. . © 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 7, Oslo. EERE 
S.A. Girén de la Unién, Lima. 
Portugal : Unico Portuguesa de Imprensa, 198 Rue 
C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
United States of America : International Documents Service, Columbia University Press, 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacién Cientifica para la América Latina, Unesco, Bulevar 
a comprehensive bibliography is 
essential and work on such a 
bibliography in folk-lore has been 
in progress since 1917. Now, with 
the aid of Unesco, it is nearing 
completion. 
Unesco is also encouraging the 
preparation of a multilingual 
glossary of terms used in folk-lore 
and ethnology which, when 
completed, will give definitions and 
equivalents in thirty languages. 
Folk music is a specialized field 
in the study of folk-lore itself. 
Last year, the International 
Commission called a meeting in 
Geneva to discuss a uniform system 
for notations in folk music. The 
classical European method of 
writing music cannot be used, since 
it makes no provision for marking 
quarter tones, which exist in some 
folk music, and cannot deal with 
certain other folk variants of 
timing and rhythm. 
One of the International 
Commission’s member organiza- 
tions, the Folk-Lore Institute of 
Scotland, is now at work on a 
linguistic survey which includes 
musical study. Equipped with 
recording machines, its members 
are tracing, through songs and 
stories, the remnants of the old 
Gaelic language still found in 
Scotland. Co 
“Mich Iarla nam bratach bana... 
Mo run geal og...” these are songs 
which are the last representatives 
of the ancient music of the Hebri- 
des, in the archaic pentatonic 
scale. It is through the preser- 
vation of such heritages that cul- 
 
Sydney. 
+ 1 St Andrew's Crescent. - 
  
de S. Bento, 3° Esq. Lisbon.   
     
  
  
    
  
Tales of fantastic exploits are legion among the folk-lore songs and stories handed down 
from one generation to another. The adventures of Sinbad the Sailor, Jack the Giant Killer 
and Gulliver may all once have had a certain basis of fact, but time and the human ima- 
gination have embroidered them to a point that makes us dismiss them as incredible. It 
was under the title of*Gulliver Revived” that the adventures of a more recent raconteur of 
stories, Baron von Munchausen, were published in France in 1787. These illustrations are 
taken from the first French edition of this collecticn of the Baron’s experiences. 
tures live on, even as small groups 
in countries which have swallow- 
ed them, as the Basques in Spain, 
the Bretons in France and the 
Flemish Scots. 
Eventually the International 
Commission on Folk Arts and Folk- 
lore hopes that history will be 
taught, not as m series of battles 
and conquests, but as the daily life 
and languages, agricultural and 
technical achievements of differ- 
ent peoples, their dances and 
poetry. 
Understanding On All Levels 
NEsco is being helped towards 
another important goal-- 
bringing advanced civiliza- 
tions and under-developed regions 
closer together, to secure for both 
the benefits often lost through 
misunderstanding and ignorance-- 
by another organization, the Inter- 
national Union for Anthropologic- 
al and Ethnological Sciences. 
Members of this organization, 
now working under consultative 
arrangements with Unesco, include 
groups studying the native peoples 
of America, the South Sea Islands 
and the primitive cultures of 
Africa. One of these, the Inter- 
national African Institute, has 
been working on a series of special 
studies which will help Unesco’s 
work on inter-cultural studies. 
Values and traditions among 
African societies often differ sub- 
stantially from those of European 
civilization. To-day, African peo- 
ples who, until a generation ago 
lived an entirely un-industrialized 
life, are playing an increasingly 
important part in world econo- 
mics. To eliminate the conflicts 
which have arisen in the past, 
there must be understanding on 
every level of dealing between 
Africans and representatives of 
western civilization. 
To this end, the African Institute 
is preparing a volume on African 
social and cultural values, and 
African reactions to western atti- 
tudes and techniques. 
Then again, family relationships 
play an important part in African 
societies, and embrace a long range 
of rights and obligations which 
are not always understood by 
other peoples. Such understanding 
is, however, necessary to the 
smooth running of the new poli- 
tical and economic role which 
Africa is entering on in world 
affairs. 
Avoiding Past Mistakes =~ 
NDER contract with Unesco, 
the African Institute has 
been at work for almost a 
year on a study of African kinship, 
marriage and family life, to be 
published in French and English. 
This work will anticipate causes of 
friction likely to arise under condi- 
tions of economic change. 
Extensive fleld studies, to inves- 
tigate African social organization, 
moral and religious ideas have also 
been proposed. The history of 
African affairs is largely a record 
of trouble resulting from misunder- 
standings on the part of outside 
civilizations which have dealt with 
them. We must not, today, repeat 
the mistakes of the past through 
ignorance. 
The work done by the Inter- 
national African Institute has been 
so satisfactory that Unesco has 
contracted with the International 
Union for Anthropological and 
Ethnological Sciences, to begin 
similar studies among the native 
peoples of America and the South 
Sea Islands. 
Through such practical applica- 
tion of research and experience, 
the free exchange of educated 
opinion among peoples of different 
cultures will form common ground 
for the foundations of a lasting 
peace. 
RECENT UNESCO 
PUBLICATIONS 
EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP 
As part of its work to stimulate 
library development Unesco recently 
published the first of a series of 
booklets on this subject — “Educa- 
tion for Librarianship” by J. Periam 
Danton, Dean of the School of Li- 
brarianship, University of California. 
All aspects of the creation and 
objectives of library schools are dealt 
with in this compact work — the 
selection of students and staff; cur- 
riculum; accommodation and facili- 
tiles and the placing of students. 
Mr. Danton presents a case for full 
time training in a properly organized 
library school. 
The first editions of this publica- 
tion in English and French will be 
followed by others in Spanish, Po- 
lish and Arabic. 
Price : 65 cents, 4/-, 200 francs. 
MONUMENTS AND SITES OF 
HISTORY AND ART AND ARCHAEO- 
LOGICAL EXCAVATIONS 
Contents of this 96 page publica- 
tion include : Restoration methods 
since the 19th century, museums of 
monuments, the restoration of his- 
toric buildings since the war and the 
conclusions and recommendations of 
the committee of experts on the pro- 
tection and restoration of historic 
monuments, held at Unesco House, 
last year. 
This bi-lingual volume (French- 
English) With 115 illustrations, has 
been published by Unesco’s Division 
of Museums and Historic Monu- 
ments. 
Price : $ 1.50, 6/-, 300 francs. 
STUDY ABROAD. 
International Handbook. 
Vacation Study Supplement to Vol- 
ume II — 1949. 
Following the publication last year 
of a special supplement to Volume I 
of Study Abroad, this supplement to 
Volume II lists opportunities for va- 
cation study abroad in 1950. List- 
ed on 77 pages are seminars, study 
courses and visits, youth camps and 
other types of educational activity 
organized for students, teachers and 
workers from different countries. 
The material is divided into three 
chapters : Vacation Study Abroad, 
International Fellowships and Faci- 
lities for short-term Teacher Inter- 
change. 
Price : $ 0.50, 3/-, 150 [rancs.     

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 81405: Experts to seek best adult education methods at UNESCO sponsored seminar

EXPERTS TO SEEK BEST ADULT EDUCATION METHODS 
AT UNESCO SPONSORED SEMINAR 
“ DULY EDUCATION" js a tearm so rich In meanings, and so varied In Ns applications, thet It 
resisly rigid definition. In one place, It may include lessons in the curing of poultry 
disease, and, In another, a course of lectures or debates on TBA Century music. In both 
places, It will seek 10 help man improve hig snvironment, to improve himself —and Lo look beyond 
Ma village and bayond his country, to recognize the interdependent brotherhood of all men, In 
the neighbourhood called the world, 
Seeking to Improve the methods of adult edusation, experts are meeting this month in Austria, 
In 8 UNESCO-aponsored seminar, whose organization and purpose are defined on this page. In 
3 the counliry where Lhe experts mest, there Is already an old tradition for adult education. A sssond 
3 story on this page describes some of the special problems Taced by he adult educalors—and 
educatess—aof Austria, A 
ak IRE TRIER Pr CL 
  
A * ad 
  
 
N a quiet country hotel cn the shores of Lake 
Mondsee in the Austrian Alps, educaticn specialists 
from :zcme twenty countries will meet this month 
for a seminar cn adult education crganized by Unesco. 
From June 18th to July 29th these educationists, 
gathered at the Waldhotel, in Kreuzstein, about 25 miles 
from Salzburg, will continue part of the work begun last 
year at Elsinore, Denmark, by the first International 
“Conference on Adult Education to be held since the war. 
INCE 1947, Unesco has 
S instituted a new kind of 
conference — the Seminar. 
The Seminar brings together 
educators from a number of 
countries to examine important 
educational problems. These 
educators make plans of action 
applicable to their respective 
countries and prepare in- 
formation material which can 
be used on a national or 
  
Embracing every kind of study and every form of 
technical and cultural knowledge, adult education has 
become one of the most important modern problems, and an international scale. The 
one of the most universal. Seminar, as well as being a 
real international gathering, is 
But it has an over-riding purpose — to defend the 
cause of peace in men’s minds, to “awaken”, as M. Torres 
Unesco’s Director-General, Bodet, told the Elsinore   a means of education in in- 
ternational understanding.   
Conference, “in the conscience of every adult 
an awareness both of his personal responsi- 
bility and of his intellectual and moral fel- 
lowship with the whole of mankind”. 
It was with these words in mind that the 
Elsinore Conference laid down two funda- 
mental principles for adult education — unity 
of aim and free choice of methods, 
should lead, through education, to a type of 
culture in which the motive principle is per- 
sonal responsibility”. 


### 81406: Adult education in Austria

"ADULT EDUCATION 
  
  
“that means. 
Apprenticeship and re-education 
HE most effective ways of achieving this 
will be sought by the specialists meeting 
at Kreuzstein, this month. They know 
that in adult education the best results are 
not realized through conventional educational 
Adult education is to some extent 
both a complementary and a compensatory 
process ; it is partly an apprenticeship and 
partly a work of re-education. 
. 
IN AUSTRIA 
 
  
    
FTER the disaster of 
National Socialism and 
war, adult education in 
Austria has more to do 
than merely to spread know- 
ledge; it must demonstrate the 
real values in democracy, hu- 
man understanding, tolerance 
and self-control. 
This is not at all easy, as 
the younger generation first 
got to know these words 
amidst misery, starvation and 
political chaos. In any case, 
_it is not enough to approach 
the intellects of the students, 
but the whole human being 
with mind and soul. 
But there is another diffi- 
culty. Austria is a country of 
an old and most valuable cul- 
ture. But many people, beset 
by daily problems, find no 
comfort in it. To many, cul- 
ture appears to be a luxury, 
useless for the “man in the 
street”. So adult education 
has to build new bridges be- 
tween men and culture to 
make them meet. 
In Austria, adult education 
tries to approach the whole 
human being. For this reason, 
the residential colleges have 
arranged courses of four to 
twelve weeks’ duration, in 
which young farmers, farm- 
workers, factory-workers and 
clerks become g community of 
their own. Plays, excursions, 
dancing, singing, music, sport 
are important parts of this 
system © of education. The 
teacher behaves as a friend, 
the lectures are followed by 
discussions. 
Self Activity the Goal 
MORE rationalistic type is 
that of the Folk High 
Schools (Volkshoch- 
schulen) and evening classes 
in the towns. It is not easy 
to get. a holiday for purposes 
of adult education; so many 
pecple. busy all day long in 
offices and factories, attend 
evening courses and single lec- 
tures in these institutions. 
From thes2 classes grow nu- 
merous discussion groups and 
study circles, for self activity 
is a conscious goal. As far as 
possible, all technical means, 
such as cinema, phonographs 
and projectors are used, but 
these means are most limited. 
Of special interest and im- 
portance are the attempts 
towards artistic education. 
Here again, institutions of 
adult education try to lead the 
students to understand art by 
self activity (singing groups, 
sculpture workshops, handi- 
craft clubs, etc.). Excursions 
to museums and exhibitions; 
good reproductions of works 
of art in the rooms and corri- 
dors contribute also to the 
students’ interest. 
Role of Libraries 
N the provinces, excursions 
to Vienna or other towns, 
to theatre concerts, exhi- 
bitions are increasing in num- 
ber. The Volkshochschule 
Linz has initiated visits to 
Italy and other neighbouring 
countries, a most valuable re- 
PE 
newal of an old educational 
idea. 
In the libraries, the leaders 
advise the readers from a psy- 
chological point of view to 
bring the right book together 
with the right person as far 
as possible. This is made 
more difficult by the limited 
book supply in many libraries. 
The librarians are partic- 
ularly encouraged to increase 
their usefulness by attending 
special courses. Lectures are 
given to enable readers to 
meet the authors personally 
and discussion groups meet 
frequently. 
In the last few years, many 
new circulating libraries have 
been founded: small chests for 
fifty or #hundred beoks are 
sent to remote places and ex- 
changed from time to time 
Small town libraries have a 
similar exchange system. 
Educators from about 20 countries will meet in this lakeside hotel at 
Kreuzstein, in the Austrian Alps, from June 18th to July 29th. for Unesco’s 
Seminar on Adult Education. 
The problem is not so much how to teach a given subject 
or to impart a given technique but rather how to co- 
operate in helping men and women to develop a wider 
understanding and use of life. 
The Kreuzstein Seminar will therefore be more than an 
opportunity for the experts to compare methods and 
exchange views; it will offer them a chance toc give on- 
the-spot demcnstraticns of adult education methods. 
At Kreuzstein, they will study the many adult education 
methods used in different countries and their discussions will 
be combined with practical demonstrations such as exhibitions 
and film shows. 
The experts will be divided into four study groups under the 
Seminar leader, Dr. Sven Bjorklund, Dean and founder of 
the Stockholm University for adult education, and world 
famous authority on the subject. 
Towards A Community Spirit 
HE first group will study the ways in which adult educ- 
ation is organized and administered according to local 
and national needs. Through the exchange of ideas and 
experiences their work should produce a useful guide to both 
the organization of adult education programmes and enlisting 
of support for them. ’ 
The second group will study the “intellectual and scientific 
training” of adults through classes, lectures, study-circles, films 
and radio. It will also examine questions of specialization in 
subjects connected with the stufient’s work and the popula- 
rization of science, 
“Social and economic training” will be the concern of the 
third group, in which the experts will consider the best ways 
cf developing among adults a community spirit and an inter- 
naticnal cutlook. 
The fourth group will deal with the arts, and with the pro- 
blem of leisure-hours. 
The four group leaders who have already been appointed, 
are: M. Jean Le Veugle (France), Mr. S. Whitman (United 
States), Mr. Alex Sim (Canada), and Sig. Joannes Carlo (Ifaly). 
The seminar will consider the possibility of establishing an 
international centre for adult education, which would not only. 
serve to train educators, but would also bring them into touch 
with statesmen, writers and trade-union leaders. 
The results of the seminar will subsequently be published as 
a brochure for the guidance of educators throughout the 
world. 
American Division. 
them. “Men of America” 
and “An Introduction 
Poetry”. 
women.   
NEW HEAD FOR UNESCO'S 
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
r. LIoNEL ELVIN, formerly Principal of Ruskin College. 
M Oxford, has taken up his duties as Head of Unesco's 
Education Department, 
Beeby, now Director of Education in New Zealand. 
Mr. Elvin started teaching English Literature at Cambridge 
University in 1930, two vears after graduating from there 
with a first class Honours Degree. During the war he served 
in the British Air Ministry and the Ministry of Information 
where he was in charge of the Labour and Industry Section, 
In 1945 he resigned his Cambridge Fellowship to become 
Principal of Ruskin College. Since then he has been a member 
of the University Grants Committee, of the Secondary Schools 
Examinations Council and in 1948 was appointed to the Central 
Advisory Council on Education. 
He is the author of several works, among 
a collection of 
historical and biographical essays on leading 
figures in the history of the United States, 
to the Study of 
In carrying out his new duties, Mr. Elvin 
told the “Courier”, last month, he hoped 
“to play a small part in creating the state of 
world mindedness which the times demand, 
and to help Unesco to become a more active 
experience in the lives of ordinary men and 
“Unesco has two main functions,” he said. 
“It endeavours to serve the international 
in succession to Dr. C.E. 
  
Professor Lionel Elvin. 
needs of education and, through education, 
to serve the needs of the world community, 
particularly for peace. There is no conflict 
between these two, though we have to find 
a balance, and one that may vary from time 
to time. 
“While I regard the first function as es- 
sential, we cannot limit ourselves lo it”, he 
said, “because it involves a necessarily slow 
process of collecting information and the 
like, and the times are too urgend for that 
alone. As H.G. Wells said nen contemplat- 
ing the prospects of mankind, ‘it is a race 
between education and catastrophe’ .”   

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 81419: Beirut Translation Commission will fill gaps in Islamic-Western literature

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 
  
¥ 
q 
* 
4 
g < 7 ~ ¢ 
  
AVICENNA 
An engraving by A. Thévet, alter a 
medieval portrait in the Paris Me- 
dical School. 
. : 1 
cultures may result from two common causes. 
One of these is the loss by a people of their 
own historic heritage of the arts and crafts and 
‘wisdom of their ancestors. The other is the barrier 
of cultural isolation—mutual ignorance of the wealth 
created by unknown men and women, in unknown 
places, surrounded by the fence of unknown langua- 
ges. On this page are described two current 
projects—each aimed at one of the “hidden hungers” 
of modern man. Libraries throughout the world 
will contribute to the work of the Institute for the 
Restoration of Arab Manuscripts, in restoring, 
preserving and making available the written records 
of Arab culture—for the benefit of Arab lands, and 
finally of all lands. The work of the Beirut Com- 
mission, translating Islamic works into Western 
languages—and Western classics into Arabic—will 
create new ‘‘cultural vitamins” for the whole of 
mankind. 
De deficiencies in national or regional 
* 
HE debt owed to Islam by Western science and philosophy is often forgotten 
and, at best, is but vaguely understood — although the influence of Moslem 
mathematicians, physicians, physicists, chemists, astronomers and mystics 
appears everywhere. 
when students wish to turn to the ori- 
ginal texts of these scientists and philo- 
sophzrs, they find themselves at a loss. 
Many people would like to know 
more of the profound and audacious 
philosophers of Baghdad or Cordova, 
the picturesque and erudite geogra- 
phers of Damascus and historians of 
Tunis. But there is no bookseller to 
supply them with what they want. 
Most of the treatises, memoirs, en- 
cyclopaedias and meditations have 
never been translated. Some of them 
appeared a long time ago in Latin. Of 
this immense literature, only a few 
isolated fragments, in large libraries 
and specialized reviews, are available 
-t0 anyone who does not read Arabic. 
This regrettable state of affairs is 
now being changed. A Commission, 
consisting of three Unesco represen- 
tatives and three Lebanese experts, 
has been working for a year in Beirut 
to provide the world with translations 
of the most representative works of 
slam. 
The Commission’s programme is a 
big one. To inaugurate it, two great 
names have been chosen—Al Ghazali 
and Avicenna. 
Few translators have devoted them- 
selves to the philosopher cof Tus, 
Without some knowledge of them it would be difficult 
to account for the “renaissances” of the 11th, 13th and 16th centuries. But 
although Al Ghazali is particu- 
larly close to European thought, on 
which he exercised g far-reaching in- 
fluence. Thanks to the Pugio Fidei of 
Raimundo Marti, this influence was 
extended first to St. Thomas Aquinas 
and later to Pascal. His life, which 
was dominated by a dramatic conver- 
sion, had points of comparison with 
the author of Les Pensées. 
Lawyer and Philosopher 
ORN in 1058 A.D., Al Ghazali devot- 
ed his predigious technical ability to 
the study of law and philosophy. As 
a professor at Baghdad, the elegance 
of his scepticism made him famous. 
In 1095, at the height of his popularity, 
when his teaching consisted of doubt- 
ing all religious truths and the possi- 
bility of absolute knowledge, he under- 
went a profound mystical crisis, which 
resulted in a complete mental break- 
down. When he recovered, he re- 
nounced his position and fortune and 
became a dervish. Surrendering him- 
self to God, he led a wandering, asce- 
tic life devoted to prayer and writ- 
ing. He died in 1111. 
His best books date from  tlte last 
phase of his life: the voluminous 
Summa theologica, Thya Ulum al-Din; 
his compilation of moral exhortations, 
: 
a 
   
’ 3 hn rn w ’ ‘ ) - - 
Fn ea 2 mt a a a Ny he v -_ 
’ 
  
- 
S— * >t 
wl oy vig ye 
rk i WRT a 4 
ih  alaath per 4 Tham 
ANG gran da aa You i 
“ der gm ands (3 0 eile ocd " 
la bar ow Tom um aie Comm 
rhe de; levy, » pov end 3 we [ie de 
SE a Si pate. 2 yee nye magn 
. 0 red TRAYw eee NS 
Ar, PW lw ap he Te 
wl - he thten 4 2 wn 7 WY 
Ire que Toi ow ’ 
vor wile om love ~ § of thr we w— —~ 
po gid wer TREE nD Jee ve nd - — — 
7 mile wit Lore LT Ly gm ve 
_-— c od lin vw ve Bo Lop hd HT ee me pe 
. ot O levumy ow tems» Ls Coo f'r Bowens a 
3 echo) Cyt wef Agree A NC LY Yew eee 
> TRY 7 Poy [wy (Yar ai. pan reg 
5 tat # pr eROE er oy hes LOE 2 
   w 80 ovale pO mdr 
, tharur mbar ponx@o 
» ¥ datidn adv - » 
x ony Compan » yolk FEMS 
mie og BON em Pe 
- our unk vw TD tw 
« TAs lepvrmy Jet abe m0 
- NR lE TF at Rn a] 
ERLE RE IL Sh Rs 
YEE 8 4A. 1. E FF BUR 
| a fav 20 rir bow Sand 
pom Wd Gren ef udt ow Cle 
ah 
wan whey ow 
{= Pl Sidi and 
ndhowe ft ( 
DE 4 (mga RE a) 
whom : —- 
I xr rg Ta pe tem Va 
Al ~~" 
ae 
Eads a STE 
RE EE Toot 
Pee tae. 
LE ea 
eel home 
Tr ab to Sr Cl Nat Low) pur @i™ NF ul ¥ aad FD we ine 
9 vty ifr - A Oh. ppl 4 pve cow aad 
ww ne war Jet oa pea “- y ta we Olan Spt Vom Phe 
wh La pat, Ey < | én Teanru pend (le prow 
€ Tofw wiane wen tke Jo ad ¢ Cam on Mew 
same > pr Sb nd or) yy . Lie mi a 
@ ee lng PR Mee age reid Mga al Sed on 
ET AE > } Vie we AR he ws 
were | ries aro : ot 
od mu »a Ll a i NN Favenund “ey » revvegw 
Er 1s i La w——— SI i Series Arwal 
I yt EN 2 Cuma Capt 7 ge Satan d 
wr pk ve { 0d ln, - 3 
ae JP pen oh + ( ih 
men BM Ge re, 
; PR 
-¥ 
* rr 
CO ¢) 2), 
-—— 
OMAR a 
A photograph of the first Avicenna manuscript published in Latin in Europe. 
Ayuha I-Walad, on the Insufficiency 
of knowledge if not accompanied by 
charitable work; and his spiritual au- 
tobiography, Al Munqidh Min al- 
Dalal, frequently compared with the 
Confessions of St. Augustin. In the 
near future, the Beirut Commission 
will present French translations of the 
last two works. 
Aviecenna’s Last Work 
T might be expected that Avicenna’s 
I work would be better known in the 
West. His philosophy is accepted 
as being intimately related to Thom- 


### 74352: Scattered Arab manuscripts collected and microfilmed

SCATTERED ARAB MANUSCRIPT 
Collected and Microfilmed 
HE valuable and difficult task of making ancient Arabic docu- 
ments available to Middle Eastern and other cultures has already 
been far advanced by the Institute for the Restoration of Arab 
Manuscripts. Under auspices. of the Institute, created by the Arab 
League in 1946, more than a million pages of manuscripts have 
already been traced and microfilmed in libraries in Damascus, Aleppo, 
 
Cairo and Alexandria. 
The pages thus far photo- 
graphed represent more than 
2.500 entire manuscripts, of 
which there are about a million 
in various parts of the world, 
and of which only a small pro- 
portion has been listed. Many 
of them are preserved on frag- 
ments of papyrus or vellum, 
and cover a wide range of sub- 
jeets. In addition to the reli- 
gious writings, including parts 
of the Koran, law studies, lite- 
~ rature, music, philosophy, his- 
tory, education and science, 
there is a group under the 
heading “Cooking and Perfu- 
mes”. 
World -Wide Research 
IBRAIRIES everywhere have 
been asked by the Insti- 
tute for lists of Arab 
works in their possession, in 
order to catalogue them, and 
experts in countries all over 
the world - have been asked to 
co-operate in rg¢search on docu- 
ments which have not been 
properly listed. In. countries 
where it is impossible to find 
anyone with sufficient know- - 
ledge for this task, the Institute 
is sending experts out to study 
the documents and make a 
choice. Libraries with the ne- 
cessary apparatus will be asked 
to contribute microfilm copies 
of the Arab manuscripts of 
value in their possession. 
  
  
  
Reliable lists already in exis- 
tence have been consulted by 
the Institute, and a selection 
made from them. 
For All Lands 
N particular the Institute call- 
| ed upon several experts lo 
make selections from many 
of the works which Brockel- 
mann considered outstanding 
in his historic treatise on Arab 
literature, “Geschichte der Ara- 
bischen Literature. 
When complete, this collec- 
tion of microfilmed manuscripts 
will be available not only to 
students in the Middle East, 
but may be acquired by any 
library on request. 
Unesco is at the moment col- 
lecting information on similar 
microfilm libraries all over the 
world which will be published 
in a catalogue in the near 
future. EERE I se. rs 
 
 
ism. Yet, of his 355 werks, only his 
books on medicine are really widely 
known. Up to the 18th Century, these 
were standard works in all European 
universities. 
His philosophical work is represent- 
ed in European languages only by 
extracts or summaries made at second 
hand. There has never been a full 
translation of the great book he wrote 
at Ispahan in the last years of his 
life, in which he departed considerably 
from the Aristotelianism that had go- 
verned all his previous writings. This 
book, Kitab al-isharat wat tanbihat, 
It is this book—the first unabridged 
version—that will be published by the 
Beirut Commission. Translated into 
French by Mlle Goichon, it will enable 
the West to arrive at a more accurate 
appreciation of the remarkable con- 
tribution of the great Persian writer. 
The fourth work which the experts 
will probably translate is a book by 
Ibn Khaldun, the great 14th century 
Tunisian historian. The plan is to 
publish his Mugaddama, the preface 
to his Universal History, in which Ibn 
Khaldun, a predecessor of Montes- 
quieu, studied the rise and fall of 
empires. 
Great Books of the West 
HESE undertakings do not exhaust 
the activities of the Commission. 
To make the great works of Islam 
known throughout the world, and first 
of all in the West, is but one of its 
aims. It also intends to ensure a wide 
circulation of representative examples 
of Western literature translated into 
Arabic. Heading the list of works is 
Aristotle's Politics, of which Islam has 
never had a faithful translation. Next 
comes Don Quixote, Descartes’ Dis- 
course on Method, Shakespeare's A 
Winter's Tale. Bacon's Essays, and 
La Storia della Colonna Infame, 8 
moving work by Manzoni. 
Although these activities are con- 
centrated in Beirut, their purpose con- 
cerns the whole Arab world. As the 
entire project develops, it is expected 
that all the Arab states, in collabor- 
ation with the Cultural Committee of 
the Arab League, will be involved. Sy- 
ria is already about to take part in 
the work of the Commission, and 
places have been assigned to repre- 
sentatives of Egypt, Iraq and Saudi 
Arabia.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

     
rT
 
T
T
 
hm 
~ STILL 
EFORE picking up this issue of 
B the Courier perhaps you were 
reading one of the 218,000.000 
copies of newspapers which are 
published each day throughout the 
world. Next to you, as you read this, 
either silent or speaking with words 
or music, may be one of the world’s 
160,000,000 radio sets. 
These, of course, — the newspaper, 
the radio, together with films — are 
the main sources of the information 
and ideas reaching people everywhere. 
Whether or not a country is well or 
poorly supplied with newspapers, 
radio stations and receiving sets and 
cinemas, determines in large part the 
opportunities for enlightenment and 
entertainment enjoyed by its citizens. 
  
of the world’s apparatus for commu- 
nication has been presented in simple, 
direct fashion. 
iss 
Did You Know That... 
HE volume begins with 20 
brightly coloured and illustrat 
ed pages of maps and charts. 
It continues with brief descriptions of 
the facilities and organization of 
communication in more than 160 
countries. There are many interesting, 
sometimes surprising facts. 
How well informed are you about 
the modern media of information? 
Did you know that? — After the 


### 81420: UNESCO discloses deficit in world communication facilities: still too few newspapers, radio sets and cinemas

UNESCO DISCLOSES DEFICIT IN WORLD 
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
TOO FEW NEWSPAPERS, RADIO SETS AND 
informational or documentary films is 
Canada. 
Out of the 10,412,000 radio sets in 
Asia, over 8 million are located in 
Japan. And, did you know that in the 
U.S.S.R., newspapers are published in 
more than 70 different languages? 
Unesco undertook the preparation 
of this volume at the request of the 
United Nations Sub-Commission on 
Freedom of Information and of 
the Press. It was prepared in the 
Division of Free Flow of Inform- 
ation, the section of Unesco which 
joins with the U.N. in efforts to 
promote the freedom of information. 
The Sub-Commission made use of the 
book at its annual session, which took 
place at Montevideo last month. 
    
  
   
- . . . ” 
receiving information”. 
  
  
  
        
Distribution|of Communication faclities varie... from Cop tinent to Continent... 
NORTH SOUTH 
WORLD AFRICA AMERICA AMERICA ASIA EUROPE OCEANIA 
POPULATION 
® 
Total : » 
2,351,113,000 i A R R 
h 
193,359,000 | 210,908,000 | 105,295,000 | 1,247,731,000 | 581,642,000 12,188,000 
PRESS 
Total Circulation y ® 
of Daily Newspapers 
218,764,700 Uv 
1,920,650 58,155,750 7,302,500 27,423,400 119,776,000 4,186,000 
RADIO 
Total Number § = " 
of Radio 0 .. —~ O we 
Receiving Sets . | Oi) . | 3) 
160,686,211 927,266 87,197,534 5,698,600 10,412,643 54,202,111 2,248,057 
FILM 
Total Number 
of Cinema Seats : |= % |. In » 
44,375,200 877,650 15,107°000 3,519,000 4,146,000 19,036,000 1,689,000           
For the first time, information on 
the world’s facilities to see and hear 
by means of press, radio, films and 
television has been assembled in one 
volume. Unesco has just published a 
lively, illustrated book entitled : 
World communications : press, radio, 
film, which gives an assessment of the 
world’s total equipment for spreading 
information ideas by these 
methods of mass communication. 
This volume will interest many, and 
not just the experts, for the appraisal 
* 
and 
During the last war, micro- 
films of letters despatched by 
air helped to span the dis- 
     
  
tance between millions of p— 
. 1 : se 
people in the fighting services | . 
and their relatives -at home. Hon hk 
. . . ! - ’ 
Microfilming was, however, 
. . lan FANS 
first put to practical use 80 W“ 
years ago by the French en- 3 mous 
gineer Dagron, who used it . to 
to get news out of besieged a 
Paris. This poster described MODAGRON 
the postal service of films car- NT 
ried by pigeons. The mes- TET 
sages were projected on a a 
screen for reading as shown in oT Bom 
contemporary engraving which ATERIE 
depicts journalists at the re- ICE 
ceiving end. 
United States, India is the world’s 
largest producer of entertainment 
films, producing about 250 feature 
films each year. That the country in 
the world that reads the most news- 
papers is the United Kingdom, where 
1 newspaper is sold daily for each 2 
people. 
In the United States there is better 
than 1 radio set for every 2 people, 
while in Ethiopia there is 1 radio set 
for every 2,000 inhabitants. One of 
  
the world’s leading producers of 
Ul POSTE OYAG fk 
< FAA QO Ey 
' TORO SOLVE ad 
DU SIEGE DE PARIS « 
POURS BORBLALE WON 
p— TEE 
str 
LE ARLE     
  
On-The-Spot Surveys 
that went into the making of the 
volume was carried out under the 
direction of a young Canadian profes- 
sor of political science, Albert A. Shea, 
who has been studying the question of 
communication by press, radio and film 
for a number of years. Available to 
him were the result of on-the-spot 
surveys of press, radio and film faci- 
lities, carried out by Unesco’s Technic- 
Th collection of facts and figures 
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
CINEMAS 
al Facilities Division in 43 countries 
and being extended to the entire 
world. 
The book opens with a series of 
coloured maps, charts and pictographs 
showing at a glance how the world’s 
peoples are served by their communic- 
ation systems. 
The next section highlights the in- 
dividual pattern of communication for 
every country — number and circul- 
ation of newspapers and periodicals, 
news agencies, schools of journalism, 
distribution of radio transmitters and 
receivers, developments in television, 
number of cinemas, film production, 
- film imports and other basic inform- 
ation. 
The third section consists of detailed 
data, mainly statistical, for the reader 
seeking facts and figures on mass 
media in any area. 
  
Facilities And Freedom 
N a foreword, Unesco refers to its 
I "efforts to help people increase and 
improve their knowledge of one 
another through such means as press, 
radio, films and television. 
“Enjoyment of the right to inform- 
ation requires, as a first step, that 
technical facilities shall exist for 
The foreword 
adds. “It also requires that the 
facilities, where they exist, shall be 
used freely and fully to inform.” 
“This report assembles the basic 
facts. From the facts, action must 
follow. Millions of people, in vast 
areas of the world, have little or no 
modern means of communication. They 
must be helped to obtain them. And, 
at the same time, those engaged in 
press, radio and films must enjoy the 
freedom, and demonstrate the respon. 
sibility, which will enable these 
potential links between peoples to 
serve peace and international under- 
standing.” 
The book is available to the general 
public and can be obtained through 
Unesco sales agents. It is priced at 
$1.20 or 7s. sterling or 350 French 
francs. 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 
  
  
| 
  
 


### 81421: Junior music, a force for world harmony

 
‘GROWING FORCE 
FOR WORLD 
HARMONY 
EFT NR SS aE LN A SSS 
     
   
  
  
   
     
 
4 
! 
A
d
 
 
    
N October nineteen hundred and forty, M. Marcel Cuvelier, Managing 
I Director of the Brussels Philharmonic Society, set to work in 
German-occupied Brussels to carry out a plan he had been 
considering for some time — the organization of a musical movement 
for the youth of Belgium. 
His original aims had been to interest boys and girls in music, to 
form their musical taste and to offer them concerts at prices they could 
afford. But now, he had a further aim — to compete for the interest and 
devotion of Belgian youth against the Nazis, who had already begun to 
set before young Belgians the example of the Jugendbewegen, ‘the Nazi 
youth movement. 
The initial phases of the plan had 
to carried out discreetly, and its 
patriotic purpose had to be well 
camouflaged as “non-political”. Still 
anxious to ingratiate themselves with 
the Belgian people, the Nazis did not 
interfere with the plan in its early 
stages. Quickly it grew so popular 
that they could not interfere — 
without giving up all hope of 
“winning” the youth of the country. 
The mere whispered announcement of 
TT ey ait. 8 Ro + wn + i Maan St a —— —— AT —— TT A 
: . 3 cat Vs Bs 
EE EE CSRS BB AS TE 
    
: 
LF       
iad 
Vo 
Je . 
LECTRONIC science 
cidents. 
of the United States. 
    
has brought 
school directly from distant class- 
rooms to more than 1,000 American 
children kept from normal physical 
attendance because of handicaps resulting 
from serious illness or disabling ac- 
By means of two-way voice 
communication over telephone wires be- 
tween electrical devices in school class- 
rooms and in rooms of homes or hospitals, 
the crippled children have been able to 
get the full advantages of regular educ- 
ation as well as the psychological bene- 
fits of indirect contact with schoolmates. 
The system, which is described in The 
Crippled Child, official magazine of the 
American National Society for Crippled 
Children and Adults of Chicago, Illinois, 
has been in use for ten years in Iowa and 
other parts of the middle western region 
A portable two- 
the plan, circulating through the 
schools, brought together in one 
season more than two thousand young 
people to listen to four symphony 
concert programmes ranging from 
Bach to Stravinsky. 
During the second season of the 
Jeunesses Musicales (Junior Music) as 
the movement was called, its member- 
ship increased to three thousand—and 
the seed sown almost in secret pro- 
duced a surprising harvest. 
i suds ar EINE v ue 


### 81424: Science brings school to crippled children

SCIENCE BRINGS SCHOOL sessen 
The movement began to spread to 
other countries. In 1941, René Nicoly 
founded in Paris the ‘“Jeunesses 
Musicales de France”. Finally, the 
- Liberation made possible the found- 
ation of the International Federation 
of Junior Music, created in 1946 at the 
Brussels Congress to which six 
countries sent delegates or observers. 
The distance travelled along the 
international road by Junior Music 
was marked at the Federation's fifth 
congress held recently in Vienna, 
attended by delegates from branches 
of the movement in eight countries 
For Youth~-By Youth 
HE reason for this success is not 
only the enthusiasm shown by 
the leaders, but the movement's 
fundamental principle that : 
all members take an active 
part in the life of the group. 
All activities are worked out 
for young people by young 
people — membership is 
limited to those aged bet- 
ween 12 and 25 years of age. 
Members are not “herded” 
to concerts. They are free to 
go or stay away as they 
please and are able to express 
their disapproval or congra- 
tulations to the Directorate 
on the concerts, music and 
other programmes which are 
arranged. 
Junior Music in Belgium 
has formed its own orchestra 
and choral society and pu- 
blishes a regular magazine. 
“Les Cahiers J”, which em- 
braces the theatre, cinema 
and poetry as well as music. 
In Brussels, where there are 
now more than ten thousand 
members, they have formed a 
council of delegates. 
The members of this coun-- 
cil — boys and girls elected 
in every school — do the 
administrative work, encou- 
rage in their fellow members 
the appreciation and study of 
music, and arrange gramo- 
phone concerts, singing com- 
petitions and reading courses. 
This delegate system reinforces the 
freely accepted discipline which is 
one of the best features of the 
movement combined with the team 
spirit which continually inspires new 
ideas and fresh ventures. 
In Junior Music, young people find 
that the realms of art are no longer a 
closed book for them, restricted to 
their elders and, horribile dictu, thrust 
dewn their throats as lessons. They 
  
  
way radio set in the classroom picks up and 
word over a leased telephone wire to the crippled student’s bedroom. 
There, over a similar radio set, he answers the class roll call, recites his 
LE TE 
transmits covery spoken 
lessons and maintains voice contact with the teacher and his classmates. 
The classroom radio unit is plugged into cutlets in the various rooms of 
the school, permitting the pupil at home to “move about”. 
Stimulus To Recovery 
THE «electrical school” has not only successfully brought education to 
shut-in children, but has helped the chances for recovery, through 
psychological stimulus, of many young victims of infantile paralysis, 
arthritis, tuberculosis and cardiac ailments. 
A number of the crippled pupils have not only kept abreast of their 
fellow pupils who attended classes in the ordinary manner but have out- 
distanced them in reaching high scholastic achievement. One boy from 
Mason City, Towa, who never saw the inside of his school, was elected 
president of his class. Three high school students of different schools 
led their classes. 
A 16-year old victim of arthritis, who lived on a farm near the town 
of Ottumwa, studied for four years at the “electrical school” after three 
and one half miles of special telephone construction had been carried 
out to make her “attendance” possible. 
 
can get as enthusiastic about a piece 
of music as they might about a sport- 
ing fixture or an expedition with their 
Scout troop. 
An Edueational Force 
B ELGIUM’S Junior Music, recently 
celebrating its tenth birthday, 
was able to look back on an im- 
pressive record of concerts, lectures, 
meetings and classes. Although it has 
never set itself up as a school or a 
league, its educational effects have 
been profound. 
Its appeal is directed toward arousing 
the intelligence and discrimination of 
young people and not the awakening 
of a short-lived enthusiam among 
them. Instead of trying to force 
them to accept hard and fast cultural 
Among the recent celebrations organized by Belgium's 
“Jeunesses Musicales” to mark the tenth anniversary of 
its foundation was an exhibition in Brussels on the 
movement's growth and 
shows Queen Elizabeth of Belgium visiting the exhi- 
bition accompanied by M. Marcel Cuvelier (right), 
founder of the movement. Behind, examining an exhibit 
is the painter, M. Creten George. who was responsible 
for the artistic arrangements of the exhibition. 
achievements. This photo 
standards, it brings them in contact 
with culture that is continually 
developing. 
One of the deeper implications of 
the movement was summed up by its 
founder, Marcel Cuvelier, when he 
wrote : “We feel that the extension of 
‘Jeunesses Musicales’ to an increasing 
number of countries will do much to 
draw nations closer togetiler and will 
make a tangible contribution to the 
building of Peace.”. : 
  
 
  
Other kinds of scheoling problems due, 
not to disease, but to distance, are also 
being solved by modern methods of com- 
munication elsewhere in the world. 
In such diverse places as New Zealand, 
France, Nigeria and China, radio has 
been a vital element in bringing learning 
to those who would otherwise be deprived. 
New Zealand has combined radio lectures 
with recitations by mail for children in 
inaccessible places. 
In Paris, the Sorbonne provides courses 
by radic—an enormous advantage to 
. many who cannot attend classes, notably 
the mothers of small children. 
Both in Nigeria and China, as well as in 
other relatively underdeveloped areas, 
collective radio listening has brought 
vital knowledge—of health, better living 
and wider cultural horizions—to children 
and grown ups alike.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 81422: Fifth session of UNESCO's General Conference opens in Florence, first speakers urge greater UNESCO contribution to peace efforts

Fifth Session of "Unesco’s 
General Conference Opens 
in Florence 
FIRST SPEAKERS URGE 
GREATER UNESCO 
CONTRIBUTION TO 
PEACE EFFORTS 
~ HIS issue of the Courier went to press during the first days of the General 
Conference, with virtually the whole of the agends remaining to be dealt 
with. Awaiting discussion and action, for example, was the whole 
programme of the Organization for 1951. Beyond this, the delegates were 
to consider the entire role of UNESCO in relation to efforts of the United 
Nations to preserve world peace, and were to project a long-range, permanent 
programme for the Organization. To present fragments of the early dis- 
cussions or fragmentary and inconclusive reports on changing situativs, 
would be incompatible with the duty of the Courier to give a balanced view 
of the Conference and its work. At press time, for example, questions relat- 
ing to the proper representation of China, and of the participation in the 
Conference of Hungary and Czechoslovakia had mot been resolved. In this 
issue are included only reports and statements made to the delegates, before 
their deliberations began. 
FANFARE of trumpets resounding 
through one of the largest and 
most beautiful rooms in the 
world — the Hall of the Five 
Hundred of the Palazzo Vecchio in 
Florence, Italy, heralded the opening 
of the fifth session of Uhesco’s Gene- 
ral Conference on May 22. 
As the four trumpeters, dressed in 
picturesque 14th century costumes, 
blew the fanfare, delegates from 56 
countries rose from their seats to 
greet the entry of Signor Luigi 
Einaudi, President of the Italian 
Republic, who had come to Florence 
to welcome them. 
More than 500 delegates from 56 
member states — among them nine 
ministers of education — as well as 
representatives from other United 
Nations Specialized Agencies and 
non - governmental organizations 
were gathered in Florence for the 
opening of the Conference which 
  
was scheduled 
June 18. 
The significance of this fifth 
Unesco General Conference as an 
occasion for re-defining Unesco’s 
role in the world and examining how 
it can contribute more vigorously to 
the United Nations mission of peace 
was underlined by many of the open- 
ing speakers. It was 
stressed by M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
Unesco’s Director-General, when 
presenting his report to the Confer- 
ence. (M. Torres Bodet’s speech is 
reported on pages 1 and 10 of this 
issue.) 
to continue until 
TRUSTEE OF PEACE 
oUNT Stefano Jacini (Italy) who 
was elected conference president 
in succession to Dr. E. Ronald Wal- 
ker (Australia) told the delegates: 
“After five years of praiseworthy 
effarts, of successes and failures, 
both useful and instructive, we have 
come to a turning point in Unesco’s 
history. 
“We must now adopt once and for 
all a particular line and method”, he 
said. Describing Unesco as “the 
trustee of a world-embracing-notion 
of peace and progress”, Count Jacini 
urged the desirability of concentrat- 
ing Unesco’s work on a few chosen 
projets. 
Sir John Maud, Chairman of 
Unesco’s Executive Board, presenting 
the Director’s General's activities 
Signor Luigi Einaudi, President of the Ita- 
lian Republic, welcoming the delegates at 
the inaugural session of the Florence 
Conference. 
* 
Nearly 600 delegates from Unesco’s Member 
States arrived in Florence to attend the Filth 
Session of the General Conference. Some 
of them are shown here listening to the 
opening speeches in the Hall of ‘the Five 
Hundred, at the Palazzo Vecchio. 
  
especially 
~~ 
Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
= §  
Speaking to representatives of Unesco National Commissions who met before 
the opening of the General Conference, M. Torres Bodet, 
“The letters which reach me from time to time — sometimes General declared : 
Unesco's Director 
from very humble people who have heard about Unesco on the wireless or have 
seen one or another of our publications — prove to me that there are in our 
Member States forces of enthusiasm. idealism and self-sacrifice which ask no 
better than to devote themselves to our cause if we give them the chance.” 
“But how could the Secretariat in Paris reach the unknown millions who 
are our real friends?” asked M. Torres Bodet. 
Commissions have an essential task”, he said. 
“HR is here that the National 
“To the extent to which they 
are really representative of all the forces in their own countries. they can give 
Unesco a hold. a degree of influence. on the workings of men’s minds and on 
public opinion.” : 
report, declared emphatically that 
Unesco was already contributing to 
peace, but he urged delegates to ask 
themselves whether Unesco could not 
make a larger and more immediate 
contribution than it had made so far. 
It was against fear, hatred and 
misunderstanding which prevailed in 
the world today that Unesco’s activ- 
ities should be set, said Sir John. 
“They are modest but solid”, he 
added, “and they are the result of 
countless acts of faith wrought by 
men and women who have worked 
for Unesco up and down the world 
in the last few years”. 
Addressing the Conference on 
behalf of M. Trygve Lie, Secretary- 
General of the United Nations, M. 
Henri Laugier, Assistant Secretary- 
General, UN Department of Social 
Affairs, said that had M. Lie been 
able to attend, he would have 
appealed to the governments repre- 
sented at the Conference to give full 
support to the UN Specialized Agen- 
cies, “all of them victims, in varying 
degrees, of the results of the cold 
» 
war . 
Before the Conference opened a 
number of important meetings were 
held in Florence. The first of 
these took place in the Palazzo Pitti, 
where Unesco’s Executive Board 
discussed and approved the provi- 
sional conference agenda. 
The draft programme before the 
delegates consists, in fact, of two 
programmes : a basic one which will 
hold good for several years to come 
and the programme for 1951, repre- 
senting the part of the basic pro- 
gramme to be carried out first. 
100 ORGANIZATIONS 
CTIVITIES proposed for 1951 
require a budget of $ 8.150.000 
— an increase of $ 150.000 over the 
1950 budget. (An outline of other im- 
portant matters to be dealt with by 
the Conference was given in the 
last issue of the Courier.) 
The second of the pre-conference 
gathering was to enable representa- 
tives of Unesco National Commis- 
sions to discuss and define the most 
effective means of co-operation in 
carrying out Unesco’s programme. 
Finally, after the start of the Con- 
ference, representatives from many 
of the 100 non-governmental organ- 
ization which have consultative 
arrangements with Unesco, met for 
the first time to consider the best 
ways of future collaboration with 
the Organization. 
“UNESCO'S MESSAGE MUST 
‘REACH ALL THE PEOPLES” 
“| F the defences of peace are to be 
built in the minds of men, 
UNESCO must reach all the peo- 
ples of the world with its message”, 
Mr. Martin Hill, representative of the 
United Nations, told the UNESCO 
Executive Board immediately prior 
to the opening of the General Confe- 
rence, 
On behalf of Trygve Lie, Secretary- 
General of the United Nations, 
Mr. Hill pointed out the need for 
greater universality in the member- 
ship of UNESCO and of other Spe- 
cialized Agencies of the United Na- 
FOUR NEW UNESCO 
MEMBER STATES 
HORTLY before the Florence 
Conference opened the Bri- 
tish Foreign Office informed 
Unesco that Costa Rica had 
deposited its instruments of rati- 
fication in London, thus becom- 
ing the 56th Member State. As 
this issue of the Courier went to 
press, the General Conference 
admitted three new countries 
— Hashemite Jordan, Indonesia 
and Korea — to membership of 
the Organization.     
tions. This is particularly urgent at 
present in the view of the UN Secre- 
tary-General, Mr. Hill said, “because 
of the extremely critical situation of 
the world” 
“The division of the world into two 
camps”, the UN representative conti- 
nued, “is utterly counter to the fun- 
damental principles of the United 
Nations. This situation can only lead 
in the long run to world war. The 
United Nations Specialized Agencies 
are built on the conception of one 
world and can function only if all the 
peoples of the States which are mem- 
bers really co-operate. 
“The work of co-operation i is now 
being frustrated by the present cri- 
tical divisions. Epidemics know no 
frontiers. Health and narcotic con- 
trols must obviously be worldwide if 
they are to be effective’. 
“The Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, Mr. Hill said, “asks 
if more cannot be done by the Spe- 
cialized Agencies, especially UNESCO, 
to cope with the immediate problems 
of peace and war, adapting them 
selves to the needs of the present cri- 
tical situation. In this field UNESCO 
has special powers because its motives 
are not suspect, and it has great 
possibilities of Mass Communication 
to carry its message to mankind”.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

T
T
 
N
a
 
A 
AR
E 
SY
 
C
R
M
 
TRA 
Cr 
V
U
 
i 
tH 
pe 
UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 
THE 
UNITED NATIONS 
  
TRYGVE LIE 
Secretary General 
 
From the Charter of the UN: 
+ “We, the peoples of the United Nations. 
% Determined to save succeeding generations from 
the scourge of war, which twice in our Ilife- 
time has brought untold sorrow to mankind, and 
v to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, 
in the dignity and worth of the human person, 
in the equal rights of men and women and of 
the nations large and small, and 
+ to establish conditions under which justice and 
respect for the obligations arising from treaties 
and other sources of intergational law can be 
maintained, and to promote social progress and 
better standards of life in larger freedom, and 
for these ends, 
* to practice tolerance and live together in 
with one another as good neighbours, an 
% to unite our strength to maintain internatio- 
nal peace and security, gnd 
% to insure by the acceptance of principles and 
the institution of methods, that armed force 
shall not be used, save in the common interest, 
an 
% to em international machinery for the pro- 
motion of the economic and social advancement 
of all people, have resolved to combine our 
efforts to accomplish these aims 
1T0 THE INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE ORGANIZATION 
(Preparatory Commission) 
ERIC WYNDHAM 
WHITE 
Executive Secretary, 
  
Among the objectives of the ITO : 
% “To assure a large and steadily 
growing volume of real income and 
effective demand, to increase the 
production, consumption and ex- 
change of goods and to contribute 
to a balanced and expanding world 
economy... 
%* “to promote industrial and general 
economic development, particu- 
larly of these countries which are 
still in the early stages of indus- : 
trial development...” [Ry 
% to encourage “action designed to 
achieve and maintain full and 
productive employment...” 
- ~~ # a ah TV 


### 81426: This is the world's work; let us get on with it

THIS IS THE W 
THE PEOPLES OF THE UNITED NATIONS, 
r 
§ 5 SATS wl 
The signing of the United Nations Charter af San Francisco. June 26, 1945. 
FAO 
THE FOOD AND 
AGRICULTURE 
ORGANIZATION 
  
NORRIS E. DODD 
Director-General 
From the Constitution of the FAO : 
% “The Nations accepting this Constitu- 
tion, being determined to promote the 
common welfare... for the purposes of : 
Jang levels of nutrition and standards of living of the 
peoples... 
% “securing improvements in the efficiency of the production 
and distribution of all food and agricultural products, 
% “bettering the condition of rural populations, 
% “and thus contributing toward an expanding world 
economy...” 
THE INTERNATIONAL (@®) 
LABOUR ORGANIZATION =~ NS—=2 
Dr. BROCK 
CHISHOLM 
Director-General 
   
THE WORLD | 
HEALTH | 
ORGANIZATION | 
 
El] 
| 
   
«CONSTITUTING a cle 
representatives, declare 
maintain world peace, an 
to that purpose. To sw 
was necessary to estab 
ones into relationship » 
For the first time in hin 
of the United Nations, 1 
Agencies of the United N 
a joint statement to the 
That statement is repm 
of the work of these wor 
A Statem 
“ The present divi 
serious conflicts of po 
vely impaired the pre 
the standard of livin 
of particular concer: 
Organizations that th 
of their work. 
“The United Nation 
upon that principle 
achieved and mainte 
THE INT CAD 
Ro ce ee J 
TER TI 
hall — 
Dr. ALBER 
Secretary. 
From the Convention on Intern 
% Whereas the future development 
to create and preserve friendsh 
nations and peoples of the wi 
threat to the general security... 
% “..the undersigned government 
ciples and arrangements in or 
tion may be developed In a sal 
* “Have accordingly concluded a 
Te - ——— or 1 
EA Telia 
  
he 
i 
= Telecommunica 
Fl 
© LEON MULATIER 
y Secretary-General 
DAVID A. MORSE 
Director 
Among the basic principles 
General, 
of the ILO : 
% “ Labour is not a commodity. ” 
% “ Freedom of expression and of asso- 
  
- 
 
Among the tasks of the WHO : 
* “to stimulate and advance work to era. 
dicate epidemic, endemic and other 
% “to promote the improvement of nu- 
trition, housing, sanitation, recreation, 
economic or working conditions and 
Sthet aspects of environmental hy- 
giene..” ; 
% “to promote maternal and child health 
and welfare and to foster the ability 
to live harmoniously in a changing 
total environment... 
| % “to foster activities in the field of 
mental health, especially those affect. 
ciation are essential to sustained pro- | 2 the harmony of human rela 
gress. ” \ | % (“Health is a state of complete physi 
“ . 3 cal, mental, and social well ” 
* Poverty anywhere constitutes a © The health of all peoples is fun 
: « BES mental to attainment of peace and danger to prosperity everywhere. security.) 
UST . wp » » rr AEM ES TV EE CRN oi 
“hh — Sa 
Let Us Ge 
Important elements 
in the work of 
the ITU: 
§ % “To maintain an 
nal cooperation 
: and rational use 
>) * “to mote the d 
nical facilities and 
operation... 
% “to effect allocatk 
boy quency spectrum... 
2 % “to promote the x 
for ensuring the s; 
the cooperation of 
service...” 
He (Telecommunications 
ji enission or ree 
writing, images and 
of any nature by wire 
3 tromagnetic systemy 
3 Wel 
   
Me NER Fe vet SS NESPRETEE ee Rely

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

ORLD’ 
dear majority of humanity, acting through their 
red in 1945 their common determination to 
and to co-operate in measures considered essential 
supplement the work of the United Nations, it 
uish other organizations, or to bring existing 
with the United Nations, 
vistory, on May 4th, 1950, the Secretary General 
, and the executive heads of all the Specialized 
Nations, or their authorized deputies, addressed 
he world. 
produced below, together with short summaries 
vorid organizations. 
nent To The World 
pision of the world and the increasingly 
policy among the great Powers have gra- 
wospects for world peace and for raising 
dng of the peoples of the world. It is 
wn to the Administrative Heads of the 
these conditions threaten the very basis 
ons and Specialized Agencies are founded 
¢ that lasting world peace can only be 
tained by world organization, and that 
J Pl 
ITERNATIONAL CIVIL 
TION ORGANIZATION. = 
§ T— 
    
    
world problems like disease, hunger, ignorance and poverty, 
which recognize no frontier, can never be overcome unless 
all the nations join universal efforts to these ends. 
“ We re-affirm the validity of this principle of universality. 
The United Nations system makes ample room for diversity 
within a universal framework. We believe it would be a 
disaster if efforts to realize the principle of universality in 
practice were to be abandoned now. 
“We believe that the greatest efforts should, on the con- 
trary, be directed towards achieving in fact true universality 
in the membership and programmes of the United Nations 
and of those of the Specialized Agencies which are foundea 
on that nel 
“We feve that it is necessary for all governments 
to renew — efforts to conciliate and negotiate the poli- 
tical differences that divide them and obstruct economic 
and social advancement, 
“Specifically, we believe that it is essential to the future 
of both the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies 
that the present political deadlock in the United Nations be 
resolved at the earliest possible moment, 
“ The peace and weli-being of all peoples demand from 
their Governments a great and sustained new effort by the 
nations of the world to achieve a constructive and durable 
peace.” 
— J 
The International 
Monetary Fund 
   
UL 
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
RE OE TE a ATS ei 
= SB —— TL. nan v . or fd B= 5 
THE UNITED NATIONS 
EDUCATIONAL, SCIEN- 
TIFIC AND CULTURAL 
ORGANIZATION 
NN 
UNESCD 
  
JAIME TORRES 
BODET 
Director-General 
  
tl Among the tasks of UNESCO : X 
_— % “to contribute to peace and security by d 
- promoting collaboration among the nations 
through education, science and culture in wl 
: order to further universal respect for jus- 1 
| tice, for the rule of law and for the human 2 
CAMILLE GUTT \ rights ari fudginental Jreadomms whish 
IRT ROPER ’ C board d are af for the ples of the wor 
General : bros go A without distinction of ra ce, sex, language 
¥ or religion, by the Charter of the United | 
. \ Among the purposes of the Fund : Nations... 
raational Civil Aviation : BS  % “To facilitate the expansion and balanced growth of inter- % “to collaborate in the work of advancing 
mt of civil aviation can greatly help 
ship and understanding among the § 
world, yet its abuse can become a § 
nis having agreed on certain prin. 
order that international civil avia. 
fe and orderly manner. ! 
8 convention to that end.” 
S| 
ITU 
International 
vations Union 
&» 
  
THE INTERNATIONAL 
BANK 
 
national trade, and to contribute thereby to the promotion 
and maintenance of high levels of employment... 
S % “.to contribute to the development of the productive 
resources of all members... 
% “To promote exchange stability, to maintain orderly ex- 
change arrangements among members, and to avoid 
competitive exchange depreciation.” 
-— NLT ¥ ry Td - - 
  
FOR RECONS- 
TRUCTION 
AND DEVEL- = 
OPMENT 
  
* 
* 
N\THE INTERNATIONAL 
  
the mutual knowledge and understanding 
of peoples, through all means of mass com- 
munication... 
“give fresh impulse to popular education 
and to the spread of culture.. 
“maintain, increase and diffuse know- 
ledge...” 
UP | THE UNIVERSAL 
| POSTAL UNION 
o
r
 
  
! 
- . ’ 
) 
Gag 2 FRITZ HESS \ : J. DONALD 
nC Ni : KINGSLEY a Director 
{Cg ; EUGENE R. ‘ we 
” BLACK ; bh Director General From the Universal Postal Convention 
wl pi: 4 President * Among the tasks of the IRO : | % “The countries between which the | 
A ht | present Convention is concluded 
nd extend internatio- . S  % “the repatriation of refugees and 
for “he improvement | of Agreement : hl) disvlaced * versal Postal Union a single postal | 
# of telecommunica- | % “To assist in the reconstruction | np Persons... pT oy territory for the reciprocal ex- | 
and development of territories of ©» change of correspondence. - development of tech- 
Wl their most efficient 
tion of the radio fre. 
ids members, 
i" From the Articles 
vestment of capital for productive 
purposes... 
by facilitating the in- 
the reconversion of classification; their care 
% “their identification, registration and 
and 
- form, under the title of the Uni- 
% “The alm of the Union is to secure 
i the organisation and improvement 
productive facilities to peacetime 
needs and the encouragement of 
the development of productive 
facilities and resources In less 
developed countries... 
of the various international postal 
services, and to promote the deve- | 
lopment of international collabo- | 
ration in this sphere... 
assistance, legal and political pro. : 
A | 
ew 
% %* “ Freedom of transit is guaranteed 
1
5
 
ca
d 
S
a
k
o
 
C 
SM
ES
 
safety of life through tection... 
of telecommunication EET 
E
N
T
 
S
s
 
% “their transport and their resettlement “Any fransmission, 
. 
2 
. ra 
adoption of measures § N 
=? 
raf 
. a 
i
c
 
SL
 
H
S
 
ie 
Fe 
7
 
S
N
 
nw of signs, signals, * “to promote the long-range balan- : &\ ; i ; Sounds ol bitaitigence ced grow th of international 2) and re-establishment in Curries able throughout the entire territory of ¢ 
ws) BE trade.” and willing to receive them... the Union.” : 
om i TN TMS pie PASTE he ea ICES at HET? a0 To "% TE rt rT Soren . a, lied . 


### 81426: This is the world's work; let us get on with it

n With It! | 
RE a ES SS ERIN TT TT RB EX Ee ESS FAT NYY Co Ca AA Tans i KL pandy LES AL El Se NE 
 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

~ UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 
tH ’ 
(Continued from Page I ) | 
Our authority is only of a moral 
character. If cannot by itself produce 
the political and economic decisions 
which could limit armaments and halt 
preparations for war. The path which 
a, "ig for us is assuredly long and 
Far from discouraging us, the 
difficulties of the present hour should 
rather strengthen our resolve, Are 
not freedom of the individual, and 
respect for the dignity of man, the 
very bases of the system set up by 
the United Nations? Without the 
support of the common will of all the 
peoples of the world, peace vould be 
no more than a truce, under constant 
threat of new conflagrations. 
I said: The peoples of the world, 
and I want to make it clear that I 
mean all the peoples of the world 
without distinction of ideological 
tendency or party. Yesterday you 
heard from M. Laugier of the concern 
of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations at the fact that, whether 
from permanent abstention or what 
hope are temporary withdrawals, 
not all the peoples are represented 
at our meeting. 
I share his concern, for an organiz- 
ation dedicated to education, science 
and culture cannot attain the kind 
of universality essential to it merely 
by increasing the number of its 
“ HUMANITY 1S UNDER N 
OR Tat lr GE taht 
re ue ¥ 
"ah eo 
i. ue SS a & so MS Lg. 
member states. The universality of 
the human spirit is not a matter of 
arithmetic but consists essentially in 
a unity with diversity of opinions, 
systems and points of view. Without 
that diversity UNESCO will not be 
universal and unless in fact it does 
s€éek to be universal I can see no 
significance in it. 
Our work, then, does not lie in the 
domain where diplomats erect the 
legal groundwork of peace. Our work 
is less spectacular. We are dealing 
with the very stuff of culture. Yet, 
will culture ever be separable from 
the political and social circumstances 
which condition it? © For us peace 
is not something taken for granted, 
international understanding is not a 
postulate. On the contrary, we 
regard both one and the other as the 
result of a series of efforts which must 
be combined and harmonized, so as to 
satisfy the longing for justice which 
- burns in man. 
As every year, the fate of our 
Organization is in your hands. 
have before you three main documents. 
The first condenses, in the form of 
specific resolutions, the programme 
which the Executive Board proposes 
to you for 1951, The second gives 
you the budget estimates which the 
Secretariat considers necessary for 
carrying out the resolutions the Board 
proposes. The third document, the 
Basic Programme, justifies and ex- 
plains the other two. 
Lack of national resolution 
~HE 1951 programme gives us, in a 
certain measure, a picture of 
Unesco as it now is. The Basic 
Programme, on the other hand, should 
give us a picture of what Unesco may 
become, The one limits and circum- 
scribes our work. The other defines 
our ambitions and, by defining them, 
gives us encouragement. 
I must not fail to point out to you 
that these two documents are still 
separated by an immense gulf. The 
Szcretariat will never be able to bridge 
that gulf unaided. It is for Member 
States and their peoples, by their 
unselfish and resolute efforts, to do 
sc. 
I do not know what view you will 
take of the programme submitted to 
you by the Chairman of the Executive 
Board. But I am bound to tell you 
that, however concrete and consistent 
it may appear to you when it leaves 
your hands, it will remain a frail 
thing until we frankly acknowledge 
that the malaise from which Unesco 
suffers is due not so much to a surfeit 
of international “resolutions” as to a 
‘lack of national resolution in each 
country to put them into effect. 
In my opinion it is important and 
urgent to see that the programme 
effectively combines the constructive 
work that devolves upon Member 
States with the function of liaison, 
stimulation and co-ordination which 
is the Secretariat’s. Similarly, in 
order to understand TUnesco’s real 
situation, it would be desirable not 
only to judge it by the Director- 
General's Report, but to illuminate its 
conclusions by an impartial study of 
the reports sent in to the Organiz- 
ation by Member States. In this 
way the Member States and the Secre- 
tariat would be linked more closely 
both by the programme and by the 
various reports of activities. 
Until these two conditions are 
fulfilled, public opinion may look upon 
our annual meetings as no more than 
occasions for administrative exchanges 
of views between the Governments 
and the Secretariat. However indis- 
pensable, however cogent, such ex- 
changes may be for myself and my 
collaborators, Unesco’s mission cannot 
be measured by the efforts of the 
Secretariat alone. For that reason 
it is of the first importance that these 
general debates should also provide 
the opportunity for another fruitful 
encounter — the bringing face to face 
before the Organization as a whole 
the true instruments of our pro- 
gramme, hamely the States which 
founded Unesco and which maintain 
it. Only a confrontation of this 
kind will enable every programme, 
present or future, to be firmly rooted 
in international fact. The concen- 
tration of our work would be of no 
avail if it failed to satisfy the needs 
of the peoples as they should find 
expression in the Reports of Member 
States. 
resolutions must be based upon a 
study of those Reports. But for that 
purpose, if you will allow me to say 
so, the Reports must be at once fuller 
and more precise than most of those 
— and there are not very many of 
them — that we have so far received. 
“A voice erying in the wilderness’ 
N examination of what each coun- 
try is doing for Unesco, of how it 
is applying the recommendations 
of the Conference, and of the response 
evoked in the men for whom we work, 
would provide a more solid basis to 
our discussions. It would help us to 
dispel the idea that our work is too 
theoretical, and above all, it would 
allow us more effectively to adapt 
means and ends. 
Doubtless many projects will be sub- 
mitted to the present Session. All 
those which promise to be valuable 
to Unesco will assuredly be warmly 
welcomed. Nevertheless, I hasten to 
urge, even before I know them — for 
later you might think that I was 
taking exception to some specific pro- 
ject — that, before presenting new 
proposals, you should ask yourselves 
in all sincerity “Will the deleg- 
ations who approve this or that pro- 
posal be able to count upon their 
governments for the full effort that 
f will be needed if the proposal is not 
to be rendered fruitless by niggard- 
~ liness in its execution ?” 
The effort I refer to must first of 
all be financial. A programme 
without a budget is a veice crying in 
the wilderness. The day will come 
— I hope so for the sake of my suc- 
cessors when critics will be 
astonished that in May 1950 men who 
believed in Unesco asked for only a 
little more than eight million dollars 
in order to carry out for a year, in 
fifty-six countries, a great inter- 
national work of culture, science and 
education. 
The budget that you will be discus- 
sing, however, was one that had to 
accord with the resolutions proposed 
by the Executive Board. It had to 
take account of the spirit of the dis- 
cussions of the General Conference 
_ contributions. 
and, lastly, it could not disregard the 
financial situation created by the fai- 
lure of certain countries to pay their 
If it was possible in 
Paris, when considering an increase 
of $220,000 to accuse the administration 
of Unesco of being ‘expansionist”, 
what, I wonder, would have been said 
of an increase larger than that which 
I am proposing to you? Yet how 
could 1 do other than strongly re- 
commend this increase, believing as I 
do that in the present circumstances 
any curtailment of the Secretariat’s 
activities . would delay for several 
years the coming into being of that 
living Unesco, of which the Secreta- 
riat must in future be only the centre 
of liaison ? 
As I pointed out in my introduction 
to the Budget Estimates, the small 
increase of $150,000 over the 1950 
Budget is not quite enough to main- 
tain the Secretariat's activities at 
their present level. In fact it means 
a reduction in the funds available for 
those activities, because of the in- 
crease in the unavoidable overheads of 
a developing organization, 
It is not only a matter of appro- 
priations for the Secretariat. Many 
-of the National Commissions can have 
only a paper existence until they too 
are in possession of a budget allowing 
them to undertake the surveys and 
the work of information, consultation 
and sometimes practical action, which 
our Organization urgently requires of 
them. 
The time has come to redouble our 
endeavours to embark resolutely upon 
constructive work. The stage of 
growth reached by the Organization, 
“the experience it has acquired in these 
early years, the documentation it has 
assembled and the surveys it has 
carried out with regard to numerous 
You 
tiers, 
To be more practical, our 
ob 
CS Sy So EU Sh GELS SEN Dl ET 
questions, added to the network of 
non-governmental international orga- 
nizations which collaborate with us, 
place Unesco now and hencefcrward 
“A mere laboratory 
MEAN tasks which, in a given field 
and for a particular area, would in- 
volve a transformation of existing 
conditions. =. Shall we for ever be 
content to be a mere laboratory of 
modal techniques ? The peoples of 
the earth do not respond to formulae, 
but to achievements. And if inter- 
national collaboration is to appear 
ever more desirable to States, before 
all it must show that it is effective. 
It may be necessary to try out fresh 
mzathods committing Unesco’s collec- 
tive action to more immediate work 
in connection with specific problems 
of international importance. The 
work of the Secretariat, as defined in 
the programme, answers in the main 
to a permanent need for intellectual 
co-operation in the exchange of in- 
formation, comparative research and 
the dissemination of knowledge. As 
such, and with the help of the Nation- 
al Commissions and non-governmen- 
tal international organizations, it 
makes up a system of basic services 
which an institution dedicated to the 
promotion of the intellectual and 
moral fellowship of man could not 
rightly reduce. 
But besides these permanent servi- 
ces, there may be room for collective 
undertakings by Member States — 
along the lines worked out for tech- 
nical assistance for economic deve- 
lopment — for the solution of certain 
problems which may arise in a parti- 
cularly acute form in one or another 
part of the world and which present 
an obstacle to the general progress 
of mankind, if not a potential threat 
to peace itself. As in the case of 
technical assistance, we should have 
to draw up a programme of specific 
objectives to be realized in a given 
number of years. Participation in 
this scheme would be entirely volun- 
tary and States could contribute to 
fio 
- - 
0 COMPULSION TO ABDICATE ” 
S32 a A § 
in a position to undertake tasks on a 
scale beyond that of the advice, the 
suggestions, the token services to 
which it has hitherto been confined. 
of model techniques’ 
it in the form of money, supplies or 
services; it would further be under- 
stood that States directly benefiting 
from the scheme would agreg to fulfil 
the conditions necessary for the suc- 
cess of this international assistance, 
Such schemes would benefit from 
the services of the Secretariat as a 
whole, and from any outside help that 
might be forthcoming. All these 
efforts would have to be co-ordinated 
and combined for the purposes of a 
concrete undertaking, and no longer 
be scattered, as they so often are 
to-day, over different specialized fields 
of work. In this way Unesco would 
give proof of unity in action, and at 
the same time realize its true voca- 
tion. In any case, for my part I 
do not see any -other way in which 
~ the Organization can advance from 
the stage of investigation and 
stimulation to the stage of practical 
accomplishment, so long as its ordinary 
Budget remains at the present figure 
or until Member States play a very 
much larger part in the carrying out 
of the programme. 
I have spoken of the financial effort 
that devolves on Member States. 
There is also the moral effort. Par- 
ticipation in our work cannot consist 
solely in paying a subscription into 
the Secretariat's account. Without 
the moral contribytion of every people, 
the financial contribution by their 
Governments would be ineffectual. 
Can we fail to see that the spiritual 
conditions in which Unesco works, 
have changed since 1945? The breath 
of human fellowship that we felt 
about us when we met in London has 
steadily weakened. A dark cloud of 
anxiety has veiled the high hopes 
that inspired us when, while the 
nations were joined in the last battles 
for libération, we laid the moral and 
intellectual foundations of permanent 
co-operation in the cause of peace. 
Have we all the time we need ? 
I" several respects the situation to-. 
day is worse than that which faced 
the world at the end of first World 
War. Never, in time of peace, has 
travel been so necessary and physically 
so easy, yet administratively so cum- 
bersome and difficult. The fron- 
closed with barbed wire in 
the war, are still dotted with firmly- 
entrenched customs posts and weari- 
some controls of currency and pass- 
ports. Before, it was the armaments 
merchants who were suspect; now 
even scholars and poets are regarded 
with mistrust. 
conflict, or provocation to conflict, 
between ideologies which consider 
themselves irreconcilable, We are 
trying to remove from children’s 
histery books a few tendentious pages, 
a few prejudiced versions of events. 
Yet we show no particular alarm 
when we see grown-up people applaud- 
ing in the newspapers and on the 
screen, in books or on the stage, 
everything that flatters nationalist 
self-esteem, even though it must 
wound the answering sensibilities of 
other nations. : 
Because of the fields in which it 
operates, and of the nature of its 
methods, Unesco, in carrying out its 
mission of peace, must mainly focus 
upon the future. The deeper it 
enters into its tasks the more time 
will it take to show results; for the 
habits of thought and feeling, which 
are the substance as well as the ins- 
truments of its activity, call for patient 
and difficult adaptation, 
sure that we have all the time we 
need ? That is a question we cannot 
escape from. And even if peace is 
maintained, is it fitting that we should 
not have helped in maintaining it ? 
Everywhere we see . 
But are we 
The future is child of the present. 
If we stand aside to-day, we shall 
forfeit the authority to win acceptance 
for our ideal tomorrow. 
As I said to you in Beirut when 
accepting the position to which you 
had elected me, it is our duty to make 
of Unesco the conscience of the United 
Nations, and coénscience can never 
stand aside from the main stream of 
history. Therefore Unesco must 
associate more closely in the work 
of the United Nations. Admittedly, 
its strictly technical sphere is different 
from that of the political organization 
of which it is a specialized agency. 
But that should not prevent it from 
taking its part to-day in the defense 
of peace — remembering that never 
before have education, science, culture 
and mass communication been such 
important factors in political action 
and practice. 
It is said that Leonardo da Vinci 
oncz uttered these despairing words: 
“Hate sees more clearly than love”. 
Let us not be defeated by such 
pessimism, against which Leonardo 
himself so ardently fought. Were 
not the smiles of the Gioconda and 
of St. Anne painted after he had said 
this? We ask ourselves to-day what 
suffering he had to endure in order 
to give being to those two smiles, 
which have in them such infinite 
wisdom and forgiveness. No! — for 
Leonardo, hate was not more clair- 
voyant than goodness, Nor will it 
be so for us. After all, if civilization 
has continued it is because, like the 
smiles of those unforgettable faces, 
every culture contains the message of 
a hope that has been tempered and 
purified by grief. 
‘Fighting for a fellowship of free men’ 
NLESS it is accompanied by social 
progress, material progress carries 
with it an immense danger. And 
how can we imagine social progress 
without a fair chance for all of an 
education that liberates each one, 
without the consolation of a culture 
in which each one can find his 
happiness ? Unesco’s very name 
indissolubly links the trinity of science, 
culture and education. The realities 
to which those words correspond 
require towards all three of them an 
equal loyalty. In a world from which 
science were missing, culture would 
again become subservient to magic, 
and education would decline into an 
automatic and tyrannical machine. 
On the other hand, in a world where 
progress depended solely upon science 
— where education lacked the influence 
of humanism, and culture was 
without warmth or vitality, where 
power would end by outgrowing the 
capacity of the mind that controlled 
it — the inventor would be merely 
the victim of his inventions. Van- 
quished by his own victories, conquered 
by his conquests, Man, placed between 
the tyranny of technical triumph and 
the responsibility of freedom, would 
no longer know how to choose. 
- Happily, humanity is under no 
compulsion to abdicate in order to 
continue its onward march. The 
peace we aspire to would be a poor 
pretercce if we thought to build it 
upon the repudiation of science, the 
restriction of teaching, or the placing 
- of culture in leading strings. On the 
contrary, Unesco is fighting for a 
fellowship of free men, a fellowship 
of human beings capable of full self- 
expression and genuine self-realization. 
It is only with men thus worthy of 
the name of men that we shall be 
able to assure a true peace. 
May your debates, gentlemen, be 
Inspired by the ideal of such a peace!

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 81427: Health centre on wheels for French Nigeria

"HEALTH CENTRE 
ON 
  
for 
 
French Nigeria 
L
a
t
 Lo
 
WHEELS 
L
v
 
E
N
 
against one of two huge silver trucks towering above him in a 
Paris garage, “is to hunt up sick people ourselves, instead of 
€ ¢ T HE problem we have to face ”, said Dr. Francis Bourrey, leaning 
waiting for them to come to us”. 
Dr. Bourrey was speaking in his capacity as president of the 
Social Affairs Commission of the Assembly of the French Union, where 
he represents French Nigeria. 
As the result of his efforts over the past four years, a travelling X-ray 
laboratory and doctor's office will 
spend the next two-and-a-half years 
picking its way over the dirt roads 
of French Nigeria to track down the 
country’s sore spots of disease and 
ill-health. The trucks left France 
late in April and were due to “report 
for work” in Nigeria during May or 
early June. 
The roving laboratory belongs to 
the people of Nigeria, the national 
assembly of French Nigeria having 
voted to finance the purchase of the 
two trucks and their equipment. 
Dr. Bourrey led the way inside 
one of the huge seven-ton vehicles 
and pointed to a map of French 
Nigeria on the wall of the room 
which will serve as office for Dr. 
Claude Vigan, chief of the mission. 
| Away From the Highways 
LONG the border separating 
A French and British Nigeria, the 
map was well sprinkled with 
towns and intersected by highways. . 
“The mission docs mot plan to 
cover this areca”, he said. “There 
the population is stable and wc 
know just what its requirements 
are in the way of hospitals.” 
He ran his hand over the interior 
of the country, where roads were 
only faint dotted lines on the map. 
“Here is where the mission is 
going”, he said. “There are [ron 
500. 000 to 600.000 people ULving 
here, many of them as nomads. 
We plan to map this area again, but 
on the basis of where its popula- 
tion is in the greatest need of medi- 
d 
ak 
cal care. Then we can go in and 
build hospitals where they will do 
the most good.” 
The mobile laboratory's first mis- 
sion is to combat tuberculosis and 
syphilis. To accomplish its task, 
the crew headed by Dr. Vigan has 
at its disposal X-ray facilities equal 
to those found in many permanent 
One of the Nigerian Medical Mission's pri- 
mary objectives is to combat tuberculosis. 
This photo shows the X-ray room of the 
medical truck. with (top and bottom) the 
rails on which the viewer slides out and 
(right) the insulating lead screen. X-ray 
plates will be developed in a darkroom 
housed in the second truck. 
  
   
TEFSHTOWE k-. 
FORMATION 
no 
Page 11 — UNESCO COURIER 
     
  
This overhead drawing shows the two trucks of the medical team which will shortly go into 
action in the most isolated parts of French Nigeria. The medical truck (on left) houses the 
doctor's office and X-ray camera, with an operating table for emergency cases. The second . 
truck has housing facilities “easily comparable with those found in many small homes”. 
hospitals, as well as supplies of 
penicillin. 
Previously, said Dr. Bourrey, doc- 
tors have run into strong opposition 
from the nomadic population of 
French Nigeria when they attemp- 
led to conduct large-scale health 
examinations. The Nigerians were 
suspicious of strangers. 
To help overcome this suspicion, 
the mission is using the tried tech- 
nique of motion pictures, but with 
a new approach. One of the trucks 
carries a motion-picture projector 
and supplies of films, mostly ani- 
mated eartoons, on health and sani- 
tation subjects. 
A Voice They Know 
HEN the trucks arrive in a vil- 
Ww lage, Dr. Bourrey said, the 
films will first be showntothe 
chief of the area and explained to 
him. Then, he will make a com- 
mentary in his native dialect which 
' Mr C.J. McLanahan, a member of the 
U.S. National Commission for Unesco and 
educational director of the Co-operative 
League of the United States, describes 
pamphlets designed for discussion 
programmes on the theme of “Food and 
People”. At his left is Barclay Acheson 
of the Readers Digest and (extreme 
right) former Governor Ellis Arnall of 
Georgia. President of the Society of Inde- 
pendent Motion Picture Producers. 
(Photo : U.S. State Dept.) 


### 81428: Food and people educational campaign launched in U.S.

FOOD AND PEOPLE EDUCATIONAL 
CAMPAIGN LAUNCHED IN U S. 
 
  
o enlist the active interest of the American people, 
whose food standards are high, in the task of 
lifting the standards of the one-half of the world’s 
people who are badly fed, the United States Natio- 
nal Commission for UNESCO has launched a nation- 
wide educational campaign on the problems of Food and 
People. 
The practical purpose is to stimulate discussion in 
communities and organizations in all parts of the United 
States on the need for national and international action 
to face the problem of a rapidly increasing world popu- 
lation not yet matched by increased food production. 
The campaign, officially begun at the semi-annual 
meeting in Washington, D.C., of the National Commis- 
sion, is being carried out with the co-operation of the 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the 
U.S. State Department and Agriculture Department, the 
FAO Inter-Agency Committee of the U.S. Government, 
schools and universities throughout the country, and ma- 
ny national, state and local private organizations repre- 
senting farm, labour, consumer and other interests. 
A Food and People “Fact Sheet”, one of 18 separate 
items distributed to interested organization. points out 
that : “Only one-third of the world’s people get enough 
of the right kind of food, and they consume three-fourths 
of the world’s food supply. One half of the human race 
actually goes hungry, and famine and starvation still 
stalk the earth, as in ancient times.” 
Six Unesco booklets set forth various aspects of the 
problems presented by the need to feed a constantly 
rising population, an estimated increase of 68,000 per- 
sons daily.   
will be taken down on a wire recor- 
der. 
Later, when the film is shown to 
a native audience, it will be explain- 
ed to them in the voice and on the 
authority of their own leader, in a 
language they can understand. 
After the showing, the audience 
will be examined for tuberculosis 
and given blood-tests. This year, 
it is hoped that 100,000 will pass 
before the X-ray camera in the mis- 
ston’s medical truck. 
Dr. Bourrey expects the mission 
to accomplish its survey at the end 
of two-and-a-half years, covering 
more than 25,000 miles each year. 
During the rainy season, when 
French Nigeria's roads become im- 
passable, the mission will make its 
headquarters in a city and examine 
the local population. 
Both trucks were specially de- 
signed and built for the job. One of 
them is used as the laboratory, 
while the other serves mainly as 
living quarters. 
The laboratory truck is divided 
into two main rooms, housing the 
X-ray camera and the doctor’s office. 
This truck is also equipped with an 
operating table for emergency cases, 
although surgery is not part of its - 
mission. 
An Example For Others 
HE second truck is equipped 
T with housing facilities easily 
the equivalent of those found 
in many small homes. One room 
incorporates a double bunk, an elec- 
tric stove, a refrigerator and a 
shower bath as well as closets and 
cupboards. This truck also con- 
tains a darkroom, for the develop- 
ing of X-ray plates, and a 10-kilo- 
watt electric generating plant. 
Both of the vehicles are air-con- 
ditioned and built with four layers 
of insulation to permit their person- 
nel to work in Nigerian tempera- 
tures, which often reach 115 degrecs 
Fahrenheit. 
The front ends of both trucks are 
Luilt in two stories, one serving as 
the driver's cab and the other as a 
compartment big enough to seat 
four persons or sleep two. 
In operation, the two trucks will 
he parked near eaca other with a 
tent stretched between them. The 
area under the tent will serve as a 
waiting room. 
“This praticular mission is infen- 
ded only to serve Nigeria”, Dr. Bour- 
rey said. “But we hope that iis 
example will bring other African 
countries to follow suit.” 
“We have based our campaign on 
principles similar to those laid down 
by UNESCO in its fundamental edu- 
cation programme — that is, it is 
as important to teach people to be 
healthy as it is to teach them to read 
and write.”

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 12 
OUTPOSTS IN A FIGHT AGAINST DESPAIR. 
 


### 81456: School nuclei' bring new hope for the Andes

‘SCHOOL NUCLEI’ BRING NEW HOPE 
TO THE ANDES 
HE town of Cuzco, perched on a high plateau of the 
Andes, still contains vestiges of the empire of the 
Incas, whose capital it was. All round the town the 
ruins of temples bear witness to the lost civilization. 
Other remains, less spectacular, but perhaps more signi- 
ficant, such as planted terraces on the mountainsides and 
irrigation installations, show the high degree of accom- 
plishment which it reached. 
On these now desolate mountain heights live the 
descendants of the Incas. Comprising 46 % of the popu- 
lation of Peru, they are therefore an important ethnic 
group. 
But the wealth and glory of the Inca empire are only 
a memory. The descendants 
way of life. Each nucleus 
has, besides its Director, a 
team of educators special- 
ized in various subjects: 
agricultural techniques and 
the conservation of the soil, 
health and hygiene, the 
Spanish language. C, 
Teachers Have Twin 
Tasks 
HESE specialists are 
trained at seminars 
organized jointly by the 
of the Incas live in direst [= - 
poverty. Mostly illiterate, \ 
they lack even the most    
  
    
 
' 
elementary knowledge. They | 
have forgotten the arts of a 
their ancestors and have LN 5 0 
not acquired the modern : wo . 
techniques that might help 
them live decently. Their 
helplessness andresignation 
present many problems in 
addition to that of restoring 
dignity and self-respect. 
For example, despite the 
fact that 64 per cent of the 
whole population of Peru 
works in agriculture, the 
country has to import the 
greater part of its food 
supply. 
The bad conditions in   
5 MALHUPILLRL : 
i, 7) 
- 
    
  
“Other remains, porbops more significant, such as planted terraces on 
the mountainsides and irrigation installations, show the high degree oi 
accomplishment reached by the Inca civilization.” The Incas built beau- 
tiful cities, like hanging gardens on the craggy summits of the Andes. 
such as Machupicchu, whose terraces and ruined fortress are shown in 
this photo. Today, the governments of Peru and Bolivia are helping the 
descendants of the Incas to escape from the misery to which history 
reduced them centuries ago. 
Bolivian and Peruvian Go- 
vernments with the help of 
the Inter-American Co- 
operative Service for the 
Production of Foodstuffs. 
Their first task is the actual 
construction of the “ school 
nuclei ”, built in the local 
style, with thatched roofs, 
letting in plenty of light and 
air. Besides teaching duties, 
each member of the team is 
responsible for looking after 
all the school buildings in 
the area in which the “ nu- 
cleus” has been set up. He 
has, indeed, not only to 
look after them but also, if 
possible, to improve them. 
Obviously, the education 
of the children cannot of 
itself suffice to change the 
living conditions of so many 
people. Adult education is 
therefore an important fac- 
tor in the task of the 
“ school nuclei ”. The teach- 
ers attached to them can 
undertake to impart know- 
ledge of such matters as soil 
conservation, agricultural 
techniques and domestic 
training. 
An Escape From 
Misery 
T is difficult to give 
instruction in hygiene to 
people who, rather than call 
a doctor or allow themsel- 
ves be vaccinated, prefer 
to call medicine men. In 
any case, the proportion of 
doctors in the Cuzco district 
is one to 40,000 inhabitants. 
Nevertheless in Bolivia 
and Peru, the new “ school 
nuclei ” will soon give the 
Indians a chance to escape 
from the misery to which 
history reduced them cen- 
I
 
~ 
3 
. 
A
 
turies ago. It is hoped that 
this work will result not. 
only in increased agricultu- 
ral production and an im- 
proved standard of living, 
but also in closer relations 
between the two main 
groups of the population. 
Golden Jubilee... 
CC YT was just a year ago to day... Ii 
I was ten years ago... 
Thss is the cente- 
 
This is our 
cialist in Moslem theology. 
studied Semitic languages and Arab literature 
in Berlin, Leipzig and Leyden. 
Ignatz Goldziher 
He then re- 
which a great many South 
American Indians now live 
result from historical cir- 
cumstances no longer oper- 
ative. The achievements of 
their ancestors are proof of 
the gifts and capabilities of 
the race. ‘There is the 
greatest promise, therefore, 
in helping to develop their 
capabilities. The first step 
is to educate them; to 
teach them to read, to culti- 
vate their land and to care 
for themselves. 
Joint Attack On 
Ignorance 
A particularly inte- 
resting experiment of 
this kind has been 
undertaken by Peru and 
Bolivia. Faced with similar 
problems, the two countries 
decided to solve them by 
joint action. The Ministries 
of Education, Social Affairs 
and Agriculture of both 
countries have, with the 
help of the Inter-American 
Co-operative Service for 
Food Production, drawn up 
a fundamental education 
programme which already 
has some achievements to 
- its credit. 
The first problem was 
how to improve the school 
system. In some parts of 
Peru, such as Cuzco, for 
instance, 88 per cent. of the 
children do not go to school. 
The primary reason is that 
communities are widely 
scattered and means of 
communication scarce. 
Defects in the organization 
of the school system aggra- 
vate the situation : a lack 
of school buildings, and of 
amenities in such buildings 
as do exist, and faulty 
training of teachers. Most 
of the teaching is in 
Spanish, but the Indian 
children speak only their 
own languages — Quecha 
and Aimara. 
The first and most im- 
portant step taken at the 
beginning of the campaign 
was the establishment of 
“ school nuclei”. These are 
staffed by specially trained 
teachers who speak the 
languages of the Indians 
and are familiar with their 
 
  
nary... Just about a thousand years ago... 
The birthdays of a child, events in the 
lives of individual men and women, com- 
memoration of the births and deaths of 
men and women who have lit lorches 
along the road of history, reddetter days 
marking the advance of mankind—these 
are dates traditionally noted in the arbi- 
trary system of reckoning which we call . 
the calendar. 
" Nat forgetting the unknown and unsung 
persons and events, perhaps of equal 
greatness, making no claim at complete- 
ness, here are some note-worthy dates in 
June, sizth month of the Gregorian 
calendar. : 
RADIO PIONEERS 
Among the host of radio “inventors”, fa- 
mous or obscure, all of them honoured in their 
own countries, the calendar reminds us to- 
day to celebrate the names of a German and 
of a Russian. The former, Karl Ferdinand 
Braun, was born at Fulda on 6 June 1850. 
His research into cathode rays and general 
wireless problems won for him in 1909 the 
Nobel Prize for Physics, along with Marconi. 
The other, Alexander Stepanovitch Popov, 
presented a remarkable paper to the Electri- 
city Congress of Paris in June 1900; it recount- 
ed his experiences in applying the radlo-elec- 
tric receiver to meteorology and mentioned 
his new invention, the wireless aerial. 
CHARLES DICKENS 
On 9 June 1870, Charles 
Dickens died suddenly at 
;he age of 58, worn out by 
hard work. He was buried 
in Poets’ Corner in West- 
minster Abbey. He left a 
Will commending his soul 
to God and to the mercy of 
Jesus Christ and leaving his 
works to the judgment of 
posterity. If G. K. Ches- 
terton is representative of 
that posterity, its judg- 
ment is favourable. ¢ Th=re 
can be no question of the 
importance of Dickens as a human event in 
history ; a naked flame of natural genius... re- 
vealing a light that never was on sea or land, 
if only in the long fantastic shadows that it 
threw from common things. » 
  
MASTER OF ARAB STUDIES 
On 22 June 1850 a Jewish boy was born in 
Hungary who was destined to become a spe- 
¢ . 
‘turned to Budapest, where he taught at the 
University for the rest of his life, but without 
neglecting his duties of secretary to the Jewish 
community. During his calm and fruitful car- 
eer Goldziher wrote a critical history of Arab 
traditions and an analysis of Hebrew mythology. 
Later, he published a comparative study of 
Jewish and Arab culture and folklore in the 
Middle Ages. 
IVAN VASOV 
"Poet, dramatist and novelist, Yvan Vasov was 
born on 27 June 1850 and aspired to give artis- 
tic expression to Bulgarian national sentiment. 
He succeeded in his aim within his lifetime and 
is to-day among the most popular writers of his 
country. Devoted though he was to Bulgaria, 
his work is free of all nationalism. When 
Vasov wrote poems of homage to Goethe, Hugo, 
Byron, Schiller, Heine and Leopardi, he tried 
to show that no nation is entitled to call itself 
Iree unless it acknowledges the ties that link 
it with world culture. After the Balkan wars, 
in which his verse with its eager patriotism 
was a powerful ally, he turned to peace as his 
theme : « Nations+cannot draw life from 
slaughter, nor from death on the field of 
battle ». 
9 
ANTOINE DE SAINT-EXUPERY 
Born 29 June 1900. Lost on a flight-mission 
on 31 July 1944. This poet of aviation did not 
take up either fiying or literature for their own 
sake, seeing in them only the best means of 
serving man. These interests did not fill his 
life, as witness his research work on radar, sa- 
fety in the air and jet-propulsion ; moreover, 
Saint-Exupéry excelled both in music and ma- 
thematics. His posthumous « Citadelle » 
exhales a spirit of sober optimism demanding 
cf man unrequited service. According to 
Saint-Exupéry, salvation lies In restoring the 
sense of collective responsibility and of sacril- 
fice. The sacrifice must be made in the cause 
of man and human dignity. 
THE FIRST WOMEN'S COLLEGE OF MEDICINE 
Just 100 years ago, the State of Pennsylvania 
issued a law establishing the first school for. 
women’: medical study. The “New York Times” 
wrote : “It is stated Miss Elizabeth Blackwell, 
who received the degree of Doctor of Medicine 
at the Geneva College in this State, and has 
since pursued her medical studies in Paris, will 
he candidate for the Chair of Surgery. This 
is the first regularly organized Female Medical 
College that has been established in any part 
of the world, and may be considered as an 
interesiing ‘sign of the times’.” 
{   

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=13) 2

### 81461: The 20th century's debt to Pascal

### 81460: Science is everyone's business

SCIENGE IS EVERYONE'S BUSI 
IVE young men were preparing to leave Bordeaux, France last month to sail 
around the world in a 46 foot (14.5 metres) catamaran, a double-hull boat whose 
construction is based on a 2,000 yearold Polynesian model. 
It will be at least five years before they return from the voyage 
F 
are “scientists”. 
The five young men 
in their vessel, the “Copula”. During that time they expect to have demonstrated that 
every person can be a scientist. For these voyagers ordinarily earn their livings, 
respectively, as a merchant, 
a sculptor, an engineer, an 
architect, and a film tech- 
nician. Apart from the 
engineer, they are all ama- 
teur scientists. To full- 
time professional scientists 
these adventurers have 
suddenly become valued 
colleagues. 
On behalf of a number 
of French scientific institu- 
tions, which have given 
them short training courses 
and supplied them with 
simple instruments, they 
are to make some investi- 
gations — that is to learn 
in detail things which have 
never been known before. 
Nothing elaborate, but the 
collection of useful data. 
For example, they have 
been asked to obtain wher- 
ever possible samples of 
the oil from the liver of 
the shark and to study the 
effect of different waters 
and different climates on 
under-water paint. 
Their notes read, in part: 
“The crew will undertake to 
record the boat's course 
and speeds, to take the 
surface temperature of the 
water daily, if possible, at 
the same hour, to note the 
state of the sea, and to log 
the different ports of call, 
the length of stay in each 
port, and to indicate 
whether the boat was in 
dry dock, aground or 
afloat”. 
Miracle Maker Myth 
LTHOUGH amateurs, if 
they proceed about the 
collection of facts care- 
fully they will be acting as 
scientists. They have very 
many famous predecessors 
Isaac Newton was a public 
official ; Leeuwenhoek, the 
father of microscopy, was a 
Dutch merchant Benjamin 
Franklin was a printer; Chris- 
tian Sprengler, who made 
some of the first studies of 
insect pollination, was a mi- 
nister; Herschel was an orga- 
nist; Joseph Priestley was a 
divine who dabbled in che- 
mistry; Charles Darwin was 
a country gentleman; Gregor 
Mendel, pioneer in genetics, 
was a monk; and Henri Fabre, 
great investigator of the 
insect world, was a school- 
teacher in a French country 
town. 
The world-renowned British 
Royal Society sprang up from 
the efforts of a group of ama- 
teurs. In the 18th and 19th 
centuries it was only the 
amateur who could make a 
centribution as a scientist, 
for science was the pursuit of 
a leisured class, a gentlemanly 
activity. This contributed in 
part to the myth that has 
grown up through the years 
following that the scientist 
is a being apart, a miracle- 
maker who moves in special 
ways his mysteries to perform. 
This false view has been 
reinforced in our century by 
the fact that for many inves- 
tigations mighty machines 
and instruments are neces- 
sary : for example, the elec- 
tron microscope and the mass 
spectrometer, the radio-active 
isotope and the cyclotron. It 
has come to be accepted that 
to do scientific research much 
equipment is needd. 
Page 13 — UNESCO COURIER 
 
  
By Maurice GOLDSMITH 
Unesco          Science Editor 
  
 
A FLOATING “LABORATORY”. 
“Copula”, five young men are setting out irom Bordeaux. France, on a 
round-the-world trip. During their five years’ voyage they will collect 
useful data for @ number of French scientific institutions. 
It is true that this is the 
age of the organized scien- 
tific worker, who is a phe- 
nomenon of the last quar- 
ter-century. It is since the 
first world war that there 
have grown up considerable 
  
the study of mathematics, physics and other 
“M ONSIEUR PASCAL having at an carly age abandoned 
profane sciences... began in about the thirtieth 
year of life to apply himself to lofticr ana more serious 
matters...” Preface to the 1670 edition of “Les Pensées” 
of Pascal. 
This was the common opi- 
nion held by learned men about 
Pascal—and about the “pro- 
fane” labours of mathematics 
and science—eight years after 
the death of one of the world's 
many-sided  scieniist-philoso- 
phers. 
His prodigious mind had 
many facets, but posterity is 
still inclined to think of Pascal 
above all as the moralist phi- 
losopher of Port-Royal, who re- 
marked, “4 great many things 
I have known; can I name 
one of them that will make me 
more equitable, wiser, more 
human or even more content- 
ear” 
Now, nearly three hundred 
years after he spoke, a remar- 
kable exhibition, “THE SCIEN- 
TIFIC ACHIEVEMENTS OF 
BLAISE PASCAL AND THEIR 
RESULTS THREE CENTURIES 
LATER”, has been organized 
by the University of Paris at 
the Palais de la Découverte. 
The exhibition serves to sug- 
gest that Paseal might not have 
advanced so far in the study 
of the human condition if he 
had not first exercised in other 
spheres a remarkably liberal 
and inventive mind. 
“At an early age he abandon- 
ed the study of profane scien- 
ces”, we are told. True, but ¥ 
was also at an early age that 
he first became interested in 
science—he was So Young, in 
fact, that his father, Etienne 
Pascal, deliberately tried to 
keep him from ‘the study of 
ceametry, 
- Exploded Vacuum 
Doctrine 
NE day, however, that 
well-—intentioned man was 
“terrified” to discover his 
son demonstrating on the floor, 
with a crude figure drawn with 
a piece of coal, a theorem cor- 
responding to the 32nd in the 
First Book of Euclid (the sum 
of the angles of a triangle is 
equal to two right angles). 
Pascal was then twelve years 
old. 
When he was sixteen he 
wrote an Essay on Conics, the 
most learned treatise on the 
subject since classical times. 
To help his father, a Normandy 
tax inspector, he invented his 
“arithmetical machine”, inces- 
tor of the electronic calculator, 
at the age of nineteen. Four 
years later, he exploded a 
piece of doctrine in physics 
which since Aristotle had been 
regarded as sacrosanct na- 
tura horret vacuum (“nature 
-ablors a vacuum”). He de- 
monstrated experimentally that 
air has weight. He even con- 
ceived a public transport sys- 
tem for Parisians, the [ive- 
penny carriages and Paris is 
indebted to him for having or- 
ganized its first omnibus net- 
work. 
Voltaire’s 
¢¢ Sublime Lunatie”’ 
7 school, we casually 
-learn about Pascals 
achievements and vague- 
ly realize that they entitle him 
  
THE THINKING MACHINE. Modern electronic computing machines like 
the Mark 111 (above) in Harvard's Computation Laboratory, look like 
the insides of large, complicated radio sets. and have ‘magnetic me- 
mories”’ 
photo. 
capabilities. 
problem that would have taken a human being 100 years to solve. 
housed in the fast-spinning aluminium cylinders shown in this 
They can take on complicated jobs which are beyond human 
One recently took 103 hours to produce the answer to a 
The 
mathematical and scientific concepts of Pascal were indispensable in the 
] development of such machines. 
(Photo : Time Magazine.) 
to a place of honour in the his- 
tory of scientific thought—-but 
now, in the Palais de la Dé- 
couverte, we have the oppor- 
Za... 8 = 
SC 
 
The complexity of modern élec- 
tronic calculators can only add 
to the glory of the inventor of 
the arithmetical machine”, 
’.. 
  
THE FIRST MECHANICAL CALCULATING MACHINE. When he was 19, 
Blaise Pascal invented the ‘Arithmetical Machine” (above) and became 
the first man te carry out a mathematical calculation by mechanical 
means. Pascal considered that mathematical calculation only required 
an initial use of intelligence and a choice of method and that the rest 
was merely an automatic mental process. The modern adding machine 
which accepts numbers through its keyboard and “remembers” them by 
the setting of its mechanism owes something to the work of the 17th 
century French mathematician. 
tunity of seeing his work ad- 
mirably illustrated and minu- 
tely defined. 
Yet the organizers of the 
exhibition have aimed at giving 
us more than that. Relating to 
each of Pascal's inventions, nu- 
merous galleries display a pa- 
norama of modern discoveries 
and methods that may legiti- 
mately be regarded as proceed- 
ing from the contributions to 
science made by the man whom 
Voltaire called "a sublime luna- 
tic born a century too soon”. 
In the preface to the catalo- 
gue of the exhibition, the emi- 
nent French savant, Louis de 
Broglie, invites us to meditate 
on the astonishing intellectual 
fecundity of this theorist, a 
thinker and experimenter. “His 
contribution to mathematics was 
considerable and entitles him 
to be called one of the fathers 
of the theory of probability... 
In physics, his work is of no 
lesser importance, for it was he 
who transformed into a cohe- 
rent science what his day knew 
of hydrostatics. . . who, using 
primitive equipment, conducted 
erperiments that even in our 
day must be deemed admirable, 
Silent testimony to the pu- 
rely material aspects of Pas- 
tal’s genius consist, at the exhi- 
bition, of modern developments 
in city transportation, meteoro- 
logy, diving helmets, methods, 
for artifical rescusitation, pres- 
surized airplane cabins, hy- 
draulic braking systems, radio 
valves and many other things 
—all of them owing something 
to the 17th Century thinker. 
Broglie’s 
¢¢ Audacious Thinker ”’ 
0 quote Louis de Broglie 
T once again: “This moving, 
audacious thinker was 
above all a great scientist, for 
only Pascal’s scientific training 
and the exceptional intellectual 
qualities he evinced in his ma- 
thematical and physical re- 
search can account for the rest 
of his work. Without them he 
would not have attained the 
sume heights in his medita- 
tions: on every page of the 
Pensées, we recognize the man 
who has thought long on the 
properties of numbers and the 
laws of nature.” 
In this double-hulled catamaran, the 
numbers of technicians who 
earn their livelihood in 
research laboratories. But the 
amateur still has a contribu- 
tion to make. His equipment 
need be only as limited as 
that belonging to Dr. Wollas- 
ton, the great chemist and 
physicist who was president 
of the Royal Society in 1820. 
“Bring Up 
My Laboratory” 
IR Richard Gregory in his 
delightful - book ‘Disco- 
very", tells how a foreign 
scientist called on Wollaston 
and asked to be shown round 
his laberatory. “Certainly”, 
said Wcllaston, and rang the 
bell. “John,” he told the at- 
tendant who entered, “bring 
up my laboratery”. ‘Where- 
upon John went out and re- 
turned in a few minutes with 
all Wollaston’s apparatus on a 
tea tray. 
Even children have a proper 
role to play as amateur scien- 
tists, according to Benjamin 
Franklin, who wrote : “Much 
of it falls within the Capacity 
of Persons, even of Children. 
It consists of attending the 
objects with which Nature pre- 
sents us, in considering them 
with Care, and admiring their 
preper Beauties, etc...” 
What the Rev. J.G. Wood, 
an English clergyman and 
amateur natural historian, 
wrote in 1861 is still valid 
today : “There is little doubt 
but that if any one with an 
observant mind were to set 
himself to work determinately, 
merely at the study of the 
commonest weed or the most 
familiar insect, he would, in 
the course of some years’ 
patient labour, produce a 
work that would be most 
valuable to science”. 
Root Of All Research 
HIS view was underlined 
vigorously by Mr. Ed- 
mend W. Sinnott, retir- 
ing president cf the American 
Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science, last Decem- 
ber. “We sometimes forget 
the still vast areas where 
facts and principles of great 
scientific value may be disco- 
vered with no more complex 
tools or techniques than are 
at the command of any intel- 
ligent layman”, he said. 
“Even to list all these 
would be impossible here. 
The exact distribution of 
plant and animal species, the 
records of flowering dates 
through the years, the varia- 
bility of wild species, bird 
censuses and the records of 
bird migration, the collection 
and identification of fossils, 
the distribution of minerals, 
detailed local weather obser- 
vations, records of meteorites 
and of variable stars. 
“Let us not disparage such 
work as ‘anecdotal’, as ‘mere’ 
natural history, simply be- 
cause experiment and complex 
apparatus play relatively 
minor parts in it. Intelligent 
observation is at the bottom 
of all research and opportu- 
nities for this are almost 
limitless. There is ample 
room in science for the efforts 
of a vast body of enthusiastic 
laymen”.

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 81463: World's youth lends a hand at Saugnac

UNESCO COURIER — Page 14     
         
. &% ’ 
Li 
L 
1) 
-    Fe.    
  
   
~~ “. 
  
© The gradual depopulation of the Landes 
through repeated forest Kress recently led 
an expert to remark, “Thirty miles somb 
of Bordeaux a desert beginae™. Although 
the largest department in France. the 
Landes hos the smallest population. The 
charred ruins of farmhouses. such as that 
shown above. symbolise the plight of is 
inhabitants, 
* 
Jean Guichot, the young Frenchmen whe 
fought! to bring back lile % the dying 
villoge of Saugnac-et-Muret. in the Lan- 
  
des Department of SW. France, This 
Ss tr. volunteers from the wotld's In. 
ternational work camps will help to 
reconstruct the village ax an example for 
other depopulated and decaying villages 
in the Landes to follow, 
a a En S—- i. 
x Ey = ~~ 
ae oi RR 
 
   
s LD 
BTS RB 
“0 - vt 
- a Se - : 
-~- -» a 
of southern France will spring back to life this summer when 
A DYING village in the heart of the burned out Landes countryside 
volunteers from the world’s work camps meet in Saugnac-et- 
Muret to help the local people restore their homes. 
For Saugnac-et-Muret, once a happy village of 1800 inhabitants, and 
now deserted by all but 650, as a result of repeated forest fires, has been 
chosen as the site for the most representative work camp project ever 
planned. Young men and women from all over the world will meet there 
this summer to build farms, repair houses, construct roads, restore the 
soil and turn Saugnac into a model village. 
Behind this ambitious Unesco 
supported project, being carried out 
under the auspices of the French 
National Commission for Unesco, 
with the financial backing of 
International Rotary, is an intense 
young man with dark curly hair and 
weatherbeaten cheeks — Jean 
Guichot. 
It was Jean Guichot who, by his 
own example, first started things 
moving in Saugnac. If he had 
stayed in Agen, 150 kilometres away, 
instead of returning to his grand- 
mother’s farm in Saugnac; if he 
had continued his studies and 
become a doctor like his father and 
grandfather before him, attention 
might never have been turned on 
this little village in the Landes, and 
it would have sunk further into 
desolation and decay. 
SCORCHED EARTH EXODUS 
UT, in 1942, Guichot and his 
family did return to the old 
homestead. That year fire 
struck the village. And again the 
following year. Thousands of pine 
trees, the collection of whose resin 
forms the principal means of 
livelihood for the people of the 
Landes, were destroyed. And more 
and more villagers, their homes and 
livelihood gone, moved away to the 
towns. 
Minding his sheep and riding over 
the charred land, Guichot thought 
up ways of solving the problem. To 
check the fires, he decided, the 
“ Landais” must resort to the 
practices of their ancestors — keep 
20 per cent of the land under 
cultivation, breed more sheep which 
would eat up the undergrowth, plant 
trees less densely, and make 
clearings. 
When vast stretches of the Landes 
were destroyed by fire last year and, 
with his neighbours, he had spent 
three weeks fighting the flames, Jean 
Guichot decided the time had come 
to put his plan into action. He called 
a meeting and, with the help of 
French officials, persuaded land- 
owners to form a co-operative and 
pool their resources for fifty years — 
to work together on a planned basis. 
Soon they bought up more land 
around Saugnac and mapped out the 
areas to be ploughed and to be 
planted with saplings. 
The young people’s interest and 
support wag enlisted by forming a 
“ Foyer Rural ” — a cultural centre 
which now has 60 members. But 
the task facing Saugnac’s 650 inha-~ 
bitants was and still is, gigantic. 
Before crops can be planted or even 
new trees, the soil has to be restored, 
the charred undergrowth removed. 
 
Within the last ten years 
the Landes Department of SW. France, 
EE
there have been more than 2.500 outbreaks of forest fire In 
is oto was taken last year when Sre swept 
across thousands of ocres culling across ro 
Many people hghting the oculbreak were trapped and died in 
There are roads to build, houses and 
farms to repair, and a centre for 
youth activities and culture to be 
created. 
Jean Guichot’s plan will also be 
the starting point for the carrying 
out of plans for the development of 
the Landes already drawn up by the 
French authorities. 
NEW HOPE IN THE LANDES 
vicHot put his plan before 
Unesco’s Reconstruction De- 
partment and Unesco’s French 
National Commission. “ With the 
help of international youth”, he said, 
we can gain valuable time. You can 
help wus greatly by arranging for 
volunteers and funds and providing 
us with cultural facilities ”. 
The project was put before the 
third conference of organizers of 
international work camps which met 
at Unesco House last month. The 
Co-ordination. Committee, set up by 
Unesco, suggested that all the 
organizations take part, and all the 
representatives present agreed. 
and destroying everyth in ta path. 
ke Tames. 
Details are now being worked out, 
but already it has been decided to 
organize three work camps in 
Saugnac this summer. Three French 
organizations -— Jeunesse et Recons- 
truction, Pax Romana, and Service 
Civil International — have under- 
taken to run them. Other organiza- 
tions, like the American Friends 
Service Committee, the International 
Youth Hostel Federation, student 
groups from England, Denmark, 
Switzerland, Sweden and Germany 
will send volunteers. 
These camps will herald a cultural 
and educational campaign in the 
Landes through the use of travelling 
libraries and scientific exhibitions 
and educational films. 
M. Guichot, who came to Paris 
early in May to put his ideas and 
plans before the organizers, returned 
to Saugnac a happy man. Soon his 
village will be bustling with activity, 
echoing with the sound of hammers 
and saws, and of many tongues. 
And Saugnac-et-Muret will become 
a symbol of new hope for the people 
of the Landes. 
York in July. 
and with the Organization. 
He told of watching the Organiza- 
tion grow from a Membership of 39 
to 56. He has also seen it grow in 
experience. Above all he has watched 
it bring in people from many dif- 
ferent countries who have learned to 
work for the same objectives. 
In going to the Institute of Inter- 
national Education, Mr. Holland sald 
he did not feel he is completely leav- 
ing Unesco, as the Institute, in ar- 
ranging for the exchange of persons 
and dealing with Unesco Fellowship 
recipients in the United States, is in 
fact carrying out part of Unesco's 
programme. 
Mr. Holland stressed the importance 
of periodically reviewing and re-   
NEW POST FOR U.S. 
DELEGATE TO UNESCO 
R. KENNETH HOLLAND, authority on international education, and Perma- 
M nent United States Delegate to Unesco since February 1948, has 
resigned from that post to accept appointment as President of the 
Institute of International Education. He will take up his new duties in New 
Before his departure from Unesco, Mr Holland, in an interview with 
the “Courier”, left a message of encouragement for all those who work for 
“Unesco’s task will take many years”, he said, 
“but the objectives of the Organization as laid down in the Constitution at 
the London Conference in 1945, are still valid, and deserve the full support 
of Member States, Non-Governmental Organizations and the many individuals 
who are interested in peace through understanding”. 
examining Unesco's programme, in 
speaking of the recent meeting which 
he attended of the U.S. National Com- 
mission in Washington. The Com- 
mission, for this meeting, had chosen 
as its theme “4 Fresh Look at Unesco 
—its Method—its Reach—its Impact”, 
because it was felt that after 4 vears 
it was time to re-assess its objectives 
and its programme. The principal 
emphasis was on "Unesco-wide pro- 
jects” designed to co-ordinate various 
fields of Unesco's work. It was 
considered the best example of this 
was the administrative plan worked 
out for a technical assistance pro- 
gramme with a co-ordinating unit in 
the Organization. 
 
The Commission discussed two such 
projects: 
(1) a greatly expanded programme 
in Germany; and 
(2) a greatly expanded programme 
in the field of Human Rights. 
Mr. Holland has attended every 
Unesco General Conference since the 
Organization came into being, and he 
would prize, he said, the acquaintan- 
ces and friends he had made at these 
conferences and in the Secretariat. 
Before taking up his new duties he 
will go to Florence in June for the 
latter part of this year's General Con- 
ference.   

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 81464: Films in India show the road ahead

FILMS IN INDIA SHOW THE ROAD AHEAD 
  
HEN the new road came to Kurvandi, an old village in rural India, it brought 
more than merely a physical change in the landscape. It brought also a thou- 
sand changes in habits of social and personal life that had remained almost 
the same in Kurvandi, as in countless other Indian villages, for many hundreds of 
years. 
But those in other villages did not. 
To teach the millions of men and women in rural India the benefits of change 
is one of the major goals of the Government of India. 
The people of Kurvandi soon came to understand the value of the road. 
Few problems are greater 
and more urgent than the need to show the people the advantages of replacing old 
habits, customs and superstitions with modern methods of living. . As an important 
means of coping with this 
problem, the Government 
is using educational and 
documentary films, simple 
in content, personal in 
approach, slower in tempo 
than ordinary films, and 
made to fit the special 
needs and conditions of 
people in rural areas. 
One of these is « Kur- 
vandi Road », made by the 
Paul Zils’ documentary unit 
for the United Nations, and 
acquired by the Govern- 
ment of India for wide dis- 
tribution by projectors on 
mobile vans in villages 
which lack electricity. The 
technique both of the pre- 
sentation of images and 
narrative is intended to 
influence and persuade 
simple people of the value 
and urgency of co-opera- 
tion for community better- 
ment. The story of the 
benefits the road brought 
to Kurvandi is made per- 
sonal by the device of 
an intimate commentary 
spoken as if by the villagers 
themselves. 
he villagers did in fact have 
a part in the making of 
the film. When Zils and 
his unit came to Kurvandi, he 
asked their co-operation, and 
they suggested angles of 
thought and approach which 
were stronger and more effect- 
ive than any he had planned 
in advance. 
“Kurvandi Road” attracted 
considerable attention when it 
was shown at the Third In- 
ternational Festival of Docu- 
mentary Films at Edinburgh, 
Scotland. 
Another film made by the 
Zils unit, which is being dis- 
tributed by the Government as 
part of its programme of 
intensive rural education by 
films, is “A Tiny Thing Brings 
Death”. Instead of the charts 
and drawings usual in scienti- 
fic documentaries, this uses a 
simple story of village life to 
illustrate the cause and pre- 
vention of malaria. 
Most of the films fer rural 
use are being made for the 
Government of India, by a 
new organization called In- 
dian Documentary Films, part 
of the Films Division or the 
Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, under the di- 
rection of M. Bhavnani, cne of 
the best known personalities 
in the Indian cinema. Pre- 
pared in four languages—Hin- 
dustani, Gujerati, Bengali and 
Tamil, the films tackle a va- 
riety of present-day social and 
economic problems. 
Food storage, for example, is 
treated in a film entitled War 
on Waste”. The need for bet- 
THEATRE DESIGN 
ter food preservation is stress- 
ed so that the present waste 
of more than two million tons 
of food grains a year can be 
reduced, thus relieving the 
Government from the need to 
import extra food. This film 
shows the modern methods 
  
  
    
   S
e
 
: Y a 
x 
>  Yim 
  
a 
—i    | 
te 
La - 
Fas Pe - 
A knowledge of geography 
and customs of other parts of 
Asia is brought by such films 
about Ceylon as “The En- 
chanted Island” and “The 
Land of Buddah”, Similarly, 
“Ladakh Diary" takes the 
viewer to “the roof of the 
La 
—— = ~ 
worn 4 
    
A 
» 
Pg NA 
al 
A scene from “Child”, one of the U.N. documentary films 
designed to aid social rehabilitation in India. In this film, 
Devi, a volunteer social worker opens a creche for the children 
whose mothers work in the fields. Devi, shown here receiving 
gifts for the creche, also convinces the villages that vaccination 
is the only sure protection against smallpox. 
used to store and preserve food 
—and also the simpler me- 
thads which ordinary persons 
can put into practice. 
“Cup That Cheers” 
ijbres to Fabrics” shows 
India’s textile industry 
from the growing of cotton 
to the finished fabric. “India’s 
Lifeline” acquaints residents 
in areas remote from mecha- 
nical means of travel with 
their country’s vast railway 
system. “The Cup that 
Cheers” tells the story of the 
cultivation, manufacturing, 
marketing and export of tea, 
an industry which gives em- 
ployment to a million workers. 
“Planned Parenthood” in- 
forms the people of the crush- 
ing burden imposed upon the 
national economy -¢f a popu- 
lation increase of more than 
5,000,000 persons a year, and 
argues that the sons and 
daughters of smaller families 
have a better chance for life 
and education. 
world”, the frontier outpost of 
Kashmir, showing the people 
of the region, their culture 
and customs. 
The range of subject matter 
is unusually broad, from 
“Fright and Prejudice” which 
seeks to arm rural villagers 
with scientific methods of 
dealing with snakes, to “Our 
Constitution” which tells how 
the Government of India drew 
up the historic document 
which forms the basis of its 
national existence, and what 
the document means in hu- 
man terms. “Dirty Habits” 
shows some of the personal 
habits of villagers which 
spread disease. 
Second Only To U.S. 
lossoms Revived”, a docu- 
B mentary about infantile 
directed by 
Krishna Gopal, describes in 
simple humau terms how a 
mother’s courage saved her 
daughter's life, with the help 
of the skill and devotion of 
paralysis 
  
 
   
     
  
 
 
Page 15 — UNESCO COURIER 
In another of the U.N. documentary films, “Community *, Indian 
villagers. shown here giving their homes and the village a 
thorough “spring cleaning”, are encouraged to work as a 
doctors and nurses .Other im- 
portant films are “Rivers in 
Harness” on the great hydro- 
electric scheme of the Govern- 
ment, and “New Pastures” on 
land reclamation. 
The Government's Films 
Division, also makes news 
reels, reviews, and documen- 
taries for use in crdinary film 
houses, while a fifth unit spe- 
cializes in films for export in 
order to acquaint the rest of 
the world with Indian life. 
The tctal production is un- 
usually large. Indeed, India 
is second only to the United 
EXHIBITION TO PRECEDE ITI 
community. 
especially in 
matters of health 
and hygiene. 
%* 
Paul Zils (left) 
directed the 
shooting of the 
series of three 
U.N. films, “Mo- 
ther”, “Child”, 
and “Commun- 
ity”, in villages 
of the Satara 
district, south- 
east of Bombay. 
Here he found 
ideal exteriors of 
typical Indian 
villages. 
States as a producer of feature 
Films, although most of the 
Indian films are not designed 
for the world market. 
There are at present in India, 
2,060 permanent theatres, 900 
touring theatres and 30 tem- 
porary ones. The total daily 
attendance is estimated at 
1,600,000, and the yearly total 
well over 600,000,000. About 
300 features are produced 
yearly by 60 studios using 138 
stages and 38 laboratories. 
A number of the provincial 
governments are also setting 
up film units. 
CONGRESS 
  
«AN AUTOMATIC LABOUR-SAVING MAC 
This was how the American architect, 
(see model above) which he designed to make a ¢ 
building. Octogonal in shape, the “New Theatre” ; 
pitched at a steep grade to give the audiénce a more intimate 
and permitting improved acoustics. 
HINE SEALED FROM NOISE AND MAKING NONE.” 
Frank Lloyd Wright described the “New Theatre” 
lean break with past tradition in theatre 
has no balcony. the auditorium being 
relationship with the stage 
ques. 
ODAY is a time of renaissance in the world of theatre — a ‘stout 
| thread for the fabric of a world society ”, as J.B. Priestley has 
described it. 
* 
experience with architects, producers, actors, designers and stage 
technicians taking part, on such questions as “ the value and use of 
stage machinery, acoustics, lighting equipment, the disposition of the 
auditorium, new stage materials and security in public premises. 
So that a wide audience can benefit from the work of the conference, 
the lectures and discussions are later to be published in pamphlet form. 
The International Theatre Institute was founded '“to promote 
international exchange of knowledge and practice in theatre arts”. The 
Conference will be a practical expression of that purpose. 
S experi from more than ten countries will share the benefit of their 
War-damaged theatres are being reconstructed all 
over Europe and new theatres being built throughout the world. 
For this reason, and as a prelude to the Third Congress of the Inter- 
national Theatre Institute (I.T.I.) which opens on June 22nd, an Inter- 
national Theatre Architecture Exhibition and Conference will be held in 
Paris from June 19th to 21st. 
Theatre architects in all countries are ready to share their knowledge 
for the common aim of making each new theatre as perfect as possible ; 
to provide the best range of vision and the most effective system of acous- 
tics so that audiences can best appreciate the team work of producers, 
actors and stage technicians. 
The Paris exhibition and conference will therefore be an effective way 
of “pooling” available knowledge and demonstrating up-to-date techni- 
 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081400engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 16 
   agencies have assumed 
development. 
were received. 
Today, the United Nations and special- 
ized agencies are preparing an expanded 
certain 
broad responsibilities for helping 
their members to obtain the techni- 
cal assistance needed for their economic 
To carry out these responsi- 
bilities, they have created machinery within 
their organizations, initiated studies of the 
types of assistance required and provided, 
on many occasions, the technical advice or 
other assistance for which the requests 
T he United Nations and specialized 
“FOR THE BENEFIT 
OF THE POPULATION 
AT LARGE" 
   
Emblem of the 
Republic of Indonesia. 
The National 
co-operative programme of technical assis- 
tance to under-deveioped countries. The first action 
under this programme was the recent despatch to 
Djakarta, capital of the young Republic of Indonesia, in 
answer to a government request, of a joint technical 
assistance mission of experts. 
Headed by Dr. Ansgar Rosenborg, Special Assistant 
to the UN Assistant Secretary-General in charge of 
Economic Affairs, the mission was last month consulting 
with the Indonesian authorities on their existing plans 
for economic development and seeking to determine in 
what field assistance was most needed. 
FOUR UNESCO FIELDS 
NESCO’S representative on the mission, Mr M. 
Akrawi, formerly a senior official on the Irak 
Ministry of Education, helped to conduct a survey 
of educational systems in Arab 
states between 1945 and 1947. 
Mr Akrawi /was also a member of 
the Unesco Educational Mission to 
Afghanistan, last year, 
In Indonesia, he has been 
consulting with the Government 
on the provision by Unesco of 
technical assistance in fundamental 
education, natural and applied 
sciences, mass communications and 
the provision of international 
training facilities for Indonesians 
in these fields, as part of the total 
plan for the economic development 
of Indonesia. 
Reflecting the broad scope of 
FOOD... Cultivating rice—Indonesia’s basic article of food. 
Indonesia are faced with a serious and cumulative shortage of rice, for which 
  
U.N. TECHNICAL ™ 
 
  


### 81466: U.N. Technical assistance mission surveys needs of Indonesia

ASSISTANCE MISSION 
SURVEYS NEEDS 
OF INDONESIA 
 
those fundamental social questions 
which ‘bear a close relation to 
economic development. 
NEED FOR 
¢ SOCIAL ENGINEERING’ 
CC YI is fitting that Indonesia should 
have been chosen as one of the 
first countries — if not the first 
— to be surveyed in connection 
with the United Nations plan for 
technical assistance to under- 
developed areas. The Indonesian 
question was one of the first matters 
to be taken up by the Security 
Council which, through its Commis- 
sion, continues to keep a watchful 
eye upon the progress of the new 
state which it had so much to do 
with bringing to birth. 
“ As you will see for yourselves ”, 
  
  
Mohammad Hatta, 
sia’s Prime Minister. 
Sukarno of 
Indonesia. 
Indone- President   
technical assistance was the 
inclusion in the mission of 
representatives of three UN special- 
ized agencies — a point stressed by 
Mohammad Hatta, Indonesia's 
Prime Minister, when he welcomed 
the group at the Indonesian Fo- 
reign Office. 
“You gentlemen are here”, he 
continued, “ primarily to explore the 
possibilities of such collaboration in 
the economic field. The composition 
of your mission — including as it 
does experts in agriculture, education 
and health — indicates, however, 
that due attention will be paid to 
Each year the people of 
the only practical solution appears to be the extension of irrigation and other agricultural 
measures. 
universal problem. 
precarious rice situation, however, is not peculiar to Indonesia. 
In « special report, the Food and Agricultural Organization has pointed 
It is a 
out that in the period between the two world wars, the production of rice in South East Asia 
increased by 10 % only, whilsf the population increased by 20 9%. 
  
said the Indonesian Prime Minister, 
“we do need a good deal of help. 
For nearly a decade, large areas of 
Indonesia have been cut off from 
normal contact with other coun- 
tries and at the same time have 
suffered heavy destruction. There 
is urgent need of rehabilitation and 
technical assistance in industry, in 
agriculture, in education, in public 
health, in what might be called 
“ social engineering ” generally. 
© “ Fortunately, we have been 
blessed in Indonesia with a generous 
share of natural resources. The 
problem with which we are grap- 
  
AND PEO The problem of 
san *teeding a rapidly 
growing population became critical during 
the wartime occupation of Indonesia and 
was further complicated by the unsettled 
period which followed. This photo, taken 
at that time and showing an emaciated In- 
donesian woman waiting to receive a bowl 
of rice from a relief service truck, illustrates 
more eloquently than any statistics the dis- 
parity between food produced and mouths 
to tee 
pling is the development of these 
resources for the benefit, not of a 
priveleged few, but of the population 
at large. We wish to see the general 
standard of living of the Indonesian 
people raised to a decent and 
dignified level. 
“But”, Mohammad Hatta 
concluded, “ we are mindful also of 
our responsibilities as a member — 
however new and inexperienced as 
yet — of the family of nations. It 
‘is our fervent hope that as time goes 
on we may be able to make an 
increasing contribution to the welfare 
of our neighbours and all other 
members of the world community.” 
“We Indonesians”, he said, 
“ recognize that it is only through 
properly integrated collaboration on 
a world-wide scale that peace and 
prosperity can be assured. 
 
ww The name “Indonesia” was coined 
by a European ethnologist who gave 
it as a common name to the thousands 
of islands scattered along the equator 
between the Asiatic Continent and 
Australia. Today it applies in a polit- 
ical rather than an ethnological sense 
to the area previously known as the 
Dutch East Indies. 
Yw 4 hundred and fifty years ago the 
total population of its entire area was 
about ten million, that of Java being 
about 3% million. Today it is assessed 
at 71 million, that of Java being about 
35 million, making it the most densely 
populated island in the world. 
* About twenty-fire different langua- 
ges and more than two hundred and 
fifty dialects are spoken in Indonesia. 
Today, the Indonesian government is 
working to establish the Malayan 
language, now called behassa Indone- 
sia, as the official lingua franca of the 
Republic. 
Y The most fruitful of all the islands 
is Java. With its adjacent island of 
Madura it has a total area of about 
32 million acres. About 8 million acres 
consist of forests and 20 million are 
arable lands and inland fisheries. From 
them, the pre-war population of 50 mil- 
lion people extracted enough food for 
ils own requirements and there was 
even an export surplus. 
% Three quarters of the 77,000,000 
inhabitants of the Indonesia Archipelago 
earn their living by cultivating the soil. 
Courier 
NERY —-—— 
EDITORIAL OFFICES : 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. 146 
* 
Editor : PETER DU BERG 
English Language Editor : R. $5. FENTON 
* 
All reproductions authorized 
* 
mprimerie GEORGES LANG 
11, rue Curial, Paris. 
  
  
UNESCO Publication 7346     