# [074820](074820engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](074820engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
sieaA Og 
1s 
S.00saun 
  
  
(103K 262) 9261 WOO A 3 1.1 Nn OI
pPlHOM 8Yy] uo uado MOpPUIM Yf

## [Page 2](074820engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

REY T° bh Cy hand Gh FT ot Sh ak 
TR Sor fia: + i \ i 
ES “th et 
  
TREASURES Nefertari’'s veil of sand 
OF This statue of Queen Nefertari (18 metres high) at Abu Simbel wears a veil of sand as she 
awaits cutting up during Unesco’s famous Nubian rescue operation (1960-1968). The Abu 
Simbel temples were dismembered and re-erected 30 metres above their original site along 
WORLD ART the Mile. In this unique operation, engineers built sand-dune mountains to protect temple 
facade while structures behind were cut away from rock wall. 
EGYPT : 5 Photo © Hildegard Weber Cologne Fed Rep of Germeny 
Sms © 
w 
2 4

## [Page 3](074820engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"@mCourier 
  
MARCH 1976 29TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 15 LANGUAGES 
English Arabic Hebrew 
French Japanese Persian 
Spanish Italian Dutch 
Russian Hindi Portuguese 
German Tamil Turkish 
 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Annual subscription rate 28 French francs 
Binder for a year’s issues: 24 French francs 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year). For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER,” plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions" of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. Photo captlons and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier staff. 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- 
film and/or microfiche) by: (1) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A. ; (2) N.C.R. 
Microcard Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, U.S.A.; (3) Bell and Howell C-,, 
Oid Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the 
Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- 
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editors-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Olga Rodel 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Fernandez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition : Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim Ei Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : N. K. Sundaram (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition : M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition : Mefra Telci (Istanbul) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Roy Malkin 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Illustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard 
Research: Christiane Boucher 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to 
the Editor-in-Chief in Paris IS
SN
 
00
41
-5
27
8 
- 
19
76
 
MC
 
76
-3
-3
19
 
N
e
 3
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 
4 UNESCO'S EARLY YEARS 
By Julian Huxley 
Unesco’s first Director-General (1946-1948) 
8 JULIAN HUXLEY 
Scientist, humanist and lover of nature 
By Paulo E. de Berrédo Carneiro 
14 A PHILOSOPHY FOR UNESCO 
Selections from a forgotten historic document 
By Julian Huxley 
19 A 50-QUESTION QUIZ ON UNESCO 
24 UNESCO AND THE WORLD OUTLOOK 
FOR TOMORROW 
By Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow 
Director-General of Unesco 
26 THE ROOTS OF A GROWING WORLD CRISIS 
Short extract from a collective text by: Yoshio Abe, Samir 
Amin, Margaret J. Anstee, Béchir Benyahmed, Wilbert Chagula, 
Jean-Marie Domenach, Marion Donhoff, Abdul-Razzak Kad- 
doura, Alfred Kastler, M.G.K. Menon, Yehudi Menuhin, Charles 
Morazé, Aurelio Peccei, Raul Prebisch, Radovan Richta, 
Joaquin Ruiz-Gimenez, Abdul Aziz el Sayed, Vadim Sobakine 
37 UNESCO'S RAINBOW CARD GAME 
37 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
2 TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
EGYPT: Nefertari's veil of sand 
     
  
Cover 
This year on November 4, Unesco celebrates 
its 30th anniversary. This is symbolized on 
our cover by three works of art and architec- 
ture at Unesco’s Paris headquarters. Domi- 
nated by the head and shoulders of Henry 
Moore's “Reclining Figure”, the Unesco Confer- 
ence building with the Moore statue outlined 
against its wall is shown bottom right. Bottom 
left (in red section) Joan Miro’s ceramic “Wall 
of the Sun”. Cover design for this issue was 
executed by Unesco graphic artist Rolf Ibach. 
J 
ar
 
=
 
.
 
-
 
—.
 
Co
ve
r 
© 
Un
es
co
 
Co
ur
ie
r.
 
Ph
ot
os
 
U
n
e
s
c
o

## [Page 4](074820engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 49460: UNESCO's early years

   
by Julian Huxley 
UNESCO'S 
ARLY YEARS 
  
Unesco’s first Director-General (1946-1948) 
This year marks the 30th anniversary of the 
foundation of Unesco. Born at the end of the 
Second World War, on 4 November 1946, Unesco 
has seen its membership grow from 20 countries 
in 1946 to 136 today. On the one hand, this issue 
focuses attention on Unesco’s early years and its 
first Director-General, Julian Huxley, who died on 
14 February 1975. On the other hand it presents a 
Unesco perspective on some of the major problems 
of the world today. The August-September double 
issue will present Unesco’s 30 years of activity 
in comic strip form. 
M: two and a half years in 
charge of Unesco affairs 
were the most exciting period of my 
life, but | must say also the most 
exhausting. 
It all started only through the acci- 
dent of Sir Alfred Zimmern's sudden 
illness early in 1945 when he was Sec- 
retary of the Preparatory Commission 
for Unesco. It was only because of 
this that | was officially asked to take 
over the Secretaryship of the Pre- 
paratory Commission in London. 
In spite of this, | didn’t feel suitable 
and when | entered the Commission's 
office, | felt, as | wrote in my diary at 
the time, like the headmaster of a 
school who is also its youngest pupil. 
After settling down, | took a fortnight 
off to write a pamphlet entitled : 
“Unesco, its Purpose and its Philo- 
sophy” to clarify my own thinking and, 
| hoped, that of the delegates in the 
forthcoming first General Confe- 
rence (see passages from this docu- 
ment, page 14). This was to be held in 
Paris in December 1946 and would 
decidé the main outlines of Unesco’s 
policy and programme and also elect 
its first Director-General. 
As it turned out, the humanist atti- 
4 
tude which | adopted in this pamphlet 
led various delegates, quite er- 
roneously, to think that | was anti- 
religious, while my liberal views were 
taken by others as communist. 
While still in London, | had recruited 
a number of the staff who would be 
needed in Paris whoever was appointed 
as Director-General. These included 
such figures as Joseph Needham, emi- 
nent both as biologist, historian of 
science and authority on Chinese 
affairs—he was to head Unesco’s 
Natural Sciences Department; the 
cultured Jean Thomas, as Deputy 
Director-General and the many-sided 
Professor Pierre Auger, as a physicist, 
both of France. 
We started work in January 1947 in 
the Hotel Majestic, which had been the 
Nazis’ Paris Headquarters during the 
Second World War. Ironically enough, 
|, as Director-General of an Organi- 
zation dedicated to peace, the promo- 
tion of knowledge and culture, occu- 
pied the room which had harboured 
the very unpeaceful, repressive Nazi 
Commandant. 
The preamble of Unesco’s Constitu- 
tion, beautifully written by the Ameri- 
can scholar-poet Archibald MacLeish,   
Ph
ot
o 
Da
vi
d 
S
e
y
m
o
u
r
 
- 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
proclaimed that Unesco was primarily 
dedicated to peace—though through 
education, science and culture—and | 
had often to defend projects that were 
not specifically concerned with peace 
by maintaining that the promotion of 
education, science and culture, espe- 
cially when involving the exchange of 
ideas and personnel between different 
regions was Unesco's primary task 
and could and would indirectly lead to 
peace through better mutual under- 
standing. 
In education, Unesco's first job was 
obviously to promote literacy in a 
largely illiterate world, but we soon 
found that literacy in the customary 
sense was not enough. Besides learn- 
ing to read, write and do simple arith- 
metic, the large mass of underprivi- 
leged people needed to be educated 
in hygiene, in improved methods of 
agriculture and better care of their 
environment. This comprehensive pro- 
gramme we called “fundamental edu- 
cation”. It proved very valuable in our 
early stages by lifting underprivileged 
peoples to a decent minimum of intel- 
lectual and physical advance. 
Later, the phrase “fundamental edu- 
cation” was dropped and there were 
separate projects for health, in con-

## [Page 5](074820engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 49460: UNESCO's early years

- 
NB
 
| 
A
S
C
O
 
4 
Bel. 
- 
\ 
= 
Ha
 
po
s 
It is in the nature of things that all wars are waged against children. Some suffer 
indirectly and others lose their lives, their limbs or their sight, like this young 
Italian boy, blind and armless after a hand grenade explosion, here learning 
to read Braille with his lips. One of Unesco’s urgent post-war tasks was 
educational reconstruction. It promoted emergency school-building programmes, 
the preparation and distribution of textbooks and the standardization 
of Braille systems and took many other steps to meet the immense 
needs of children in war-torn countries. 
junction with the World Health Orga- 
nization, for general education, for 
science, for population control, for 
exchange of persons and for conser- 
vation—all co-ordinated by the Techni- 
cal Assistance Department of the 
United Nations. 
Besides this, there were numerous 
non-governmental associations con- 
cerned with different aspects of 
Unesco’'s work. Some were already 
in existence before 1945, like the Inter- 
national Museums Office, which 
I, as Secretary to the Preparatory 
Commission, agreed should be affi- 
liated to Unesco, helping Unesco with 
advice, benefiting by grants or visits 
by specialists financed by Unesco. 
Others had to be deliberately 
created, sometimes in the face of 
considerable opposition. This was the 
case with the International Union for 
the Conservation of Nature, IUCN for 
short, consisting of specialists in eco- 
logy, in establishing reserves to pro- 
tect unspoiled scenery, rare and inte- 
resting plants and animals and in pre- 
venting pollution and unplanned urban 
spread. 
Many delegates to the Conference, 
which we held at Fontainebleau in 
1948, thought that preserving wild life 
and the like was outside Unesco’'s 
province, as it did not specifically 
promote peace. But eventually, the 
conference agreed to the formation of 
the Union and its affiliation with 
Unesco. | may add that the Union, 
both on its own and with grants from 
or personnel financed by Unesco has 
achieved a great deal in preserving 
much of the world's beauty and its 
interesting plant and animal inhabi- 
tants, though there is still much to be 
done. 
It has also helped in conjunction with 
the United Nations and its Specialized 
Agencies in setting up the International 
Biological Programme, which is at the 
present moment surveying human 
health—as wealth—and the conserva- 
tion and better utilization of the world’s 
biological resources. 
As regards Science, we found that 
the scientists in one country in a given 
region, like the Middle East, were often 
more ignorant of the work of scientists 
in other countries of their own region 
than of the work of leaders of science 
in more developed countries. 
The Regional Centres for Science 
established by Unesco put local scien- 
tists in touch with each other so that 
they could apportion research in rela- 
tion to the area's need, and they also 
put them in touch with world science 
by the information we provided. 
We also set up a scheme for the 
exchange of individual experts; post- 
graduate students to work in the scien- 
tifically more advanced countries; 
specialists to advise on projects in 
so-called underdeveloped nations; 
exhibitions in world centres for artists 
i] 
4

## [Page 6](074820engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 49460: UNESCO's early years

_in different regions; visits by eminent 
lecturers, and so forth. 
In visual arts, we set up two special 
projects. One was a catalogue of good 
reproductions of well-known paintings 
with miniature coloured photographs 
of the originals and prices of the re- 
production. This has proved extremely 
useful in schools in many countries. 
The other was the publication of large 
folio volumes illustrating little known 
works of painting and architecture and 
sculpture, such as the cave paintings 
of Ceylon and India. These were 
more valuable to specialists but cer- 
tainly disseminated knowledge and ap- 
preciation which was otherwise un- 
available. 
| badly wanted to set up a powerful 
organization concerned with population 
control in association with the U.N. 
and, | hoped, its other Specialized 
Agencies; but religious and nationalist 
prejudices permitted only a handful of 
experimental projects. Today, I'm 
thankful to say, not only Unesco but 
the U.N. itself, the World Health Orga- 
nization and also the World Bank are 
helping in this, in my opinion, the most 
important task facing mankind. 
I must mention one final project 
suggested to me by Joseph Needham : 
the writing and publishing of a world 
history which would stress advances 
in science and literature, in culture and 
the arts, rather than political changes 
and military events. This was adopted, 
though against considerable opposi- 
tion, by the Unesco General Confer- 
ence in Beirut (Lebanon) in 1948, when 
my career as Director-General ended. 
However, in 1949, Professor Paulo de 
Berredo Carneiro of Brazil was ap- 
pointed President and myself as Vice- 
President of the Commission appointed 
to supervise the writing of the work. 
Today, the six volumes of the Cultu- 
ral and Scientific History of Mankind, 
bringing it right up to date, have been 
published both in French and English, 
numerous other translations have been 
arranged and a pocket edition with 
fewer illustrations is being published. 
| have no hesitation in saying that this 
is a valuable achievement (1). 
Naturally the scope of Unesco’s 
activities has been much enlarged and 
often redefined in slightly different 
terms. | can truthfully say that my 
two and half years at Unesco were the 
high point of my life, a time when all 
my capacities and all my knowledge 
and energies were fully involved. | 
fervently hope and indeed confidently 
expect that Unesco will continue along 
the same general lines as a promoter 
of cultural advance and mutual under- 
standing, but always on the lookout 
for new problems and new ways of 
tackling them. 
From an interview with Sir Julian 
Huxley recorded in 1970. 
(1) History of Mankind: Cultural and Scien- 
tific Development, published by George Allen 
and Unwin Ltd., London (U.K.} and by Harper 
and Row Publishers, New York (1963-1969). 
it has also been published in French, Greek, 
Serbo-Croat, Slovenian, and Spanish. 
n 
pe 
© 
a 
2] 
[2] 
2 
2 
[=] 
= 
a  
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 - 
Ec
la
ir
 
M
o
n
d
i
a
l
 
  
  
  
(1) At the end of World War Il many of Europe's cities were as devastated 
as this street in Sheffield (U.K.) after a bombing raid in 1940. Unesco was set 
up immediately after the war with the aim of using the resources of education, 
culture and science to contribute to international peace and security. Its 
Constitution was signed in London on 16 November 1945 by the representatives 
of countries from every continent. (2) Among the signatures on the Constitution 
reproduced here are those of A.A. Hekmat (Iran), Yicel (Turkey), Naji al-Asil 
(Iraq), E. Letts (Peru), Ellen Wilkinson (U.K.) John A. Beasley (Australia) and 
Leon Blum (France). (3) A year later, on 20 November 1946, the opening 
session of Unesco’s first General Conference was held in the main amphitheatre 
of the Sorbonne in Paris. (4) The Conference continued its work until 
December 10 at Unesco’s provisional headquarters in the Hotel Majestic, Paris. 
(5) Julian Huxley, Unesco’s first Director-General, addresses the General 
Conference. On his left is Leon Blum (President of the Conference) and on his 
right Jean Thomas, Deputy Director-General of Unesco. 
 

## [Page 7](074820engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 49460: UNESCO's early years

Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
- 
K
e
y
s
t
o
n
e
 
   
   
  
3 
\ 
od
e 
La
 
S&
L 
h
a
e
 
Rat 
bo
 
r 
es
 
¥ 
t 
C 
A, 
- 
. 
- 
x 
et
 
S
i
n
t
.
 
is
 
v 
» 
A 
H] 
p 
a 
No
 
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
- 
Ec
la
ir
 
Mo
nd
ia
l 
W
i
 
x
 
LE
 
Fr 
w
r
a
r
e
 
>
 
+f
 
BUILDING FOR PEAGE ON THE RUINS OF WAR 
 
 
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o

## [Page 8](074820engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 49462: Julian Huxley: scientist, humanist, and lover of nature

JULIAN HUXLEY 
  
scientist humanist, 
and lover of nature 
by Paulo E. de Berrédo Carneiro 
‘W HAT | aimed at was to 
achieve better education 
for the underprivileged; a greater 
understanding of the role of science 
by all nations; exchange of students 
and teachers between countries with 
different ideologies or at different 
levels of cultural development; con- 
servation of natural beauty and sites of 
historical interest; a greater under- 
standing of evolution and its workings, 
both in nature and in human society; 
the extirpation of ideological and 
nationalist interference in matters of 
art, literature and science; measures 
against overpopulation. Above all, a 
  
PAULO E. DE BERREDO CARNEIRO of 
Brazil has been associated with Unesco since 
1946 when he was Brazil's representative on the 
Unesco Preparatory Commission in London. He 
is a member of Unesco’s Executive Board and 
was its Chairman during 19571-1952. Permanent 
delegate of Brazil to Unesco from 1946 to 1965, 
he led his country’s delegation to many sessions 
of Unesco’s General Conference, of which he 
was President in 1962. He has been chairman 
of the Executive Committee for the Interna- 
tional Campaign to Save the Monuments of 
Nubia since 1962. For many years he direc- 
ted the work of the International Commission 
set up by Unesco to prepare the multi-volume 
History of Mankind—Cultural and Scientific 
Development (See page 715). A member of 
many scientific and cultural institutions, including 
the Brazilian Academy of the History of Science 
and the Institut de France (corresponding 
member), he taught chemistry at universities in 
Brazil and other countries and has lectured and 
written widely on philosophical, historical and 
literary subjects. 
consciousness of the unity of mankind 
and the need to co-ordinate efforts 
towards cultural and social progress 
on a world-wide scale.” 
It is in these words that Julian 
Huxley describes in his autobiography, 
Memories, the aims of the first pro- 
gramme for Unesco which he was 
called on to prepare in 1946 as 
Secretary of the Organization's Pre- 
paratory Commission. 
Few indeed, in 1946, were those who 
could have taken charge of as bold 
and pioneering an enterprise as the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
Called on by the educators, scien- 
tists and scholars who had created 
Unesco, Julian Huxley accepted the 
challenge to make the new organization 
a living reality. His previous studies, 
his work, the whole course of his life 
had, in fact, prepared him to perform 
the task with brilliant success. 
As a schoolboy at Eton, Julian Huxley 
was equally attracted to scientific 
research and literature. Latin and 
Greek interested him as much as 
animal life and behaviour, and he 
divided most of his free time between 
writing poems in these languages, 
dissecting insects, and bird-watching. 
At 18 he won a scholarship in 
zoology at Balliol College, Oxford. By 
now he was spending all his spare 
time roaming through fields and woods, 
notebook and binoculars in hand, 
observing the different kinds of birds, 
noting their songs and jotting down 
descriptions of their nests, their eggs, 
and the distinctive characteristics of 
their behaviour. 
As a young student at Balliol he 
made the acquaintance of distinguished 
Oxford figures in addition to the 
teachers with whom he studied exper- 
imental embryology, comparative anat- 
omy and zoology. While at Oxford he 
also won the university poetry prize, 
the Newdigate, and bought his first 
microscope with the prize money. 
In 1909 Julian Huxley attended an 
important international gathering held 
at Cambridge to celebrate the centen- 
ary of Charles Darwin's birth. During 
the ceremony, as he tells us in his 
autobiography, he thought of his grand- 
father, the famous biologist Thomas 
Henry Huxley, who had vigorously 
defended Darwin's work against the 
religious prejudices of those earlier 
times. 
He resolved there and then to 
approach all his studies in a Darwinian 
spirit and to devote his major work to 
evolutionism, on which he threw much 
new light through his own research. 
In the same year he published his 
first scientific paper, concerning a 
protozoan parasite in a freshwater 
shrimp, a survivor from the carbon- 
iferous epoch 300 million years ago, 
which had been found in Tasmania. 
Soon afterwards, he was awarded a 
scholarship at the Naples Marine Bio- 
logical Station, where he was delighted 
to discover almost limitless possi- 
bilities for research. His first piece 
of work, on the tissues of sponges, 
was immediately published in the

## [Page 9](074820engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 49462: Julian Huxley: scientist, humanist, and lover of nature

Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
  
As a broadcaster, lecturer and the author of some 40 books—scientific books based on original 
research and others on travel, religion, science and politics, popular science, natural history 
and poetry—Sir Julian Huxley became known to a wide public. His ability to interpret scientific 
and philosophic ideas in a lively style and easily understood terms earned him the award of 
the Unesco Kalinga Prize for the popularization of science, in 1953. (See also footnote 
page 38). Photo shows Sir Julian at the Kalinga prize-giving ceremony at Unesco’s 
Paris H.Q. With him (on right) is Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, former 
chairman of Unesco’s Executive Board who later became President of india (1962-1967). 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society. He next turned his attention 
to a rare Foraminiferan [a tiny marine 
creature] which lived in mud and whose 
reproduction process he was the first 
to describe. Each individual of this 
species divides up into about 500 
miniature organisms, each resembling 
the parent except that their bodies 
are ovoid instead of elongated. 
But his most important work at the 
Naples Institute concerned Clavellina, 
an Ascidian [a jelly-like animal] which 
lives attached to rocks in the sea. 
When its thorax is cut and left in a 
container, it shrinks into an opaque, 
formless mass. Only its heart-beat 
continues as evidence of normality. If 
this formless mass is replaced in clean 
water, it redifferentiates, not into a 
new thorax but a normal whole 
individual. This remarkable experiment 
was the starting point for many others 
of a similar kind. 
Julian Huxley's stay at the Naples 
Institute was an extremely fruitful 
period for his biological work. It also 
brought him into contact with two 
distinguished scientists, Otto Warburg 
(later a Nobel Prizewinner) with whom

## [Page 10](074820engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 49462: Julian Huxley: scientist, humanist, and lover of nature

Photos on this page show 
Julian Huxley at three 
stages in his long career. 
Right, the young zoologist 
in his laboratory at Oxford 
in the early 1920s. 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
As Secretary of the Zoological Society of London (1935-1942) 
Julian Huxley transformed the London Zoo. One of his projects was 
to set up a special children’s zoo. In photo above, taken in 1938, 
a sea lion seems to listen attentively as Julian Huxley chats to 
a London zoo-keeper. 
After serving as Secretary 
of the Preparatory 
Commission for Unesco 
in 1946, Julian Huxley 
was elected Director- 
General of the Organization 
at its first General 
Conference held in Paris 
in 1946. Photo right 
shows Julian Huxley and 
his wife Juliette at a 
Unesco function in Paris 
in the same year. 
10 
    
  
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ph
ot
op
re
ss
, 
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
  
Huxley later worked in his laboratory 
at Heidelberg, and E.G. Conklin, an 
embryologist at Princeton University. 
Huxley now returned to Oxford to 
take up a lectureship at Balliol and a 
demonstratorship in the university 
Department of Zoology. He gave free 
rein to his interests as a naturalist and 
spent. most of his time in scientific 
bird watching. 
His first descriptions of the court- 
ship ceremonies of certain birds such 
as the great crested grebe were 
published in 1914 and had a major 
impact. Having been struck by the 
formalized nature of some of the male 
bird's actions, he concluded that they 
served to establish an emotional link 
between the couple. Julian Huxley's 
work on these courtship rituals make 
him a pioneer of ethology and a pre- 
cursor of Konrad Lorenz and Nikolaas 
Tinbergen. 
In the autumn of 1912 he sailed for 
the United States to attend the opening 
of the Rice Institute in Houston, Texas 
where he had been appointed to the 
chair of biology. This appointment 
which he took up the following year 
gave him the opportunity to get to 
know the United States, its universities 
and its scientists. 
In New York his first visit was to 
the famous “fly-room” at Columbia 
University, where T.H. Morgan and his 
team had just completed their first 
great piece of research on Drosophila, 
the fruit-fy. One member of the team 
was H.J. Muller, a future Nobel Prize- 
winner, who was to become Huxley's 
assistant at the Rice Institute. During 
this period he met many noted 
American biologists, including E.B. Wil- 
son, S. Flexner, Peyton Rous and 
Rosa Harrington. 
A year after his arrival in Houston, 
the First World ‘War broke out. In the 
early summer of 1916, Julian Huxley 
returned to England to join the army. 
His service with the armed forces, 
first in England then in Italy, lasted 
until the end of the war, when he 
returned to Oxford to take up a feltow— 
ship in Zoology at New College. 
Here he continued his research 
and teaching, numbering among his 
students many who were destined for 
a brilliant future in science. 
In the time he could spare from his 
scientific activities, Julian Huxley read 
philosophical and religious works. His 
study of Abelard, St. Thomas Aquinas, 
St. Augustine, St. Francis of Assisi and 
other saints, mystics and theologians 
laid the foundations for the work he 
wrote later on the role of religion in 
present-day society, Religion without 
Revelation. 
Immediately after his return to 
Oxford at the beginning of 1919, Julian 
Huxley proposed to Juliette Baillot, a 
charming Swiss girl he had met two 
years before. She accepted. “This 
provoked a whirlwind of happiness in 
my heart”, he wrote in Memories, “and 
| spent much of my time writing to all 
my friends and relatives telling them

## [Page 11](074820engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 49462: Julian Huxley: scientist, humanist, and lover of nature

One of Julian Huxley's 
most remarkable 
biological discoveries 
was made when he 
studied the bristle-worm 
Sabella (right) at Lough 
Ine (Ireland) in 1934. 
His research showed that 
headless fragments of 
the worm's thorax would 
regenerate a complete 
thorax and abdomen, 
whereas it had previously 
been supposed that the 
brain and its nerves were 
needed for this process. 
2 
A 
[J 
[+8 
< 
c 
-] 
Q 
] 2 
© 
b= 
o > 
[J 
2 Si 
@ | 
[2] 2 
© 
£ 
a 
U.
S.
A.
 
Sa
n 
Di
eg
o,
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Un
io
n 
Tr
ib
un
e 
Pu
bl
is
hi
ng
 
Co
.,
 
During a visit to the United States in 1956 Julian Huxley 
makes friends with a baby orang-outang at San Diego Zoo. With 
him is his younger brother Aldous, distinguished novelist, 
essayist and critic. 
of my good fortune.” This happiness 
was to last a lifetime. 
About this time, Oxford University 
prepared to send a scientific ex- 
pedition to Spitzbergen in the Arctic 
Ocean. Julian Huxley was one of the 
organizers and in addition to him, the 
expedition included botanists, a geogra- 
pher, a geologist and an ecologist. 
Julian Huxley's task was to study 
Arctic birds and describe their habits. 
To his delight he saw species such 
as the grey phalarope and the purple 
sandpiper for the first time and ana- 
lysed their sexual behaviour. Each of 
these two species is distinguished by 
the reversal of roles between the 
sexes: the hen (brightly coloured in 
the case of the grey phalarope) takes 
the initiative in courtship while the 
protectively coloured male broods the 
eggs and looks after the young chicks. 
The Spitzbergen expedition led to the 
foundation of the Oxford Exploration 
Society, the first of the British uni- 
versity exploration clubs. 
In 1925 Julian Huxley left Oxford 
to become professor of Zoology at 
King's College in London. This move 
coincided with a turning point in his 
research and his career as a writer. 
His mind now turned increasingly to 
social problems, to which he applied 
the scientific methods which had 
proved their worth in his biological 
research. 
The biologist became a sociologist, 
a humanist, an educator anxious to 
‘serve a world in disarray. His 
approach was that of a man of science 
who recognizes the need for free- 
ranging imaginative solutions in dealing 
with complex social problems. 
The population explosion of modern 
times became one of his favourite 
themes as a writer and thinker. He 
returned to this problem again and 
again, demonstrating its gravity and 
its implications for mankind. He 
expounded his views on family planning 
in newspaper articles, lectures and 
radio broadcasts which won a wide 
audience. 
11 
4

## [Page 12](074820engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 49462: Julian Huxley: scientist, humanist, and lover of nature

  
4 In 1930 he played an active part in 
the World Conference of Anglican 
bishops at Lambeth Palace in London, 
where family planning was a major 
topic of discussion. In its final report, 
the conference recognized the danger 
of over-population and left the practice 
of birth control to the conscience of 
the individuals concerned. 
From a very early age, Huxley had 
no belief of any kind in the super- 
natural. He thought it possible to 
establish a moral system which was 
purely scientific in inspiration and 
which would be capable of uniting 
mankind. In his view, love of God 
should be replaced by love of nature 
and love of Humanity. His concept 
was of a religion without revealed 
dogmas, without deities, without heaven 
or earth, 
To expound his main thoughts on 
this subject, he wrote in 1927 a book 
of major philosophical importance, 
entitled Religion without Revelation. 
Apart from his biological works this 
is undoubtedly his most important 
book. In a collection of lectures entit- 
led What Dare | Think ? published in 
1931, he returned to many of the 
fundamental points he had raised in 
the earlier book: “Religion, in the 
light of psychological and anthropo- 
logical science is seen not as a divine 
revelation, but as a function of human 
nature ... God in the current sense in 
which they use the word, is the 
creation of man...Almost without 
exception, the elements and practices 
of the existing world-religions could 
be utilized by a religion which, aban- 
doning the interpretation in terms of 
God, has adopted the scientific out- 
look as basis for its theology. 
“This new religion] ...can help to kill 
fear and to achieve freedom from 
the sense of sin. It can reveal to 
its adherents unexpected richnesses, 
possibilities of their own nature of 
which they were ignorant...But it 
will never be a real force in human 
affairs, unless, in addition to providing 
spiritual refuge and solace and the 
opportunity of doing miscellaneous 
good works, it makes some bold appeal 
to the moral sense and the imagination 
of humanity... 
“Thus, whether looked at from the 
human or from the scientific point of 
view, a new religion cannot be a 
religion of negation, of death, of 
asceticism, of resignation. It must be 
Observation of nature and the animal world preoccupied Julian Huxley from his 
schooldays to the end of his life. Devoted to the question of conservation of 
wildlife and natural habitats, he studied these problems in Africa where he 
carried out several missions for Unesco between 1960 and 1971 (see “Unesco 
Courier”, September 1961). Below, perching happily on one leg, a crane cleans up 
its beak with the other foot. 
religion of life... From the point of 
view of the individual's inner life, its 
message will be that life can be sa- 
cramental. 
“The apprehension of truth or 
beauty; suffering or sacrifice; simple 
joy and simple health; love, spiritual 
and physical alike; ecstasy and disci- 
pline; self-surrender and self-control 
—the most widely differing aspects of 
life can become tinged with transcen- 
dent emotion, whereby we feel that 
we are greater than we know and 
come to experience a new value in 
existence... [This religion] can also 
help to give life a purpose beyond 
itself... Who can doubt that the mo- 
tive of work for the continuation of the 
race and the increase of its capacities 
for achievement and enjoyment could 
be charged with religious emotion?” 
This scientific humanism is based 
on the evolutionism of Darwin, but in 
my view, it has a much closer affinity 
with the philosophy of Auguste Comte 
and his religion of humanity. 
In 1927 H.G. Wells invited Julian 
Huxley to join him and his son G.P. 
Wells in compiling an encyclopedia of 
biology, to be called The Science of 
Life. Huxley was to be responsible 
CONTINUED PAGE 38 
Photo © Raghu Rai, New Delhi, India 
  
  
    

## [Page 13](074820engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 49462: Julian Huxley: scientist, humanist, and lover of nature

mh 
A specialist on the subject of nature ET 
» 
reserves, Julian Huxley helped 
to set up national parks and 
wildlife reserves in the United 
Kingdom after World War il. Photo 
shows him on the Berkshire Downs 
(England) during a visit of the 
U.K. National Parks’ Commission to 
  
possible sites for parks and reserves. 
  
    
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
5
3
 
o
 
i
e
 
ab
 
" 
. 
y
d
,
 
x 
» 
i
 
t
s
 
   
  Ph
ot
o 
Oo
 
“A
ir
 
Mi
ni
st
ry
, 
Photo Fabius Henrion © Jacana, Paris 
Julian Huxley’s concern 
for scientific 
investigation as a 
biologist and zoologist 
was matched by his 
talents as an educator 
and an interpreter of 
science. His account of 
the courtship ceremonies 
of such birds as the 
great crested grebe 
(photo above) 
published in 1914, 
marked him as a pioneer 
of ethology. in 1934 he 
recorded the behaviour 
of gannets (photo left) 
on a Welsh island 
sanctuary in a remarkable 
documentary film on 
these seabirds entitled 
“The Private Life of 
the Gannet”. 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
Ma
x 
Jo
ni
n 
© 
Ja
ca
na
, 
13

## [Page 14](074820engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

PHILOSOPHY 
FOR 
UNESCO 
Selections from 
a forgotten 
historic document 
by Julian Huxley 
In 1946, before Unesco was officially 
constituted, Julian Huxley drafted a long 
paper entitled “Unesco, its Purpose and its 
Philosophy.” This document became the 
subject of much controversy for its so-called 
“anti-religious bias” with the result that the 
Unesco Preparatory Commission and the 
first General Conference of Unesco withheld 
official sponsorship of the text. Below, we 
publish salient passages from Huxley's 
“Philosophy” which has remained virtually / 
unknown for the past thirty years. 
U NESCO-—the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cul- 
tural Organization—is by its title 
committed to two sets of aims. In the 
first place, it is international, and must 
serve the ends and objects of the 
United Nations, which in the long 
perspective are world ends, ends for 
humanity as a whole. And secondly it 
must foster and promote all aspects of 
education, science, and culture, in the 
widest sense of those words. 
14   
its Constitution defines these aims 
more fully. The preamble begins with 
Mr. Attlee’s noble words—"since wars 
begin in the minds of men, it is in the 
minds of men that the defences of 
peace must be constructed.” 
It continues by stressing the dan- 
gers of ignorance— "ignorance of each 
other's ways dnd lives has been a 
common cause, throughout the his- 
tory of mankind, of that suspicion and 
mistrust between the peoples of the 
E
r
 
TR
 
S
N
e
 
Photo Unesco 
 
world through which their differences 
have all too often broken into war.” 
It then proceeds to point out that the 
late war was made possible by the 
denial of certain basic principles—"the 
democratic principles of the dignity, 
equality and mutual respect of men"— 
and by the substitution for them of 
“the doctrine of the inequality of men 
and races.” 
From these premises it proceeds to 
point out that “the wide diffusion of

## [Page 15](074820engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

  
  
  
HISTORY IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE. The publication of 
a six-volume history of the cultural and scientific 
development of mankind, produced under Unesco’s auspices, 
was an unparalleled international achievement. Begun 
in 1950, the enterprise took almost 20 years to complete. 
Some 1,000 historians and scientists from many countries 
collaborated on this unique collective work which traced 
for the first time the evolution of man’s 
cultural and scientific developments from prehistory to the 
culture, and the education of humanity 
for justice and liberty and peace, are 
indispensable to the dignity of man and 
constitute a sacred duty which all the 
nations must fulfil in a spirit of mutual 
assistance and concern” : and draws 
the notable conclusion, never before 
embodied in an official document, that 
a peace “based exclusively upon the 
political and economic arrangements of 
governments” would be inadequate, 
since it could not “secure the unani- 
FAR 
ant 
|| | 
AA alas at 
Go Fi ra sea FEE OR VE Sw i I TR 
i _. -— i i , i Eb ARE : YY py ‘ SR E 
present age. This global history stresses advances in culture, 
the arts, science, technology and philosophy rather than 
political and military history. The History of 
Mankind : Cultural and Scientific Development has so far 
appeared in English, French, Greek, Serbo-Croat, Slovenian 
and Spanish language editions. Photo shows on left, 
cover of the Greek edition and on right cover of 
Serbo-Croat edition, against the background of the 
mous, lasting and sincere support of 
the peoples of the world,” and that 
“the peace must therefore be founded, 
if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual 
and moral solidarity of mankind.” 
And finally, the States which are 
parties to the Constitution assert their 
belief “in full and equal opportunities 
of education for all, in the unrestricted 
pursuit of objective truth, and in 
the free exchange of ideas and 
knowledge.” 
Unesco Secretariat building in Paris. 
They agree “to develop and increase 
the means of communication between 
their peoples and to employ these 
means for the purposes of mutual 
understanding and a truer and more 
perfect knowledge of their lives” : and 
they “hereby create the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization,” whose purpose is then 
specifically laid down as that of “ad- 
vancing, through the educational and 
scientific and cultural relations of the 
15     
4

## [Page 16](074820engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

4 peoples 
of the world, the objectives of 
international peace and of the common 
welfare of mankind, for which the 
United Nations Organization was 
established and which its charter 
proclaims.” 
But in order to carry out its work, an 
organization such as Unesco needs 
not only a set of general aims and 
objects for itself, but also a working 
philosophy, a working hypothesis 
concerning human existence and its 
aims and objects, which will dictate, or 
at least indicate, a definite line of 
approach to its problems. 
From acceptance of certain prin- 
ciples or philosophies, Unesco is 
obviously debarred. Thus, while fully 
recognizing the contribution made to 
thought by many of their thinkers, it 
cannot base its outlook on one of the 
competing theologies of the world... 
Neither can it espouse one of the 
politico-economic doctrines competing 
in the world today to the exclusion of 
the others—the present versions of 
capitalistic free enterprise, Marxist 
communism, semi-socialist planning, 
and so on. 
It cannot do so, partly because it is 
contrary to its charter and essence to 
be sectarian, partly for the very prac- 
tical reason that any such attempt 
would immediately incur the active 
hostility of large and influential groups, 
and the non co-operation or even with- 
drawal of a number of nations. 
For somewhat similar reasons it 
cannot base itself exclusively on any 
special or particular philosophy or 
outlook. Nor, with its stress on dem- 
ocracy and the principles of human 
dignity, equality and mutual respect, 
can it adopt the view that the State is 
a higher or more important end than 
the individual; or any rigid class 
theory of society. And in the preamble 
to its Constitution it expressly repudi- 
ates racialism and any belief in 
superior or inferior “races,” nations, 
or ethnic groups. 
And finally, with its stress on the 
concrete tasks of education, science 
and culture, on the need for mutual 
understanding by the peoples of the 
world, and on the objectives of peace 
and human welfare on this planet, it 
would seem debarred from an exclus- 
ively or primarily other-worldly outlook. 
Unesco’'s main concern is with 
peace and security and with human 
welfare, in so far as they can be 
subserved by the educational and 
scientific and cultural relations of the 
peoples of the world. Accordingly its 
outlook must, it seems, be based on 
some form of humanism. Further, that 
humanism must clearly be a world 
humanism, both in the sense of seeking 
to bring in all the peoples of the world, 
16 
and of treating all peoples and all 
individuals within each people as 
equals in terms of human dignity, 
mutual respect, and educational 
opportunity. 
It must also be a scientific human- 
ism, in the sense that the application 
of science provides most of the 
material basis for human culture, and 
also that the practice and the under- 
standing of science need to be 
integrated with that of other human 
activities. It cannot, however, be ma- 
terialistic, but must embrace the spiri- 
tual and mental as well as the material 
aspects of existence, and must attempt 
to do so on a truly monistic, unitary 
philosophic basis. 
Finally it must be an evolutionary as 
opposed to a static or ideal humanism. 
It is essential for Unesco to adopt an 
evolutionary approach. If it does not 
do so, its philosophy will be a false 
one, its humanism at best partial, at 
worst misleading. 
An evolutionary approach provides 
the link between natural science and 
human history ; it teaches us the need 
to think in the dynamic terms of speed 
and direction rather than in the static 
ones of momentary position or quanti- 
tative achievement: it not only shows 
us the origin and biological roots of 
our human values, but gives us some 
basis and external standards for them 
among the apparently neutral mass of 
natural phenomena; and it is indis- 
pensable in enabling us to pick out, 
among the chaotic welter of conflicting 
tendencies today, those trends and 
activities and methods which Unesco 
should emphasize and facilitate. 
Thus the general philosophy of 
Unesco should, it seems, be a scien- 
tific world humanism, global in extent 
and evolutionary in background. 
Evolution in the broad sense de- 
notes all the historical processes of 
change and development at work in 
the universe. It is divisible into three 
very different sectors—the inorganic 
or lifeless, the organic or biological, 
and the social or human. The inorganic 
sector is by far the greatest in extent, 
comprising the overwhelming bulk of 
the cosmos, both of interstellar space 
and of the material aggregates we call 
stars. 
The biological sector is very much 
limited in extent, being confined to the 
outer surface of the single small planet 
Earth, and perhaps to the very few 
similar situations in the universe. On 
the other hand, with the emergence of 
the two basic properties of living 
matter—self-reproduction and variation 
(mutation)—a quite new and much 
more potent method of change became 
available to life, in the shape of Natural 
Selection. And as a result the possible 4 
. programmes are also telecast. 
© Below, villagers in Rajasthan 
~. State watch programme 
The new 3 R's: 
schools, 
satellites, skills 
Unesco has a direct stake in the 
use of space communication for 
education, science and culture and 
has co-operated closely in studies 
or planning for broadcasting 
satellites in Asia, Africa, the Arab 
States and Latin America. In india, 
Unesco helped train programme 
producers for the experimental k] 
project SITE, wherebyeducationalTV 
programmes are beamed via : 
a satellite directly to community 
receivers in some 2400 villages in 
six Indian states. Special school 
  
   
picked up by a roof antenna. 
 
 

## [Page 17](074820engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

Unesco has helped many countries in the 
battle to eradicate illiteracy and was a 
pioneer in developing “functional 
iiteracy” teaching that aims to 
improve technical skills and knowledge. 
Right, electricians at work on a high 
tension line in Mali, where a Unesco- 
aided pilot project in functional literacy, 
launched in 1966, reached 83,000 workers. 
Unesco is aiding literacy campaigns 
in African countries, in the Arab States, 
and in Asia and Latin America. 
Below right, schoolgirls in Quito 
(Ecuador) learn how rain is formed from 
an experiment on water condensation, 
part of a Unesco project to give greater 
depth to primary school programmes in 
Ecuador. Within the framework of a 
major project to develop primary 
education in Latin America, launched 
by Unesco in 1957, Latin American 
countries created within ten years over 
2,000 teacher-training schools, and 
enrollments of primary school-age 
children rose from less than 50 per cent 
to between 87 and 95 per cent. 
    cri og 
a 
pp _— TR 
SA fxm TF Ni se ou 
ive bv Sn, 4 Cy > Ww 
RE le Be oY SALT fat Jol 25 
nM 3 3 : 
   
ASI Nae ph 
  
 
    ge 
Photo J.-C. Bois - Unesco 
  
     
 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
it
ed
 
N
a
t
i
o
n
s

## [Page 18](074820engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

rate of evolution was enormously 
speeded up. 
Finally there is the human sector. 
This is still further restricted in extent, 
being confined to the single species, 
man. But once more a new and more 
efficient method of change is available. 
It becomes available to man through 
his distinctively human properties of 
speech and conceptual thought, just as 
Natural Selection became available to 
life as a result of its distinctive pro- 
perties of reproduction and variation. 
Objectively speaking, the new 
method consists of cumulative tra- 
dition, which forms the basis of that 
social heredity by means of which 
human societies change and develop. 
But the new method also has a sub- 
jective aspect of great importance. 
Cumulative tradition, like all other 
distinctively human activities, is largely 
based on conscious processes-—on 
knowledge, on purpose, on conscious 
feeling, and on conscious choice. Thus 
the struggle for existence that under- 
lies natural selection is increasingly 
replaced by conscious selection, a 
struggle between ideas and values in 
consciousness. 
Through these new agencies, the 
possible rate of evolution is now once 
more enormously speeded up. What 
is more, there has so far been a steady 
acceleration of the new rate. 
During the past 30 years 
Unesco has developed far- 
reaching programmes to 
promote and improve li- 
brary services. It has 
provided training fellow- 
ships for librarians, orga- 
nized seminars and cour- 
ses on library develop- 
ment and helped set up 
librarians’ training cen- 
tres in several parts of the 
world. One pilot project 
led to the creation in 1951 
of an experimental public 
library in Delhi (India). 
Open 11 hours a day, 
every day of the week, 
the library soon became 
one of the busiest in 
Asia. Here, Indian girls 
browse in the library's 
children’s room. 
18 
Ph
ot
o 
Er
ic
 
S
c
h
w
a
b
 
- 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
Whereas in lower palaeolithic times, 
major change required something of 
the order of 10% years, by the late 
upper palaeolithic the unit was nearer 
10* years, and in historic times soon 
came down to the century or 102 years. 
During the last hundred years each 
decade has seen at least one major 
change—if we are to choose ten such, 
let us select photography, the theory 
of evolution, electro-magnetic theory 
with its application in the shape of 
electric light and power, the germ 
theory of disease, the cinema, radio- 
activity and the new theories of matter 
and energy, wireless and television, 
the internal combustion engine, chemi- 
cal synthetics, and atomic fission. 
Today, indeed, even the most mo- 
mentous changes, such as the disco- 
very and practical application of atomic 
fission, may take only half a decade, 
and there is as yet no sign of the rate 
of acceleration slowing down. 
Evolution in the human sector 
consists mainly of changes in the form 
of society, in tools and machines, in 
new ways of utilizing the old innate 
potentialities, instead of in the nature 
of these potentialities, as in the 
biological sector. 
Man's inherited mental powers 
cannot have changed appreciably since 
the time of the Aurignacian cave- 
dwellers : what have changed are the 
ways in which those powers are used, 
and the social framework which condi- 
tions their use. This is not to say that 
what has happened since the Aurigna- 
cian period or since the time of ancient 
Greece, is not evolution: it is a very 
astonishing bit of evolution. 
Nor does it mean that man’s innate 
mental powers could not be improved. 
They certainly were improved (presum- 
ably by natural selection) in the 
earliest stages of his career, from 
Pekin man through the Neanderthalers 
to our own species; and they could 
certainly be improved further by delib- 
erate eugenic measures, if we con- 
sciously set ourselves to improve 
them. Meanwhile, however, it is in 
social organization, in machines, and 
in ideas that human evolution is mostly 
made manifest. 
But it is not only complexity which 
increases with time. In the biological 
sector, evolution has led to greater 
control over the environment and 
greater independence of the changes 
and chances of the environment. It 
has also promoted a higher degree of 
individuality. And this trend is con- 
nected with another which has led to 
increase of mental powers—greater 
capacities for acquiring and organizing 
knowledge, for experiencing emotion, 
and for exerting purpose. 
This last trend, towards fuller knowl- 
CONTINUED PAGE 23 
  
  
  

## [Page 19](074820engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

"mCouricr 
A H0-QUESTION QUIZ 
ON UNESCO 
Answers at end of questions. But don’t peek ! 
Ph
ot
os
 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
“Since wars begin in the 
minds of men, it is in the 
minds of men that the 
defences of peace must be 
constructed.” This phrase 
in Unesco’s Constitution is 
based on the words of a 
statesman and of a poet. 
Who are they? 
STATESMEN 
a) Winston Churchill 
b) Lenin 
c¢) Clement Attlee 
d) Franklin D. Roosevelt 
POETS 
e) Pablo Neruda 
f) Paul Valéry 
g) Archibald Macleish 
h) William B. Yeats 
deposited in one of these 
, Unesco’s Constitution is 
cities:   
a) San Francisco 
b) Paris 
c) London 
d} Geneva 
had Unesco when it was 
created in 1946? 
a) 18 
b) 20 
c) 53 
d) 102 
3 How many Member States 
Below are the names of 
Unesco’s six Director- 
Generals. Can you put 
them in chronological order? 
Luther H. Evans 
René Maheu 
Julian Huxley 
Vittorino Veronese 
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow 
Jaime Torres Bodet   
Which of Unesco’s Di- 
rector-Generals (see list 
previous question) has 
held office for the longest 
period? 
How many Member 
States did Unesco have 
in February 1976? 
a) 102 
b) 123 
c) 136 
d) 141 
The world spends over 
200 billion dollars yearly 
on armaments. Unesco’s 
current budget for two 
years is : 
a) 930 million dollars 
b) 530 million dollars 
¢) 320 million dollars 
dj} 170 million dollars   
by the United Nations. 
8 Unesco’s budget is voted 
True or false? 
national campaign to save 
“the pearl of Egypt”, a 
name given to: 
a) the Valley of the Kings 
b) the temples of Philae 
c¢) the temples of Abu Simbel 
d) the great temple of Luxor 
9 Unesco launched an inter- 
Which are the two 
1 most translated au- 
thors or books accord- 
ing to Unesco’s latest inter- 
nationa! bibliography of 
translations, Index Transla- 
tionum? 
Dostoievsky 
Jules Verne 
the Bible 
Engels 
Karl Marx 
List continues overleaf 

## [Page 20](074820engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

Shakespeare 
Lenin 
Tolstoy 
Balzac 
Pearl Buck 
Gorki   
c) World Population Year 
d) International Book Year 
14 
Unesco is helping to 
preserve the world’s 
largest statue of Bud- 
dha (53 m. high) located at: 
a) Pagan (Burma) 
  
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
is helping to restore 
or preserve the five 
monuments and sites below. 
Place them in their respec- 
tive countries (1 to 5): 
a) Carthage 
b) Machu Picchu 
c) Borobudur 
d} Isfahan 
e) Bonampak 
11 Unesco has helped or 
1) Indonesia 
2) Iran 
3) Tunisia 
4) Peru 
5) Mexico 
Unesco has launched a 
12 programme for the set- 
ting up of a world- 
wide scientific and technical 
information system. It is 
known as: 
a) NATIS 
b) UNISIST 
c) IUCN 
d) MAB 
In 1975 Unesco gave a 
13 major place in its pro- 
gramme to one of the 
following themes: 
a) International Education 
Year 
b) International Women's 
Year   
b) Bamiyan (Afghanistan) 
c) Polonnaruva (Sri Lanka) 
d) Ajanta (India) 
e} Kamakura (Japan) 
Between 1959 and 1965 
15 Unesco organized a 
major international 
oceanographic expedition 
during which a fleet of 
research vessels from 24 
countries explored the 
depths of which one of 
these oceans? 
a) Pacific Ocean 
b) Arctic Ocean 
c¢) Antarctic Ocean 
d) Indian Ocean 
Among these Nobel 
16 prizewinners for lite- 
rature, which two re- 
ceived the award after trans- 
lations of their works had 
appeared in the Unesco Col- 
lection of Representative 
Works ? 
a) George Seferis (Greece) 
b) Rabindranath Tagore 
(India) 
c) Yasunari 
(Japan) 
d) Albert Camus (France) 
Kawabata 
forms part of an im- 
1 The study of arid zones 
portant Unesco re-   
search programme on Man 
and the Biosphere. An arid 
zone is: 
a) a desert zone where no 
life exists 
b) a zone where rainfall is 
too low for ordinary crop 
growth 
c) a hot desert zone 
The world’s arid and 
1 8 semi-arid zones cover: 
a) 1/3 of the earth's 
land area 
b) 1/4 of the earth's land 
area 
c) 3/4 of the earth's land 
area 
1 
a) been abandoned as the 
costs involved are too high 
b) led the Italian Govern- 
ment to obligate $475 mil- 
lion to safeguard the city 
and the lagoon 
c) led Unesco to develop 
Venice's industrial zones in 
order to bring new life to 
the city and safeguard its 
historic monuments. 
20 International Social 
Science Council. True 
or false? 
{b) Unesco set up the Inter- 
national Film and Television 
Council. True or false? 
The international cam- 
paign launched by 
Unesco to save Venice 
(a) Unesco set up the 
gramme is inspired by 
the Universal Declar- 
ation of Human Rights, 
adopted by the United Nat- 
ions on: 
i 
/ 
N Unesco’s entire pro- 
4 ’ ts 
/ 
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
a) 8 March 1945 
b) 8 May 1945 
c) 10 December 1948 
d) 6 June 1952 
Lévi-Strauss, Claude 
2 Michel Leiris, L.C. 
Dunn, N.P. Dubininand 
  
  
Otto Klineberg have all 
worked with Unesco on a 
major international problem 
concerned with: 
a} the origins of man 
b) oraltraditionsindifferent 
societies 
c) racism 
d) population growth 
Unesco has a major 
project for preserving 
23 the remains of a great 
civilization that developed 
between 2500 and 1500 B.C. 
at: 
a) Bonampak 
b} Bogazkoéy 
c) Mohenjo-Daro 
d) Sumer 
had about 630,000 pri- 
mary school-teachers. 
Today, thanks to a project 
launched by Unesco with 
Latin American countries, 
this figure has: .- 
a) doubled 
b) tripled 
92 In 1957 Latin America 
¢) quadrupled 
What is the Pantanal? 
a) A Tibetan medi- 2 om 
b) part of the basin of the 
river Paraguay 
c¢) a project in India to 
promote international un- 
derstanding 
26 
Unesco created the 
International Music 
Council. 
True or false? 
  
Unesco’s latest Cata- 
logue of Reproduct- 
ions of Paintings re- 21 
produces The Smoker, The 
Card Players, The Boy with 
Red Vest and Fruit-Dish and 
Apples which were all paint- 
ed by one of these artists: 
a) Van Gogh 
b} Henri Matisse

## [Page 21](074820engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

c¢) Joan Miré 
d)} Paul Cézanne 
Hydrological De- 
cade 1965-1974 Unesco 
studied the world’s water 
cycle. In which of the follow- 
ing forms is most fresh 
water found? 
a) underground water 
b) lakes and rivers 
c) vaporized water in the 
atmosphere 
During the Internatio- 
28 nal 
How many historians 
29 collaborated in the 
preparation of Unes- 
co's 6-volume History of 
Mankind: Cultural and 
Scientific Development? 
a) 200 
b) 300 
c) 500 
d) 1,000 
Unesco created the 
International Theatre 
30 Institute. 
True or false? 
Unesco’ has always: 
J promoted the develop- 
ment of national parks 
and biological reserves. The 
world now has how many 
national parks and reserves? 
a) 106 
b) 1,220 
c) 10,900 
Unesco’s top best- 
3? seller, published in 
28 languages, is its 
“Source Book for Science 
Teaching”, a: 
a) do-it-yourself science 
textbook 
b) textbook on biology and 
microbiology 
c) teacher training manual 
d)} textbook on the history 
of world science 
33 University, jointly 
sponsored by Unesco 
and the United Nations, has 
its headquarters in: 
a) Athens 
b) Ibadan 
c¢) Tokyo 
The United Nations 
d) New York 
Two masterpieces of 
J4 Latin American litera- 
ture, Martin Fierro by 
José Hernandez, and Fa- 
cundo by Domingo F. Sar- 
miento, have been published 
in Unesco’s Collection of 
Representative Works. 
Which country did both au- 
thors come from? 
a) Argentina 
b) Mexico 
c¢) Venezuela 
d) Peru   
The Mohammad Reza 
35 Pahlavi Prize and the 
Nadezhda K. Krup- 
skaya Prize are Unesco-spon- 
sored awards for: 
a) the best school textbook 
b) literacy teaching 
c) translation 
in July 1965, a Unesco- 
36 organized oceanogra- 
phic research expedit- 
ion (33 vessels from 7 coun- 
tries) began a survey of one 
of the following ocean cur- 
rents. Which one? 
a) Kuroshio 
b) Humboldt 
c¢} Benguela 
d) Gulf Stream 
Unesco has developed 
3] new types of buildings 
for: 
a} schools 
areas 
b) refugee hostels in South 
East Asia 
c) research centres in desert 
regions 
in disaster-hit 
major general history 
of one of these cont- 
inents: 
a) Latin America 
b) Asia 
c) Africa 
3 Unesco is preparing a 
d) Europe 
Unesco promotes the 
39 teaching of “modern 
mathematics”. A ma- 
thematician whose work 
helped the development of 
this new way of teaching 
maths is: 
a) George Boole 
b) Aristotle 
¢) Spinoza 
d) al Biruni 
e) Albert Einstein 
40 
a) music 
b) architecture 
c) literacy teaching 
d) popularization of science 
The Kalinga Prize is a 
Unesco prize for: 
lished a study on the 
efficiency and cost of 
programmed learning. Pro- 
grammed learning is: 
a) alternating schooling and 
work in factories and farms 
b) individualized tuition ba- 
sed on questions and answers 
c) using T.V. programmes 
for teaching in schools 
d) continuous revision of 
school courses 
I, 
41 Unesco recently pub- 
Unesco has a pro- 
gramme on plate tec- 
tonics, dealing with:   
a) a new method of printing 
b) a theory on the evolution 
of the earth’s crust 
c) industrial uses of tor- 
toise-shells 
d) computer translations 
world has the greatest 
number of countries 
asked Unesco to assist them 
in examining the feasibility 
of using communication sa- 
tellites for education? 
a) Latin America 
b) Africa 
c) Asia 
4 In which region of the 
d) Europe 
a) The number of illi- 
terate persons in the 
44 world is falling. 
True or false? 
b) The percentage of illite- 
rate persons in the world is 
falling. 
True or false? 
unesco 
  
Which of these leading 
4] scientists, scholars and 
writers have partici- 
pated in Unesco’s work? 
a) Claude Lévi-Strauss 
(France) 
b) Frédéric Joliot-Curie 
(France) 
c¢) Margaret Mead (U.S.A.) 
d) Jacques Maritain (France) 
e) Paulo Freire (Brazil) 
f) Alejo Carpentier (Cuba) 
g) Sir Sarvepalli Radhakri- 
shnan (India) 
h) Leopold Sedar Senghor 
(Senegal) 
i) Norair 
(U.S.S.R.) 
Jj) Benedetto Croce (Italy) 
k) Mahatma Gandhi (India) 
/) Taha Hussein (Egypt) 
m) Aldous Huxley (U.K.) 
48 
M. Sissakian 
Unesco publishes an 
annual summary of 
information on natural 
    
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
More than 80 coun- 
45 tries participate in 
Unesco’s Man and the 
Biosphere ecological re- 
search programme, launched 
in 1970. What is ecology? 
a) the science of relations 
between living organisms 
and their environment 
b) the science of the protec- 
tion of living organisms 
.c¢) a branch of technology 
for controlling pollution 
d) a policy for limiting the 
waste of natural resources 
46 up the European Nu- 
clear Research Centre 
(CERN) near Geneva. 
True or false? 
Unesco helped to set   
human rights 7 
disasters providing data on 
earthquakes, volcanic erup- 
tions and tsunamis. A tsu- 
nami is: 
a) a series of huge sea 
waves sometimes caused by 
an earthquake 
b) a waterspout 
c) a Japanese observatory 
for recording earthquake 
shocks 
d) an underwater volcanic 
eruption 
international Council 
49 of Museums? 
True or false? 
Unesco set up the 
World Confederation 
of Organizations of the 
Teaching Profession. 
True or false? 
h Unesco set up the

## [Page 22](074820engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

—— eikew “« - - 
cae LTRS gy 3 AF g. a] rr 
ANSWERS 
1 :¢c. Clement Attlee, Prime 
Minister of the United Kingdom, 
inaugurating the Constituent 
Conference of Unesco, held in 
London, in November 1945, 
used the words “wars begin in 
the minds of men”. g. The 
American poet, Archibald Mac- 
Leish, later completed the phrase 
with, “it is in the minds of men 
that the defences of peace must 
be constructed.” 
2:¢ 
3:5 
4: Julian Huxley, Jaime Torres 
Bodet, Luther H. Evans, Vitto- 
rino Veronese, René Maheu, 
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow. 
5: René Maheu (for 12 years, 
from 1962 to 1974). The only 
Director-General of Unesco to 
hold office for two terms, 
Mr. Maheu died on 19 December 
1975. 
6: ¢, (Grenada, in the Caribbean, 
136th Member State, joined 
Unesco on 18 February 1975). 
7:d   8: False. 
9:b 
10: First, the Bible, second, 
Karl Marx. Following them in 
descending order are: Engels, 
Lenin, Dostoievsky, Tolstoy, Ju- 
les Verne, Gorki, Pearl Buck, 
Balzac, Shakespeare (Latest edi- 
tion of the /ndex, published end 
1975, covers the year 1972). 
11: 3-3, b-4, c-1, d-2, e-5. 
12: 5. The meaning of the other 
sets of initials are: MAB (Man 
and the Biosphere) NATIS (Na- 
tional Information Systems)— 
both are Unesco programme 
activities. IUCN (International 
Union for the Conservation of 
Nature and Natural Resources), 
was set up under Unesco’s 
auspices in 1948. 
13: 5. International Education 
Year was held in 1970, Inter- 
national Book Year in 1972, 
World Population Year in 1974, 
14: H 
15: d 
16:3, c 
17: bH 
18: a 
19: b. As part of the Unesco 
campaign, about 30 committees 
have been set up in different 
countries, each committee 
assuming responsibility for the 
restoration of one monument.   
20: a. True. 
b. True. 
21: ¢ 
22: ¢. (Their studies were pub- 
lished collectively in Unesco’s 
“The Race Question in Modern 
Science”, 2nd ed. 1973). 
23: ¢c. Mohenjo-Daro (Indus Val- 
ley, Pakistan). 
24: H 
25: b. Part of the basin of the 
river Paraguay, covering frontier 
areas of Brazil, Bolivia and 
Paraguay. In this region a major 
hydrological survey is being 
carried out jointly by Brazil and 
Unesco. 
26: True. 
27: d 
28: a 
29: d 
30: True. 
31:56 
32: a. It explains how to build 
simple scientific apparatus with 
easy-to-come-by materials (tin 
cans, bottles, knitting needles, 
etc.). 
33:¢ 
34:4     
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
35: b. The prizes were establish- 
ed in 1967 and 1969 respecti- 
vely by the Shahinshah of Iran 
and the Government of the 
U.S.S.R. for outstanding work 
in literacy teaching. 
36: a 
37: a 
38: ¢c 
39: a. George Boole, 19th-cent- 
ury British mathematician. 
40: d 
41: bh 
42: b 
43: c. Asia: (India, Indonesia, 
Iran, Pakistan, Philippines). 
44: a. False. Total numbers 
have increased because of the 
global population explosion. 
b. True. Global percentage has 
dropped thanks to literacy cam- 
paigns launched by Unesco and 
many countries. 
45: a 
46: True. 
47: All of them. 
48: a 
49: False. 
50: False.

## [Page 23](074820engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

A PHILOSOPHY FOR UNESCO (Continued from page 18) 
edge, richer emotion, and more 
embracing purpose, is continued 
(though by different methods) in the 
human sector, and is continued at a 
much increased rate. But to it is 
superadded another trend—an increase 
in the capacity to appreciate values, to 
appreciate experiences that are of 
value in their own right and for their 
own sake, to build on knowledge, to 
work through purpose, and to inject 
ethical values into the process of 
social evolution itself. 
WwW E now know much about the 
methods of biological evol- 
ution: the existence of several quite 
different types of selection; the con- 
ditions which promote or retard change; 
the subordinate position of mutation as 
against selection in directing the 
course of evolution; the evolutionary 
roles of the degree of specialization 
and of progress shown by an organism, 
of its biological environment, and of its 
physical environment respectively, and 
the interaction between them; the 
evolutionary conflict between the limi- 
tations set by an organism's nature and 
past history and the requirements of 
the present, and its solution by means 
of some new adjustment—or its lack 
of solution, followed by extinction. 
  
This last point immediately recalls 
the thesis, antithesis, and synthesis of 
Hegelian philosophy, and the Marxist 
“reconciliation of opposites” based 
upon it. Indeed, dialectical materialism 
was the first radical attempt at an 
evolutionary philosophy. Unfortunately 
it was based too exclusively upon 
principles of social as against bio- 
logical evolution, and in any case was 
undertaken too early. before either the 
facts or their analysis were able to sup- 
port any such vast superstructure. 
Today it is possible at least to begin 
the construction of a comprehensive 
philosophy of evolution; and many of 
its conclusions will be of value in 
formulating details of Unesco’s own 
philosophy. 
For it is of major importance that 
biology has enabled us to detect a 
direction in evolution as a whole, and 
not merely within the small domain of 
human life, to which the term progress 
can properly be applied. 
This evolutionary progress, we find, 
is directed towards an increase of the 
following characteristics: throughout 
evolution, an increase in complexity of 
organization; on this, in the biological 
and human sectors, is superposed a 
more important trend towards greater 
control over and greater independence 
of the environment, and, in later 
phases, one towards an increase of 
mental capacities; and finally, in the 
human sector alone, an increase in 
the understanding and attainment of 
intrinsic values, which now in its turn 
becomes the most important charac- 
teristic of progress. Throughout, prog- 
ress has the further characteristic of 
always permitting further progress, 
never shutting the door on later 
advance. 
Of special importance in man’s 
evaluation of his own position in the 
cosmic scheme and of his further 
destiny is the fact that he is the heir, 
and indeed the sole heir, of evolution- 
ary progress to date. When he asserts 
that he is the highest type of organism, 
he is not being guilty of anthropo- 
centric vanity, but is enunciating a 
biological fact. 
Furthermore, he is not merely the 
sole heir of past evolutionary progress, 
but the sole trustee for any that may 
be achieved in the future. From the 
evolutionary point of view, the destiny 
of man may be summed up very 
simply: it is to realize the maximum 
progress in the minimum time. That 
is why the philosophy of Unesco must 
have an evolutionary background, and 
why the concept of progress cannot 
but occupy a central position in that 
philosophy. 
The analysis of evolutionary prog- 
ress gives us certain criteria for 
judging the rightness or wrongness of 
our aims and activities, and the desir- 
ability or otherwise of the tendencies 
to be noted in contemporary history— 
tendencies of which Unesco must take 
account. 
Thus mere increase of our control 
over nature is not to be valued for 
itself, yet appears to be a necessary 
foundation for future progress. Put 
in a way more closely affecting 
Unesco's programme, research may be 
perverted, and its material applications 
may be over-valued; yet without them 
we shall not advance. This conclusion 
applies a fortiori to mere complexity 
of social organization. 
Again, even knowledge that appears 
to be wholly beneficent can be applied 
in such a way that it does not promote 
progress. Thus, the application of 
medical science may increase the 
number of human beings in a given 
area but lower their quality or their 
opportunities for enjoyment of life; 
and if so, in the light of our basic 
criterion of evolutionary direction, it 
is wrong. 
We are brought by a new route to 
realize once more the need for a 
Unesco policy balanced between many 
fields—in this instance, Unesco policy 
would have to include, besides 
the application of medical science, 
studies on agricultural productivity 
(soil erosion, mechanization, etc.) and 
on social welfare, and also the pro- 
vision of birth-control facilities. 
In general, Unesco must constantly 
be testing its policies against the 
touchstone of evolutionary progress. 
A central conflict of our times is that 
between nationalism and international- 
ism, between the concept of many 
national sovereignties and one world 
sovereignty. Here the evolutionary 
touchstone gives an unequivocal ans- 
wer, The key to man's advance, the 
distinctive method which has made 
evolutionary progress in the human 
sector so much more rapid than 
in the biological and has given it 
higher and more satisfying goals, is 
the fact of cumulative tradition, the 
existence of a common pool of ideas 
which is self-perpetuating and itself 
capable of evolving. And this fact has 
had the immediate consequence of 
making the type of social organization 
the main factor in human progress or 
at least its limiting framework. 
Two obvious corollaries follow. 
First, that the more united man's tra- 
dition becomes, the more rapid will 
be the possibility of progress: several 
separate or competing or even mutually 
hostile pools of tradition cannot poss- 
ibly be so efficient as a single pool 
common to all mankind. And secondly, 
that the best and only certain way. of 
securing this will be through political 
unification. 
As history shows, unifying ideas 
can exert an effect across national 
boundaries. But, as history makes 
equally evident, that effect is a partial 
one and never wholly offsets the 
opportunities for conflict provided by 
the existence of separate sovereign 
political units. 
| HE moral for Unesco is clear. 
The task laid upon it of promot- 
ing peace and security can never be 
wholly realized through the means 
assigned to it—education, science and 
culture. It must envisage some form 
of world political unity, whether through 
a single world government or other- 
wise, as the only certain means for 
avoiding war. 
However, world political unity is, 
unfortunately, a remote ideal, and in 
any case does not fall within the field 
of Unesco’'s competence. This does 
not mean that Unesco cannot do a 
great deal towards promoting peace 
and security. Specifically, in its 
educational programme it can stress 
the ultimate need for world political 
unity and familiarize all peoples with 
the implications of the transfer of full 
sovereignty from separate nations to 
a world organization. 
But, more generally, it can do a great 
deal tn lay the foundations on which 
CONTINUED PAGE 30 
23

## [Page 24](074820engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 49465: UNESCO and the world outlook for tomorrow

  
UNESCO 
and the world outlook 
for tomorrow 
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow 
Director-General of Unesco 
   
   
    
     
       
In the article below, Unesco’s Director-General, Amadou- 
Mahtar M'Bow, examines Unesco’s role in the world today 
and the outlook for tomorrow. His text serves as an 
introduction to the findings of an international advisory 
panel (see page 26) set up last year by Mir. M'Bow to 
survey the major problems of the world in the light 
of Unesco’s fields of interest and the new international 
economic order. 
world and the outlook for the or communication. Here they can 
last quarter of the 20th century examine the great problems of our 
seem to me to show that Unesco, as time in the light of different approaches 
it attains its 30th year, has just as originating in many parts of the world, 
important a mission to fulfil as when 
it was founded at the end of the 
Second World War. 
Unesco’s original and essential 
function, which ultimately is an ethical 
one, is still in fact to contribute to 
peace by promoting international co- 
operation in education, science, cul- 
ture and communication. 
The dangers to which world peace 
is exposed are in evidence every day. 
But we know, too, that there are other 
threats, in some cases resulting from 
the very powers which science and 
technology have given to mankind: 
natural resources are being exploi- 
ted without order or control, our envi- 
ronment is deteriorating, the inequali- 
ties between countries or groups of 
countries, and indeed within certain 
countries, are becoming intolerable, 
and misunderstandings between cul- 
tures are deepening despite, or per- 
haps even because of, the rising flood 
of information, which sometimes looks 
as if it is going to submerge us. 
| am therefore convinced that, to 
ward off these dangers, it is essential 
to engage in a joint, world-wide effort 
of reflection on where our civilizations 
are heading. 
Unesco has a duty to take part in 
this reflection in depth, which should 
be its foremost obligation. Unesco's 
particular vocation as an international 
organization is to be a forum for those 
24 
| HE present situation in the who serve science or education, culture

## [Page 25](074820engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 49465: UNESCO and the world outlook for tomorrow

  
Thon AdAistlomntivua V_shanad 
ITI UIDLINIVLIVE | ~olapyocu 
Secretariat building of 
Unesco’'s headquarters 
(circled) is clearly visible in 
this helicopter view of part of 
Paris's Left Bank. Photo was 
taken from almost directly 
above the Eiffel Tower, 
(bottom). 
Photo © IGN, Paris 
exchanging, supplementing and con- 
solidating their viewpoints. 
In emphasizing Unesco's réle in 
international intellectual co-operation 
| do not feel that | am singling out 
an aspect of the Organization's mis- 
sion which is basically different from 
its work to promote development. 
There is, of course, often a tendency 
to draw a distinction between these 
two aspects of Unesco's work. It is 
pointed out that during its early years, 
when its members belonged mostly to 
the industrially developed world in the 
northern hemisphere, Unesco was 
chiefly concerned with promoting in- 
tellectual co-operation, whereas later, 
as new States which had recently be- 
come independent joined the Organi- 
zation, it turned to concrete action to 
assist development, 
These two forms of action must be 
complementary, however, for apart 
from the need to base action for dev- 
elopment on sound knowledge and 
skills—which Unesco can secure from 
the international community only if it 
is a lively centre for carrying out 
studies and pooling ideas—the actual 
work involved in promoting develop- 
ment affords opportunities for intellec- 
tual and cultural exchanges, so that 
eventually no fundamental difference 
between intellectual co-operation and 
operational action can be clearly dis- 
cerned. 
But above all, | am convinced that 
the problem of development is insep- 
arable from a whole complex of matters 
considered as relating to intellectual 
life. We cannot accept the picture, 
inspired by a facile idealism, of 
Unesco on the one hand devoting 
some of its efforts to scientific and 
cultural co-operation and the world of 
ideas, in the hope that such co-oper- 
ation will further the spirit of peace in 
the world, and on the other addressing 
itself to the task of improving the 
situation of the least privileged. 
The distinguishing feature of the 
world today seems to me, on the 
contrary, to be the close interdepen- 
dence between all its parts, all the 
regions composing it, all the human 
groups living in it. Development is 
therefore not a problem peculiar to a 
certain number of countries. It is a 
world problem, because its significance 
is something involving a global com- 
plex of relationships and mechanisms, 
a certain kind of order or disorder. 
It is a concept applicable alike to 
the prospects of the industrialized 
countries, wondering about the future 
of their growth and its effects on living 
conditions, and to the longing for a 
better life in the countries of the Third 
World. 
It is a unifying concept in the 
domain of theory, even though it may 
cover the most serious disparities 
between human groups and between 
individuals, and as such, more than 
any other, it implicitly calls for human 
solidarity, that solidarity whose ab- 
solute necessity | stressed on taking 
office as Director-General of Unesco, 
pointing out that it presupposes not 
only the acceptance of differences 
between individuals and between 
cultures but also concerted efforts to 
achieve justice and progress for all. 
I have dwelt on the question of 
development in this way partly no 
doubt because it is central to our 
preoccupations, but also because it 
appears to me to provide an excellent 
illustration of some of the major 
problems affecting the future of 
mankind and necessitating a concerted 
approach on the part of the inter- 
national community if they are to be 
solved. 
BM Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow 
25

## [Page 26](074820engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

Short extract from a collective text 
by: 
YOSHIO ABE, Professor, University of 
Tokyo. 
SAMIR AMIN, Director, African Institute 
for Economic Development and Planning, 
Dakar. 
MARGARET J. ANSTEE, Deputy Regio- 
nal Director, Bureau for Latin America, 
United Nations Development Programme, 
New York. 
BECHIR BENYAHMED, Director of Jeune 
Afrique magazine, Paris. 
WILBERT CHAGULA, Minister for Econ- 
omic Affairs and Development Planning, 
United Republic of Tanzania. 
JEAN-MARIE DOMENACH, Director of 
Esprit magazine, Paris. 
MARION DONHOFF, Chief Editor of the 
weekly Die Zeit, Hamburg. 
ABDUL-RAZZAK KADDOURA, Former 
Rector, University of Damascus. 
ALFRED KASTLER, Member of the French 
Academy of Sciences; Nobel Prize for 
Physics. 
M.G.K. MENON, Secretary, Department of 
Electronics, Government of India. 
YEHUDI MENUHIN, Former President, 
International Music Council, Unesco, Paris. 
CHARLES MORAZE, Director, Institute of 
Studies for Social and Economic Develop- 
ment, University of Paris. 
AURELIO PECCEI, Chairman of the Club 
of Rome, Italy. 
RAUL PREBISCH, Former Special Repres- 
entative of the Secretary General, United 
Nations Emergency Operation, New York. 
RADOVAN RICHTA, Director, Institute of 
Philosophy and Sociology of the Czechoslo- 
vak Academy of Sciences, Prague. 
JOAQUIN RUIZ-GIMENEZ, Professor, 
University of Madrid. 
ABDUL AZIZ EL SAYED, Former Director- 
General, The Arab Educational, Cultural and 
Scientific Organization, Paris. 
VADIM SOBAKINE, Professor of Interna- 
tional Law, Moscow. 
—- al, BE 7 » 
Photo Dominique Roger - Unesco min ZA ERR iin 


### 49466: The Roots of a growing world crisis

26 
THE ROOTS OF 
W-: are now undergoing a 
period of profound and rapid, 
though uneven, and not infrequently 
crisis-ridden change. This change is 
largely connected with the ever-increa- 
sing power available to man through 
the development of science and 
technology. 
The roots of the crises lie, however, 
in the crucial sphere of social relations 
which to a considerable degree are 
still not sufficiently adapted to cope 
with the rapidity of change caused by 
science and technology. 
Technology is ambivalent. On the 
one hand it has brought immense bene- 
fits to mankind. On the other, it has 
resulted in an incredible accumulation 
of destructive devices. Furthermore, 
the contradictions inherent in the 
transfer of technology from the indus- 
trial centres to the developing areas 
of the world have brought very serious 
maladjustments and disruptions. In- 
equalities have been accentuated and 
an extraordinary demographic growth 
is taking place. 
One thing is beyond doubt: none of 
the urgent problems facing mankind 
     
  
2 : ~ L k 
Photos Georg Gerster © Rapho 
WORLD 
today and tomorrow can be solved 
successfully if the conditions of peace 
are not ensured, if the relaxation of 
international tension is not transfor- 
med into an irreversible process and 
if the enormous resources, today still 
tied up with armaments, are not 
gradually released for human dev- 
elopment. 
Efforts for the consolidation of 
peace, which is to be understood as 
a just and democratic system of inter- 
national relations based on the prin- 
ciples of peaceful coexistence and not 
simply as the absence of war, should 
be expanded in all spheres, from 
economics to science, from diplomacy 
to culture. 
Annual expenditure on the arms race 
is probably around 200 to 250 billion 
dollars—a sum equal to the total natio- 
nal income of those countries in which 
the majority of mankind is living. At 
the same time twenty-five hundred 
million men and women live a largely 
precarious existence at levels of nutri- 
tion below the acceptable minimum. 

## [Page 27](074820engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 49466: The Roots of a growing world crisis

A GROWING 
CRISIS 
The present growth-rate of these 
populations is such that their number 
is expected to double in 25 years. 
The currently accessible resources 
of the earth have their limits. Within 
the space of a few generations we 
are frittering away reserves of energy 
below the ground which nature has 
taken thousands of millions of years 
to accumulate. 
In the immediate future there is a 
danger that we shall destroy, without 
a thought for future generations, the 
plants and trees produced over the 
ages. In the last 50 years, nine-tenths 
of the forests of some tropical islands 
have disappeared. Many forests are 
being ravaged by the paper industry,   
on which the press of several indus- 
trialized countries, as well as certain 
other industries and commercial 
interests make excessive demands. 
The equatorial forest is being 
attacked in turn. The future is also 
being jeopardized through the excessi- 
vely primitive exploitation of natural 
resources by famished groups of 
human beings. Their pressing needs 
are destroying resources which, if 
exploited rationally, would help to 
ensure future progress. 
Under the pressure of either justi- 
fied or artificial imperatives designed 
to maintain economic growth, increase 
consumption or satisfy it without 
heeding the consequences, today's 
generations are plundering and pollu- 
ting nature and condemning future 
generations, tomorrow's vastly increas- 
ed populations, to live in a seriously 
degraded environment. > 
“No man is an island, entire of 
itself.” The English poet John 
Donne's famous words, written 
in the 17th century, have never 
been more relevant than today. 
As inhabitants of a “global 
village”, our very survival calls for 
an effort to rise above our 
differences and to transcend 
self-interest in the search for 
solidarity as a world community. 
Photos here symbolize the 
evolution of the human outlook 
from that of the small community 
and the region to a truly global 
perspective. Photo far left 
is of a statue by the Swiss 
sculptor Alberto Giacometti 
which stands in a patio at 
Unesco’s headquarters in Paris. 
 — -_rrm———=—r——r————= 
Photo USIS 
21

## [Page 28](074820engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 49466: The Roots of a growing world crisis

> Thus the very fact that our resources 
(whether renewable or not) are limited 
would indicate that the “Western 
model of development” cannot be 
applied everywhere or at all times. 
A plan of progress based on the Wes- 
tern model until now considered by 
some groups as capable of extension 
all over the world, is henceforth faced 
with fundamental contradictions. 
In some societies where they are 
firmly established, industrialization and 
technology deprive individuals and 
groups of the possibility of influencing 
their living conditions, and hence their 
own destiny, 
The issue at stake is man’s ability 
to establish a comprehensible and 
creative relationship between himself, 
his group and the environment. 
Human rights and freedoms are 
threatened by multiple intrusions into 
private life. As a result of the spread 
of computer science and communica- 
tion techniques, life is being condi- 
tioned on the basis of surveys whose 
aims in some cases are to a certain 
extent inquisitorial. Thus some of the 
industrialized countries must under- 
take a new kind of struggle to defend 
human rights, the very notion of which 
is an empty promise for the masses 
of the developing countries who are 
deprived of the most elementary 
means of satisfying their needs. 
These considerations emphasize the 
close interdependence of the prob- 
lems facing the modern world. We 
are not faced with distinct problems, 
each of which we may try to solve 
separately and in isolation. We are 
dealing with a complex whole in which 
mechanisms or phenomena are 
closely interrelated, acting or reacting 
on one another. The world must be 
considered as a totality or a system 
whose parts are organically linked. 
A global view must therefore be 
a prerequisite to any attempt to 
solve the different problems of today. 
The United Nations declaration on a 
New International Economic Order can 
be regarded as an event of world-wide 
significance aftesting to the joint en- 
deavours of nations to achieve a 
positive settlement of urgent problems 
of present-day social and economic 
development. The introduction of a 
New International Economic Order 
obviously concerns not only econo- 
mics, but is also a matter of social, 
scientific, technological and cultural 
relevance, 
The problems of peace, of human 
rights, and of the survival of mankind 
are not to be separated from the 
problems of development itself. For 
this reason we should look beyond 
economic development. We must give 
up thinking of the centres of econo- 
mic power as the sole repositories 
of truth, civilization and universality. 
It has been held in certain quarters 
that industrial growth, modelled on 
28 
that of certain European or North 
American centres, would itself bring 
about a general improvement in human 
conditions, each nation being free to 
reproduce the proposed pattern for 
itself. We must face the fact that 
this is not so. 
Once it is seen as global, develop- 
ment can no longer be the direct 
extension to the whole world of the 
knowledge, ways of thought, life styles 
or experiences specific to a single 
region of the world; each local dev- 
elopment must be related to its own 
values and culture. 
It is not enough to transfer the sum 
total of the knowledge available in 
developed countries to the developing 
countries; to do this excludes the pos- 
sibility of any genuine implantation of 
science and technology in the coun- 
tries at the receiving end. It favours 
the “brain drain” and even slows down 
the general advancement of knowledge 
by depriving the creative imagination 
of access to more varied sources than 
those on which the existing system 
drew. 
The immediate problem facing the 
developing countries is that of estab- 
lishing an infrastructure for science. 
As long as this does not exist, as 
long as these countries do not possess 
their own scientific capability, there 
can be no authentic scientific dev- 
elopment, but only transplantation of 
imported science, which does not cor- 
respond to the true needs of the 
country. 
The kind of scientific development 
which does correspond to the needs 
of a country can only be based on an 
awareness of its civilization, traditions 
and values. 
Whilst science has been concerned 
with discovering knowledge and un- 
derstanding nature, its applications 
have been largely governed by the 
profit motive to the benefit of small 
sections of human society—groups or 
countries; and indeed, in this process, 
distortions have crept into the priori- 
ties for the growth of science itself. 
We would also like to draw atten- 
tion to the huge sums spent on scien- 
tific research, half of which at least 
are spent on armaments which become 
obsolete or cancel one another out 
as quickly as possible; and to the 
sums which are spent on stimulating 
and attempting to satisfy unnecessary 
needs of the consumer system. 
An orientation of scientific and 
technological development basically 
lacking any underlying commitment to 
overall social progress has given rise 
in many quarters to a feeling of “frus- 
tration” and “disillusionment”, to a call 
for the “containment of science” and 
for the “taming” of technology, ultima- 
tely resulting in fear and hatred of 
science and technology in general. 
In actual fact, science is one of the 
great creative manifestations of human 
genius. What is needed is a new 
concept and long-range international 
strategy for the development of 
science and technology which reflects 
overall global social needs—a concept 
and strategy that should not and must 
not, in their rational advance, become 
detached from the basic human orien- 
tation and fundamental values of hu- 
man life. 
With the headlong progress of 
science and technology, there are 
new developments in the offing whose 
implications are of a global nature for 
human society as a whole—such as 
interference with the genetic code, 
deliberate efforts to modify climate, 
mass employment of information sys- 
tems and storage devices with per- 
manent memories, industrial utilization 
of micro-organisms, creation of closed 
man-nature metabolism cycles and so 
on. 
C orcennne questions of so 
far-reaching a character, there is 
need for a widely based discussion 
leading to a global concept and in this 
Unesco should play an important role. 
A truly sound concept of the future 
of contemporary civilization can only 
be based on a parallel development 
of man and society on the one hand, 
and technology on the other. We are 
entering a period in which—without 
well-thought-out programmes of social 
development, without a purposeful 
control of social processes and without 
a purposeful shaping of our way of 
life—man’'s socially useful abilities will 
be prodigally wasted. We need to 
realize that the control of social pro- 
cesses is at once the most compre- 
hensive and the most difficult task 
confronting contemporary science. 
Culture is not a luxury reserved for 
those whose elementary needs are 
satisfied; it is linked with the organi- 
zation of society, and to it society 
owes its dynamic force. It is made up 
of the wisdom of the illiterate or the 
experience handed down through 
generations of manual workers as well 
as of the highest scholarship. Tradi- 
tions which have been forgotten or 
destroyed by inconsiderate moderni- 
zation are irreparable losses to the 
understanding of our destiny. 
To over-assert cultural particularities 
is just as dangerous as to underrate 
them. It is another way of running 
the same risks. We must maintain 
a constant equilibrium between scien- 
ces and cultures, although this is not 
enough. It must be matched by an 
equilibrium in mutual efforts at com- 
prehension, and by incessant adjust- 
ments between what different cultures 
have to learn from one another. 
The processes of education have 
clearly to be two-way. No educatio- 
nal body can properly transmit what it 
knows unless it is sufficiently familiar 
with those to whom it is addressing 
itself. And since no one can know 
everything, mechanisms should be 
established to provide balanced 
exchanges and thus offset the inequa-

## [Page 29](074820engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 49466: The Roots of a growing world crisis

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Le
s 
Ca
hi
er
s 
M
é
d
i
c
a
u
x
 
Ly
on
na
is
. 
Ly
on
, 
Fr
an
ce
 
lities of knowledge. The study and 
setting up of mechanisms of this kind 
is a particularly arduous task since 
it has never yet been attempted. 
If it had been possible for such 
equilibria between the two comple- 
mentary flows of communication to 
exist spontaneously, the virtues of 
peace, freedom, equality, and human 
rights and duties would come just as 
naturally to human beings as their 
physiological functions. 
For example, it has been established 
that a foreign language is learned 
more easily at school when the pupil 
knows how to use his own language. 
Even learning of the most difficult kind 
becomes readily accessible if the 
learning process is based on ex- 
perience that has been properly lived 
and assimilated. 
It is not to be taken for granted that 
men will escape the course of events 
which has led them to the present 
dangers; the survival of the planet is 
at stake. Is it not high time to display 
  
      
  
    
“a
4 
S
e
y
 
: 
e
H
 
R
L
Y
 
h
e
r
 
Te 
r
a
t
 
Ma
ho
» 
» 
V
y
 
y
f
 
w
l
 
d 
« 
                    
  
  
    
a certain modesty, a wisdom which 
at times our ancestors possessed and 
which could constitute the basis of a 
new morality ? 
What is at stake, indeed, is not 
merely the survival of the human race, 
but the survival of all living things. 
If man really wants to live in harmony 
with the natural environment, as he 
claims he does today, he must show 
respect not only for human rights but 
also for the rights of life in its widest 
sense. | 
                                                      

## [Page 30](074820engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

A PHILOSOPHY FOR UNESCO 
(Continued from page 23) 
world political unity can later be built. 
It can help the peoples of the world 
to mutual understanding and to a 
realization of the common humanity 
and common tasks which they share, 
as opposed to the nationalisms which 
too often tend to isolate and separate 
them. 
it can promote enterprises which, by 
being fully international from the out- 
set, demonstrate that nationality and 
nationalism can be transcended in 
shared activity. 
With all this Unesco must face the 
fact that nationalism is still the basis 
of the political structure of the world, 
and must be prepared for the possibility 
that the forces of disruption and con- 
flict may score a temporary victory. 
But even if this should occur, Unesco 
must strain every nerve to give a 
demonstration of the benefits, spiritual 
as well as material, to be obtained 
through a common pool of tradition, 
and specifically by international co- 
operation in educatiori, science, and 
culture, so that even should another 
war break out, Unesco may survive it, 
and in any case so that the world will 
not forget. 
Our evolutionary analysis shows 
clearly enough that a well-developed 
human individual is the highest product 
of evolution to date. This provides 
external and scientific support for the 
democratic principle of the dignity of 
men, to which by its Constitution 
Unesco is committed. 
It also constitutes a complete dis- 
proof of all theses (...) which maintain 
that the State is in some way higher 
than the individual, and that the indi- 
vidual exists only or primarily for the 
State. 
The human individual is, quite 
strictly, meaningless in isolation; he 
only acquires significance in relation 
to some form of society. His develop- 
ment is conditioned by the society 
into which he is born and the social 
traditions which he inherits; and the 
value of the work he does in life 
depends on the social framework 
which benefits by it or transmits it to 
later time. 
Thus Unesco's activities, while con- 
cerned primarily with providing richer 
development and fuller satisfactions 
for the individual, must always be 
undertaken in a social context; and 
many of its specific tasks will be 
concerned with the social means 
towards this general end—the improve- 
ment of social mechanisms or agencies, 
such as educational systems, research 
organizations, art centres, the press, 
and so forth. 
The unifying of traditions in a single 
common pool of experience, aware- 
CONTINUED PAGE 33 
  
The struggle to save Venice 
  
  
  

## [Page 31](074820engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

In 1966 Unesco and the italian Government launched an international campaign to save Venice, 
increasingly threatened by flooding from the sea, which for centuries had brought life and 
splendour to the city. The Italian Government called on Unesco’s co-operation because of 
the complexity and scale of such problems as land subsidence, water and air poliution, 
flooding at high tide, deterioration of monuments and buildings, and an exodus of inhabitants due 
to economic stagnation. As part of the Venice campaign the Italian Government has obligated about 
$475 million for major preservation work. “Save Venice” committees in a number of countries, 
acting in co-ordination with Unesco, will be responsible for restoring some of the more seriously 
threatened buildings. But an enormous effort will still be needed to save Venice and its countless 
masterpieces of art. 
    
  
Photo © Fulvio Roiter, Venice 
| 31 

## [Page 32](074820engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

    
Photo "LEUIeNIR . Unesco 
  
"Photos on this page illustrate “three of the 21 projects to preserve the 
world’s great monuments and other cultural treasures launched under 
~~ Unesco’s auspices. Above, Machu Picchu, the famous Inca citadel in Peru, 
where monuments are being preserved and the site profected. Below left, a 
sculpture at Borobudur, the great Buddhist temple in Java (Indonesia). 
Built 1100 years ago, it has suffered extensive damage and decay. Restoration 
work will be completed in 1982 and is expected to costabout $11.9 million. 
Unesco has pledged $5 million through voluntary contributions, and its 
Member States have already donated large sums for this rescue operation. 
~ Below, Roman remains at Carthage (Tunisia), a historic site where an 
- international campaign of monument preservation and archaeological 
y excavation is in progress. : 
TET TY TN LR 
: oo Photo © Marc Riboud - Unesco 
A 
  
E
U
 
g
o
 
F
A
 
r
r
 
go
. 
- 
 
Photo Gérard Schmidt - Unesco

## [Page 33](074820engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

A PHILOSOPHY FOR UNESCO (Continued from page 30) 
ness, and purpose is the necessary 
prerequisite for further major progress 
in human evolution. Accordingly, 
although political unification in some 
sort of world government will be 
required for the definitive attainment 
of this stage, unification in the things 
of the mind is not only also necessary 
but can pave the way for other types 
of unification. 
Thus in the past the great religions 
unified the thoughts and attitudes of 
large regions of the earth's surface; 
and in recent times science, both 
directly through its ideas and indirectly 
through its applications in shrinking 
the globe, has been a powerful factor 
in directing men's thoughts to the 
possibilities of, and the need for, full 
world unity. 
S PECIAL attention should conse- 
quently be given by Unesco to 
the probiem of constructing a unified 
pool of tradition for the human species 
as a whole. This, as indicated else- 
where, must include the unity-in-variety 
of the world's art and culture as well 
as the promotion of one single pool of 
scientific knowledge. 
But it must also eventually include 
a unified common outlook and a com- 
mon set of purposes. This will be the 
latest part of the task of unifying the 
world mind; but Unesco must not 
neglect it while engaged on the easier 
jobs, like that of promoting a single 
pool of scientific knowledge and effort. 
From this global aim, another prin- 
ciple immediately follows. It is that 
Unesco should devote special attention 
to the levelling up of educational, 
scientific and cultural facilities in all 
backward sectors where these are 
below the average, whether these be 
geographical regions, or under-privi- 
leged sections of a population. To 
use another metaphor, it must attempt 
to let in light on the world’s dark areas. 
The reason for this is plain. For 
one thing it will be impossible for 
humanity to acquire a common outlook 
if large sections of it are the illiterate 
inhabitants of a mental world entirely 
different from that in which a fully 
educated man can have his being, a 
world of superstition and petty tribalism 
in place of one of scientific advance 
and possible unity. 
Thus mass campaigns against illit- 
eracy and for a common fundamental 
education must form part of Unesco’'s 
programme. Further, a satisfactory 
common scale of values can obviously 
not be attained so long as large 
sections of mankind are preoccupied 
with the bare material and physiologi- 
cal needs of food, shelter, and health. 
Again, science will not achieve its 
optimum rate of advance, either in 
research or in its application, until its 
light is more evenly shed over the dark 
surface of the world's ignorance, so 
as to provide a more equable distri- 
bution of scientists, of apparatus, and 
{equally important in the long run) of 
popular understanding of science. 
With art and the appreciation of 
beauty, much of the “dark area” is 
differently situated—in the centres of 
industry and among the proletariat of 
industrially advanced sections. But 
the task of lightening the dark spots 
in this field is no less urgent than in 
education or in science. 
Furthermore, social mechanisms 
must be constructed in the right way 
if they are to provide the basis for 
realizing the right values and for 
providing individuals with the fullest 
opportunities and satisfactions. 
An educational system, for instance, 
can just as readily be made to promote 
the idea of a chosen race or of a 
privileged caste as it can that of the 
dignity of men and the equality of 
their opportunity. 
A scientific system can be based on 
secrecy and focussed on war or on 
economic rivalry; or it can be focussed 
on increasing human knowledge and 
human welfare, and founded on 
freedom. 
A mass-production system can 
indirectly destroy creative initiative 
and aesthetic appreciation, and lead to 
apathy or escapism, as readily as it 
can be made to function directly to 
produce for real human needs. 
Thus broad studies of various social 
mechanisms and their effects, conduc- 
ted in the light of some general 
philosophy, will necessarily form part 
of Unesco's programme, 
F INALLY we come to a difficult 
problem—that of discovering 
how we can reconcile our principle of 
human equality with the biological fact 
of human inequality. Perhaps the 
problem is not so difficult as it appears 
when stated in this paradoxical form; 
for the contradiction largely disap- 
pears as soon as it is realized that 
equality is used in two very different 
senses. 
The democratic principle of equality, 
which is also Unesco's, is a principle 
of equality of opportunity—that human 
beings should be equal before the 
law, should have equal opportunities 
for education, for making a living, for 
freedom of expression and movement 
and thought. The biological absence 
of equality, on the other hand, con- 
cerns the natural endowments of man 
and the fact of genetic difference in 
regard to them, 
Concretely, genetic human inequality 
is of two types. First, there is the 
inequality of mere difference. Some 
people are fair, others dark; some are 
tall and thin, others short and stocky; 
some have a natural gift for music, 
others for athletics; some are intro- 
spective, others practical and extrovert. 
Indeed, we can now definitely state 
that no two human beings, with the 
single exception of the members of 
pairs of identical twins, are biologically 
equal in the sense of possessing the 
same genetic constitution, so that 
biological difference is, for all practical 
purposes, universal. 
Furthermore, the range and degree 
of genetic variety in man is greater 
than that to be found in any other 
animal species. This is largely due to 
one of man’s biological peculiarities, 
namely that his local differentiation 
into races is not continued to the stage 
of separate and intersterile species, 
as in almost all other organisms, but 
has always been followed by migration 
and interbreeding. But whatever its 
cause, the resultant high degree of 
variability is a fact, and one of con- 
siderable evolutionary importance. 
Secondly, there is difference in qual- 
ity or level. Human beings are not 
equal in respect of various desirable 
qualities. Some are strong, others 
weak; some healthy, others chronic 
invalids; some long-lived, others short- 
lived; some bright, others dull; some 
of high, others of low intelligence; 
some mathematically gifted, others 
very much the reverse; some kind and 
good, others cruel and selfish. 
It is usually not so easy to say how 
much of this second sort of inequality 
is due to heredity and therefore 
relevant for our purpose; how much 
only to the effects of physical or social 
environment. But in most cases we 
now know, and in almost all can be 
reasonably sure, that some at least of 
the difference is genetic. 
This is certain, for instance, of length 
of life, physical strength, and, most 
important for our purpose, for inteilec- 
tual gifts—both special ones like math- 
ematical aptitude and general ones like 
intelligence; while it is highly probable 
for some aspects of moral qualities, 
though the situation here is more 
complex, 
It is therefore of the greatest import- 
ance to preserve human variety; all 
attempts at reducing it, whether by 
attempting to obtain greater “purity” 
and therefore uniformity within a 
so-called race or a national group, or 
by attempting to exterminate any of 
the broad racial groups which give 
our species its major variety, are 
scientifically incorrect and opposed to 
long-run human progress. On the 
contrary, Unesco should aim at sec- 
uring the fullest contribution to the 
33

## [Page 34](074820engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

—— 
International 
  
 
partnership 
In science 
Photo United Nations 
  
Over 100 countries joined forces to study the world’s water problems 
during Unesco’s International Hydrological Decade which lasted from 
1965 to 1974. Since 1975 this co-operation has continued through 
Unesco’s international hydrological programme, enabling countries 
to assess and make better use of their water resources to meet 
the needs of their populations, industry and farming. Above a trainee 
hydrologist in south-east Asia learns use of new survey equipment. 
J common pool from racial groups which, 
owing to their remoteness or their 
backwardness, have so far had little 
share in it. 
To adjust the principle of democratic 
equality to the fact of biological in- 
equality is a major task for the world, 
and one which will grow increasingly 
more urgent as we make progress 
towards realizing equality of oppor- 
tunity. To promote this adjustment, a 
great deal of education of the general 
public will be needed as well as much 
new research; and in both these tasks 
Unesco can and should co-operate. 
The task before Unesco is necess- 
ary, is opportune, and, in spite of all 
multiplicity of detail, is single. 
4 
  
  
Ph
ot
o 
Re
x 
Ke
at
in
g-
Un
es
co
 
aE SS * te 
That task is to help the emergence 
of a single world culture, with its own 
philosophy and background of ideas, 
and with its own broad purpose. This 
is opportune, since this is the first time 
in history that the scaffolding and the 
mechanisms for world unification have 
become available, and also the first 
time that man has had the means (in 
the shape of scientific discovery and 
its applications) of laying a world-wide 
foundation for the minimum physical 
welfare of the entire human species. 
And it is necessary, for at the 
moment two opposing philosophies of 
life confront each other from the West 
and from the East, and not only impede 
the achievement of unity but threaten 
  
  
to become the foci of actual conflict. 
You may categorize the two philos- 
ophies as two supernationalisms; or 
as individualism versus collectivism; 
or as the American versus the Russian 
way of life; or as capitalism versus 
communism; or as Christianity versus 
Marxism; or in half a dozen other 
ways. The fact of their opposition 
remains and the further fact that round 
each of them are crystallizing the 
lives and thoughts and political aspir- 
ations of hundreds of millions of 
human beings. 
Can this conflict be avoided, these 
opposites be reconciled, this antithesis 
be resolved in a higher synthesis? 
| believe not only that this can happen, 

## [Page 35](074820engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

  
As part of its programme on the study and prevention of natural disasters, Unesco 
has organized many emergency scientific missions to disaster-hit areas. Following 
the devastating earthquake in Guatemaia in February 1976, Unesco immediately 
sent a team of experts in engineering, school building, seismology and monument 
restoration to study the earthquake’s causes, assess the damage and advise 
on earthquake-resistant reconstruction. Photo left shows Unesco seismologists 
studying the after-shocks of a major earthquake in Khorassan province, Iran, in 1968. 
C
T
 
aed
: 
e
e
d
 
bie 
\ {|
 
Promoting international co-operation in oceanographic studies, the 
intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of Unesco co-ordinates major 
marine research programmes in a number of ocean regions. Amongst other 
projects, the Commission is developing an integrated global ocean station system 
for monitoring the world’s oceans and a comprehensive plan for global investigation 
of pollution in the marine environment. Below, the German (Fed. Rep.) ocean 
research vessel “Anton Dohrn”, veteran of many international expeditions. 
  
  
| 
. 
. \ C
N
B
            
        
as oe 
- FE S 
Ian Soy oe NW, Lape 
SY re a iNew ., pa . 3 3d # ng ig ’. - 
= 5" TE al We EE 
DN Nr ea” 4 ~ 
SYA SE Cf = oe Sn OW he - Tow FLEE - 
” - 
“ J Bp 
any - 2 & : 
ee ® R 
» » ~~ LR | 
rl = R 
p= 
JB - | —— . 
Vad a FACE — BR 3 
J $ - Las pi Sh, -— . — ol 
Ea —- ——— ~. — - A 
» ’ W " = - . . : - - -— £ - T— A 
-rs | — RS ~ - —— TN —— = 
’ al | ol » _ " - 
; 3" ph os QL - i ~~ - - 3 
: ma A sn > — » - , T— SN A — 
- Bo —-— = _~ ~~ De " 
: SE | Ea - - — i 
- “ : lh a - _, — a — " 
. -—| — “— nn 
ge 8 . -_ . FRI - — 
- | . T.~ 
Kn Pd hE a — . — —_— AR ~ —-— 
PRE Nad oo EI a - — — 
Joa = | TN" TC — = -— 
HR er i ve : - lb ~ -_ene —~ A 
) —— Cl oc Fr " A sl gl ——— — . 
but that, through the inexorable dia- past. For that is what dogmas are— ation with opposing systems. If we 
lectic of evolution, it must happen— 
only | do not know whether it will 
happen before or after another war. 
Since another war would be so 
appalling as to set back the march of 
human progress by centuries, | am 
convinced that the task of achieving 
this synthesis in time to forestall open 
conflict must be the overriding aim of 
Unesco. 
In pursuing this aim we must eschew 
dogma—whether it be theological 
dogma or Marxist dogma or philo- 
sophical or any other form of dogma. 
East and West will not agree on a 
basis for the future if they merely hurl 
at each other the fixed ideas of the 
the crystallizations of some dominant 
system of thought of a particular 
epoch. 
A dogma may, of course, crystallize 
tried and valid experience; but if it be 
dogma, it does so in a way which is 
rigid, uncompromising and intolerant. 
What, for wanting a better term, | have 
called doctrine may also embody valid 
experience; but it may be flexible, may 
be capable of growth and development 
and adjustment. 
Some dogmas may represent a more 
recent past than others; but that does 
not render them any the less rigid and 
accordingly any less dangerously out 
of date, any less incapable of reconcili- 
are to achieve progress, we must learn 
to uncrystallize our dogmas. 
The two opposing philosophies of 
today differ essentially on one point— 
the relation between the individual and 
the community. But this one central 
difference provides differences in every 
field with which Unesco has to deal, 
as well as in many others. 
It engenders different moralities and 
systems of ethics; different methods 
of education; different conceptions of 
the role of art in society; different 
economic systems; different ways of 
integrating science with national life; 
different interpretations of the funda- 
mental human freedoms; different con-p 
38

## [Page 36](074820engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 49463: A Philosophy for UNESCO: selections from a forgotten historic document

  
“2
 
we 
ap “x 
4 
AS 
Ax
 
Article 27 of the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights says that “everyone has the right freely to 
participate in the cultural life of the community”. Unesco has been trying to make this principle 
a living reality by encouraging a broad programme of educational and cultural development and an 
awareness, particularly amongst the world’s newer nations, of cultural identity. In Africa and 
elsewhere Unesco is engaged on a long-term programme for the preservation of oral traditions. 
The preparation of a General History of Africa, at present under way, is part of this overall 
approach. Above, visitors admire works of African art during the 1966 Festival of Negro Art in 
Dakar (Senegal) organized with Unesco’s help. 
ceptions of the possibilities and limits 
of international co-operation. 
| believe that these differences, 
though they will undoubtedly become 
irreconcilable without armed conflict if 
they are permitted to express them- 
selves as dogmas, to embody them- 
selves in rigid social systems, and to 
become translated into terms of politics 
and power, can in principle be rec- 
onciled. They can be reconciled along 
the lines of some such evolutionary 
humanism as | have sketched in my 
opening sections, in which, though the 
full development of the individual is 
recognized as the central aim and 
criterion of further evolutionary prog- 
ress, the proper organization of society 
is recognized as the indispensable 
mechanism of that progress. 
Put in another way, society as such 
embodies no values comparable to 
36 
those embodied in individuals. But 
individuals are meaningless except in 
relation to the community (though that 
community transcends the nation both 
in space and in time), and can only 
achieve fullest self-development by 
self-transcendence, by interpenetration 
of the self with other reality, including 
other selves. 
The problem is thus not one of 
metaphysics or dogma, but essentially 
practical—how best to adjust or still 
better to reconcile the claims of two 
concrete sets of realities—individual 
human beings, and human social 
organizations. 
Accordingly, | believe that this 
reconciliation can be approached from 
two directions. It can be approached 
from above and from outside, as an 
intellectual problem, a question of 
agreement in principle; and it can also 
be approached from below and from 
within, as a practical problem, a 
question of agreement through action. 
The world is potentially one, and 
human needs are the same in every 
part of it—to understand it, to control 
it, and to enjoy it. Anything that 
Unesco can do to satisfy these needs 
through promoting education, science 
and culture, will be a step towards a 
unified way of life and of looking at 
life, a contribution to a foundation for 
the unified philosophy we require. 
And finally, | believe that a body 
such as Unesco, which is charged with 
promoting both the higher activities of 
man and their practical application, and 
of doing so on an international scale, 
is the most likely agency to make this 
dual approach and so to speed up this 
necessary process of reconciliation. 
WB Julian Huxley 
Ph
ot
o 
B
r
a
c
h
e
r
-
U
n
e
 
s
c
o

## [Page 37](074820engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

  
NO CHILD MARRIAGES 
IN SRI LANKA 
Sir, 
In his article “Machismo—Latin Ame- 
rica’s Myth Cult of Male Supremacy” 
(Unesco Courier, March 1975) Hernan 
San Martin has made an extremely mis- 
leading comment with regard to the mar- 
riage system in Sri Lanka. He refers to 
an interpretation of “the ‘purity’ of wo- 
men among the castes of Sri Lanka and 
the Malabar Coast in India, where girls 
are married at an extremely early age, 
before puberty, perhaps with the aim 
of defending this ‘purity’ through a 
commitment to marriage and fidelity” 
{page 31). 
The institution of marriage and the 
pattern of marriage in Sri Lanka taken 
horizontally from urban areas to rural 
areas and vertically from the earliest 
times to the present, does not reveal 
any marriage of girls before puberty. To 
say otherwise is a complete aberration 
of facts as far as Sri Lanka is con- 
cerned. 
| have no doubt that Hernan San 
Martin has referred to Nur Yalman's 
article which appeared in the Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute (Vol. 
93, 1963) under the title “On the Purity 
of Women in the Castes of Ceylon and 
Malabar”. But even this article did not 
mention an incidence of pre-puberty 
marriages in Sri Lanka. However, in ano- 
ther issue of the same journal (Vol. 89, 
1959) an article by E.K. Gough reported 
pre-puberty marriages among the Nayars 
of Malabar, though not in Sri Lanka. 
B.A. Tennyson Perera 
Dept. of Sociology 
University of Sri Lanka, Nugegoda 
LEARNING FROM BURMA 
Sir, 
Reading the letter from France in your 
January 1976 issue about women's lost 
identity [on taking a husband's name] 
reminded me of Khin Myo Than's eye- 
opening article “From a Young Burmese 
Girl's Notebook” in the March 1975 
issue on International Women's Year. 
No change of name, no ring, equal 
rights and responsibilities under marriage 
law, personal names for children to last 
for life, neither man nor woman subor- 
Letters to the Editor  
dinate to the other but working in a 
complementary way. This has been so 
for centuries. 
We, in Europe, could learn from 
Burma. All countries should be prepared 
to learn from each other more. 
Patricia Martland 
Letchworth, England 
THE CELTS 
Sir, 
| congratulate you most warmly on the 
December 1975 issue of the “Unesco 
Courier” devoted to the Celts. This 
really is a splendid piece of work and 
| am recommending it to all my pupils 
and am getting copies of the issue to 
put in various college and department 
libraries. 
With all good wishes. 
Dr. Glyn Daniel 
Editor, “Antiquity” St. John’s College 
Cambridge, England 
WOMEN'S RIGHTS 
IN URUGUAY... 
Sir, 
In your March 1975 International 
Women's Year issue, Helvi L. Sipila 
writes in her article “Women’s Lib—30 
Years of Progress” that in some 
countries a woman needs “the autho- 
rization of her husband or the court to 
exercise her legal capacity to contract, 
sue and be sued (e.g. Ecuador, Haiti, 
Mexico, the Philippines, Uruguay).” 
As far as Uruguay is concerned this 
statement is incorrect since there are no 
restrictions on women’s legal rights in 
Uruguay on the grounds of sex. Uru- 
gayan women have enjoyed equal civil 
rights with men since 1946 and in fact 
their rights are in some cases greater 
than men's. For instance only women 
have the right to seek a divorce simply 
because they want the marriage to be 
dissolved, without citing any specific 
reason. This being so, it is unfortunate 
that your list of “Milestones Towards 
Emancipation”, on page 9 of the same 
issue, did not mention this measure 
dating from 1946. The list also notes 
that women obtained the vote in France 
and ltaly in 1945 but omits to say that in 
 
Uruguay voting rights were extended to 
women in the 1920s. 
Herminia N. Martinez de Sposto 
Lawyer 
Montevideo, Uruguay 
... TUSCANY 
Sir, 
Since the appearance of your chro- 
nological list of “Milestones Towards 
Emancipation” in your March 1975 
International Women's Year issue, you 
have published two readers’ letters 
giving further information on this subject. 
One pointed out that women obtained 
the vote in the Isle of Man in 1881, the 
other that voting rights were extended 
to women in South Australia in 1894 
and Western Australia in 1899. 
| should like to point out that the 
Grand Duchy of Tuscany, one of the 
States constituting Italy before unifi- 
cation in 1860, granted voting rights to 
women on 20 November 1849. This right 
was exercised by means of a male inter- 
mediary and only provided a limited 
degree of freedom to vote. However, 
it was a first step, and when the 
first Italian parliament began its work, a 
deputy who proposed that voting rights 
be granted to women added that if the 
Assembly rejected his proposal (which 
it did) it would cause serious discontent 
in this region where women already had 
the vote. 
 
Dr. Marina Della Seta 
Rome, Italy 
...AND IRAN 
Sir, 
In your March 1975 issue, Iran is 
listed as having banned the veil in 1963. 
This information is incorrect. 
In Iran, the veil was banned by Reza 
Shah Pahlavi in 1934. What is correct 
is that political rights for women in 
Iran, including the right to vote, were 
gained in 1963. 
In 1967 and 1975 Iran's laws were 
changed to allow women to sue for di- 
vorce and be awarded custody of chil- 
dren in the event of their husband's 
death. 
Haleh Esfandiari 
Women's Organization of Iran 
Tehran, Iran   
On the occasion of its 30th 
anniversary, Unesco is telling 
people about itself and its work 
through a 
players of all ages, devised and 
produced by graphic 
UNESCO'S RAINBOW 
card game for drawing, 
artists 
two jokers) are composed of the 
letters in the word UNESCO. of the word Unesco, or a 
Each letter, illustrated with a 
symbolizes 
Unesco's major activities : its 
work for peace and human 
CARD GAME 
joker. 
one of 
plays it, 
player must play a U, first letter 
If he has neither, he 
takes a card from the pack. If 
he draws a U or a joker, he 
tf not he keeps the 
replaced by letter-cards. 
  
player who does this may then 
replay the joker or another card 
but may not draw from the pack. 
A player placing a U must 
play a second card (except for 
Freimut Steiger of Austria and 
Markus Osterwalder of Swit- 
zerland. The game (see back 
cover) is currently available in 
a French edition, produced in 
co-operation with the French 
National Commission for Unes- 
co. It is hoped that other edi- 
tions will shortly appear in dif- 
ferent languages. 
The 50 cards in the set (eight 
each coloured blue, green, yel- 
low, orange, red or violet, and 
rights, international understand- 
ing, education, science, cul- 
ture and communications. 
The game may be played by 
2, 3,4, 5 or 6 players. The 
object is to form the word 
UNESCO several times, the 
first time respecting a specific 
order of the colours in the rain- 
bow. Six cards are dealt to 
each player; the remaining 
cards are placed in front of the 
dealer, face down. The first 
cards and the next player tries 
to start the game. 
Once the word UNESCO has 
been completed, players use it 
as a base from which to form 
the word again vertically or 
horizontally. They need not fol- 
low the same colour sequence 
as the first time but they must 
not place two cards of the same 
colour in the word UNESCO in 
any direction. 
Jokers already played may he 
the player who starts the game) 
provided that it can be placed 
in the line formed from this U. 
if not he takes a card from the 
pack, 
The first player to use up all 
his cards wins the round. 
The game is currently avail- 
able at the Gift Shop in Unes- 
cos H.Q. 7 Place de Fon- 
tenoy, Paris 75700 (price 16 
French francs) and will later be 
obtainable at other sales points. 
31

## [Page 38](074820engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 49462: Julian Huxley: scientist, humanist, and lover of nature

JULIAN HUXLEY 
SCIENTIST, HUMANIST AND LOVER OF NATURE (Continued from page 12) 
for most of the scientific work. He 
therefore resigned his chair at King's 
College, London and devoted himself 
full time to preparing and editing the 
far-ranging encyclopedia. 
The formidable work took three 
years to complete; but it gave Huxley 
an opportunity to deepen his know- 
ledge of a vast range of subjects— 
and also to display his descriptive 
powers. From then onwards he was 
asked increasingly often to use his 
undoubted gift as an interpreter of 
scientific subjects, for which many 
years later, he was to receive the 
Kalinga Prize awarded by Unesco (1). 
Ar such a long period of 
concentrated writing he felt the 
need of a break. So he packed his 
notebooks and instruments and set off 
for Africa. He had been asked to 
inquire into the state of nature conser- 
vation there and also to report on the 
role of biology teaching in African 
schools. Africa View, the book he 
wrote after this journey, records his 
impressions and observations of wild 
life and human problems in this vast 
region. 
Near Nairobi he met the young 
paleontologist Louis Leakey, who al- 
ready believed that primitive man had 
first appeared in Africa, a hypothesis 
he was to prove thirty years later when 
he found the famous fossil skull of 
Zinjanthropus. Huxley went on safari 
with his wife Juliette in the Belgian 
Congo (today Zaire), and studied there 
the great fauna of equatorial Africa 
in their natural habitats. 
When he returned to the United 
Kingdom in January 1930 he presented 
a report that included a scheme for 
setting up nature reserves for the 
wild animals of the entire region, but 
it was some years before his propo- 
sal was accepted. 
After the African trip, Huxley paid 
a brief visit to the U.S.S.R. This gave 
him material for another travel book, 
A Scientist among the Soviets. On his 
return to London he resumed work on 
a major study dealing with the differ- 
rences in growth of different parts of 
the body. This was published in 1932 
under the title Problems of Relative 
Growth. 
As soon as he finished it he began 
another ambitious project with his 
former pupil, Gavin de Beer; the 
preparation of Principles of Experimen- 
tal Embryology. This book took two 
years to complete. When it appeared 
(1) Prize of £1,000 for the popularization of 
science, created by Unesco in 1951 through 
the donation of an indian industrialist, Bijoya- 
nand Patnaik. The prize is awarded by an 
international jury chosen by Unesco. There 
have been 24 Kalinga prize-winners to date. 
38 
in 1934 it had an immediate success, 
and for many years was widely used 
by teachers and researchers. 
The 1930s saw a vast wave of pro- 
paganda concerning racial myths that 
falsely claimed to be scientific. It 
provoked a vigorous reaction from 
Julian Huxley. He wrote a stinging 
counter-attack to the Nazi slogans, 
dismantling the theories of racial su- 
periority point by point and showing 
they had no more weight than a house 
of cards. His book, We Europeans, 
was published in 1935. It demon- 
strated that there was no such thing 
as “pure race” anywhere in the world 
and that the qualities and achievements 
of each so-called race or ethnic group 
were determined mainly by environ- 
ment and cultural history. 
But these many activities never de- 
flected Huxley from his vocation as 
a dedicated naturalist. During the 
same period he began a new venture, 
with film director Alexander Korda. To- 
gether they made a marvellous docu- 
mentary on seabirds, shot on a small 
offshore island, and called it The 
Private Life of the Gannet. 
When the film was finished Huxley 
went off to southwest Ireland, near 
Lough Ine. Here he studied a lake- 
worm, the Sabella, whose body show- 
ed a remarkable and completely un- 
expected ability to achieve new growth 
after amputation. He discovered that 
headless fragments of thorax would 
regenerate a complete thorax and 
abdomen, though it had previously 
been supposed that the brain and its 
nerves were necessary for the process. 
I: 1935 Julian Huxley agreed to 
become Secretary of the London 
Zoological Society, a post he was to 
hold until 1942. In his autobiography 
he writes at some length about this 
phase of his long career, a period 
marked by the convulsions of World 
War Il and the bombardment of London. 
In the midst of much work and worry 
Julian Huxley nevertheless found time 
to produce one of his most important 
books: Evolution, the Modern Syn- 
thesis. It appeared during the war, 
in 1942, soon after he had resigned 
from his post at the London Zoo. “It 
is perhaps the work | am most proud 
to have achieved”, he notes in his 
autobiography. 
Soon after war broke out the British 
Broadcasting Corporation invited Ju- 
lian Huxley to join the Brains’ Trust— 
a weekly programme in which a small 
group of distinguished figures discuss- 
ed various questions submitted by the 
public. He also wrote a number of 
articles and a booklet, Reconstruction 
and Peace, in which he stressed the 
need to look ahead to the post-war 
world and to prepare fair peace terms 
and material aid, not only for the 
occupied countries but for Germany 
herself, so that she too could rise from 
ruin and defeat. 
On the suggestion of the Confer- 
ence of Allied Ministers of Education, 
Britain, France and the United States 
invited the countries which had fought 
alongside them to meet for discussions 
on the setting up of an international 
organization concerned with education, 
science and culture. The conference, 
held in London in November 1945, set 
up a Preparatory Commission and 
Julian Huxley agreed to become its 
Executive Secretary, 
The proposals he made concerning 
this ambitious project reveal the bold 
and broad sweep of his vision. Re- 
reading them thirty years later, as he 
presented them at the first General 
Conference of the new organization in 
a paper entitled Unesco, its Purpose 
and its Philosophy, one is struck by 
his inspired foresight. 
Regrettably, at that time the 
delegations did not share his insights 
and felt unable to adopt the proposal. 
The plan was shelved, but by degrees 
a good many of its features have come 
to figure in Unesco’s programme. The 
extracts of this remarkable document 
published elsewhere in this issue 
(page 14) will enable readers of the 
“Unesco Courier” to judge the true 
significance of his proposals. 
With equal ease Julian Huxley dis- 
cussed and analysed questions con- 
cerning education or information, the 
natural sciences and the human 
sciences. The opinions he expressed 
at meetings of Unesco's Executive 
Board or at its General Conferences 
always sparkled with intelligence, and 
often with humour. A natural frank- 
ness gave his ideas a sincerity that 
imposed respect, even from his most 
determined opponents. 
Placed at the service of Unesco, 
his universalist spirit opened unlimited 
horizons which reveal Julian Huxley's 
tremendous contribution to inter- 
national co-operation, to cultural de- 
velopment and to the cause of peace. 
Unesco is soon to publish a com- 
plete bibliography of his writings. 
The scientist, philosopher and apostle 
will gradually take hig rightful place 
among the illustrious figures of our 
century. Posterity will remember him 
as much with admiration as with 
gratitude, and will fully endorse his 
own judgment of himself. “I | am 
to be remembered”, he wrote, “I hope 
it will not be primarily for my special- 
ized scientific work, but as a genera- 
list; one to whom, enlarging Terence's 
words, nothing human and nothing in 
external nature was alien.” 
WM Paulo E. de Berrédo Carneiro Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
— 
Dé
pé
c 
lé
ga
l 
C 
t 
— 
Ma
rs
 
19
76
 
— 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
{P
ri
nt
ed
 
in
 
Fr
an
ce
}

## [Page 39](074820engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
New from 
the Unesco Press... 
 
A sensitive tribute to women of all ages 
and professions in every part of the world 
—compiled by Unesco staff photographer 
Dominique Roger. This album of more than 
fifty black and white photographs bears 
witness to Unesco’s continuing concern 
with the role of women 
science, culture, communication—in every 
activity affecting mankind. 
in education, 
“The eye of a woman photographer, looking 
at women and seeing them as they are... 
wishing neither to abase nor to exalt, but to 
provide images which make us think.” 
— Marie-Pierre Herzog 
former Director of Unesco’s Human Rights 
Co-ordination Unit 
24 French francs 
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National 
Distributor in your country. (See list below; names of 
distributors in countries not listed, along with subscrip- 
tion rates in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
— AUSTRALIA. Pubtications: Educational Supplies Pty. 
Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; Periodicals: Do- 
minie Pty., Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of Australia, 
Victorian Division 5th floor, 134-136 Flinders St, Mel- 
bourne (Victoria), 3000. — AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg 
Fromme & C°., Arbeitergasse 1-7, 1051, Vienna. — BEL- 
GIUM. “Unesco Courier’ Dutch edition only: N.V. Handei- 
raatschappi} Keesing, Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne- 
Antwerpen. French edition and general Unesco publica- 
tions agent: Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. 
CCP 708-23. — BURMA. Trade Corporation N° 9, 550-552 
Merchant Street, Rangoon. — CANADA. Information Ca- 
nada, Ottawa (Ont.). — CYPRUS. “MAM”, Archbishop Ma- 
karios 3rd Avenue, P. O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 {perma- 
nent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka Prague 
1. For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag - Publishers, Hurbanovo 
nam. 6, 893 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — DENMARK Munks- 
gaards Boghandel, 6, Nérregade, DK-1165, Copenhagen K. 
— EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for 
Unesco Publications, N° 1 Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir 
Square, Cairo; Librairie Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, 
Cairo. — ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box 2996, Addis-Ababa. — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. — FRANCE. Librairie 
de I'Unesco, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75700-Paris, C.C.P. 
12598-48. — GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REP. Buchhaus 
Leipzig, Postfach 140, 701 Leipzig or from Internationalen 
Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. — FED. REP. OF GER- 
MANY. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed. only): 53 Bonn 
1, Colmantstrasse 22, C.C.P. Hamburg 276650. For scienti- 
fic maps only: GEO CENTER D7 Stuttgart 80, Post- 
fach 800830. Other publications; Verlag Dokumentation, 
Possenbacher Strasse 2, 8000 Mianchen 71 (Prinz Ludwigs- 
héhe} — GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd., P.O. 
Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd., P.O. Box 78689, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The Uni- 
versity Bookshop of Cape Coast, The University Bookshop 
of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom. — GREECE. Angie elle Agency, 5, 
Koumpari Street Athens 138. — HONG KONG. Federal 
Publications Division, Far East Publications Ltd., 5 A Ever- 
green Industrial Mansion, Wong Chuk Hang Road, Aber- 
deen. Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon. — 
HUNGARY. Akadémiai Konyvesbold, Vaci u. 22, Buda- 
pest V; A.K.V. Kdnyvtarosok Boltja, Néopkoztarsasag-utja 
16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. Snaebjdrn Jonsson & Co., - 
H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — INDIA. Orient Longman 
Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan 
Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 
2; B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 1; 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi 
Road, Bangalore-560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda Hyderabad- 
500001. Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 17 Park 
Street, Calcutta 16; Scindia House, New Delhi; Publications 
Section, Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, 72 Thea- 
tre Communication Building, Connaught Place, New Delhi 
1.— INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 29 
JI. Oto Iskandardinata Ill, Jakarta; Gramedia Bookshop, JI. 
Gadjah Mada 108, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI. Dr. Sam Ratulan- 
gie 37, Jakarta Pusat. — IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and 
Distribution C°., 229 Daneshgahe Street, Shah Avenue, 
P.O. Box 141486, Teheran. Iranian National Commission 
for Unesco, Avenue Iranchahr Chomali No 300, B.P. 1533, 
Teheran. — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid Street, 
Baghdad; University Bookstore, University of Baghdad, 
P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The Educational 
Company of Ireland Ltd., Ballymount Road, Walkinstown, 
Dublin 12. — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blums- 
tein’s Book-stores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat Ben- 
jamin Street, Tel-Aviv; 9, Shiomzion Hamalka Street Jeru- 
salem. — JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O. 
Box 366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston. — JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc, C.P.O. Box 1728, Tokyo 100-92. — 
KENYA. The E.S.A. Ltd., P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — KO- 
REA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box 
Central 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., 
Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LESOTHO. Mazenod Book 
Centre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Africa. — LIBE- 
RIA. Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Mon- 
rovia. — LIBYA. Agency for Development of Publication & 
Distribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEMBOURG. 
Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. — MA- 
LAYSIA. Federal Publications Sdn. Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, 
Jalan Riong, Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. Sapienza’s Li- 
brary, 26 Kingsway, Valletta. — MAURITIUS. Nalanda 
Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. — MO- 
NACO. British Library, 30, bd des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. 
— NETHERLANDS. For the “Unesco Koerier” Dutch edi- 
tion only: Systemen Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, 
Amsterdam-1007. Agent for all Unesco publications: N. V. 
Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. — 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned 
Ant.). N.V., Willemstad, Curagao,N. A. — NEW ZEALAND. 
Government Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: 
Rutland Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford 
Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. 
Box 857 Hamilton; Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; 
Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, Wellington. — NIGERIA. 
The University Bookshop of Ife. The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286; The University Bookshop of 
Nsukka; The University Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY. All pu- 
blications: Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl 
Johans-gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only; A.S. 
Narvesens Literaturtjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6. — PAKIS- 
TAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-e-azam, P.O. 
Box No. 729, Lahore 3; The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., 
Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms: Urdu Bazaar, Lahore, and 57-68 Murree 
Highway, G/6-1 Islamabad. — PHILIPPINES. The Modern 
Book Co., 926 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404. — 
POLAND. All publications: ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i 
Nauki, Warsaw. For the Unesco Courier only: RUCH, ul. 
Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Ltda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — SIN- 
GAPORE. Federal Publications {s) Pte Ltd., Times House, 
River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOMALI DEMOCRA- 
TIC REPUBLIC. Modern Book Shop and General, P.O. Box 
951, Mogadiscio. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook 
Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. — SRI 
LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam 
Gardiner Mawata P.0.B. 244 Colombo 2. — SUDAN. Al 
Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. 
All publications: A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the 
Unesco Courier: Svenska FN-Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 
150 50 S- 104 65, Stockholm. — SWITZERLAND. All publi- 
cations: Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich. Librairie 
Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236. — 
TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.0.B. 9030 Dar- 
es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 
Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402, 
Bangkok; Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Ave- 
nue, Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, 
Bangkok. — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Cad- 
desi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — SOUTH AFRICA. All publica- 
tions: Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty). Ltd., Libri Building, 
Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. For the Unesco Cou- 
rier {single copies) only; Central News Agency P.O. Box 
1033, Johannesburg. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Statio- 
nery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l., and Government 
Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Man- 
chester, Birmingham, Bristol. — UNITED STATES. Uni- 
pub, Box 433, Murray Hill Station New York, N.Y. 10016. 
For “Unesco Courier” in Spanish: Santillana Publishin 
Company, Inc., 5675 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY, 
10022. — U.S.8.R. Mezhdu- narodnaja Kniga, Moscow, 
G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazije, 
27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zalozba Slovenije, Titova C 25, 
P.0.B. 50, Ljubliana.

## [Page 40](074820engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

i —-— 
4 
= re 
— yo A 
A J g 
LE, J 
WITH UNESCO 
See page 37 
RY 
  
 