# [079702](079702engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](079702engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  Ati bute 
m The Courier 
  
| ne Lnristiani Rs JALAL IAAL ACALL fC L 1( | ] 
of Kievan Russia 
to three poets Lord Byron; René Char; Césa V r
e
 
1888 : the abolition of slavery in Brazil 
   

## [Page 2](079702engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

June 1988 
4 
The baptism of Kiev 
A thousand years ago, 
the birth of a Christian nation 
by Boris V, Rauschenbach 
9 
Beauty, sanctity and truth 
The philosophy of the icon 
by Sergei S. Averintsev 
14 
The ‘golden ring’ 
16 
A thousand-year heritage 
by Metropolitan Juvenaly 
26 
Everyday life and letters in ancient Russia 
by Mikhail J. Braichevsky 
30 
Byron the rebel 
by Mark Storey 
33 
René Char 
by Edouard Glissant 
34 
César Vallejo 
A revolutionary voice in modern poetry 
by Leyla Bartet 
36 
Thelong struggle for liberation 
Reflections on the abolition of slavery in Brazil 
by Oswaldo de Camargo 
38 
Milestones on the road to freedom 
by Ligia Fonseca Ferreira 
The Courier ILL 
A window open on the world 41st year 
Published monthly in 35 languages English 
French Spanish Russian German 
Arabic Japanese Italian Hindi 
Tamil Hebrew Persian Dutch 
Portuguese Turkish Urdu Catalan 
Malaysian Korean Swahili Croato- 
Serb Macedonian  Serbo-Croat 
Slovene Chinese Bulgarian Greek 
Sinhala Finnish Swedish Basque 
Thai Vietnamese Pashto Hausa 
Ed
it
or
ia
l 
In 988, a thousand years ago, the people of Kiev 
waded into the Dnieper River, in obedience to a 
decision taken by their prince, Vladimir, and 
underwent mass baptism. This “was an event of 
great historical significance”, writes Metropolitan 
Juvenaly, a high dignitary of the Russian Orthodox 
Church, in his contribution to this issue, “bringing 
as it did a major part of the population of eastern 
Europe into the family of Christian nations”. 
Vladimir’s decision had an immediate bearing on 
the fortunes of his Kiev-based principality known 
as Rus’, a grouping of east Slav tribes from which 
the Russian, Ukrainian and Byelorussian Slav 
peoples of the USSR would later emerge. In the 
short term, Rus’ was enabled to assert its position 
vis-a-vis the Byzantine Empire and the other 
Christian States of Europe. But Vladimir’s decision 
also had a more lasting influence on the later history 
and identity of the peoples who inherited its legacy. 
In the words of Pope John Paul 11, head of the 
Roman Catholit Church, in an Apostolic Letter 
published on the occasion of the millennium of the 
baptism of Kievan Rus’, “The elements of the 
Christian heritage have imbued the life and culture 
of those nations.... making room fora totally 
original form of European culture, indeed of 
human culture itself.” 
This issue of the Unesco Courieris a contribution 
to a number of activities which Unesco is 
organizing to mark this anniversary, including a 
symposium on “the significance of the introduction 
of Christianity in Rus’ for the development of 
European and world culture and civilization”, 
which will be held at the Organization’s Paris 
Headquarters from 28 to 30 June 1988. 
We also pay tribute in this issue to three poets 
who all shared, in addition to talent, a hunger for 
freedom: an Englishman, Lord Byron, who was 
born 200 years ago; a Frenchman, René Char, who 
died this year; and a Peruvian, César Vallejo, who 
died fifty years ago. Also commemorated in the 
following pages is an important act of liberation— 
the abolition of slavery in Brazil 100 years ago. The 
granting of liberty by decree, by a stroke of the pen, 
was followed by a hard struggle to enjoy its fruits 
on the part of a black Brazilian community whichis 
only today starting to discover its own identity and 
forms of expression. 
Editor-in-Chief: Edouard Glissant

## [Page 3](079702engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Masterwork 
of 
medieval Russian art     
Le 
: of [TD 
- - ' 
    
       
  
  
— . YT — = 
'” I and aks ‘ SC wines wo 
« 5 ? ’ L oe » " a) hs : - - 
- » 
  
» -_ 
» . ~ ™ “ ~ oF " 
TA Cl war 
0 Cie SECA © id 3 
al ll; UN ler 
RE as eR SP 
v2 . Tu nL AI 
VAS 
: 5 1 
’ { 
et ha re Ta TA ei 
3 | Te ii 
The Old Testament Trinity (above and front cover) was painted by the great Russian icon painter Andrei Rublev 
(c.1370-¢.1430) some time in the first quarter of the 15th century for the Trinity and St. Sergius monastery at Zagorsk, near 
Moscow. The icon depicts the visit of three angels to Abraham and Sarah as recorded in the Bible. Rublev treats this traditional 
subject in an original manner, retaining only the three angels, who are depicted with gentle grace in a circular composition where 
all is harmony and spirituality. The three figures are also those of the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, which asserts that God is 
one in substance but three in “person” (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit), and 1s fundamental to Orthodox theology. In the 16th 
century, on the orders of Tsar Boris Godunov, the Trinity was given an encasement (oklad) of vermeil and precious stones (see 
front cover), which was removed at the beginning of the 20th century when the icon was restored. Since 1929 this masterpiece of 
Russian art bas been exhibited in the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow without the encasement, in all its original splendour (above). 
Photos © The Journal of the Mascow Patrarchate, Moscow 
 

## [Page 4](079702engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 79703: The Baptism of Kiev: a thousand years ago, the birth of a Christian nation

The baptism of Kiev 
BY BORIS V. RAUSCHENBACH A thousand years ago, 
the birth of a Christian nation 
thousand years ago, in 988, the Slav principality of 
Kievan Rus’, or Kievan Russia, came into being as 
one of a cluster of Christian States in Europe. Its 
emergence was one of the far-reaching consequences of a bold 
feudal reform of the State structures which was carried out by 
Grand Prince Vladimir, who wished to put his principality on 
the same footing as the developed feudal monarchies of that 
time. 
In 980 Vladimir was at the head of a loose federation of Slav 
tribes, which could only be held together by the use of armed 
force (or at least the constant threat of its use). In order to 
strengthen this federation, the young prince took two impor- 
tant decisions. First, he settled in Kiev, intent on keeping his 
hands on the reins of government, which his predecessors had 
abandoned for months or even years while leading military 
expeditions. Second, he endeavoured to unite the Slav tribes 
ideologically—as we should say today—by means of a reli- 
gion common to them all. 
Once established in Kiev, Vladimir began to build fortifica- 
tions to the east of the town, thus making it clear that he meant 
to stay in the capital and defend it against nomads. It was 
essential to the success of the radical State reforms that life in 
the city should be peaceful and safe. 
  
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
  
    
    
  
™ = 
ANE 
Ll) -r . 
“un, y 
LALLA AMAMRAISS 
Ph
ot
o 
O.
 
Ma
ka
ro
v 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 

## [Page 5](079702engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

   AN
 
Na
n 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
A
P
N
,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
The Saviour in Glory, an icon painted by 
Andrei Rublev around 1420 and today pre- 
served in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow. 
Christ is depicted on His throne surrounded by 
seraphim and the 4 symbols of the Evangelists 
(see also colour page 21). 
A thousand years ago, in 988, Vladimir, grand prince of Kiev, who bad 
recently been converted to Christianity, bade the peoples over which be 
ruled to follow bis example, in order to consolidate their political and 
spiritual union. Far left, imposing bronze statue in Kiev (4.5 metres high - 
and standing on a pedestal 16 metres high) shows Vladimir holding a 
cross in one band and bis princely beadgear in the other. The monument 
was inaugurated in 1853. Vladimir later became the hero of popular 
epics and was canonized by the Orthodox Church. According to the 
Soviet specialist Sergei Beliaev, Vladimir was baptized in the baptistery 
of the Uvarov basilica at the Byzantine town of Chersonesus in the 
Crimea (near the modern city of Sevastopol). Left, drawing of a recon- 
stitution of the baptistery. Above left, vertical section of the baptistery as 
it was in the 10th century, showing the remains of the walls as they are 
today. Drawings were executed as part of a project to rebuild the 
baptistery. : 
To solve the second problem—the unification of the allied 
tribes—he first of all gave “equal rights” to all the main tribal 
gods (and consequently to those groups of the clergy that had 


### 79703: The Baptism of Kiev: a thousand years ago, the birth of a Christian nation

most influence). A traveller arriving in Kiev from afar could 
see that the god of his own tribe was worshipped in Kiev as 
well as the Kievan gods. Six heathen gods were worshipped in 
Kiev; traces of these cults have been found by modern 
archaeologists. 
These measures taken by Prince Vladimir strengthened the 
State. But it soon became clear that the path on which he had 
embarked so successfully was actually leading nowhere. 
There were two main reasons for this. First, even after Vladi- 
mir’s innovations the heathen religion perpetuated the old 
way of life. It suited a patriarchal system, but it was a major 
‘obstacle to the formation of the new production relationships 
of nascent feudalism. A new law, new customs, a new social 
awareness and a new approach to the world were all needed. 
The old paganism could not provide these things. But they 
were all to be found in Byzantium. 
The second reason was that Kievan Rus’ could not attain 
equality with the leading countries of Europe and the East, it 
could not, to use a modern expression, reach “world class” 
unless it borrowed from those countries a knowledge of 
crafts, building techniques, science, culture and much else. 
And all this, too, was to be found in Byzantium. 
Vladimir’s choice of religion was largely conditioned by 
5

## [Page 6](079702engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  
The “Chronicle of Radziwill” (named after the 
Lithuanian prince to whom it belonged) is a 
late 15th-century illustrated manuscript con- 
taining over 600 miniatures, many of which 
are based on far older models. Far right, minia- 
. ture showing Princess Olga, the first pagan 
ruler (945-964) of Kievan Russia to accept the 
Christian faith. Right, miniature bearing the 
date 1071 depicts an encounter between 
Christians and pagans. At left are the prince 
with bis halberd and a bishop with bis cross, 
accompanied by their followers. At right, a 
wizard in a long white robe with wide sleeves, 
also accompanied by bis attendants.  
Ark 5 4 0 [pcos acmancmgmonprya. EOgH ANI ATE 
AIFA (OBOKKOY THE ER JOCAARH -HLIAAARD (MOINAGD [AC6Ba 
history, but it was also due to his wisdom as a statesman. Rus’ 


### 79703: The Baptism of Kiev: a thousand years ago, the birth of a Christian nation

had already forged quite strong economic links with Byzan- 
tium, which was not far away. The Bulgarians, who were the 
kinsfolk of the people of Rus’, had accepted Christianity 
about 100 years before, largely thanks to the work of Cyril 
and Methodius, who had developed a Slav alphabet and 
preached Christianity in the Slav language. Vladimir’s deci- 
sion may well have been influenced by the fact that in the 
Orthodox Church, unlike the Roman Catholic Church, peo- 
ple could worship God in a language they understood. 
At this time Byzantium was still at the height of its glory. 
The tradition of Antiquity still survived there. Homer and 
other classical writers of Antiquity were studied in its schools, 
and Plato and Aristotle lived on in the philosophical disputes 
that took place there. The Byzantine form of Christianity met 
the needs of a feudal society, and therefore fully conformed 
with Vladimir's intentions. And at the same time it solved the 
problem of providing a single religion for all the tribes of 
ancient Rus’. 
Neither Rus’ nor Byzantium regarded the proposed accept- 
ance of Christianity as a purely religious step. Byzantium’s 
view, expressed in simplistic terms, was that since Rus’ was 
turning to the Orthodox faith and the head of the Orthodox 
Church was the Byzantine patriarch and the emperor, Rus’ 
automatically became a vassal of Byzantium. 
But the State of ancient Rus’ was expanding and was already 
quite powerful, and had fought Byzantium successfully sever- 
al times; it did not intend to play the role of a vassal. Vladimir 
and his court had other ideas. They thought that the accept- 
ance of Christianity and the adoption of Byzantine culture 
and skills along with Christianity should in no way diminish 
the independence of Rus’. As the prince saw it, Rus’ should 
become a State friendly to Byzantium, but should retain its 
entire sovereignty. 
The introduction of Christianity was a gradual process; 
authorities today believe that it took around 100 years—a 
very short time in view of the vast size of the country. The 
Christianization of Sweden and Norway, which began about 
the same time as that of Rus’, took 250 and 150 years 
respectively. 
Vladimir’s political reform released a potential that had 
been gradually building up within the society of Rus’. The 
6 
rapid development of the country shows how timely the 
reform was. 
Master builders were invited to come from Byzantium to 
Rus’, where they erected stone churches and other buildings 
and adorned them with frescoes, mosaics and icons. Russians 
worked with them, learning skills of which they had known 
nothing before. The next generation erected elaborate build- 
ings in the towns of Rus’, with hardly any help from for- 
eigners. Changes took place in agriculture, too, and horucul- 
ture was introduced into Rus’ at this time. 
The clergy who had come to Rus’ from Byzantium did not 
merely conduct religious services in the new churches; they 
also trained “national leaders” for the Church, and knowledge 
and literacy spread widely as a result. Schools were opened, 
and Vladimir made the children of the nobility attend them, 
despite the mothers’ protests. He sent young men to study in 
other countries. A chronicle was begun. Like other developed 
States, Kievan Rus’ started to mint its own gold coins. 
Little by little, ancient Rus’ became a State with a new high 
culture, although it would be wrong to think that it did not 
have an authentic culture of its own in pagan times. This pagan 
culture was to live on for a considerable time, and it imparted 
certain unique features to the art of ancient Rus’. What was 
new was mainly that body of knowledge that had already been 
acquired by cultured peoples throughout the world, ranging 
from the works of Aristotle to techniques for building stone 
arches. 
But rapid as the changes of Vladimir’s day were, his feudal 
reform was not completed in his lifetime. More time was 
needed, and Vladimir’s work was finished by his son, Yaro- 
slav the Wise. As the chroniclers say, Vladimir ploughed the 
land, Yaroslav sowed the seed, and we (later generations) have 
reaped the harvest. 
Yaroslav was as zealous as his father had been in continuing 
the reform. Like his father, he built fortifications to defend his 
lands, this time mainly in the west. Like his father, he saw to it 
that nothing held up the feudal reforms; and he showed just as 
much energy in building, clearly striving to make Kiev the 
equal of Byzantium (later Constantinople). He did much to 
develop trade; and he began to strike silver coins as well as 
gold. 
Yaroslav’s principal aim, however, was to build up a

## [Page 7](079702engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
os
 
©)
 
Na
uk
a 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
  
   
genuinely Russian intelligentsia (insofar as such a concept can 
be used with reference to that period). Vladimir had not had 
time to do this. Literacy in itself was not enough; steps had to 
be taken to ensure that Kievan Rus’ did not have to “import” 
Greek clergy, that it had its own scholars, writers and philo- 
sophers, and that it could, if necessary, wage an ideological 
struggle, notably against Byzantine imperial ideology. It 1s 
not surprising that Russian monasticism is first heard of in 
Yaroslav’s day. 
Inventories dating from the fifteenth and sixteenth centur- 
ies (earlier ones have not survived) show that most of the 
books in the monastic libraries were secular rather than 
religious. There were chronicles, historical records, “itinerar- 
ies” or geographical works, philosophical and military 
treatises, and classical works such as the History of the Jewish 
War by Flavius Josephus. A learned monk must indeed have 
had an all-round education. 
Chronicles such as The Russian Primary Chronicle and 
polemical works (often with a definite political undercurrent) 


### 79703: The Baptism of Kiev: a thousand years ago, the birth of a Christian nation

were written in the monasteries. Books were copied, too. We 
are indebted to copyists in the monasteries for the fact that we 
can read the ancient chronicles that have come down to us 
(works such as The Song of Igor’s Campaign). Icons were 
painted by masters such as Alimpi of Kiev. The Russian clergy 
who replaced those from Byzantium were trained in the 
monasteries. 
In 1051, after the death of the Greek metropolitan of Kiev, 
Yaroslav himself (acting without the emperor or the patriarch 
of Constantinople) “having called together the bishops”, for 
the first time appointed a Russian metropolitan, Hilarion, a 
priest in the prince’s village of Berestovo. The Russian Ortho- 
dox Church was asserting its independence. Metropolitan 
Hilarion was certainly a man of great ability. His work “On 
Law and Grace”, a remarkable example of the literature of 
ancient Rus’, was a trenchant ideological weapon in the battle 
for the independence of Kievan Rus’. 
The work of literacy teaching and school building con- 
tinued under Yaroslav (and not only in Kiev). We have 
evidence that a school for 300 children was opened in Nov- 
gorod in 1030, at which children began to “learn to read 
books”. Schools for girls were founded. Gradually all sectors 
of the population learnt to read and write, as we know from 
  
Ph
ot
o 
M.
 
lu
rc
he
nk
o 
© 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
Engraved on this white stone cross is the so- 
called “Hymn to the Cross”, an important 
specimen of Russian writing in the 12th cen- 
tury. The cross once stood near the church of the 
Intercession of the Virgin, on the river Nerl (see 
photo 22, page 15), and is today preserved in 
the municipal museum at Bogolyubovo. 

## [Page 8](079702engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 79703: The Baptism of Kiev: a thousand years ago, the birth of a Christian nation

  
  
    
wt 
| 
B | 
5 
2 - 
: # 
2 » 
z “ow 
5 
2 
© 
2 N 
2 - i 
[9 
inscriptions that have been found on strips of birch bark. The earliest works of Old Russian literature 
Yaroslav himself “was diligent in reading books by night and date from the late 10th century. Most of them 
day”, and he also “collected many books, translated books have down to ws in the form of collections 
’ > . y i5- 
from the Greek to the Slav language, and wrote many books”. of texts known as Izborniki. Above, fron 
Cul di dl h le of anci piece of the Izbornik of 1073, one of the oldest 
u ture was spreading rapidly among the people of ancient of these manuscripts. Based on Bulgarian texts 
Rus’. CL oo translated from Greek, it was compiled for 
Civilized States cannot exist without written laws. Yaroslav Prince Suyatoslav Yaroslavich and constitutes 
introduced a number of written statutes, including “Russian a kind of theological encyclopaedia containing 
Law”. In a word, under Yaroslav, who completed Vladimir’s over 380 articles by 25 authors. 
reform, Kievan Rus’ became a freely developing feudal State, 
the equal of any State in the civilized world. It was surpassed 
by no other country, either in economic and social structure 
(feudalism, which continued to develop) or in culture, trade 
ot the arts of war. 
The introduction of Christianity, which became the ideolo- 
gical basis of the feudal State system of ancient Rus’, played a 
progressive role in the early Middle Ages. The old division 
into tribes was a thing of the past. A people had taken shape as 
a State, and from it, in time, emerged the Russians, Ukrainians 
and Byelorussians. || 
BORIS VIKTOROVICH RAUSCHENBACH is a Soviet Academician, 
winner of the Lenin Prize and a member of the International Academy of 
Astronautics. A specialist in mechanics, the theory of combustion and the 
control of the orientation of spacecraft, he was closely involved in the 
preparations for the first Soviet space flights. Among his published works are 
a study on spatial structures in ancient Russian painting (1975) and an essay 
on iconography as a means of conveying philosophical ideas (1985). 
8

## [Page 9](079702engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 79704: Beauty, sanctity and truth: the philosophy of the icon

Beauty, sanctity and truth 
The philosophy of the icon 
 
BY SERGEI S. AVERINTSEV 
N the chronicles which relate the events that took place a 
thousand years ago in Russia, one episode stands out— 
that of the so-called “testing of faiths”. 
Prince Vladimir of Kiev had already talked with Muslims, 
Roman Catholics, and Khazars of Jewish persuasion. Then he 
heard a homily from a Greek “philosopher” who also gave 
him a lesson in biblical history and a brief catechism. This 
presentation, it seems, was the one that made the most 
favourable impression. The prince observed that the Greeks 
were “artful” and “captivating” speakers and that it was a 
pleasure to listen to them. 
But homilies alone were not enough; nor did doctrine and 
question-and-answer sessions settle the matter enurely. 
Things had to be seen, as well as heard, to be believed. And so 
in AD 987 Vladimir, following the considered advice of his 
boyars' and elders, selected ten “virtuous and sensible men” 
1. His chief vassals. Editor 
  
  
: 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Th
e 
Jo
ur
na
l 
of
 
th
e 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
Pa
tr
ia
rc
ha
te
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
  
and instructed them to obtain firsthand evidence of each faith, 
observing how God was worshipped, by whom and where. 
The envoys carried out their mission. The movements and 
postures adopted by the Muslims at prayer in their mosques 
seemed strange to them. Nor did they find any aesthetic 
satisfaction in the Latin ritual: “We saw no trace of beauty 
there,” they said. In Constantinople, however, “the beauty of 
the liturgy” to which they were introduced by the head of the 
Church, the patriarch, came as a revelation. “We knew not 
whether we were in Heaven or on Earth,” they told the 
This late 14th-century Dormition of the Vir- 
gin is thought to be the work of Theophanes the 
Greek, (c.1350-¢.1410) an outstanding icon 
painter of Byzantine origin, or of one of his 
pupils. Strong dramatic tension is created by 
the vigour of the composition and the imposing 
dimensions of the figure of Christ. 
  
- ———— no —
 

## [Page 10](079702engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
A.
 
Ag
ab
al
ia
n 
© 
Ru
ss
ia
n 
ed
it
io
n 
of
 
th
e 
Un
es
co
 
Co
ur
ie
r,
 
Pr
og
re
ss
 
Pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
prince. “For surely there is no such splendour or beauty 
anywhere upon Earth, and we are at a loss how to describe it; 
we only know that God dwells there among men, and their 


### 79704: Beauty, sanctity and truth: the philosophy of the icon

ceremonies are fairer than those of other nations. We cannot 
forget that beauty.” Time and time again the word “beauty” 
recurs in their account, and the envoys’ experience of that 
beauty clinches their theological argument: “There, God 
dwells among the people.” Now the prince could make his 
choice. “Then Vladimir replied, and said “Where shall our 
baptism take place?” 
Thus, the aesthetic argument carried the greatest convic- 
tion. “God dwells among men”, where beauty is; beauty is 
evidence—and indeed proof—of His presence. 
Whatever the real events that inspired it, this story told in 
the “Tale of Bygone Years” (also known as The Russian 
Primary Chronicle), the most important historical work of 
early medieval Russia, reflects a manner of conceiving, or at 
least perceiving, the world that is in itself a historical fact. 
Even if the thinking of Prince Vladimir and his entourage was 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Known as the Ustyug Annunciation from the 
town where it originated, this icon (now in the 
Tretyakov Gallery) is a work of the Novgorod 
school and dates from the 12th to the 13th 
centuries. 
10 
In Eastern Christian churches of Byzantine tradition, the iconostasis is a 
screen which separates the sanctuary, where the sacrament of the 
Eucharist is celebrated, from the nave, where the congregation stands. It 
is covered with icons (sacred images), and pierced by 3 doors. Far from 
being a barrier, the iconostasis symbolizes the boundary between the 
world of the senses and the spiritual world, and invites the faithful to the 
sacraments of the Eucharist. Right, the iconostasis and altar (18th to 19th 
century) of the cathedral of the archangel Michael in the Kremlin, 
Moscow (16th century). 
not exactly that described by the chronicler, and even if the 
entire anecdote is a fiction, it has a significance which is 
remarkably similar to that of a statement made during the first 
half of the present century by the Russian priest, scientist and 
philosopher Pavel Aleksandrovich Florensky (1882-1943) 
who wrote as follows about the most famous of Russian icons, 
Andrei Rublev’s Old Testament Trinity: “Of all the philo- 
sophical proofs of the existence of God, that which carries the 
most conviction is not mentioned in any textbook; it may be 
resumed as follows: ‘Rublev’s Trinity exists, therefore God 
exists’.” 
Obviously, there is a great difference between the story told 
in the Chronicle and the extract from Florensky’s philo- 
sophical treatise. The chronicler is artless, whereas Florensky 
deploys a paradox of whose subtlety he is fully aware. All that 
the texts have in common is the extreme simplicity of the 
logical proposition that beauty is not “merely” beauty; itis a 
criterion of truth—indeed of truth at its most profound, its 
most important. 
An imaginary line drawn through the millennium that 
separates the episode of the “testing of faiths” from 
Florensky’s postulate would pass through many points. On it 
one would find that conjunction of a sense of style with a 
sense of the sacred, expressed in icon painting, which the Old 
Believers? of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries inher- 
ited from ancient Russia and which is perceptively described 
in “The Sealed Angel”, a story by the nineteenth-century 
writer Nikolai Leskov. In this story, a simple stone-mason, 
self-confessedly “of the most rustic education”, evokes his 
favourite icon, a product of the seventeenth-century Stroga- 
nov school of icon painting: “The wings are outspread and 
white as snow; against the clear blue of the sky, feather stands 
out against feather, and strand against strand in the tuft of each 
feather. You look at these wings, and all the fear in you 
disappears; you pray ‘Give me light’, and suddenly every- 
thing falls still, and peace enters the soul”. 
Are we here in the presence of prayer or of ecstasy? It is not 
enough to say that the two are related. What counts is that this 
form of contemplation is just as exacting as prayer; here, 
indulgence in emotion, in sublimated sensibility, in art for 
art’s sake, are kept at a far greater distance than, for example, 
in Gothic, Renaissance or Baroque art. At the same time, 
prayer cannot be dissociated from the plastic reality of the 
icon: there is a relation between the “peace that enters the 
soul” and the contrast of “strand against strand in the tuft of 
each feather”. Here, as in the report by Prince Vladimir's 
emissaries and Florensky’s aphorism, beauty confers authen- 
ticity. Beauty can be trusted, “and peace enters the soul”. But 
it must be beauty of a very special kind. 
It is precisely because so much depends on the quality of 
this beauty that it is subjected to such rigorous demands. In 
the seventeenth century, the turbulent archpriest Avvakum, 
  
2. Followers of the ancient rites of the Russian Orthodox Church. Editor Ph
ot
o 
©
 
A
P
N
,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 11](079702engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 79704: Beauty, sanctity and truth: the philosophy of the icon

 
 
 

## [Page 12](079702engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 79704: Beauty, sanctity and truth: the philosophy of the icon

leader of the Old Believers, raged against departures from the 
traditional aesthetics of icon painting, seeing in such “un- 
seemly figurations” both a spiritual betrayal and a disintegra- 
tion of the values inherent in the life of the people. What was 
painted “with carnal intent” forfeited its claims to reliability, 
to authenticity. It is interesting to note that at the height of the 
Roman Catholic-Orthodox rivalry during the reign of Ivan 
the Terrible (1547-1584), the Jesuit Antonio Possevino, who 
had vainly endeavoured to convert the Tsar to Catholicism 
and thus conserved a certain rancour towards Russia and 
things Russian, nevertheless found words of surprised 
admiration for the chasteness and sobriety which characte- 
rized both the icon and the manner of its veneration. 
The hero of Dostoyevsky’s novel A Raw Youth hears the 
pilgrim Makar Ivanovich use the archaic word blagoobrazie, 
and is deeply moved. The word conveys the idea of beauty as 
sanctity, sanctity as beauty, beauty at its most austere as a spur 
to asceticism. 
In the psychology of the Russian people, beauty and asce- 
ticism are very closely related. Russian folklore offers an 
abundance of spiritual verses about the Tsarevich Ioasaf’s 
renunciation of a life of luxury and his departure into the 
wilderness, where care for his bodily welfare is no longer of 
importance: 
Here, in my wilderness, 
Labouring, I must labour still; 
Here, in my wilderness, 
Fasting, I must further fast; 
Here, in my wilderness, 
Enduring, I must yet endure.... 
But this retreat, the scene of labour and endurance, 1s, as the 
folktales insist time and time again, a “beautiful wilderness”; 
not only a vale of suffering and grief, but also a plenitude of 
simple delights for eye and ear alike: 
When spring in all her beauty comes back again, 
Meadow and marsh will don their finest apparel, 
And, in the leaf-decked wood, 
The bird of paradise 
Will sing with an archangel’s voice. 
Nowhere else, it seems, in Russian popular poesy is the 
beauty of Nature accorded such generous treatment as in 
these plaintive songs about a young prince’s rejection of 
worldly temptations. Only the austere light in which the 
whole is bathed justifies the ecstasy that such beauty pro- 
vokes, by providing the guarantee that beauty itself will not 
degenerate into forbidden balowstvo (frivolous indulgence), 
and will retain the quality of blagoobrazie. 
When Florensky, too, attributed to beauty the force of 
argument, he chose Rublev’s Trinity as his point of departure. 
We too shall refer to ancient Russian icon painting, and to 
Rublev its uncontested master, in making the more modest 
but still extremely important point that the traditional Rus- 
sian attitude to beauty is not a romantic fabrication and that 
the examples cited above are in no sense exaggerated. 
It may be argued that the story with which we began is after 
all only a legend. It is true that similar stories are told about 
the conversion of different peoples to Christianity, but this 
one is, we believe, uniquely Russian. It may be argued that 
Florensky’s statement is excessively coloured by the atmos- 
phere of aestheticism and the general climate of opinion in the 
early part of this century. And it may be argued that Leskov’s 
characters are too stylized to be anything but artificial. Even if 
12 
      Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Th
e 
Jo
ur
na
l 
of
 
th
e 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
Pa
tr
ia
rc
ha
te
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
Virgin Orans and St. George slaying the 
Dragon (11th to 13th century), a double icon 
preserved at the church of the Moscow Theolo- 
gical Academy. 
such objections are unfair, the fact that they can be raised 
means that none of the examples given so far reach to the heart 
of the matter. 
Only the ancient Russian icons, rediscovered by a handful 
of enthusiasts at the turn of the century and now acknow- 
ledged as an important element of the universal heritage, 
illustrate irrefutably the relationship between beauty and 
sanctity. The Old Believers described by Leskov were the 
guardians of a far older tradition, and the icon of the Stroga- 
nov school, described with such loving attention, is the 
product of a style that was in the process of disintegration. In 
the fifteenth century, on the other hand, this style appears in 
all its purity. Similarly, Dostoyevsky overheard in the lan- 
guage of the common people the word blagoobrazie, and it 
stands out in the pages of his story as the expression of a 
profound nostalgia, whereas in Rublev’s work and in that of 
his contemporaries, blagoobrazie—the sanctity of beauty, the 
beauty of sanctity—is at home, is simply in its place.

## [Page 13](079702engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 79704: Beauty, sanctity and truth: the philosophy of the icon

Using words alone, it would be very hard to prove that the 
ideal of beauty as sanctity really existed in Russian culture in a 
clearly delineated, vital and active form. But fortunately the 
masterpieces of the classical age of Russian icon painting are 
sufficient evidence for the existence of this ideal. With them, 
demonstration is no longer required, presentation is suffi- 
‘cient. They are proof in themselves. To paint in such a 
manner, one must believe with the totality of one’s being that 
beauty is not a matter of aesthetics, but of ontology. 
Use of these two philosophical terms is a reminder that 
until the seventeenth century scholastic philosophy was un- 
known in Russia. This is why there are no Russian equivalents 
of such learned works as St. John Damascene’s The Source of 
Knowledge in Byzantium, or the Summa theologiae of St. 
Thomas Aquinas in the medieval West, which provided a 
synthesis of the thinking of an entire age. This does not mean, 
however, that Russia totally lacked a philosophical approach 
to existence, simply that in Russia philosophizing took 
another form, that of icon painting. It is not in treatises, but in 
religious images; not in syllogisms and definitions, but in 
visible manifestations of beauty—sufficiently austere, rigor- 
ous and transparent to permit the passage of the pure light of 
spiritual significance—that the central ideas of ancient Rus- 
sian culture must be sought. In other words, the creation of 
beauty assumed in Russia complementary functions which, in 
other cultures, were the province of abstract thought. 
It is now possible to understand why the style of the 
Russian icon demands of beauty such a unique austerity, 
surpassing even the asceticism of Byzantine art and radically 
different from the poetic atmosphere of Gothic. It is pointless 
to attempt to compare the highest manifestations of the 
potential of art on the basis of “better” or “worse”. Rublev’s 
Trinity is not “better” than the Statue of the Visitation of 
Reims Cathedral, because nothing could be “better” than it. 
The opposite is also true. But each of these highly spiritual 
creations expresses a different form of spirituality. While one, 
the Virgin of Reims, appeals to the emotions and the imagina- 
tion, the other appeals to the intellect. 
Feeling is one thing; knowledge is another. This is why the 
spirituality of Gothic statuary is charged with warm-blooded, 
noble and chivalrous emotion and admiration before the 
charms of femininity. The Gothic sculptor can permit himself 
expressions of this kind because he has been relieved of 
responsibility for demonstrating spiritual verities; there are 
syllogisms for this purpose. In its austerity, the Russian icon 
goes further, passing beyond the stage at which emotion 
reigns into the realm where the spirit alone can be heard. The 
aim of the Russian master-painter is not to incite, not to 
disturb, not to play on the emotions, but to show truth itself, 
absolute and incontestable, and to bear witness to this truth. 
"His duty calls for the greatest possible constraint—instead of 
an outburst of Gothic enthusiasm, what is required of him is 
bezmolvie (silence, or quietude). In Greek, this quality is 
denoted by the word hesychia, from which the Hesychasts, 
members of a mystical fourteenth-century Byzantine sect for 
whom “all human flesh must fall silent....”, took their name. 
Beauty which seeks to authenticate truth cannot but address 
itself austerely. 
Modern Russian culture, anticipated in the critical period of 
the seventeenth century, born during the age of Peter the 
Great, renewed during all the storms of Russian history, 
shares a complex and sometimes dramatic relationship with 
the ancient heritage of blagoobrazie. But it cannot deny its 
affinity with the millenary tradition. The Russian mind seems 
to find it difficult to abandon the notion of beauty as a 
signpost in the quest for truth. The past two centuries have 
 
1 1 
3. 
+ 
- 
} 
Icon depicting St. Nicholas (mid-12th to early 
13th century) belonged to Moscow’s Novo- 
devichei monastery but may have originated in 
Novgorod, the city which gave its name to one 
of the great schools of Russian icon painting 
(12th to 16th centuries). The main figure and 
the small surrounding figures of saints seem to 
have been painted by two different hands. The 
icon is now in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow. 
produced a number of sometimes outstanding Russian philo- 
sophers, but it is still questionable whether the authentic 
Russian philosophy is not to be found elsewhere—in the 
verses of Pushkin or Tyutchev, for example; in the novels of 
Dostoyevsky; perhaps in the music of Scriabin. Classical 
Russian literature is deeply afraid of aesthetic balovstvo— 
frivolous indulgence: Gogol burning manuscripts and Tol- 
stoy endeavouring to repudiate the artist in himself in order to 
remain simply a pursuer and pedagogue of truth, have few 
parallels in the history of other literatures, What is unique in 
Russian life is the attitude to poetry as both a draught of 
live-giving air and an opportunity of salvation. 
If the ancient faith in beauty evoked in The Russian Primary 
Chronicle were to disappear altogether, what would become 
of us? | 
SERGEI SERGEEVICH AVERINTSEYV, Corresponding Member of the 
USSR Academy of Sciences, is a leading Soviet specialist in ancient and 
medieval cultures and the author of some 100 published works, including 
monographs on Plutarch and the literature of Antiquity (1973) and on early 
Byzantine poetics (1977). He is a member of the USSR National Commission 
for Unesco. 
13 
Ph
ot
o 
A.
 
Ag
ab
al
ia
n 
© 
Ru
ss
ia
n 
ed
it
io
n 
of
 
th
e 
Un
es
co
 
Co
ur
te
r,
 
Pr
og
re
ss
 
Pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w

## [Page 14](079702engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
   
Pereslavl-Zalessky 


### 79705: The 'Golden ring'

 
The ‘golden ring’ 
| m— 
Kostroma 
    
     
  
| Jo 
/ Pereslavl-Zalessky 
@ 
[agers Vladimir 
Moscow 
  
  
RE ' 
Moscow 
(1) Photo V. Karpov © APN, Moscow. (2) and (3) Photos © Editors of The Journal of the 
Moscow Patriarchate, Moscow. (4) Photo I. Lvova © APN, Moscow. (5) Photo R. Beniamin- 
son © APN, Moscow. (6) Photo M. Vishnevskaia © APN, Moscow. (7) Photo © APN, 
Moscow. (8) Photo Y. Rodin © APN, Moscow. (9), (12), (13), (14) and (22) Photos © 
“Architecture in the USSR" magazine, Moscow. (10) Photo S. Metelitsa © Forokronica TASS, 
Moscow. (11) and (15) Photos (© Fotokronica TASS, Moscow. (16) Photo S. Metelitsa and 1. 
Dynin © Fotokronica TASS, Moscow. (17) Photo A. Chogin © Fotokronica TASS, Moscow. 
(18) Photo A. Lyskin © APN, Moscow. (19) Photo Y. Abramochkin © APN, Moscow. (20) 
Photo Y. Somov © APN, Moscow. (21) Photo M. Yurchenko © APN, Moscow. (23) Photo © 
A. Goriainov, Moscow. 
Conception of map and picture story by G. Nikolska, member of the editorial staff of the 
Russian edition of the Unesco Courier, Moscow. 
  
 

## [Page 15](079702engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 79705: The 'Golden ring'

  
With the fragmentation of Kievan Russia into autonomous principali- 
ties in the 12th century, Russian cities experienced an extraordinary 
flowering of architecture and the arts. In the northeast, the principal- 
ity of Vladimir-Suzdal became the major political centre after the 
decline of Kiev. At the end of the 14th century, it was absorbed by its 
appanage, the principality of Moscow. 
Monuments built in the cities of this region between the 12th and the 
17th centuries rank among the finest cultural treasures of Old Russia. 
On a map they form a “golden ring”. Photos on this double page show 
some of the treasures that can be seen on a trip around the ring in 
clockwise direction, beginning at the walls of the Kremlin (citadel) of 
Moscow (1). 
    
Zagorsk developed around the walls of the Trinity and St. Sergius 
monastery, which was founded in 1340 by St. Sergius of Radonezh and 
later became a major religious centre. (2) View from the 80-metre-high 
bell tower; left, the chapel of the well (1644); at rear, the church of the 
Holy Spirit (1476); right, the Trinity cathedral (c.1422). (3) Religious 
service in the cathedral, for which Andrei Rublev painted his O/d Testa- 
ment Trinity. (4) Cathedral of the Dormition, begun in 1559 during the 
reign of Ivan the Terrible. 
Pereslavl-Zalessky was founded in 1152 by Prince Yuri Dolgoruki, who 
also founded Moscow. (5) Church of the Presentation (1778), dedicated to 
Aleksandr Nevsky. (6) Right, cathedral of the Dormition at Goritski 
monastery, noted for the remarkable quality of its acoustics; left, All 
Saints church at Danilov monastery (13:h century). 
Sigh ES AD 
   
Rostov is mentioned in The Russian Primary Chronicle in 862. (7) The 
Kremlin, on the shores of Lake Nero. (8) St. George slaying the Dragon. 
This 15th-century wood sculpture is one of the treasures of the church of 18 
St. John the Theologian (9), built above an entrance gate on the periphery 
of the Kremlin (1683). (10) Centre, bell tower of the cathedral of the a a RE — 
Dormition, with its 13-bell carillon. oe \ Vladimir Eb 
Yaroslavl, founded in 1010 by Prince Yaroslav the Wise, ranked second 
only to Moscow in the 17th and 18th centuries. It has a number of 
magnificently decorated churches. (11) The church of St. Elias (1647- 
1650) and (12) its famous baroque iconostasis (screen decorated with icon 
paintings). (13) Window framed with enamelled tiles in the church of St. 
John Chrysostom, in the Korovniki district. (14) The church of St. John 
the Baptist, in the suburb of Tolchkovo. (15) The monastery of the 
Transfiguration of the Saviour (1506-1516), where the manuscript of the 
12th-century Song of Igor’s Campaign was found. 
Kostroma, thought to have been founded in 1152 by Yuri Dolguruki. (16) 
The Ipatievski monastery, which houses a museum of architecture in 
wood, is dominated by the cupolas of the mid-17th century cathedral of 
the Trinity (17). 
Suzdal, first capital of the principality of Vladimir-Suzdal, is known to 
have existed since 1024. (18) In its Kremlin are the cathedral of the 
Nativity (13th century) and the monastery of the Saviour-Efimievski 
(14th century). (19) The central area: left, market halls dating from the 
19th century. 
Vladimir, founded by Vladimir Monomakh in 1108, became the capital of 
the principality of Vladimir-Suzdal in the mid-12th century. (20) The 
church of St. Dimitri (1194-1197) and detail (21) of low-reliefs inspired by 
popular imagery which adorn it. (22) The church of the Intercession of the 
Virgin (1165) on the river Nerl is a masterpiece of Russian architecture. 
(23) The cathedral of the Dormition (begun 1158), where Russian princes 
and metropolitans were enthroned until 1432, contains works by Andrei 
Rublev, Daniel Cheorny and the school of Master Dionysius.  22123

## [Page 16](079702engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 79706: A Thousand-year heritage

A thousand-year 
heritage 
BY METROPOLITAN JUVENALY 
HE conversion of Russia to Christianity, the 
thousandth anniversary of which is being solemnly 
celebrated in 1988 by the Russian Orthodox Church, 
was an event of great historical significance, bringing asitdid a- 
major part of the population of eastern Europe into the family 
of Christian nations. 
The first seeds of the faith had, however, begun to sprout 
from the soil of what was to become the State of Rus’ as early 
as the first century AD, the Age of the Apostles. According to 
one thesis, St. Andrew, the “first-called”, carried out mission- 
ary activities in the region. This thesis is confirmed by a 
tradition related to this saint in the first- to third-century 
Christian communities of the northern Black Sea coast. Ex- 
cavations of churches of this period at Chersonesus, Tanais 
and the ancient city of Aksaiskoe (or Kobyakovoe) have 
yielded moulds which were used for making communion 
wafers and which are patterned with the distinctive X-shaped 
cross of St. Andrew rather than the more familiar upright 
cross. 
During the third and fourth centuries, there were Greek 
dioceses in a region stretching from the north shore of the 
Black Sea to the limits of the Slav-dominated regions; the 
evangelizing influence of the more sophisticated culture and 
religion that they represented cannot have been lost on the 
members of the Slav communities. And when, in the sixth 
century, successive waves of invaders—Huns, Magyars, Bul- 
gars and Avars—displaced the Slav tribes until they occupied 
virtually the whole of the Balkan peninsula as far as ancient 
Sparta, the resulting close cohabitation with Christian Greeks 
must have had a further impact. From this period date the 
earliest established settlements of Christianized Slavs. 
According to the Lives of St. George of Amastris and St. 
Stephen of Surozh, bands of Russian warriors (druzhinniki) 
attacked these two cities in Asia Minor at the end of the'eighth 
century, and were later baptized there. In 864 an entire Slav 
State, Bulgaria, was converted to Christianity. By the tenth 
century, it was already possible to speak of the eastern Slavs as 
comprising both Christians and pagans—a mixture noted by 
the contemporary Arab writer and traveller, Masudi (¢.900- 
¢.956), in his compilation “The Fields of Gold”. It seems that 
at that time Christianity had made greater progress among the 
southern Slavs, who were closer to the Bulgarians and the 
Greeks, than among those living further north. 
In 957, Princess Olga of Kiev was baptized in Constantino- 
ple. She remained a Christian until the end of her life, and 
strove unremittingly to extend the faith among her compat- 
riots. “May God’s will be done,” she implored; “may He 
pardon my people and the land of Russia; and may it be 
granted to them as it was granted to me—to turn to Him.” It 
was Olga’s grandson, Prince Vladimir, who in 988 accepted 
Christianity on behalf of the Kievan State. 
An age of mass evangelization had arrived. Whole countries 
abandoned paganism and became part of European Christen- 
— CONTINUED PAGE 18 
16 
 

## [Page 17](079702engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 79706: A Thousand-year heritage

  
= . : 
» ’ rT 
WT a 
o.oo ! Phd 
a 
        
  
  
4  ] 
"il 
” r ” y ApS 
we Rt / ITN oe : 
\ od ® =i 
+ ¢ 
 
L Wes dup, r ph : 
a ni 
5 " - . : 
y 4 Le 
wy 
Ph
ot
o 
I. 
Ko
st
in
 
© 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
The Pecherskaya lavra (Monastery of the 
Caves) in Kiev was founded in the 11th cen- 
tury. Its first monks were hermits living in 
caves dug out of the clay banks along the 
Dnieper. The Lavra (or important monastic 
foundation), which soon became the centre of 
Kievan intellectual life, is an extraordinary 
architectural ensemble which was built over 9 
centuries. One of the monks was the late 11th 
century chronicler Nestor, the main compiler 
of The Russian Primary Chronicle which re- 
lates the earliest bistory of Kievan Russia. 
Above, manuscript of the Chronicle, preserved 
in the Lavra’s museum of ancient books. Photo 
left shows (at left) the church of the Trinity 
(1106-1108), which is built above the main 
gateway of the Lavra; centre, the ruins of the 
first, brick-built abbatial church (1077), des- 
troyed in 1941; at right, the great bell tower 
(1731-1745). 
  
   
     
   
17 
Ph
ot
o 
V.
 
Re
pi
k 
an
d 
V.
 
Fa
li
n 
© 
Fo
to
kr
on
ic
a 
TA
SS
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w

## [Page 18](079702engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 79706: A Thousand-year heritage

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
“A
rc
hi
te
ct
ur
e 
in 
th
e 
US
SR
® 
ma
ga
zi
ne
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
” 
SR SE at IA. Fas 
J aa PIN SBE, No ERR Se 
The soaring lines of the church of the Ascension 
(1532) at Kolomenskoie, southeast of Moscow, 
call to mind a famous passage in The Russian 
Primary Chronicle describing the awe felt by 
the emissaries of Prince Vladimir of Kiev when 
they saw the majesty of worship at Constanti- 
nople: “For surely there is no such splendour or 
beauty anywhere upon Earth, and we are at a 
loss bow to describe it. We only know that God 
dwells there among men..." 
a 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16 
false witness 
SLT 
ra rg p14) RFI go 
RIG SE AE BC URES Ll EB 
dom: Denmark in the tenth century; Iceland and Norway 
around the year 1000; Sweden during the following century. 
The Christianization of Russia is important because the 
new religion brought a fundamentally new manner of perceiv- 
ing the world, the organization of society, the power of the 
State, relations between peoples and their interpretation of 
morality. There is, after all, total antinomy between Christian 
and pagan principles of self-awareness. Moreover, a Christia- 
nized world is no longer the domain of deities bent on 
delivering chastisement, to be appeased with sacrifices, but 
the creation of an infinitely benevolent and all-merciful God. 
And all people are equal in dignity for in Christianity, as the 
Apostle Paul wrote (Epistle to the Galatians, 3,28): “There is 
neither Jew nor Greek ... you are all one in Jesus Christ.” 
“Cherish not only your own faith but also that of others”, the 
Russian Church enjoined its followers. Finally, Christian 
baptism brought with it a number of commandments such as 
“thou shalt notkill ... thou shalt not steal ... thou shalt not bear 
...”, which transcended national frontiers and 
were to be observed by all who shared the same faith. 
With the coming of Christianity, the writings of the 
Church Fathers made their way into western, northern and 
eastern Europe, together with the literature of Antiquity. 
Monasteries, churches and schools were founded. Annalists 
like the Venerable Bede in England, Adam of Bremen in 
Germany, and Nestor the Chronicler in Russia (considered to 
be the compiler of the Povest vremennykh let, or “Tale of 
Bygone Years”, also known as The Russian Primary Chronic- 
le) committed their countries’ legends to massive tomes. 
There began an age of journeys, peregrinations and cultural 
contacts, later to be described in autobiographical accounts, 
of which the twelfth-century “Pilgrimage of the Abbot Daniel 
to the Holy Land” is one outstanding example from early 
Russian literature. | 
Christianization brought with it a passion to build. Follow- 
ing his conversion, Prince Vladimir gave orders for the con- 
struction of religious edifices in Kiev and elsewhere, 
launching a large-scale programme which literally laid the 
foundations of Russian architecture with such world-famous 
masterpieces as the cathedrals of St. Sophia in Kiev and 
Novgorod, the cathedral of the Assumption in Vladimir and 
the Pecherskaya lavra (Monastery of the Caves), also in Kiev. 
CONTINUED PAGE 23 
COLOUR PAGES 
The painting of icons, images of sacred figures 
or events, became an outstanding art form in 
Christian Russia. In Orthodox churches such 
images are venerated and have a place in the 
liturgy through the iconostasis or icon-covered 
screen (see page 11). The art of the icon is 
symbolical rather than realistic, and the tradi- 
tional icon painter was not an artist expressing 
a personal vision, but a mediator who followed 
rules prescribed by tradition to make a picto- 
rial expression of Church doctrine. Austere, 
and usually shunning realistic detail, Russian 
icon painting is an art of great subtlety and 
nuance. In old Russian icons the subject is often 
painted in a recess cut into the wooden panel, 
and the raised surrounding “frame” thus 
formed is part of the work. In the 16th century 
and later the painted figures were sometimes 
partially covered by an encasement of precious 
metals and stones (see caption page 3). 
18 
Page 19 
Above: Detail of a Virgin “Hodigitria” (“She 
who shows the way”) from one of the earliest 
‘Russian icons, believed by some scholars to date 
from the early 12th century. The Virgin Hodi- 
gitria was a form of depicting the Virgin Mary 
much used by icon painters. (See also colour 
photo bottom left, page 22). This icon is cur- 
rently undergoing restoration at the Kremlin 
State Museums, Moscow. 
Below: In this icon, one of the oldest images of 
Christ Emmanuel (“God with us” in Hebrew), 
Christ the Saviour is shown as an adolescent 
flanked by two archangels. Formerly in the 
cathedral of the Dormition in the Kremlin, 
Moscow, the icon is today in the Tretyakov 
Gallery. 
Photos E. Agabalian © Russian edition of the Unesco Courier, 
Progress publishers, Moscow 
Page 20 
Attributed to Master Dionysius (c.1440- 
c.1503), the outstanding icon painter of the 
Moscow School taught by the successors of 
Andrei Rublev, this Crucifixion (c. 1500) is 
one of the most beautiful of all Russian icons. 
The elongated figures strengthen the vertical 
rhythm of a work in which golden light sym- 
bolizes Christ’s victory over death, a feature of 
the Orthodox conception of the crucifixion. 
Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow. 
Photo © The Journal of the Moscow Patriarchate, Moscow 
Page 21 
The Saviour in Glory (early 15th century), 
painted by Andrei Rublev (c.1370-¢.1430} and 
Daniel Cheorny (c.1360-c.1430) for the 
cathedral of the Dormiticn at Vladimir, north- 
east of Moscow. Enthroned within an oval 
mandorla (an iconographical symbol signify- 
ing Divine Glory), Christ blesses with the right 
band, while with the left He supports the open 
Gospels resting on His knee. In the corners are 
the symbols of the evangelists. This type of icon 
evokes the Last Judgment and is inspired by the 
Books of Ezekiel and the Apocalypse. 
Photo © The Journal of the Moscow Patriarchate, Moscow

## [Page 19](079702engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 20](079702engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 21](079702engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
  
   
 
— TREE : —

## [Page 22](079702engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
 
-—— 
- 
- ew Wo ON —— 
-——— al 
 
 
    
  
  
 

## [Page 23](079702engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 79706: A Thousand-year heritage

COLOUR PAGE 
Above: icon of the Holy Face of Christ. It 
belongs to an iconographical type known in 
Russian as Nerukotvorny (“not made with 
hands”), in reference to a tradition whereby the 
original icon was a legendary image sent by 
Christ to King Abgar of Edessa. According to 
that His Passion was near, sent the king the 
image of His face miraculously imprinted on a 
piece of cloth. Attributed by some specialists to 
the Novgorod School, the icon shown bere once 
adorned the cathedral of the Dormition in the 
Kremlin, Moscow (mid-12th century-early 
13th century) and is now in the Tretyakov 
Gallery, Moscow. 
Below: 15th-century icon painted on both 
sides. Right, The Trinity and left, a Virgin 
Hodigitria (see also top photo page 19), in 
which the Virgin holds the Christ-child on ber 
left arm while she gestures towards Him with 
ber right band. Jesus holds a scroll of the Scrip- 
tures in His left band and makes a benediction 
with His right. The Greek monogram of Christ 
this tradition, the king, afflicted with leprosy, 
wished to talk with Jesus but Jesus, knowing 
"Photo E. Agabalian © Russian edition of the Unesco Courier, 
Progress publishers, Moscow 
(IC XC) is inscribed above His bead. This icon 
belonged to the cathedral of St. Sophia in 
Novgorod, 
Photo A. Riazantsev © Soviet Culture Fund, Moscow 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18 
The birth of Slav literature, for its part, was a direct product 
of the evangelistic activities of the missionaries, Saints Cyril 
and Methodius, who in the ninth century created a new 
alphabet for the translation of the Gospels and various litur- 
gical works into the language known as Old Slavonic. In the 
Russtan Orthodox Church, the national language now began 
to be used for religious services and sermons. 
The eleventh and twelfth centuries also saw the emergence 
of a distinguished school of Russian writers, including Hilar- 
ion, metropolitan of Kiev; Cyril, bishop of Turov; Daniel the 
Exile; and Simon, bishop of Vladimir, and the monk Poly- 
carp. At the same time, missionary activity and the creation of 
new monasteries in outlying regions facilitated further settle- 
ment and the extension of Russian territory. 
With the thirteenth century, the sky darkened. Storming 
out of the east, the Mongols hurled themselves against the 
State of Kiev in 1237. Three years later, the city fell and the 
Horde of Khan Batu pressed further westwards, laying waste 
to everything in its path. They were halted essentially because 
the fierce resistance of the Russian State wore down the 
Mongol forces. 
For 200 years, occupied Russia was under the Mongol 
yoke. While the countries of western Europe applied their 
genius to the construction of cathedrals, cities and castles, the" 
creation of magnificent libraries and the foundation of schools 
and universities, Kievan Rus’, its energies sapped by servi- 
tude, paid annual tribute to its nomad overlords. 
Little by little, however, and thanks notably to the efforts 
of the Church, a patriotic resistance movement took shape in 
and around the hitherto obscure city of Moscow. The guiding 
spirit of the struggle for freedom was the founder (in 1337) 
and Father Superior of the monastery of the Trinity, St. 
Sergius of Radonezh, who predicted the hard-won victory 
over the Mongols on the Plain of Kulikovo in 1380, which 
marked a turning-point in Russian history and a milestone on 
the road to liberation. The disciples of St. Sergius travelled to 
the farthest corners of the land of Russia where, in the most 
remote and untamed wildernesses, they founded monasteries 
and hermitages. 
Despite the sufferings imposed by the Mongol yoke, the 
Russian Orthodox Church continued, through the efforts of 
its most faithful servants, to produce crop after crop of 
Influence of religious icons can be seen in works on secular themes by some modern Russian painters. 
Below, The Year 1918 at Petrograd, painted by Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin (1875-1939) in the 
dramatic atmosphere of the early days of the Revolution, is a modern treatment of a favourite 
subject of the old icon painters, the Virgin and Child. Affinities with ancient icons can also be seen 
in the stylization of the figures and the purity of the colours. 
N
F
 
T
E
E
 
A
N
T
 
R
T
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Iz
ob
ra
zi
te
ln
oe
 
is
ku
ss
tv
o 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
   
 
Bi h on 
He 
  23

## [Page 24](079702engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 79706: A Thousand-year heritage

  
spiritual fruits. This period saw the foundation of religious 
institutions including the Trinity and St. Sergius monastery 
(1337), the monasteries of Spass-Andronikov (1360), Simo- 
nov (1370), Kirillovo-Belozersky (1397), Solovetsky (1429), 
and many others. Some monasteries became centres of annal- 
writing; others incorporated schools and libraries; still others 
provided workshops where such masterpieces of Orthodox 
icon painting as the works of Theophanes the Greek and, 
most notably, the Qld Testament Trinity of Andrei Rublev 
were created (see front cover and page 3). 
The significance of Russian religious culture during the past 
thousand years may be measured by its influence on 
European, Asian and American cultures. At one point or 
other in its history, this influence has reached out to Finland, 
Poland, the Volga region, the Caucasus and Transcaucasia, 
Western Siberia, Yakutia, Kamchatka, the Amur river region, 
Alaska, the Aleutian islands, North America, Japan, Central 
Asia, Korea and parts of China. The evangelistic work of the 
Church over these immense territories brought more than 
forty different ethnic groups totally or partially into the 
Christian fold; thanks to the missionaries, many of them 
acquired their own written language and gained access to 
translations of the Gospels. Thanks, too, to missionaries of 
the Russian Orthodox Church, the original religious culture 
and traditions are alive today in the art, music, architecture 
and plainsong of Orthodox dioceses in such countries as the 
United States, Japan and Finland. 
The consolidation of Russia as a unified State centred on 
Moscow may be said to have begun under the influence of 
Metropolitans Peter (d. 1326) and Aleksei (d. 1378). Russian 
culture of the Muscovite period may be defined as essentially 
religious. At the time when western Europe was caught up in 
the crisis of the Reformation, daily life in Russia was perme- 
24 
A number of monasteries classified as historical 
monuments have recently been returned by the 
Soviet State to the Russian Orthodox Church. 
One of them is the 13th-century Danilov 
monastery in Moscow, which is the seat of the 
Moscow Patriarchate and the Holy Synod of 
the Russian Orthodox Church. The main cere- 
monies marking the millennium bave taken 
place in the monastery, Moscow’s oldest, which 
bas been meticulously restored. Left, view of 
the monastery from a bell tower, Right, an old 
photo of the 16th-century Vvedenski monas- 
tery, which was returned to the Church in 
1987. The Russian writer Fyodor Dostoyevsky 
paid two visits to the monastery while working 
on his novel The Brothers Karamazov. Ph
ot
os
 
©)
 
Th
e 
Jo
ur
na
l 
of
 
th
e 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
Pa
tr
ia
rc
ha
te
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
ated with, and to a great extent determined by, the influence of 
the Church, which inspired the creation of whole cities that 
may today be considered as monuments to Russian Ortho- 
doxy: Suzdal, Rostov-Veliky, Pereslavl-Zalessky, Kirillov 
(see photos pages 14 and 15). 
The construction of new monasteries carried Russian 
architecture to even greater heights; the result may be seen in 
such splendid edifices as the churches of the Ascension at 
Kolomenskoe; of St. John the Precursor in the village of 
Dyakovo; of the Intercession on Red Square in Moscow (the 
cathedral of St. Basil the Beatified); of Elijah the Prophet at 
Yaroslavl; of the Resurrection on the Debr at Kostroma; and 
very many others. 
The art of icon painting has given us the names of Diony- 
situs, Prokhor of Gorodets, Daniel Cheorny, Prokop Chirina, 
Istom Savina, and Simon Ushakov. A Greek deacon, Paul of 
Aleppo, wrote after a visit to Russia in 1666 that “the icon 
painters here have their equals nowhere on Earth, such are 
their artistic skills, the delicacy of their touch and their ease of 
craftsmanship. ... Sad it is, indeed, that such hands are 
mortal.” 
The heritage of Muscovite Russia developed still further 
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Familiariza- 
tion with ancient traditions generated fresh literary and artis- 
tic creativity. Nikolai Gogol, Nikolai Leskov, Pavel Melni- 
kov-Pechersky and many others, including Fyodor Dos- 
toyevsky, wrote against the background of Orthodox spir- 
ituality. Even the works of those Russian writers of genius, 
from Pushkin and Tolstoy to Blok, whose attitude to Ortho- 
doxy was more contradictory, are indelibly marked with signs 
of their Orthodox roots; while the sceptic Ivan Turgenev 
depicted the piety of the Russian people in his story “Living 
Relics”. 
The paintings of Mikhail Nesterov (1862-1942), Mikhail 
Vrubel (1856-1910) and K.S. Petrov-Vodkin (1875-1939), the 
sources of whose art lay in Orthodox icon painting, are of 
very great interest; while the history of music has been 
immensely enriched by the Russian Orthodox choral tradi- 
tion and, later, by the work of Bortnyansky, Tchaikovsky and 
Rachmaninov. 
Russtan religious thought has left more than a few traces in 
European history. During the first half of the present century, 
‘Russian philosophy and theology influenced western Euro- 
pean culture through the works of such eminent figures as 
Vladimir Solovev (1853-1900), the priests Sergei Bulgakov 
(1871-1944), Pavel Florensky (1882-1943), Georgy Florovsky 
(1893-1979) and many others. 
Today, the members of the Russian Orthodox Church

## [Page 25](079702engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 79706: A Thousand-year heritage

      
   
on . - J 
ae rd 
VRC i 
Amcrmngia 8a Ana 
I Bix wrod me pies npeevansinie Devt Alavponoany 
\ Momosmare § wma Pouin Waoraopy 
! Ma Vl soggaipn Owwpign: rade K nojonnes 
inant moraine whip 
: oo Of 
: JR Com PRE RA rare 
IN otal 
yuoririg yer iwannag tons 
A ari? 2! AN 
i Ho ea OCIMCIILAT [nr a“ 
BIRO 20 NEA 
AERA ER re FAA irate 
x ph . . Sa LS 
2 at » - Fey 
Gea cameron gs 
1e* of 2042"20 227A 
L. ~ ~ ~~. 
ET avEne a vagest . HAY 
” £ in JF Be A 
XO HOLE NANT NO CRT IGT br dp dA 
3 Sr 2" a9\ 2 
XNA AY ~ Lo - 
Met oY ernie TIO EA SEN yav 
I a) 
AP IAA PERE TIA TES EAN 
ie N WANE INI Pr 
HEACTOVIV EIA rel eecs- 
.) No Fo 
MECN, “e iy 
Wik $1 £ A or A 4 
ER) JRE iAP = TTP   
a
—
—
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Le
ni
n 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
    
Inberited from the Byzantine musical tradition, the liturgical chant of 
the Russian Orthodox Church was originally monophonic (sung by a 
single voice or by several voices in unison) and executed without 
instrumental accompaniment. Above, verses of hymns composed by Ivan 
the Terrible. 
- 
UE EARS 
aL al Taha he 
number tens of millions. With ten centuries’ experience in 
building a Christian ethic, our Church in the modern world is 
engaged both in the pursuit of its traditional mission and in 
the identification of new approaches to its task. Since strongly 
endorsing and adhering to the international peace movement 
when it emerged in the late 1940s, it has become a member of 
many international organizations working for peace, cultural 
creation and the safeguard of cultural values. 
In 1977, for the first time in the history of our country, an 
international conference was organized on the initiative of the 
Russian Orthodox Church on the theme of “Clergy for a 
lasting peace, disarmament and equitable relations between 
peoples”. The conference established guidelines for co-opera- 
tion between the Russian Orthodox Church and the members 
of other religions in the struggle for peace. A similar confer- 
ence was held in 1982. 
In 1987, our experience of co-operation in the struggle for 
peace was widened to include not only the members of other 
religions but also international public opinion, when our 
Church took part in an international forum, “For a denucle- 
arized world, for the survival of humanity”, which launched 
an appeal for joint action. 
The thousandth anniversary of the Christianization of 
Russta has shown the great interest in our Church taken by 
international opinion, and at international meetings held to 
celebrate this event in Kiev (1986), and Moscow (1987), 
scholars of worldwide reputation have traced the links be- 
tween Russian culture and the Orthodox heritage. | 
Monsignor JUVENALY, Metropolitan of Krutits and Kolomna, is a leading 
figure in the Russian Orthodox Church and a member of its Holy Synod. He 
is a member of the USSR National Commission for Unesco and an active 
participant in the work of many Soviet organizations and institutions con- 
cerned with cultural affairs, international co-operation and peace. 
25°

## [Page 26](079702engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 79707: Everyday life and letters in ancient Russia

Everyday life and letters 
in ancient Russia 
 
BY MIKHAIL J. BRAICHEVSKY 
  
N ancient Rus’, birch bark played a similar role to that of Birch bark manuscripts discovered at the city 
papyrus in ancient Egypt and wax tablets in Rome. of Novgorod since 1951 have provided a host of 
Although feudal deeds, which were meant to be pre- j: fascinating details about life in medieval 
served indefinitely, were written on parchment, birch bark Z Russia Above, fragment of a letter dating from 
was used for writing of a more everyday kind, such as = the te 1th century. Signed drawing, below, 
: © was made in the early 13th century by a school- 
instructions about farm or household matters, acknowledg- 2 boy named Onfim. It shows Onfim astride a 
ments of debt, memoranda, and private correspondence. In £ charger with an enemy dead at bis feet. 
1951, archaeologists working in the ancient Russian city of 
Novgorod unearthed several score of these texts, the oldest 
dating from the late eleventh century. The importance of this 
remarkable find for the history of language and culture is 
comparable to that of papyri for classical studies. 
The writers and recipients of the birch bark missives were 
people of various degrees of eminence and from different 
sectors of society. They included boyars, patricians, ordinary 
artisans, peasants and soldiers. Hundreds of such writings 
have been found. Nearly all deal with everyday matters, 
reflecting the humdrum side of life which in most historical 
sources is overshadowed by events of national importance. 
Such material is a mine of information about the extent of 
literacy in Rus’ and about the existence of a well-established 
primary education system there. Schoolchildren even had 
“exercise-books”, as we know from the discovery of those 
that once belonged to a little boy called Onfim, who lived in 
Novgorod in the first half of the thirteenth century. 
Thus it is not surprising that many inscriptions should have 
been found on instruments used by the master craftsmen of 
ancient Rus’. A jeweller’s matrix unearthed in Kiev is in- 
scribed with the name of its owner, “Makosimov”. Arabic 
inscriptions on matrices discovered in the Podol district of 
Kiev provide valuable evidence about the international com- 
position of the patrician class in Kiev. The inscription on an 
amphora found in Kiev reads “Mstislavl’s amphora”, indicat- 
ing-its owner. A fragment of another amphora is inscribed 
with the word “good”—probably part of a formula express- 
ing good wishes. Another inscription, which reads “May this 
amphora be well filled!”, is quite unambiguous. 
Specialists are still arguing about the meaning of the inscrip- 
tion on the best-known amphora, which was discovered in a 
 
26

## [Page 27](079702engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

LR y i 
" 
. >» 
Da pr 
Photo ©) Mistetsvo publishers, Kiev 
 
graveyard at Gnezdovsk near Smolensk. Some read it as Two horsemen slaying a warrior are shown on 
Goronkhshcha (mustard), others as Goroushna (gaseous mix- this low-relief carving (late 12th century). 
ture), while yet another school has suggested the curious Now in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow, the 
reading Goroukh psa (Goroukh wrote this). This find is relief originally came from the cathedral of St. 
3 . . . i Michael with the Golden Roof, Kiev. Built 
particularly interesting because it dates from the first half of 5 1108 and 1113. the cathedral i 
h h car bef e Prin e Vlad; . b ir Ww etween < an HL, tne cathedral is re- 
the tenth century, betore lnnc Imir's baptism. we nowned for its mosaics and frescoes, some of 
know that writing existed in Rus’ long before 988 from which are thought to be the work of a great 
treaties concluded between Rus’ and the Greeks, from the Russian icon painter, Alimpi of Kiev. 
“Life of Cyril the Philosopher”, and from information re- 
corded by writers from the East. But on the amphora from 
Gnezdovsk we have a “real-life” autograph written before the 
time of Vladimir. 
A tenth-century writer named Chernorizets Khrabr, who 
wrote a treatise on the rise of Slav literacy, suggested that 
writing developed in the following stages: “first, our ances- 
tors used ‘marks’ and ‘cuts’ when they wanted to transmit 
information, then they used characters from the Greek 
alphabet ‘without adaptation’, and finally Cyril invented a 
specifically Slav alphabet.” 
An alphabet recently discovered on the wall of the chapel of 
St. Mikhail, in the cathedral of St. Sophia in Kiev, shows the 
first stage of the “adaptation” of the Greek alphabet to the 
phonetic characteristics of Slav languages. In addition to the 
“Greek letters, it contains four characters indicating the Slav 
sounds “B”, “Zh”, “Sh” and “Shch”, for which symbols had 
to be found. 
In any society, the introduction and spread of literacy is 
accompanied by revolutionary changes in all spheres of social 


### 79707: Everyday life and letters in ancient Russia

life. With the coming of literacy, information becomes auton- 
omous and acquires almost unlimited possibilities for trans- 
mission in space and time. It can be said that the extraordinary 
development of culture in ancient Rus’ before the Mongol 
invasion was largely due to this circulation of information 
within society. Enamelled medallion dating from the early 
If we consider culture as a system, we can see that itis really 13th century. Around the image of Christ are 
a whole, and that the factors that determine its development the words “I am the light”. 
influence (albeit in different ways) all spheres of creative 
activity, from science and agriculture to poetry, metallurgy, 
clothing and architecture. The latter calls for special attention. 
 Ph
ot
o 
(©
 
Na
uk
a 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
Mo
sc
ow
 
  
27

## [Page 28](079702engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 79707: Everyday life and letters in ancient Russia

(a LEK . NCMOra Off ME ANECAMET KOU HOKOAH MM ACLOo ;-s 
  
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Na
uk
a 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
   
~ 
Miniature from the “Chronicle of Radziwill”, 
a late 15th-century illustrated manuscript (see 
also caption page 6). The scene, set in the 
Christianized Russia of 1092, shows the people 
of Polotsk barricaded inside their homes to 
escape the “naves”, or spirits of the dead, whose 
appearance in Polotsk, according to the Chro- 
nicle, was a portent of great misfortune 
throughout the country.   
~ = < >> - v «= 
OCEMAREMAYALLA- BANKABAATIN - AAISONE. Ares TER BHA 6A 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Na
uk
a 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
  
  
These anthropomorphic laundry beaters from 
Kievan Russia are decorated with Sun and 
Earth symbols. Each head bas the form of the 
Sun, the cross-pieces are shaped like outstretch- 
ed arms, and the base is a wide skirt carved 
with Suns and zig-zag lines representing water. 
  
‘What traces of the architecture of ancient Rus’ have sur- 
vived and what have archaeologists learned from them? 
The social structure of medieval society was such that there 
were three broad categories of dwelling—palaces, castles and 
houses. Each was designed to provide for a certain standard of 
living, a certain way of life, certain ideas about behaviour, and 
about real needs and the means of meeting them. In a private 
house, for instance, there was no need for a servants’ refec- 
tory, but a refectory was necessary in a castle. Nor did a 
private house require a throne room, which was an important 
part of a palace. 
It was long thought that most of the people of Kievan Rus’ 
lived in dug-outs with sides 3 or 4 metres long. Each dug-out 
was spanned by a roof resting on the ground. Towns were 
depicted as a strange mixture of magnificent temples, luxu- 
rious palaces and wretched hovels in the ground. 
Researchers were not perturbed by the obvious discrepan- 
cy between this combination and the general cultural level at 
that time. It did not occur to them that people who had 
composed—or at least who read—the “Tale of Bygone Years” 
(The Russian Primary Chronicle) and The Song of Igor’s 
Campaign could not possibly have lived in burrows, or that 
women dressed in silk, velvet and brocade, and wearing 
attached to their head-dresses the ornaments and pendants 
that are displayed in Russian museums today could not have 
crawled out of dug-outs on hands and knees. 
It is true that in Rus’, as in all feudal societies, the social 
classes were divided by great inequalities of wealth. But at the 
same time there was a limit beyond which society could not go 
without sinking into degradation and decay. Archaeology has 
produced convincing evidence in this field. 
Stone palaces in Kievan Rus’, for example, were few in 
number, but we know that they existed in many large towns— 
in Kiev, Chernigov, Pereyaslavl, Bogolyubovo, near Vladi- 
mir-on-Klyazma, and others. 
Exhaustive studies have been carried out on the castles and 
the many fortified urban centres that made Rus’ so pictur- 
esque in the ninth and tenth centuries. Unfortunately, mis- 
understandings have occurred, because evidence has often 
been misinterpreted. The tenth-century fortified centre of the 
village of Gorodishche, near Shepetovka, is a good example of 
such a misunderstanding. Excavations were carried out in the 
village for several seasons, but the archaeologist, who was

## [Page 29](079702engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 79707: Everyday life and letters in ancient Russia

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Na
uk
a 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
A | RESEND a A - 
’ n 
ip TL TET FFT FT TISRS 
   
  
searching for a specific “feudal manor”, did not suspect that 
the whole complex, consisting of dozens of dwellings, farm 
buildings, tradesmen’s premises and warehouses, was what he 
was actually looking for. 
But the type of building which has stimulated the greatest 
controversy is the ordinary dwelling, about which the most 
extraordinary ideas have been advanced. We now know that a 
peasant’s dwelling at that time was like the later Ukrainian 
khata or the Great Russian izba. In the towns, most of the 
buildings were log houses or frame buildings, modified and 
adapted to the conditions of urban life. The frame buildings 
were constructed according to the standard Fachwerk (half- 
timber) technique which was widely used throughout 
medieval Europe, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Caspian Sea. 
Both these types of building had several floors, usually 
three, it would seem, since buildings are generally shown in 
ancient Russian miniatures with three floors (though some 
have two or four). The “dug-outs” were simply part of the 
lower floor that was set into the ground, for reasons of fire 
prevention and general domestic purposes. The log houses 
that have been found, especially in the Podol district of Kiev, 
may have consisted of semi-basements surmounted by a 
Fachwerk superstructure. Such structures have been found in 
Zvenigorod, with grooves to strengthen the Fachwerk struc- 
ture at the level of the uppermost logs. 
Much has been written about ancient Russian culture. An 
enormous amount of fresh information has been obtained 
from the latest discoveries made by archaeologists, but there is 
still a long way to go before we fully understand this complex 
phenomenon. One thing is certain—that the culture of Rus’ at 
the time when it adopted Christianity was in no way inferior 
to that of neighbouring peoples; and the introduction of 
Christianity, which linked Rus’ with a different cultural 
tradition, merely encouraged the flowering of the lofty 
humanism which was inherent in the culture of ancient Rus’. 
[| 
MIKHAIL JULIANOVICH BRAICHEVSKY, Soviet specialist in the 
history and archaeology of the Slav peoples of Russia, is a senior scientist with 
the Institute of Archaeology of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. He 
is the author of over 300 publications, including “When and How Kiev was 
Born” and “The Roots of the Ancient Slav State”. Many of his works have 
been translated. 
      
    
Fragments of a finely crafted gold and silver 
distaff (viewed from both sides), from 12th- 
century Kiev. The wheel bears the inscription 
“distaff charm”, evoking magical practices. 
Symbolic charms and ornaments (below) seem 
to have been popular in Kievan Russia. Bird- 
shaped amulets (top row) may have been in- 
tended to bring good fortune in marriage. Cen- 
tre row, duck/borse trinkets incorporating so- 
lar symbolism. Ornamental spoons (bottom 
row) were a token of abundance. 
FURTHER READING 
The Russian Primary Chronicle: Laurentian 
Text, edited and translated by S.H. Cross and O.P. 
Sherbowitz-Wetzor. Mediaeval Academy of Ame- 
rica Publications, Cambridge, Mass., USA, 1953, 
1968. 
Art of Ancient Kiev, by Yuri Aseev. Unesco/ 
Holmes & Meier Inc., Paris/New York. {250 pp., 
illustrations, bibliography, index, chronological 
table) In press. 
The Meaning of Icons, by Leonid Ouspensky and 
Vladimir Lossky. St. Vladimir’s Seminary Publi- 
shers, USA; A.R. Mowbray & Co. Ltd., Oxford, 
UK; 1983. 
Byzantine Painting: The Last Phase, by David 
Talbot Rice. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 
1968. 
The Byzantine Commonwealth: Eastern Eur- 
ope, 500-1453, by Dimitri Obolensky. Weidenfeld 
& Nicolson, London, 1971. 
The Art and Architecture of Medieval Russia, by 
Arthur Voyce. University of Oklahoma Press, 
1967. 
29 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Na
uk
a 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
M
o
s
c
o
w

## [Page 30](079702engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ro
ge
r-
Vi
ol
le
t,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Bi
bl
io
th
éq
ue
 
Na
ti
on
al
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
HE English poet George Gordon, 
Lord Byron (1788-1824) said that he 
had been “born for opposition”. In 
spite of his tendency to dramatize himself, to 
strike an attitude, he could be remarkably 
clear-sighted about himself, and this phrase 
sums up the central aspect of his life and his 
work. He rebels against the norms of society 
and of the literary culture of his age: his 
targets, he says, are “cant political, cant 
poetical, and cant moral”, and he refuses to 
separate them in any cosy fashion. 
For Byron, politics, morality and poetry 
are inextricably intertwined; by extension, 
theres a crucial connection between what he 
writes and how he lives. His recognition of 
this makes him that much more effective and 
compelling as a rebel. When he died at Mis- 
solonghi in 1824, before he had seen any 
action in the Greek War of Independence for 
which he had gone to fight, he quickly came 
to be viewed as a martyr for the cause, a 
central figure around whom the freedom 


### 79708: Byron, the rebel

30 
the rebel 
 
BY MARK STOREY 
fighters—and their European allies—could 
rally, and eventually throw off the Ottoman 
yoke. It was an appropriate conclusion to a 
relatively brief life, in which the poet 
repeatedly insisted on the superiority of 
actions to words. “Born for opposition”, he 
died for it too. 
Byron’s life was tumultuous, and he has 
become the figure for a certain type of 
Romantic writer. But we need to see how the 
living and the writing go together. If Byron 
saw himself as in some way cursed from the 
beginning, he could find physical justifica- 
tion for this belief in the deformed foot with 
which he was born, and psychological justi- 
fication in a miserable childhood spent with 
his Calvinist mother in Aberdeen. 
When he inherited his uncle’s estate at 
Newstead Abbey, near Nottingham, in 
1798, he began to believe that, as 2a member 
of the Regency aristocracy, he could be 
“well avenged” for the cruelties of his birth. 
He would assert himself against the odds. He 
Painting by Adeline Oppenbeim, presented at 
the Paris Salon of 1902, depicts an episode from 
Byron’s poem The Corsair, first published in 
1814. Medora swoons as she learns from the 
shipmates of the pirate Conrad, ber lover, that 
be bas fallen into the hands of the Pasha Seyd.

## [Page 31](079702engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 79708: Byron, the rebel

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ro
ge
r-
Vi
ol
le
r,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Bi
bl
io
th
eq
ue
 
Na
ti
on
al
e,
 
Pa
ns
 
  
became obsessed with physical fitness, and 
was to brag, when he swam the Hellespont 
in 1810, that it was the one great achievement 
of his life. Freed from the shackles of pover- 
ty, he launched on an amorous career that 
seemed, at every stage, to flout convention. 
He formed attachments as though they were 
challenges, taking on, with increasing risk, 
the women of high society who seemed only 
too ready to respond to the challenge. 
For Byron, the price of his wholesale sex- 
ual rebellion was to be exile: he left England 
for Ttaly in April 1816, never to return. But 
he soon discovered that the amorous delights 
of Venice provided ample compensation. It 
was not until he became the official compan- 
ion (cavaliere servente) of Countess Teresa 
Guccioli that he appeared ready to settle 
down; and even then he broke all the rules, 
wrecking the Countess’ marriage in the 
single-minded pursuit of his passion. 
It would be wrong to see all this activity as 
mere self-indulgence. Byron’s emotional 
And, like a wither’d lily, on the land 
His slender frame and pallid aspect lay, 
As fair a thing as €’er was formed of clay. 
A scene from Byron's “Epic Satire” Don Juan 
is depicted in this painting by the English artist 
Ford Madox Brown (1821-1893). After being 
shipwrecked on the way from Cadiz to 
Leghorn, Don Juan is cast away on a Greek 
island where be is found, apparently lifeless, by 
the beautiful Haidée and ber attendant. 
  
31

## [Page 32](079702engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 79708: Byron, the rebel

restlessness reflected two things: his com- 
mitment to personal freedom, and his belief 
that things did not, could not, remain static. 
In 1810 he went on the Grand Tour of 
Europe, in the course of which he began the 
poem that was to bring him fame two years 
later, Childe Harolde’s Pilgrimage. Itis very 
much an autobiographical poem, with the 
hero’s restless depravity and self-imposed 
exile a mirror of Byron's own psychology. 
But itis also an astute and angry response to 
the state of Europe at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century. 
Byron could not share in the generally 
held English reaction against all the original 
ideals of the French Revolution. For him, 
Napoleon was still a hero; the episode of the 
Elgin Marbles (still reverberating today) was 
for him an indication of England’s perfidy. 
He recognized the importance of the Greek 
ideal as represented by the ruined, classical 
past, and by the stirrings towards Greek 
Independence that were to find their fulfil- 
ment twelve years later, In writing ostens- 
ibly about himself, Byron was in fact pro- 
ducing a highly political and provocative 
poem, championing the cause of freedom 
throughout Europe. 
Typically, his maiden speech in the House 
of Lords in 1812 was against the tyranny of a 
government that wanted the death penalty 
for frame breaking," against what he saw as 
the “palpable injustice” of the bill. But he 
soon saw that his rebelliousness would not 
fr— — 
  
  
suit him for Parliament: he did not belong in 
that system, either. His fight against political 
hypocrisy, however, was to bring him into 
active involvement with the attempts of the 
secret revolutionary society of the Carbo- 
nari to free Italy from the Austrians in the 
1820s, and then, of course, the final act— 
much more than a gesture—on behalf of the 
Greeks. 
All this time, he was writing poetry of an 
extraordinary range and diversity. Even the 
works that won him popular acclaim, the 
so-called Turkish Tales, did not exactly fit 
comfortably into a literary tradition. Byron 
was focusing all his attention and energies on 
characters with whom he could sympathize, 
mysterious adventurers with guilty secrets, 
set apart from society, and driven by some 
all-consuming fury that elevates them into 
potentially tragic heroes. These lonely 
figures can be compared to the rebellious 
Prometheus, about whom Byron writes on 
several occasions, The image of the rebel god 
who brought fire to mankind, and was 
1. In the early 19th century, great distress was caused in 
parts of England by the introduction of new textile 
machinery (“frames”) which led to the dismissal of many 
handicraftsmen as well as the impoverishment, owing to 
increased competition, of others who did not actually lose 
their employment. In response to the destruction of 
frames by organized bands, the government introduced 
severe repressive legislation. Byron’s speech in the House 
of Lords was a notable feature of opposition to this 
legislation. Editor 
In 1823, Byron decided to join the Greeks in 
their rebellion against Ottoman rule, a struggle 
which ended in the establishment of an inde- 
pendent kingdom of Greece. The poet did not 
live to see the end of the War of Independence. 
After a brief illness be died in the Greek town 
of Missolonghi on 25 April 1824, Missolonghi 
later heroically withstood a long siege (below) 
before falling to the forces of Ibrabim Pasha in 
April 1826. 
punished for it, is an apt reflection of the 
rebel poet. 
With a few exceptions, Byron had little 
use for his contemporaries. His first satire, 
English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, was an 
attack on most living authors. The Vision of 
Judgment was a brilliant and scurrilous 
attack on the poet laureate Robert Southey, 
who had written a poem of the same name 
celebrating the imagined arrival of King 
George III in Heaven. This combination of 
poetical and political anger was to inform 
Byron’s largest, most ambitious work, Don 
Juan, in which he attacks the literary giants 
of his own day, the decline of moral integ- 
rity, and the glorification of war on which 
the concept of Empire depends. It is all the 
more remarkable for being comic. Rebel- 
lious in everything, Byron’s final act of liter- 
ary rebellion is to produce an intensely 
humane poem that is a radical critique of his 
society, in a form that challenges the very 
premises of other writers of his time. By his 
determined opposition to cant, hypocrisy 
and humbug, Byron ensured that his name 
would survive, along with his work, as a 
byword for truth and liberty. [| 
MARK STOREY is Reader in English literature 
at the University of Birmingham, England. He has 
written and edited several books, including The 
Letters of John Clare (Oxford University Press, 
1985), and Byron and the Eye of Appetite (Macmil- 
lan, 1986). His Poetry and Ireland since 1800 will 
be published later this year. 
i = mr re Sr —— = 
   
32 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ro
ge
r-
Vi
ol
le
t,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 33](079702engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
  


### 79709: René Char: a tribute

A tribute 
BY EDOUARD GLISSANT 
We poets die, some part of the illumination 
of the world dies with them; yet the rever- 
berations of their works open up new hori- 
zons. Aloof from the fads and ephemeral triumphs of 
daily life, they bear witness to and, more often than not, 
are the dynamic source of those deeper currents that 
~ shape the course of the world. ~ 
René’ Char fashioned his writings from the French 
language with the silent concentration of a turner work- 
ing at his lathe, inventing a form of expression which lies 
somewhere between that of the pastoral poem and the 
maxim. The phraseology is familiar and the formulation 
is enigmatic yet evocative; and this draws him close to the 
very source of the wisdom of the people, to the world of 
writings based on popular oral traditions in which the 
poet works the raw material of words with the same 
simplicity as a potter works his clay. Poetry of this kind 
thus stands at the interface of the spoken and the written 
word, even if it owes its permanence to the written 
dimension. To it could be applied the words that the poet 
Jean Grosjean used about the Gospels when he declared 
that “... they are manifestly spoken yet deliberately 
written”. 
This strange marriage of a diamond-hard economy of 
writing and the comfortingly familiar grace of the voice is 
paralleled by the rapprochement that René Char made 
between justice and beauty. A militant who fought 
against the forces of darkness, he never resorted to sim- 
plistic anathematizing. In one of his finest and most 
profound books of poetry, Feuillets d’Hypnos, written at 
the time (1943-1944) that he was leading a resistance 
group in the Vaucluse against the Nazi occupying forces, 
he wrote: “We invite Liberty to sit down with us at all the 
meals we share. The seat remains empty but a place is 
always laid for her.” 
The source of the consistent quality of happiness and 
well-being that is to be found in René Char’s writings is 
undoubtedly his passionate attachment to the Vaucluse, a 
region from which he never strayed. In this land of 
burning light, which gave him his love of painting and of 
certain artists such as Braque, Mir4, Lam and Vieira da 
Silva, of intense silence, whose muffled echo can be heard 
in the aphorisms and philosophical notes of his Recherche 
de la base et du sommet, (1941-1965; “Search for the Base 
and the Summit”), of the benison of sunlit waters and the 
mute stirrings of olive trees, in this very special land René 
Char put down the roots of that unquenchable desire to 
create, to love, to go ever further, that makes him the 
contemporary of each and every inhabitant of this planet. 
 
The French poet René Char (1907-1988) 
“Et qui sait voir la terre aboutir a des fruits, 
Point ne l'émeut Uéchec quoiqu’il ait tout perdu.” 
(And be who bas seen the earth come to fruition 
Will never know defeat though all be lost.) 
René Char 
  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Lu
th
 
Gz
ko
k 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ro
ge
r 
Ca
ne
ss
a,
 
To
ul
on
   
33

## [Page 34](079702engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 79710: César Vallejo: a revolutionary voice in modern poetry

César 
ALLE] 
CQ 
A revolutionary voice in modern poetry 
porary Spanish-American poetry 
would not be what it is today without 
César Vallejo. Yet his work, which marked a 
radical break with traditional forms and sub- 
ject-matter, took shape in a society whose 
reaction to it was one of indifference, if not 
perplexity and hostility. 
Vallejo was born in 1892 in the village of 
Santiago de Chuco, in the Andes of northern 
Peru, and his poetry was deeply marked by 
his ties with that cultural background. 
Forty-six years later-—already half a century 
ago—he died in Paris one rainy afternoon in 
April 1938, as he had unwittingly prophesied 
in one of his poems, when he wrote: “I shall 
diein Paris on a rainy day/aday I can already 
remember”. 
There are two main periods in Vallejo’s 
work, both marked by the environment in 
which he lived. The first of these, which he 
spent in Peru, saw the beginning of what was 
to become a constant factor—a rejection of 
intellectual coteries and stereotypes, of the 
uncritical adoption of literary models, and of 
identification with any particular school. 
With his first two collections of poems, Los 
beraldos negros (1918; “The Black Heralds”) 
and Trice (1922), Vallejo began to use a 
language which broke away from Romantic- 
ism and the mannerisms of Modernism, 
from the Decadent Movement, and from the 
dream-inspired symbolism that were typical 
of Peruvian poetry of the time. The distinc- 
tive aesthetic quality of Los heraldos negros 
upset the critics, while Trice, whose very 
title is a mystery and may be a combination 
of “triste” (sad) and “dulce” (sweet), 
violated all the prevailing literary canons. At 
the time, Luis Alberto Sinchez, a leading 
Peruvian intellectual, wrote: “César Vallejo 
has come out with an incomprehensible and 
I: is no exaggeration to say that contem- 
34 
 
BY LEYLA BARTET 
 
The Peruvian poet 
César Vallejo 
photographed at Versailles in 1929 
extremely strange book. .. and my astonish- 
ment increases with every page”. 
There can be no doubt that this was writ- 
ing of a kind that the Latin American conti- 
nent had never seen before. In it intimist 
cameos fuse with social preoccupations, and 
contradictory ideas and emotions are cou- 
pled (faith and scepticism, hatred and love, 
life and death): 
All my bones are alien to me; 
perbaps I stole them! 
I somehow came to take something 
that was meant for someone else; 
and I think that had I not been born, 
some other poor soul would be drinking 
this coffee! 
I am not much of a thief ... what will 
become of me? 
[Los beraldos negros] 
Later, the Martiniquais poet Aimé Césaire 
rightly noted that Trilce had dynamited the 
language in its bid to achieve expression, 
defined the problems of modernity, and 
settled scores with the existing Modernist 
aesthetic. 
Vallejo was very quick to grasp the need 
for social commitment, which he saw in 
terms not so much of political militancy or 
the adoption of a hard and fast partisan 
political stance as of making a choice at a 
given historical moment. In his student days 
in the city of Trujillo in northern Peru, he 
became involved with a group of intellec- 
tuals who were connected with what was 
later to become the APRA Party (Alianza 
Popular Revolucionaria Americana). In- 
deed, as a result of being unjustly accused of 
involvement in a local uprising, he had to go 
into a long period of hiding, following which 
he was arrested and imprisoned for four 
months.

## [Page 35](079702engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 79710: César Vallejo: a revolutionary voice in modern poetry

  
Pen and ink drawing of 
Vallejo made by Pablo 
Picasso in 1938, shortly 
after Vallejo’s death 
Photos © SPADEM 1988, Paris 
Manuscript, dated 21 
November 1937, of apoem 
from Vallejo’s volume 
entitled Poemas humanos 
       
   
  
Pas TY Ia 
< 
IA er fle ol Aijav direst ) ne Vabinr od 
  
  
- Te. —_— 
[ u bo ss 3H 
Foy . £3 dove A Futon da. Lo te ba 
Cprra— ‘ ’ 4 : 
Jr—r—~ / Ty. alla vi) {lenge hae.     
  
  
   Jha ven Vf hats — Ay J -r~ 
dl. J basa Adi I i L ~ l'ai, 
’ TMA dl - e Are Ai Va Nema ’ 
divicke da ln 
fmt pms fo 
brava, Py JPA 4; 
bh 7% pudiT 0 ser 
he An, jal A y- v 
[A *- Aa rl ae an 
fare EEE » LE er 
/ 
oe nada 
Con oo "" 
    
    
   
   
 
   
y Ry WIRE dN 
bayer’ Lode, of WN «sr Ca 
ry L Jo Jeo hae. “a 
Lon ‘Zr fai Cu 
  
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
‘ / y 
Ao Teo- - Lae TE = py AL aa py A ty / J ‘ 
dh p 4 rere, CET) FIX TINE 
a tipan | ban uot — 
In 1923 he moved 10 France, and lived in 
Paris until his death fifteen years later. While 
he was there, he took a keen interest in the 
problems of his time. He was passionately 
enthusiastic about the Russian Revolution 
and in 1932 published Rusia en 1931 (“Rus- 
sia in 1931”), a short book describing what 
he had learned from a visit to that country. 
He was greatly distressed by the Spanish 
Civil War in 1936. He was particularly con- 
cerned with the role of the intellectual in 
modern society and was scathing in his cri- 
ticism of the European avant-garde. In El art 
y la revolucion (“Art and Revolution”), he 
wrote: “Literary schools come and go. Such 
is the fate of any form of anxiety which, 
instead of becoming an austere creative 
laboratory, merely turns into an empty 
formula”, 
Vallejo later became involved with anti- 
fascist groups and in 1937 went to war-torn 
Spain to attend a congress of intellectuals in 
support of the Republic. 
During his time in Europe, he wrote many 
prose works and analytical essays, but it was 
only after his death that the poetry he wrote 
during this period came to be known, with 
the publication in 1939 of Poemas bumanos 
(“Human Poems”) and Esparia, aparta de mi 
este caliz (“Spain, take away this cup from 
me”). These books reveal significant changes 
in Vallejo’s style, Although some of the 
features present in Trilce are still to be found, 
there Is a growing preoccupation with rhyth- 
mic patterns and with the overall structure of 
the poems, so that the reader never feels that 
the writing is disjointed. Vallejo was now 
making more systematic use of such devices 
as enumeration and anaphora, or repetition. 
Neither pebble, nor oven nor white dog 
Defenceless Malaga, where my death was 
born 
While taking a stroll 
And where it died of passion without being 
born.... 
Malaga, following in your footsteps, with 
no way out. 
[Espana, aparta de mi este cdliz] 
Vallejo was ‘a poet of universal and 
prophetic significance. This explains both 
why his work continues to be so relevant and 
why his poetic diction is so surprisingly 
modern. It also accounts both for the failure 
of his contemporaries to understand him, 
and for the heart-rending emotion he feltasa 
creative artist. This was undoubtedly the 
price he had to pay for being one of the 
greatest poets who has ever written in 
Spanish. : | 
LEYLA BARTET, Peruvian journalist and 
sociologist, studied linguistics at the University of 
Paris. She has published a number of articles on 
ideology and communications, and has co- 
authored books on advertising and the press. 
35

## [Page 36](079702engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 79711: The Long struggle for liberation; reflections on the abolition of slavery in Brazil

THE LONG STRUGGLE 
FOR LIBERATION 
Reflections on the abolition of slavery in Brazil 
HE abolition of slavery in Brazil, 
which was enshrined in the Le: Au- 
rea (“Golden Law”) of 13 May 1888, 
was the outcome of a long struggle punctu- 
ated by defeats as well as victories. The 
decree that became law on that Sunday in 
May was couched in simple, unembroidered 
language: 
“Article 1: With effect from the date of the 
present law, slavery is declared to be abo- 
lished in Brazil. 
Article 2: All provisions to the contrary are 
hereby repealed. 
(Signed) Isabel, Imperial Princess Regent.” 
In spite of the brevity and terseness of its 
language, this document, which had actually 
“ been drafted six days before, on 7 May 1888, 
revealed the extent to which the struggle 
against slavery in Brazil had intensified. 
It was the culmination of a long story in 
which African slaves—black Brazilians— 
were treated as chattels. Their fate was de- 
cided as if they were pawns in a game of 
chance. 
The black slaves who, according to “offi- 
cial” records, were present in Brazil from as 
“early as 1550, became a key element in the 
country’s development. “Without the 
Blacks, Brazil would not exist,” claimed the 
Portuguese historian Oliveira Martins. 
There would have been no sugar or coffee or 
tobacco, and stock-raising and mining 
would not have been developed. None of the 
wealth that fuelled Brazilian prosperity in 
the late nineteenth century would have been 
generated. It is easy to grasp the importance 
of the interests that opposed the emancipa- 
tion of the slaves. 
It can be argued that the Brazilian eco- 
‘nomy would have collapsed without the 
black slaves. Hence, before the long process 
of liberation could begin, the circumstances 
that had prompted the European countries 
to impose slavery in the Americas had to 
change. 
After abolishing the slave trade, Britain 
began to exert pressure on other nations to 
follow suit so that the products of her col- 
onies would continue to be competitive. 
Brazil came under this pressure after achiev- 
ing independence in 1822, and probably as a 
result of it Emperor Pedro I signed a conven- 
tion in November 1826 (ratified the follow- 
ing year) whereby “any trade in slaves con- 
ducted in the three years subsequent to this 
date shall be deemed to constitute piracy”. 
36 
BY OSWALDO DE CAMARGO 
The Emperor had spoken, but how much 
weight did his wishes have compared with 
those of the powerful interests involved in 
the Brazilian slave trade? This was only the 
beginning of along and gradual process dur- 
ing which many decrees were promulgated, 
some of them tinged with bitter irony, such 
as the law in respect of “sixty-year-olds”, 
which freed Blacks who had reached sixty 
years of age. 
After the slave trade had been officially 
abolished in 1850 under the law sponsored 
by Euzébio de Queirds and as a result of the 
vigorous steps taken by the authorities, no 
more “ships laden with ebony” would ever 
again set sail from Africa for Brazil. And, 
some thirty-eight years later, Princess Isabel 
would sign the celebrated Aurea law. 
What is a slave but an empty shell, utterly 
devoid of speech? “Servus non haber perso- 
nam”—slaves have no personality; they have 
no bodies, no past, no names, no property. 
For white people, slaves, as bodies without 
the attributes of personality, were by defini- 
tion the incarnation of a social void. 
Indeed, the most harrowing and dramatic 
consequence of slavery in Brazil was the 
slaves’ loss of their identity. And it is that 
identity which black Brazilians have been 
 
\0 ou
 00 de 
seeking since the beginning of the century 
through paths that have been fraught with 
difficulty. 
White Brazilians were among the first to 
praise the abolition of slavery. One of them 
was Luis Murat, whose “Redemption 
Hymn” was set to music by Abdom 
Milanez: 
How fortunate you are, my native land. 
Your explorers see you emerge as beautiful as 
the dawn. 
Tell the slaves that masters no longer exist 
and that now they are free the world over. 
  
These 4 photos of black slaves in Rio de Janeiro 
were taken before 1870 by a Rio photographer, 
José Christiano de Freitas Henriques Junior. 
They belong to a series of portraits originally 
used as postcards showing “a substantial part of 
the population of Rio de Janeiro, over balf of 
whom are Blacks or mulattos, slaves or free”. 
Top of page: proclamation issued in 1862, 
offering a reward for the capture of a fugitive 
black slave. 
Photos taken from Escravos brasilieros do século X1X na fotografia 
de Christiano Jr., Ex Libris publishers, Sao Paulo

## [Page 37](079702engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 79711: The Long struggle for liberation; reflections on the abolition of slavery in Brazil

  
However, this is not the tone adopted by 
most black Brazilians when they think about 
13 May. The literature produced by Afro- 
Brazilians to advance the arguments pro- 
pounded in the nineteenth century by the 
mulatto Luiz Gama and by the Black Joao da 
Cruz e Sousa is a magnificent demonstration 
of their desire to achieve self-awareness and, 
above all, to act as black people. 
While white people such as Luis Murat 
could sing the praises of 13 May in a spirit of 
tranquillity and sausfaction, the black poet 
Carlos Assumpgio (born in Teite, Sio Paulo 
State, in 1927) gives vent to feelings of anger 
in his poem Protesto: 
Although my words of fire are not heeded, 
I shall not cease from crying out 
No. I shall not cease from crying out, 
Masters. 
I was sent into this world 
To protest 
Neither lies nor empty show, nor anything 
else 
Can make me silent. 
And he goes on to say: 
  
. a . . =n hy Le gs SS CHE HE 
. One day, in the midst of applause and 
bouquets of roses, 
They suddenly cast me out from the prison 
where I lay 
Into a more spacious prison. 
The freedom they granted me 
Proved to be a Trojan horse. 
There were snakes lying in wait 
Under the cloak of enthusiasm. 
Earlier, the poet Solano Trindade (1908- 
1974), from Pernambuco, in his Cantares do 
meu povo (1961; “Songs for My People”) 
had written: 
I sing the praises of Palmares, 
Without envying Virgil or Homer 
Or Camoens, 
Because my song 
Is the cry of a race 
In the thick of its struggle 
For freedom. 
The Brazilian slaves always fought for 
their freedom, there should be no mistake 
about that. The black people in Brazil were 
never submissive and never yielded to their 
lords and masters. Right from the outset, 
whether in the countryside or in the city, 
revolt and flight were commonplace. In 
1719, the slaves of the State of Minas Gerais 
planned an uprising against their white mas- 
ters. The date was set for 30 March. In his 
book Abolicio em Minas (“Abolition in 
Minas Gerais State”), Oliam José states that 
“the rebels had reached the point where they 
had appointed a king and ministers to help - 
them govern the black country, so that there 
would no longer be slaves in Minas Gerais”. 
However, the movement was betrayed and 
the uprising did not take place. 
Quilombos, settlements of fugitive slaves, 
came into being. In the largest of them, there 
were a code of legal and moral rules and a 
tribunal to judge the most serious misde- 
meanours. The most famous of the many 
guilombos was Palmares, a veritable republic 
founded in the seventeenth century. The 
significance of Palmares, which soon came to 
be known as the black Troy, 1s increasingly 
recognized, especially by the present-day 
black movements in Brazil. Earlier in the 
century Palmares also had great symbolic 
values for the Imprensa negra (“Black 
Press™) which was published from 1916 on- 
wards by a group of Afro-Brazilians, and for 
such movements as Frente negra (“Black 
Front”) which was launched in Sio Paulo in 
the 1930s. 
A genuine black hero emerged from Pal- 
mares. This was Zumbi, a black warrior who 
fought against the slave-owners. A “Short 
History of Brazilian Blacks” published in 
Brazil in 1976 describes how “After two 
years’ resistance, the troops led by the mer- 
cenaries Domingos Jorge Velho and Bernar- 
do Vieira de Melo succeeded in destroying 
Macaco, the capital of the Palmares guilom- 
bo, in 1694. In the course of the battle, many 
Blacks perished or else flung themselves over 
the precipice surrounding the citadel. On 
that occasion, Zumbi managed to escape and 
lived to return and mount further attacks 
but, on 20 November 1695, he was cornered 
in his hideout after being betrayed by a 
former companion-in-arms. Outnumbered, 
he died fighting heroically against an enemy 
force.” The date of 20 November has come 
to be the Day of Black Consciousness in 
Brazil. 
* For Brazilian Blacks 13 May is a day of 
reflection, on which they give thought to the 
consequences of the Aurea law promulgated 
by Princess Isabel. By way of conclusion, it 
should be noted that 13 May is severely 
condemned in the works of most black Bra- 
zilian authors. 
One of them, the poet Oliveira Silveira, 
(born in Rio Grande do Sul in 1941) pro- 
claims in his poem “Treze de Maio”: 
The thirteenth of May spells betrayal: 
Freedom without wings 
Freedom with clipped wings 
Like 
This poem. 
And so disenchantment with the historical 
date on which slavery was abolished in Bra- 
zil continues to be a distinct and consistent 
theme in poetry and prose, indicating the 
way in which black people nowadays think 
about their condition. In his book A roite 
ndo pede licenga (1987; “Night Seeks No 
Permission”) Paulo Colina writes: 
May 
Thirteenth 
One thousand eight hundred and eighty- 
eight 
Sounds to my ear like a whisper 
From the cosmos. 
37

## [Page 38](079702engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 79711: The Long struggle for liberation; reflections on the abolition of slavery in Brazil

Watercolour depicting black slaves in Brazil is 
by the French painter Jean-Baptiste Debret 
(1768-1848), who went to Brazil in 1816 as 
official court artist to the Emperor Pedro I. 
Debret recorded bis experiences in Brazil in 
many paintings and drawings and in 3 illus- 
trated volumes entitled Voyage pittoresque et 
historique au Brésil (1834-1837). 
Startled by sirens, 
The night 
Rouses me out of my sleep. 
I turn’ out my pockets, 
Looking for the pass 
That will allow me 
To cross the streets 
Of Sao Paulo 
In uneasy peace. 
The Princess forgot to sign 
Our labour permit. 
I'm afraid that a living Palmares 
Is still necessary. 
The same sentiment is reflected in prose. 
In some instances, this sense of frustration is 
expressed with deep irony and bitterness. 
The following passage is taken from A 
alvura das pdlpebras (1987; “Under the 
Whiteness of the Eyelids”), a story from a 
collection entitled Quizila by Cuti (Luis 
Silva): 
“My grandfather told me to kill the Prin- 
cess. I took from his bands the guts of my 
great-grandfather and used them to strangle 
the ‘Mistress of Freedom ” 
It is clear that this centenary year of the 
abolition of slavery in Brazil represents, for 
the black Brazilian, something that is still 
unfinished and unfulfilled, which has to be 
re-examined and re-evaluated. The black 
people of Brazil—and especially black intel- 
lectuals and black students—are today re- 
vealing the hidden underside of that historic- 
al event. Brazil has changed and, with it, its 
former slave population which, for a century 
now, has been gradually asserting itself by 
the force of its gestures, its actions and its 
words. Little by little, it is taking control of 
-its destiny and its soul. 
They are merely human beings, black hu- 
man beings. What could be more important 
than thar? [| 
OSWALDO DE CAMARGO, Brazilian jour- 
nalist and poet, is an active participant in the work 
of Black movements, especially in the field of 
literature. He is the author of six books, including 
“Black Writing—Notes on the Black Presence in 
Brazilian Literature” (1987). 


### 79712: Milestones on the road to freedom

38 
  
Milestones on the road 
to freedom 
 
BY LIGIA FONSECA FERREIRA 
1500: Discovery of Brazil by Pedro Alvares 
Cabral. 
1539: Probable date of arrival of the first slaves in 
Brazil. 
1597: First steps in the formation of the Quilom- 
bo dos Palmares (in what is now Alagoas State), 
a group of villages where fugitive black slaves 
sought refuge after escaping from the sugar 
plantations (which absorbed almost 550,000 
slaves in the 16th and 17th centuries). Palmares, 
symbol of resistance to slavery in colonial Brazil, 
held out for almost a century against many 
attacks by the Dutch (who occupied northeast 
Brazil in 1654-1655) and the Portuguese. 
1655: Birth of Zumbi, the last and greatest leader 
of Palmares. 
1695: Death of Zumbi. Destruction of Palmares. 
Discovery of gold. 
1720-1730: Gold and diamond rush in the new 
province of Minais Gerais. Between 1701 and 
1800, more than 1,700,000 Blacks brought to 
work in the mines. Introduction of coffee to Brazil. 
1800-1850: Expansion of coffee cultivation; 
massive new imports of black slave labour to 
work on the plantations of Rio de Janeiro and 
Sao Paulo. 
1822: Independence. Dom Pedro of Portugal 
crowned first emperor of Brazil. 
1835: Slave rebellion at Salvador de Bahia. 
1850: End of the slave trade. 
1871: Promulgation of the Ventre Libre law, 
granting freedom to the children of slaves. 
1885: Promulgation of the “Law of the Sixty- 
year-olds”, granting freedom to slaves over the 
age of 60. 
1888 (13 May): Abolition of slavery in Brazil (the 
last American country to abolish). 
1889: Proclamation of the Republic. 
1931: Foundation of the Frente negra brasileira 
(Brazilian Black Front) at Sao Paulo, a political 
party which survived until 1937. 
1937: Prohibition of immigration to Brazil by the 
Estado novo, the government of Getulio Vargas, 
in order to “preserve and develop in the country's 
ethnic composition the characteristics most faith- 
ful to its European ancestry”. 
1944: Foundation of the “Experimental Black 
Theatre” at Rio de Janeiro by Abdias do Nas- 
cimento. 
1945: End of the Getulio Vargas government: 
renaissance of black movements in several 
Brazilian States. 
1950: 1st Congress of Brazilian Blacks held at 
Rio de Janeiro. 
1951: Race, colour and religious discrimination 
penalized by the “Afonso Arinos Law". 
1964: Establishment of a military régime. 
1969: All mention of facts relating to racial discri- 
mination forbidden in the media. 
1976: Bahia the only State to end police super- 
vision in places where Afro-Brazilian rites are 
practised. 
Since 1980: Several events of international im- 
portance, such as the 3rd Congress of Black 
Culture in the Americas, have taken place. Black 
associations and movements in different States 
fight to win a hearing for their demands through- 
out Brazil: equal opportunities for prolonged stu- 
dies; equal rights in social, cultural and economic 
life; elimination of all forms of discrimination in 
working life; full rights of citizenship; the 
qualification of racial discrimination as uncon- 
stitutional. 
1985: End of the military régime; beginning of the 
“New Republic”. 
1988: Centenary of the abolition of slavery. 
 
LIGIA FONSECA FERREIRA, of Brazil, teaches at the 
university of Campinas at Sao Paulo. She is currently in 
Paris preparing a doctoral thesis on black Brazilian 
literature. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ch
ac
ar
a 
do
 
Ce
u 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
. 
SE
IT
A 
Mu
se
um
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 39](079702engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
ALBANIA. ‘Ndermarra e perpjes se libri’, Tirana. ARGENTINA. Libreria el 
Correo de la Unesco - EDILYR, SRL, Tucuman 1685, 1050 Buenos Aires 
AUSTRALIA. Books only Educational Supplies Pty. Lid, P OQ. Box 33, 
Brookvale 2100, NSW, Penodicals: Domine Pty. Subscriptions Dept., P.O. 
Box 33, Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub-agents: Umted Nations Assocation of 
Australa, Victonan Dwision, 328 Flinders Street. Melbourne 3000 Hunter 
Publications, 58a Gipps St., Collingwood. Vicloria 3066. AUSTRIA. Gerold 
and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. BAHRAIN. United Schools Interna- 
wonal. Arab Regional Office. P O. Box 726, Bahrain; The Arabian Agencies 
and Distributing Co.. Al Mutanabi St... PO Box 156, Manama BANGLADESH 
Karim International, GPO Box No: 2141, 64/1 Manipur Para, Tejgaon, 
Farmgate, Dhaka. BARBADOS. Universily of the West Indies Bookshop, 
Cave Hill Campus, P O Box 64. Bndgetown. BELGIUM. Jean de Lannoy, 202 
Ave du Ror, 1060 Brussels. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, PO Box 91 
Gaborone BRAZIL. Fundagao Getulio Vargas, Servigo del Publicagoes. 
caixa posia! 8 042-ZC-05 Praia de Botalogo 188. Rio de Janero (RJ) 2000: 
Books only. Imagem Latincamencana, Av. Paulista 750, | andar, caixa postal 
30455, Sao Paulo CEP 01051. BULGARIA, Hemus, Kanlora Literatura, 
boulevard Rousky 6. Sofia. BURMA, Trade Corporalion no. (9). 550-552 
Merchant Street. Rangoon. CANADA, Renouf Publishing Co. Lid, 1294 
Algoma Road. Ottawa, Ontario KiB 3W8 (Stores' 61 Sparks Street, Ottawa, 
211 Yonge St., Toronto, Sales office: 7575 Trans Canada Hwy. Ste. 305, St. 
Laurent, Quebec H4T 1v6, CAMERQON. Cameroon Book Centre, PO Box 
123. Limbe, Commission Nationale, BP 1800, Yaounde. CHILE. Editorial 
Universitana S A, Departamento de Importaciones, M. Luisa Santander 
0447, casilla 10220, Santiago: Editonal “Andrés Bello’, Av. BR. Lyon 946, 
Casillo 4256. Santiage de Chile; Dipublic, Antonio Varas 671, 29 prso, casa 
14364, Correo 21, Santiago. CHINA. China National Publications import and 
Export Corporation, P.O. Box 88, Bejing. COLOMBIA. Instituto Colombiano 
de Cultura (Colcultura), Carrera 3A, n® 18 / 24, Bogola; Books only: Libreria 
Buchholz Galeria, Calle 59, No; 13-13, Bogota. CYPRUS. ‘MAM’, Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avene, PO Box 1722, Nicosia. CZECHOSLOVAKIA. SNT.L.. 
Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1; For Slovakia only" Alfa Verlag -Publishers, 
Hurbanove nam. 6.893 31 Bratislava: PNS-UED, Jindnsska 14. praha 1: 
Slovart, Gottwaldovo Nam 6. 805 32 Bratislavia DEM. REP. OF YEMEN. 14th 
Qctober Corporation, PO Box 4227, Aden DENMARK. Munksgaard Export- 
0G. Tidsskriftservice, 35 Norre Sogade, DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Libreria Blasco. Averida Bolivar, No: 402. esq 
Hermanos Deligne, Santo Domingo. EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). Un- 
esco Publications Centre, No. 1 Talaat Harb S1., Caro ETHIOPIA. Ethiopian 
National Agency for Unesco, PO Box 2996. Addis Ababa FINLAND. 
ppa. P. O. Box 128, SF-00100 Helsinki. Suomalainen 
Kinak Oy. K kufa 2 01640 Vantaa 64 FRANCE. Librarne de 
I Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. Periodicals only Unesco CPO / 
V-1, rue Miolhis, 75015 Pans. GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchex- 
pon, Postfach 140, Leninstrasse 16, 7010. Leipzig FED. REP. OF GER- 
MANY. For the Unesco Courier: Mr H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kuner 
Vertrieb, Basaltstrasse 57. D5300 Bonn 3; UNO-Verlag, Simrockstrasse 23, 
D-5300 Bonn 1; S. Karger GmbH, Verlag Angerhofsirasse 9. Postfach 2 
D-8034 Germering } Munchen For scientiic maps only; Geo Center, Postlach 
800830. 7000 Stuttgart 80. GHANA. Books only: Presbytenan Bookshop 
Depot Lid.. PO Box 195, Accra. Ghana Book Suppliers Lid . PO 7869. Accra, 
The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra: The University Bookshop of Cape 
Coast: The University Bookshop of Legon, PO Box 1. Legon. Penodicals only 
Fides Entreprises, P.O. Box 14129. Accra. GREAT BRITAIN. See United 
Kingdom. GREECE. Elettheroudakis SA, International Bookstore, 4 Nikis 
Streel. Athens: John Mihalopoulos & Son SA, International Booksellers, P.O. 
Box 10073, 541 10 Thessaloniki. Greek National Commission for unesco, 3 
Akadimias Street, Athens HONG KONG. Swindon Book Co., 13-15 Lock 
Road, Kowloon; Federal Publications (HK) L1d., Tokwawan, Kowloon: Hong 
Kong Government Information Services, Publication Section, Hong Kong: 
Periodicals onfy Beaconsheld House 6th floor, Oueen's Road Central, Viclor- 
1a HUNGARY, Kultura-Bushimport-ABT, P.O.B. 1439-H- 1388, Budapest 62. 
ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson and Co., H.F. Hafr th 9, Reykjavik 
INDIA. Orient Longman Lid , Kamani Marg, Ballard Estale, Bombay 400038: 
17 Chilaranjan Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai. Mount Road. Madras 2, 
5.9-41/1 Bashir Bagh, Hyderabad 500001 (AP): 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd.. 
Bangalore 560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-agents. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.. 17 Park St. Calcutta 70016: Scindia House, 
New Dell 11 0001. INDONES!A. Bhralara Publishers and Booksellers, 29. 
J1, Oto Iskandardinata 111. Jakarta: Indra P.T., JI Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, 
Jakarta Pusat, IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1188 Englab 
Ave., Rostam Gwe Building, PO. Box 11365-4498, Teheran 13158. 
IRELAND. Pengpdicals only: The Educational Company of reland Lid., PO Box 
43A, Walkinstown, Dubhn 12; Becks only: TDC Publishers, 11 North Frederick 
Street, Dublin 7. ISRAEL. Lierary Transactions, Inc.. c/o Steimatzky Lid. 
P 0. Box 628, Tel Aviv: A.B.C. Bookstore Lid , P O Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd.. 
Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Libreria Commissionaria Sanson, Sp A), Via 
Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence; via Bartohni 29, 20155 
Milan: FAD Bookshop, via delle Terme oi Caracalla, 00100 Rome JAMAICA. 
University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kingston 7. JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc.. 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113. JORDAN 
Jordan Distribution Agency, PQ Box 375, Amman Periodicals only: Jordan 
Book Centre Co. Lid.. PO Box 301, Al Jubertha, Amman. KENYA. East African 
Publishing House. PO 30571, Nawobr; Africa Book Services Ltd, Ouran 
House. Mangano Streel, PO Box 45245, Nairobi. KOREA. Korean National 
Commission for Unesco. P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwan 
Bookshop Co., Lid, POB 2942, Kuwarl; Periodicals only: Farafalla Press 
Agency, P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwad. LEBANON. Librairie Antoine A Naufal 
et Freres, BP 656. Beirul. LESOTHO Mazenod Book Centre. PO Mazenod, 
Maseru. LIBERIA National Bookstore. Mechlin and Carey Streets, PO Box 
590, Monrovia; Cole and Yancy Bookshops Lid., PO Box 286, Monrovia - 
LUXEMBOURG. Books only: Librairie Paul Bruck, 22. Grande-Rue, Luxem- 
bourg, Periodical. Messagenes Paul Kraus, BP 1022, Luxembourg MALAWI 
Malawi Book Service. Head Office, PO Box 30044, Chichin, Blaniyre 3. 
MALAYSIA, Unwersity of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 
22-11. MALTA, Sapienzas, 26 Repubhc SL, Valletta MAURITANIA GRA LI.- 
COMA, 1 rue du Souk X, Avenue kennedy, Nouakchott. MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd.. 30 Bourbon St., Port-Louis. MEXICO. Libreria EI 
Correo de la Unesco, Actipan 66, Colonia del Valle, Apartado postal 61 164, 
06600 Mexico DF. MONACO. Bnuish Library, 30 Bd. des Mouhns, Monte 
Carlo. MORROCCO. Libraine "Aux belles images’, 282 ave. Mohammed-V, 
Rabat, Libraine des écoles, 12 ave, Hassan-ll, Casaglanca; Societé chenfien- 
ne de distribution et de presse. SOCHEPRESS, angle rues de Dinant et St. 
Saens, 8P 13683, Casablanca 05. MOZAMBIQUE. Instituto National do Livro 
edo Disco (INLD), avenida 24 de Julho, 1921 r / d 19 andar. Maputo NEPAL. 
Saha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Books only: 
Keesing, Boeken B.V., Hogehilweg 13, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. 
Penodicals® Faxon Europe. PO. Box 197, 1000 AD Amsterdam. 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine N V., PO Box 200, Willem- 
stad, Curacao, NA. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing, P.O. Box 
14277-Kilbirnie, Wellington. NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ife: The 
Unwersity Bookshop of Ibadan, P.O. 286, The University Bookshop of Nsukka; 
The University Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu Bello. University Bookshop of 
Zaria. NORWAY. Johan Grund! Tanum, P.O.B 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1: 
Universitets Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Blindern. Oslo 
3: Periodicals only: Narve en A/S, Litteraturt Jenesten, P O B 6125 Etterstad, 
N 0602 Oslo 6 PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid--azam, 
P.0. Box No. 729. Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for 
Book Development in Asia and the Pacific, 39 Delhi Housing Society. P.O. Box 
8950. Karachi 28. PANAMA, Distribuidora Cultura Internacional, Apartado 
7571. Zona 5. Panama. PHILIPPINES. National Book Store Inc., 701 Rizal 
Avenue, Mamila, POLAND, Orpan-tmport, Palac Kultury | Nauta, Warsaw: Ars 
Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7 00-068 Warsaw PORTUGAL. 
[ras & Andrade Lida Livrana Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. ROMANIA. 
ARTEXIM Export-tmport, Piata Scienten, no. 1, PO Box 33-16, 70005 
Bucharest. SAUDI ARABIA. Dar a! Watan, Olaya Man Street, Ibrahim Bin 
Sulaym Building, Riyadh. SEYCHELLES. New Service Lid, Kingsgate 
House, PO Box 131, Mahé, National Bookshop, PO Box 48. Mahé. SIERRA 
LEONE. Fourah Bay College, Njala University and Sierra leone Diocesan 
Bookshops, Freetown SINGAPORE. Righteous Enterprises, P.O. Box 562, 
Kallang Basin Post Office. Singapore 9133 SOCIALIST PEOPLE'S LIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. General Establishment for Publishing, Distnbution and 
Advertising. Souf Al Mahmoud: St., PO Box 959. Tripoli. SOMALIA. Modern 
Book Shop and General, PO Box ua. Mogadiscio. SPAIN. Mundi-Prensa 
Libros SA, apartado 1223, Castelld 37, Madnd 1; Ediciones Liber, apartado 
17. Magdalena 8, Ondarroa {Vizcaya), Donaire, Ronda de Quteiro. 20, 
apartado de correos 341, La Corufia; books only” Librena Castells, Ronda 
Unwersidad 13 y 15, Barcelona 7: Librena de la Generalitat de Catalunya, 
Palan Moja. Rambla de los Estudios 118, 08 002 Barcelona. SRI LANKA. 
Lake House Bookshop. 100 Sr Chitampalam Gardiner Mawata. P O B. 244, 
Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118. Khartoum. 
SURINAME, Suriname National Commission for Unesco. P O. Box 2943, 
Paramanbo. SWEDEN. A/ B CE. Frtzes Kungl Hovbokhandel, Regenng- 
sgatan 12, Box 16356. S-103 27 Stockholm 16; For the Unesco Couner: 
Svenska FN Forbunget, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 S-104. 65 Stockholm; For 
penodicals onfyWennergren-Wilhiams AB, Nordenflychisvagen 70. 5-104, 25 
Stockholm; Esselte Tidskriffscentralen, Gamia Brogatan 26, Box 62 -101, 20 
Stockholm, SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag. 5 Ramistrasse, Zunch; Libraries 
Payot in Geneva Lausanne, Basle, Berne, Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and 
Zunch, SYRIA. Aleppo Unversity Books Establishment. Uriversily of Aleppo, 
Aleppo. TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, POB 9030, Dar-es- 
Salaam. THAILAND. Nibongh and Co. Ltd, 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, 
Siyaeg Phaya Sn, P O. Box 402, Bangkok; Suk 1 Panit, M 9. 
Rajdamnern Ave , Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company. 1715 Rama IV Road. 
Bangkok; ROEAP, PO Box 1425, Bangkok 10500. TRINIDAD AND TOBA- 
GO. Nationa! Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St., St. Clair, Port-of- 
Spain. TURKEY. Haset Kitapevi A.S . Istiklal Caddes), No 469, Posta Kulusu 
219. Beyogly, Istanbul. UGANDA, Uganda Bookshop. PO Box 7145, Kampa- 
la. UNITED ARAB EMIRATES. Maklabal al Maktaba. PO Box 15408, At Ain, 
Abu Dhabi UNITED KINGDOM. H M Stationery Office. PO Box 276. London, 
SWB SDT. H.M § O Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham, Bristol; Third World Publications, 151 Stratford Road, Birming- 
ham Bt1 1RD: for scientific maps only: McCarta Lid., 122 King's Cross Rd , 
London WC1X SDS. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Bernan-UNIPUE, 
Penodicals Dep t, 4611-F A bly Drive, Lanham, MD 20706 4391. 
URUGUAY, Ediciones Trecho, S A. Maldonado 1092, Montevideo. USSR. 
VIO Mezhdunarodnaya Kmiga, Ul Dimitrova 39, Moskva 113095. 
YUGOSLAVIA. Miadosl, Iica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankarjeva Zalozba, Zopitat- 
jeva 2, Lubljana; Noht, Terazie 13/7 VII, 11000 Belgrade; penodicals only 
Jugosolvena Kniga, PO Box 36, YU 11001 Belgrade ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Lid, P.O. Box 2664, Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Lid., + Norwich Union Centre, Harare. 
The Courier Im 
A window open on the world 
Published monthly in 35 languages by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization 
A selection in braille is published quarterly 
in English, French, Spanish and Korean 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda el Khazen 
Spanish edition: Francisco Fernandez-Santos, 
Miguel Labarca 
Arabic edition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoud 
Braille edition: 
Nlustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Georges Servat 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions: 
Solange Belin 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Special projects: Peggy Julien 
Non-Headquarters editions 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ram Babu Sharma (Dclhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran), 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra llgazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Abdul Manaf Saad (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Sycung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasckera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Lina Svenzén (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 90 French francs. 
Binder for a year'sissues: 62 FF 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, plus date of 
issue. and three voucher copies are sent to the 
editor. Signed articles reprinted must bear author's 
name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on 
request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be 
returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles 
express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of Unesco or 
those of the editors of the Unesco Courier. Photo 
captions and headlines are written by the Unesco 
Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published in 
the magazine do not imply official endorsement or 
acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. The 
Unesco Courier is produced in microform 
(microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (1) Unesco, 7 
Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) University 
Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, 
U.S.A.; (3) N.C.R. Microcard Edition, Indian 
Head. Inc. 111 West 40th Street, New York. 
U.S.A; (4) Belland Howell Co. , Old Mansfield 
Road. Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
All correspondence should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-chief in Paris 
Imprimé en France (Printed in France) - Dépot légal: C1 - 
Juin 1988. 
Photogravure-impression: Maury-Imprimeur S.A. 
Z.1. route d'Etampes, 45330 Malesherbes. 
ISSN 0041-5278 
N°6-1988-CPD-88-1-457 A

## [Page 40](079702engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

ey 
» _— 
- rt b 
- i 
PY, 
wie 
: 
- Lok 
  
   
  
   
” 
: eh ri PA 
~ ay ad - 3 LEE dis ged pian Rae 
JUL Anni £10 AJ Didi oh ratios oy of 1 el 
+h of the Englis poet 
Ry reat ie _ ACH aE 
a Ne ; op (TC , aw ik et 
~~ George Gordon, Lord 
: >EC Ge " a “ 
SOT PIO 
a / Re TS 
ERA TL We TTA 
: : 14 
het 
, w ( nh 
: lL 1 Ape 
FEELIN ce Faneliy 8 
CAPE he RR xb im thao] v1! 
Ng ac CR Ce 
JN oir MLUry. 
" ed Ir