# [065221](065221engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](065221engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
   
60 franc s (France) 
30 cen ts (U. S.) 
    
 
 
.
 
L
L
 
{a
 
p
e
 
a
A
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
= 
a’
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
     
  
 
   
  
 

## [Page 2](065221engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

EE
 
S
e
]
 
PP 
4 
rd
. 
o
w
 
I B | § 
  
  
T
T
T
 
T
I
 
TT ss ANT 
Young volunteers from Asia, Afri- 
ca, America. and Europe have 
joined an army of young Yugo- 
slav volunteers to help build a 
. new international highway which. 
will soon cut across Yugoslavia 
from north-west to south-east. 
Known as the * autoput ”, the 
motor highway will be completed 
next year. Each morning the youth 
volunteers, carrying picks and 
- shovels, set off in singing columns 
from their camps bound for the 
site of the new highway. Left, 
smiling Swedish girl pushes wheel- 
barrow, while a schoolboy from 
Zagreb (above) swings a pick on 
a' stretch of the road being built 
between Ljubljana and Zagreb. 
Last year 60,000 young people 
worked on this stretch. of road. 
Photos Yugoslav Youth Movement 
 

## [Page 3](065221engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

hv
 "mC Courier. 
  
A WINDOW OPIN ON THE WOALD 
 
APRIL 1959 
I2TH YEAR 
‘No. 4 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
3 EDITORIAL 
4 IT’S NEVER TOO EARLY TO LEARN 
“Housekeeping” and “baby care” for three-to-sixes 
9 MIX-UP OF THE SEASONS. 
Today's warmer winters and colder summers 
By Lucien Néret 
10 FILM MAKING: NO LONGER THE PRIVILEGE 
OF JUST A FEW NATIONS 
By Georges Sadoul 
20 YUGOSLAVIA'S ‘YOUTH ROAD’ 
Built by young volunteers from four continents 
By Bertha Gaster 
24 THE DRIVERLESS TRACTOR 
Latest thing in mechanized farming 
By E.W. Golding 
26 KHUJIR: ISLAND CAPITAL ON WORLD'S 
DEEPEST LAKE 
By Evgueni Veltistov 
28 FALLACIES ABOUT AUSTRALIA'S ABO 
By Ronald M. Berndt 
33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
* 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Alexandre Leventis 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Carrera Andrade 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7¢ 
* 
RIGINES 
Cultural 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly (12 issues a year) in English, 
French, Spanish and Russian. The United States of America edition is distri- 
buted by the UNESCO Publications Center. U.S.A. 80] Third Avenue, New 
York 22, N.Y., Plaza 1-3860. 
York, N.Y, (M.C. 58,1.135 A) 
Second-class mail privileges authorized at New 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credic line reads ‘Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER plus date 
of issue”, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage, Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
Annual subscription rates: § 3.00; 10/-stg.; §00 Fr, frs. or equivalent, 
    
The Unesco Courier. — April 195% 
COVER PHOTO 
 
“Kanal”, the story of an encircled 
group of combattants who perish In 
the sewers during the Warsaw uprising 
in the last war won a Cannes jury 
award in 1957. Cover shows Teresa 
Berezowska who played her first role 
in this film. Produced by Andrzej 
Wajda, 32, “Kanal” is his second film. 
Poland's quality feature film output is 
an example of why cinema production 
has ceased to be the privilege of just 
a few natlons. (See also page |6.) 
Photo Film Polski 
nknown and unhonoured until recently, the Japanese 
U cinema industry today leads the world in the pro- 
duction of feature films. Before 1951 few were the 
persons outside of Japan who had seen a Japanese motion 
picture. But in that year, for the first time since 1940, 
Japan showed some of its productions at an international 
film festival held in Venice, and Rashomon walked off 
with the premier award—an event as unexpected to niost 
Japanese as it was to many Western observers unacquaint- 
ed with the high standards achieved by the Japanese 
film industry. 
Since then Japan has won considerable international 
acclaim and with 443 films released in 1957, it has become 
the first country to jump ahead of the United States in 
output. Here are the latest figures for 1957 of the “Top 
Five Producers” just compiled by UNESCO: 
J YE: 1s 1: 5 o NE 443 
2. US A, iii iiitiettnintinnennennns 378 
3.India ......iiiiiiiiinnn.. een .. 295 
4, Hong KONg ....ovvviiivnnnnnnnnnn. 217 
5. France ..... Cee eereeraraeeneans .. 142 
It is worth noting that of these “top five” producers, 
three are Asian countries. 
Although motion pictures are shown regularly for 
entertainment in nearly every country of the world it is 
only in very recent years that information has become 
available on anything approaching a world-wide basis to 
indicate the scale of film activity in different countries. 
Even today such information is often scanty and 
incomplete. 
As a UNESCO study, Film and Cinema Statistics, 
published a few years ago pointed out: “When it is 
considered that the number of commercial cinemas in 
the world is greater than 100,000, that world cinema 
attendance Is in the order of 10,000 million per year, that 
some 2,000 long films are produced every year, and that 
the annual turnover of the world’s film industry must 
be close to 4,000 million dollars, it is surprising, to say 
the least, that an activity involving such amounts of 
capital, labour and leisure should be so unusually poorly 
documented.” 
Since 1947 UNESCO has been collecting information on 
the status of the film industries in different countries and 
has issued various publications on this subject. It is with 
this material at his disposal, along with data from 
other sources, that M. Georges Sadoul, the great French 
authority on the history of the cinema, has prepared the 
survey published on page 10 which reveals the new and 
often unsuspected horizons of the world cinema of today. 
3

## [Page 4](065221engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 65218: It's never too early to learn

  
        
: 1 
is 
  
Be
v 
1 
-
 
a
   
- 
  
e
r
 
N
 
P
T
s
 
F
r
 
  
   
     
rey 
       
  
’ 
~ . 
: 
: ’ KE : 
: ny . 
| ar ak
cts dat rn ITO AI 2.1% Sn re Ye BY 
pl - 
-— rr JL rewire 
2 Te » "# : \ y 
+ ) : 
: 
PEs ana Di Rieenten pr SAL ET VEL ad hve Ss oad HR CAR AN BON oh oh EA 
- = FRO a
 nS I TTRTIITIS CooL 
“TODAY WE'LL BAKE A CAKE’, announces the teacher, ‘because Pierre and Robert are five years old today.” 
he blackboard and explains what she has written, because the 
She writes the names of the ingredients and the quantities on t 
e stove and now he stirs the mixture 
d or write. Supervised by the teacher, Jean has lit t 
children cannot yet rea 
; 
S 
dren in a Paris nursery school are learning housekeeping. 
in a saucepan over the gas. For the first time in France, chil 
4

## [Page 5](065221engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 65218: It's never too early to learn

HREE hundred French children, aged from three to 
| six, are having the time of their lives in a Paris school. 
They don’t know it, of course, but the eyes of many 
educational authorities are ‘watching them closely because 
they are taking part in an experiment 'whose success may 
bring a new note to.the whole problem of nursery school 
education. 
These youngsters are proving every day that “it’s never 
too early to learn.” In a spacious kitchen and an adjoin- 
ing bedroom they apply themselves earnestly to their 
roles as cook or housewife, mother or father. They cook 
simple dishes, wash clothes, do housework, make the beds... 
it is all a far cry from the “make believe” of games or 
the symbolism, so often unsatisfying, of toys. 
The children work in teams of twelve boys and girls. 
For a 'week each team becomes a “family” and takes pos- 
session of the special experimental classroom “apartment” 
in miniature. In the kitchen whose walls are painted a 
daffodil-yellow, the gas stove is only 18 inches high and 
the two sinks for washing have been constructed in such 
a 'way as to render any accidents unlikely. In the second 
big room stands a row of small beds where the “older” 
children learn the proper way of getting the three-year- 
old “babies” to bed. 
In this way the children in this nursery school are not 
only brought into direct contact with, and have the chance 
to handle, real life objects—chosen of course with a view 
to the height and physical capabilities of the pupils—but 
the way is also open for them to accomplish all sorts of 
home-making and family activities, thanks to their spon- 
taneous urge to imitate their elders and enter the world 
of grown-ups. : : 
This is the over-riding purpose of the experiment, and 
the French Government is backing the project for a very 
good reason: most of these children come from workers’ 
families in which they have to help mother from a very 
early age. 
Very few mothers, or, for that matter, even teachers, 
realize the extent of the deep-seated changes that take 
place in the child during his years in the nursery school— 
years when his progress 
in growth, speech and 
vocabulary and control 
over his physical actions 
is strikingly evident. 
When a child enters a 
nursery school the only 
environment to ‘which he 
is accustomed is his home, 
his family and friends. 
Being plunged into an 
entirely new situation 
upsets and bewilders him. 
If however, the difficul- 
ties of this period can be 
smoothed out and the 
anguish of separation 
overcome, this will be the 
starting point of his entry 
into the ‘world around 
him. The new relation- 
ships he makes will help 
him in this period, and 
 
      
   
  
The Unesco Courier. =— April 1959 
  
  
if he is given the right sort of understanding aid he 
will begin to grow to adulthood in line with the society 
in which he lives. 
Thus, the kitchen and the bedroom in the nursery school 
are “half-way houses” in which the child is not entirely 
in a school atmosphere and where, though removed from 
tlie house where he lives, he nevertheless finds himself in 
a family environment which helps him to become one of 
the group. 
This family atmosphere created in school aims to pro- 
vide the children with an experience in which each new 
event is a revelation or source of self-discovery. This is 
not a form of “apprenticeship” and the children are not 
necessarily expected to retain the things they have learn- 
ed; they may forget them temporarily, only ito reconsoli- 
date this knowledge later in the normal course of their 
development. 
Instead, they have here an entry into the world of 
adults, statisfying an urge to be “grown-up”, a desire for 
independence and a sense of accomplishment. Praised for 
his achievements, a child will be helped along the road of 
intellectual growth and towards the development of a 
healthy personality. This is the atmosphere which the 
nursery school kitchen and bedroom seek to create. 
Children who have experienced this kind of education 
show unbridled confidence and lose such traits as anxiety, 
timidity and shyness, aggressiveness and deceitfulness. 
Integration into constructive situations forming part of 
group activities has led to many cures and a drop in the 
incidence of unhealthy symptoms. 
The teacher has a vital part to play in a class conceived 
on these lines. She must be a highly qualified person, 
fully aware of the educational results that are expected 
of her and stimulated by the boundless possibilities of an 
experiment which throws new light on to the desires, psy- 
chological problems and deep-seated attitudes of children. 
What is needed is not a fully-qualified domestic science 
teacher, but a good all-round nursery school educator. 
The kitchen-classroom, considered as an essential cog in 
the educational policy of integration now being developed, 
is only one aspect of a form of educational initiation which 
stimulates in the child the urge to enter fully into the 
world of people and things. 
Here is a direct preparation for life... Shall we soon be 
seeing six-year-old girls giving advice to their mothers as 
they market together? It would not be surprising, and 
certainly nothing to complain about.

## [Page 6](065221engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 65218: It's never too early to learn

 

## [Page 7](065221engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 65218: It's never too early to learn

  
mT yy 
Pa wa RE FURAN pT 
Learning the 
‘grown-up’ way 
Each week a “family” of twelve little 
boys and girls takes possession of 
a special classroom “apartment” in 
a Paris nursery school. Here some 
things are made on a miniature scale, 
but in detail and use correspond 
exactly to the real thing. However, 
the aim of this experimental pro- 
gramme is not to turn out young 
housekeepers, and the children are 
not expected to remember the things 
they learn. Instead they find them- 
selves in an atmosphere and among 
surroundings in which elements of 
school and home are combined. 
Here they can give full play to their 
imitative desires and their urge to 
join in the world of adult things. 
Top left, Jean beats up the eggs 
while René weighs the flour. Above, 
the cakes are ready and Pierre tries 
to blow out the five candles with 
one puff. Right, five-year-old Chris- 
tine maternally cuts the cake for her 
neighbour. Left, a carrots and pota- 
toes cleaning session in ‘progress. 
SR CA stmt Xm. et 
“0 : - i . 2 jE A 
 
The Unesco Courier. April 1959

## [Page 8](065221engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 65218: It's never too early to learn

  
a 
  
eo 
—————————————. TT A —————— ——— a —— 
Eh, 
REC OR 
 
The ‘Big Ones’ Learn Baby Care 
In a large room whose walls are decorated with colourful 
children’s paintings stands a row of small beds where the 
“older” children learn the proper way of getting a boisterous 
three-year-old into bed. (Photos above and below.) Photo 
left shows Giselle giving the “baby’s” diapers a good washing. 
  
SE 
IE Se EE RRR RE A mE Ea Ee A Rn BE Rn lr

## [Page 9](065221engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 65219: Mix-up of the seasons: warmer winters and colder summers

MIX-UP OF THE SEASONS: 
e Unesco Courler., = April 1959 
WARMER 
WINTERS AND COLDER SUMMERS 
by Lucien Néret 
PEAKING before the American Chemical Society in 
December 1957, the famous physicist Edward Teller 
gave a solemn warning about the increase in the 
rate of carbon dioxide gas in the air. According to 
Dr. Teller, the carbon dioxide content of the air has gone 
up by 2% since the beginning of the Industrial Revolu- 
tion. He said that if the rate of increase reached 109% 
the melting of Arctic ice would be speeded, causing the 
level of the oceans to rise quite considerably. 
The same view had been expressed some three months 
earlier by delegates at the International Congress of 
Geodesy and Geophysics, meeting in Toronto, Canada. 
They stated that by the end of the century the level of 
the oceans would have risen by nearly five feet, enough 
to threaten many ports and seaside towns. 
Adding to these observations, two ‘well-known American 
scientists, Professors Maurice Ewing and William L. Donn, 
have stated that the gradual melting of the Polar ice- 
caps would lead to condensation of the water vapour which 
in turn would produce continuous snow-storms. Such 
phenomena, the two specialists believe, might well mark 
the beginning of a new ice-age in a hundred years’ time. 
Both Western Europe and the Eastern part of the United 
States would feel the effects of this cataclysm, and a 
layer of ice more than a mile thick might form in some 
parts of the world. 
Such warnings, especially when they are voiced by such 
well-known authorities, deserve to be taken seriously and 
that is why special attention has been paid during the 
International Geophysical Year to glaciological and 
oceanographical research. 
Over the last ten years specialists have noted a marked 
change in meteorological phenomena. Generally speak- 
ing, the average temperature is rising both in the northern 
and southern hemispheres—a fact which fits in well with 
the observed melting of the Polar ice-caps. 
But while the winters are getting warmer, the summers 
are now cooler. One result is that some of the fast- 
flowing glaciers are extending their surface; but there 
are other consequences. In England, cricket clubs 
complain that their season grows shorter every year; 
fisheries experts have noted that the shoals of cod are 
tending to move northwards; and in the last few years 
the Great Salt Lake in Utah has dried up by half. 
H-bomb tests not to. blame 
VER since the present series of bad summers began, 
public opinion has put the blame on nuclear and 
. thermonuclear explosions. Most meteorologists, 
however, state that this accusation is completely ground- 
less. They stress that it would take tremendous energy, 
exceeding anything man is capable of producing, to exert 
an influence on the air circulation and the formation of 
anti-cyclones ‘which lead to widespread weather distur- 
ances. 
Even a small local thunderstorm would require almost 
as much energy as that liberated by about fifteen 
hydrogen bombs. Scientists state that the average storm 
at sea is equal to the energy of hundreds or thousands 
of atomic explosions. To create a full-scale storm artifi- 
cially you would have to let off atomic bombs almost 
every second! 
Such 1s the opinion of most meteorologists. There are 
exceptions, however, and among them authorities such as 
Dr. Horace R. Byers, head of the Meteorological Depart- 
ment of the University of Chicago, and Professor William 
H. Parker of the University of Manitoba. 
Dr. Byers maintains that each atomic explosion in- 
creases the fonization of the atmosphere and compromises 
the electrical balance between the atmosphere’s positive 
charge and the earth’s negative charge, 
As for Professor Parker, he has noted “an abnormal 
sensitization of the ionosphere.” Recalling that the 
eruption of the Krakatoa volcano in 1883 was followed by 
several disastrous summers, he asks: “Why should not 
artificially-produced atmospheric disturbances have 
similar effects?” 
During the fifth meeting of the special committee for 
the International Geophysical Year In Moscow last 
summer, I asked several meteorologists for their views on 
these theories. All of them expressed a negative opinion. 
Weather ‘eyes’ in the stratosphere 
N the other hand, both Russian and American 
O scientists stressed that the data transmitted by the 
artificial satellites has revealed a considerable den- 
sity of meteoritic dust in the vicinity of our planet. They 
believe that this dust may play the role of ice-forming 
nuclei promoting the condensation of water droplets and 
thereby producing the abnormal rainfall which has been 
noted recently in various parts of the world. 
Observations carried out during the I1.G.Y. also seem 
to prove a relationship between the appearance of 
sunspots and solar protuberances and variations in the 
climate. During periods of intense solar activity, special- 
its have noted an increased circulation of the air and 
temperature varidtions. It is cooler in the tropics and 
warmer in the polar regions. A mass of data on these 
phenomena has been collected all-over the world during 
e I.G.Y. 
Once it is sifted we shall know a lot more about the 
influence that solar activity exerts on the earth’s 
atmosphere. 
Already artificial satellites have proved to be excellent 
instruments of observation, and scientists are now 
contemplating sending aloft satellites equipped like real 
meteorological stations. Launched in an orbit 3,700 miles 
above the Earth, such stations would take about four 
hours to travel from one Pole to the other. They would 
provide scientists with invaluable information on the 
evolution of hurricanes and the formation of cloud 
masses. 
At this stage, man ‘will have advanced a long way 
towards his dream of mastering the climate. ‘Weather- 
making has become a necessity of modern living. As the 
world population grows and men strive to produce more 
and more food, it is important that agriculture should not 
be dependent on the whims of the weather. 
Up to now man’s “weather-making” activities have been 
on a very minor scale, such as inducing hail or thun- 
derstorms over a limited area. Now two scientists 
—Harry Wechsler, in the United States, and Grigory 
Avsiuk, In the Soviet Union—speak of nothing less than 
changing the climate in the Arctic by melting the floating 
ice which has formed there over thousands of years. 
Technically, the plan could be successful. Its direct 
consequence would be to make the climate warmer and 
more humid over an area covering more than 47,500,000 
square miles. Since only the ice floating on the sea is 
involved, there would be no danger of flooding such as 
that mentioned at the beginning of this article. Vegeta- 
tion would appear again in the coldest parts of Siberia 
and Alaska, though glaciers might form in the 
mountainous areas. 
All this, however, is still only a dream.

## [Page 10](065221engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

  
NTIL about ten or fifteen years ago it 
looked as if film making ‘was the privi- 
lege of five or six big nations. Since 
then it has been gradually recognized 
that, in fact film production has become 
“a_'world-wide medium of culture and a fast-expanding 
industry in more than fifty countries. ’ 
Though more and more films from Asia, the Arab 
countries and Lavin America began to be shown at 
important international festivals such as those of Venice 
and Cannes, Karlovy Vary (Czechoslovakia), Sao Paulo 
and Berlin, audiences continued for a long time to be 
limited and either critical or unimpressed. Between 1947 
and 1951 Unesco published reports on the film industry 
running to several thousand pages, but relatively few 
people explored this mine of information closely enough 
- to be struck by the growing universality of film produc- 
tion. 
After 1950, however, awards made at the festivals of 
Venice, Cannes, Karlovy Vary, and Berlin, turned the 
spotlight on the Japanese film industry which, since 1925, 
has produced more feature films than Hollywood, and on 
the Indian cinema with its productions in 14 languages. 
And while the West was at last discovering the longest- 
Georges Sadoul is a leading authority on the history of the cinema. 
Professor at the Institute for Advanced Studies on the Cinema in 
Paris and Lecturer at the Institute of Filmology at the Sorbonne, 
he is the author of a General History of the Cinema (five volumes 
published) on which he has been working for the past 20 years. 
Over 100,000 copies of this work have been printed in eight lan- 
guages. A fifth edition, completely revised and covering the evo- 
lution of the cinema in over 70 countries, is now. in press. 
Mr. Sadoul is also the author of a Life of Charles Chaplin and 
of The Wonders of the Cinema. 
10 
AN SSS YET ETE 
CUE bem AT La LBNEESRENS FRE FEA 3 ERLE SR 
  
established of the Eastern film industries, new national 
schools ‘were coming into being. Films of strong emo- 
tional appeal such as The Maimed (Si Pitiang, 1952) by 
the Indonesian producer Kotot Sukardi, or those of poetic 
beauty like Path of Destiny (Rekava, 1947) by the 
Ceylonese producer, Leister Peires, showed that certain 
countries had acquired the art of film making almost 
simultaneously with their independance. 
To take in the full panorama of the cinema in the 
world today ‘we need to look beyond Europe and North 
America to the countries of Asia, the Arab world, Latin 
America and the continent of Africa. 
Yet how well known is Europe’s own film production? 
There is much more to it than the works of the main 
film producing countries—Great Britain, Italy, Germany 
the U.S.S.R.,, France and two of the Scandinavian 
countries, Denmark and Sweden, which were already 
producing remarkable films between 1910 and 1920. 
Just after the Second World War came the revelation 
of Central Europe’s great progress in the art of film 
production. What did we know of Hungarian films before 
It Happened in Europe (Radvanyi, 1947) and Talpalainyi 
Fold (Frygies Ban, 1948)? about Polish films before Last 
Stage (Wanda Jakubowska, 1948) and Border Street 
(Alexander Ford, 1948)? or about Swiss films, until 
Lindtberg’s Last Chance (1945) made such an overwhelm- 
ing impression with its message of human solidarity? 
Yet these films were not the works of suddenly inspir- 
ed producers. They were the end result of some twenty 
to thirty years’ research, patient experiment and tentative 
groping, and of fruitful international contacts which 
helped to set the art of film making on its feet in 
countries ‘where the national film industry lacked 
independence or the means to develop. 
Since 1950, Spain has given us the films of Bardem and 
 
CONTINUED PAGE 12 
 

## [Page 11](065221engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — April 1959 
  
Nordisk Tonefilm 
SWEDEN is by no means a newcomer to the film industry, As early as 1915 and for some ten years 
after then, the work of Swedish producers and actors carried this country’s productions to the supreme 
heights of film art. Following a period of eclipse, the Swedish cinema is today again in the forefront of 
world film making. Above, Ingrid Thulin in a scene from “Brink of Life™, the work of Ingmar Bergman. 
Il

## [Page 12](065221engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

FILM MAKING  (crines 
Berlengua (Welcome Mr. Marshall, Death of a Cyclist, 
Calabuig); Greece, those of Cacoyannis (Stella) and 
Kondouros (The Ogre of Athens); Yugoslavia, productions 
by Pogacic and Striglic; and Bulgaria, the work of Z. Jan- 
dov. 
How many people know that Finland, with a population 
of barely four millions, and having a language that is 
practically unknown outside its frontiers, manages to 
produce from 25 to 30 feature films a year? Many of these 
films, as for example The White Reindeer (Erik Blomberg, 
1952) and The Unknown Soldier (Edwin Laine, 1955) set 
very high standards. Though the artistic merits of the 
Turkish cinema are an unknown quantity, the fact that 
in some years the studios at Istambul produce fifty films 
or more is not without significance, since quantity is 
sometimes the forerunner of quality. 
In art there is never a status quo for very long. A 
brilliant school can disappear overnight and just as 
easily come to life again. 
Between 1915 and 1925 Sweden reached the supreme 
heights of film art through the work of producers like 
Stiller and Sjostrém and actors and actresses like Lars 
Hansom and Greta Garbo, and then seemed to flounder 
in the doldrums of commercialism. But in 1940, came 
a revival and today Sweden is once again in the fore- 
front of world film making, not only thanks to Ingmar 
Bergman, but to other equally talented producers, Sjosberg 
and Siicksdorf in particular. 
Storm over Asian filmdom 
f the art of making films can flourish in a country of 
I seven million inhabitants it can hardly fail to take 
root in the ancient civilizations whose populations run 
into hundreds of millions. An early masterpiece by the 
great Russian producer Pudovkin was given the title 
Storm Over Asia. Nowadays Asian countries are sending 
their films to the rest of the world, with their own storms, 
idylls and discoveries, their own epics and elegies. 
First of the Asian film makers was Japan which began 
back in 1910 and which was soon followed by China, 
Korea and India. Few people know that in 1927 more 
feature films (90) were produced in Shanghai ‘than in 
France. Production standards soon reached high levels. 
In the film library of Peking, I was able to see several 
Chinese films made in the thirties, including The Lost 
Horses by Tsai Tsou-sen and The Angels of Mercy by 
Yuang Mu tse, which (were every bit as good as the best 
Occidental films of that period and which already had 
a. “neo-realist” flavour. 
In China today a score of new fllm studios are being 
built in as many provinces. Though the number of 
cinema tickets sold in 1958—2,600,000,000—represents an 
average of only four per -person, it is still 30 or 40 
times higher than’the average for 1945; and the local 
number of tickets sold makes China the second or third 
cinema-going country in the world, after the United 
States of America and the USSR. 
As for Japan, both the production figures—1,000 full- 
length films in 1928, 443 in 1957, and probably about 520 
in 1958—and the audience figures (one thousand million 
cinema-goers, an average of twelve cinema tickets per 
year per inhabitant) are high; so is the quality. Since 
1921, Kinugasa, Nizogushi, Heinosuke Gosho and H. 
Shimizu have joined the ranks of the leading film pro- 
ducers of the world. Even today one cannot help being 
impressed by the technical perfection, bold approach and 
poetic qualities of Jujiro (Kinugasa, 1928), one of the 
few Japanese silent films ever to be seen in Europe. This 
film is the equal of the finest American, German, French 
and Soviet productions of the days of the silent screen. 
Since 1950, owing to the well-deserved success of The 
Gates of hell (Kinugasa), Rashomon (Kurosawa) and Life 
of Oharu, The Gallant Lady (Mizogushi), many people 
have gained the impression that most Japanese films, 
and certainly the best ones, deal with the Samurai period. 
In actual fact, though they are not as well-known in 
the West, the majority of Japanese films, including the 
best and the most audacious, deal with contemporary the- 
mes. One could almost say jokingly that neo-realism was 
born, not in Rome in about 1944, but in Tokyo in 1927, 
12 CONTINUED PAGE 14 
 
T
a
m
 
Le 
A 
  
  Bt TO SS TT EL We Ae Sa ES peg 1 
» y k Ts Soh rE ATs PPh Eg TE x : ra 3 : art wy 
tn
 
LI
 
TEA
 r
ye
 
Hs Why i 
i + ¥, I es * 
Bi ad aah Fea 
pe or - {ak ey 
k Toa SN bi ly : = 
¥ " , 
: be * 
a 
LEH
 
Gy 
5 
1 
0, F
a
 
i S
N
e
 A
 
T
e
 
  
us 
a 
cl By) 
* eA ayo TA a a ns am LA I pts LER, eC 3 ATE TR 
De A = Al E4348. wi Poy + tape ET MEE Sop Fo SR, RE NR TY A CERNE Reg TR PR RRA ey 
Sa G8 BTR Ln Se he A BT SS REE RE SR Pt RT PR SER ER EAN EPR

## [Page 13](065221engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
The Unesco Courier. 
  
April 1959

## [Page 14](065221engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

FILM MAKING (Cont'd) 
  
  
IN CONTINENTAL CHINA many new film studios 
are now being built and cinema-going has shown a 
massive increase—in 1956 the number of tickets 
JAPAN'S FILM INDUSTRY, unknown and unhonoured abroad until recently, is the world's 
leading producer of feature films (500 in 1958). Those on modern themes, like **Crab Fisher- 
man” (above) are even less known in the West than films on the Samurai period. 
with the Pro Kino movement, and that, after 1951, neo- 
realism has burned with a brighter flame in the Japanese 
archipelago than in the Italian peninsula, thanks to 
Tadashi Imai (We Are Alive), S. Yamamoto (The Sunless 
“ Square), Kaneto Shindo (The Children of Hiroshima) 
Yamamura (Kanikosen), Naruse (Okasan) and H. Gosho 
(The Four Chimneys). 'We must remember too that Akiro 
Kurosawa, one of the most outstanding of today's film 
producers, made not only Rashomon and the Seven Samu- 
rai but also To live and Doomed, in which he treats the 
problems of present-day Japan with a depth and under- 
standing worthy of a great novelist or painter. 
Every year two hundred films are made in Hong-Kong, 
about one hundred in the Philippines, and some sixty in 
North Xorea. Though neither they nor the fresh, lively 
films of the young Indonesian cinema (seventy-five films 
in 1956) are scarcely known outside South-East Asia, we 
are at least beginning to see something of the films made 
in India. 
Hindi, Bengali, Tamil, Telugu, Mahrati’ Gujrati, Mala- 
yalam, Kanarese... India’s films are made in fourteen lan- 
guages. There are three main centres of production. The 
newest is inthe South. The one in the West (centred on 
Bombay) is the oldest; and it is here that the father of 
the Indian cinema Phalké, made his first films back in 
1913. The Bombay studios’ production includes many high 
budget films, the demand for which is now gradually 
growing in the Orient and also as far away as Morocco. 
On the east coast, Calcutta studios have been a centre 
14 
of sparkling, brilliant productions for the past twenty 
years. Here, in the country of Rabindranath Tagore, 
important films, inspired by masterpieces of contemporary 
Bengali literature, have been produced by the New 
Theatre led by Devaki Bose and Barua. Their merit was 
recognized by a Venice Festival jury as early as 1935. 
Nor has the standard of this output dropped since then; 
on the contrary it has risen. Two of the greatest of the 
modern Indian producers are, in fact, from Bengal: Bimal 
Roy (Twa acres of land) who started with the New Thea- 
tre movement: and Sajatajit Ray (Pather Panchali and 
The Unconquered) who won a prize at Venice. 
Sajatajit Ray learned a great deal from watching Claude 
and Jean Renoir making The River in India; and Phalké, 
before making his first Indian film, spent some time train- 
ing with the French firm of Pathé at Vincennes. Inter- 
national exchanges yield valuable fruits, and “old” film 
industries can help new ones to find their feet; though 
there is no doubt that India, with her wealth of talent, 
would inevitably have succeeded in building up an out- 
standing film industry on her own, without knowing 
anything about the art of film making in the West. 
New cinema industries are springing up in other parts 
of Asia as well. The cinema industry in the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics is multi-national, and all the 
main Republics have their own studios—at Baku, Tbilisi, 
(Georgia), Erivan (Armenia), Stalinabad (Tadjikistan), 
Tashkent (Uzbekistan), Alma-Ata (Kazakhstan) among 
others— all producing films in the languages of their 
countries. The film production of the Asiatic Republics

## [Page 15](065221engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
The Unesco Courier. — April 1959 
Georges Sadou] Collection 
sold was between ten and twenty times more than 
the average for 1 945. Scene above is from the Chinese 
film “The White-haired Girl” made nine years ago. 
INDONESIAN FILMS typify the work of the young cinema industries which have been 
springing up across Asia in recent years, but whose fresh and spirited productions are 
hardly known at all outside that part of the world. ‘“The Return” (above) was made in 1954. 
of the U.S.S.R. has been expanding rapidly in recent years 
(10 to 20 films per year), 
Over a period of eight years (1950-1958) Iran made 
ninety films, or five to six times more than its entire pro- 
duction during the previous fifty years. There is a curious 
reason for this boom. After 1945, two foreign films 'weré 
dubbed in Persian—a French one First Rendez-vous, ‘with 
Danielle Darrieux, and an Azerbaijan comic opera film, 
Arshin mal alan, made in Baku. The cinemas showing 
First Rendez-vous and Arshin mal alan. between 1946 and 
1948, were besieged, simply because these films were 
dubbed in a language people understood. Since Persian- 
speaking films were obviously a good business proposition, 
the production of commercial films began to increase. 
This in turn enabled studios to be built, and before long, 
as audiences became more demanding, the standard of the 
films improved. Among the best of these since 1957 are 
The Knightly Vagrant by Mahed Mohseni. The Happy 
Urchin by Rafi and, above all, South of the Town by Gaf- 
fary. These films bear the imprint of certain French and 
Italian techniques... “neo-realism” may soon be making its 
appearance in Iran. 
The vast film world of Latin America, which begins not 
at the Panama Canal but at the Rio Grande, is 
practically unknown. | 
The Mexican film industry, the best known and rightly 
so, produces an average of one hundred films a year. 
These are screened throughout the Spanish-speaking 
world and actually have a ‘wider diffusion than Hollywood 
productions. Since Portrait of Mary, The Pearl and 
Lovesick, producer Emilio Fernandez and cameraman 
Gabriel Figueroa, have become world famous, though 
there are many other famous names in the Mexican school, 
including Galindo, Bracho, Gavaldon, the great Luis 
Bunuel, Carlos Velo, and Benito Alazraki. 
It is worth remembering that Emilio Fernandez likes to 
call himself “El Indio”—the Indian. A large part of the 
Mexican cinema, including Portrait of Mary and Alaz- 
raki’s Roots, is permeated with the ancient culture of the 
pre-Columbian era. If Eisenstein with Que viva Mexico 
(1930) and Paul Strand and Zinnermann with The Wave 
and The Alvarado Rebels (1936) gave much to the Mexican 
cinema, it was because they, in turn found great riches 
in Mexico, with its Indians, its peons, its historic battles, 
its ancient monuments and modern murals, and the 
wealth of its folklore and traditions. 
Between 1927 and 1932 the technique and hold approach 
of Brazilian films made them a match for the best Euro- 
pean productions, thanks mainly to Umberto Mauro and 
Mario Peixoto. After this the Brazilian film industry 
appeared to do little more than produce commercial films 
designed to popularize the songs and dances of the Brazil- 
ian Carnival. Then about 1950 it revived again partly 
due to the fact that the famous Alberto Cavalcanti went 
back, to work in his country for a time. : 
The success of Lima Baretto’s magnificent O Cangaceiro 
has since drawn the world’s attention again to the exis- 
tence of the Brazilian cinema industry although this was 
only one among many other good films it had produced. 
CONTINUED PAGE 17 

## [Page 16](065221engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
   
   
THE TUNISIAN CINEMA 
made a promising start-in the 
field of production with 
“Goha” (above) on which 
Tunisian film-makers collabo- 
rated closely with the French 
producer, Jacques Baratier. 
Georges Sadoul Collection 
LAs t ee TES 
SOOO, 
Jenn 
  
  
  
POLAND'S FILM INDUS- 
TRY was little known before 
1948 when two important 
films, ‘Last Stage” and ‘“‘Bor- 
der Street” were produced. 
Yet each year Poland releases 
eighteen to twenty films, many 
of which like “The Five Boys 
of Barska Street” (above) de- 
serve to be better known. 
Photo Film Polski 
  
 
EGYPT is the major film- 
producing country of the Afri- 
can Continent and its films are 
shown throughout the vast 
Moslem world, from Dakar to 
Jakarta. Scene above is from 
“The Leech” by Abou Seif. 
Georges Sadoul Collection

## [Page 17](065221engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

  
Georges Sadouj Collection 
NEGRO AFRICA remains a “white blank” on the map of 
world film production. The short-length film “Mouramani® 
(above) is one of the few films entirely produced by Africans. 
No major film has yet been made by Negroes in Africa. 
BT Ya ! =x . A a 
  
Ceylonese Legation, Paris 
CEYLON is one of the countries which entered the ranks 
of the world’s film makers almost simultaneously with their 
accession to independence. Above is a scene from “Path of 
Destiny” made in 1947 and produced by Leister Peires. 
The Unesco Courier. — April 1959 
FILM MAKING  (conineg 
In Argentina, the cinema has already celebrated the fif- 
tieth anniversary of its first productions. During the 
1930's, Argentinian films held first place on the markets 
of the Spanish-speaking peoples, and though Argentina 
has now been supplanted by Mexico, Buenos Aires still 
continues to turn out between thirty and forty full-length 
films a year. The work of Sazlavsky, Lucas Demare, Hugo 
Del Carril and Torre Nilson amongst others, is well up to 
international standard. 
The production of films in Chile and Venezuela has been 
uneven; but The Forgolien Creek, produced by Bruno Ge- 
bel near Santiago, and The Sloop Isabel, made by Hugo 
Christensen near Caracas, have won favourable comment 
at international festivals. Cuba has been producing full- 
length films since 1910; and before long Colombia, Pana- 
ma, Bolivia, Uruguay and even Puerto Rico—where the 
film industry has been developing spasmodically—may 
come into the field. 
The vast, rapidly developing territory of Latin America 
with its teeming millions, will, no doubt add new eye 
openers to the film world before the cenfury is out. So 
may Australia, which has been producing films for fifty 
years; or New Zealand, which, since 1950, already has 
several full-length films to its credit. 
In the continent of Africa, the only major film- 
producing country is Egypt, whose films are shown 
throughout the vast Moslem world wherever the language 
of the Koran is understood and modern Arabic is used by 
press and radio. Thus Egypt's films reach audiences in 
two continents, from Dakar to Jakarta, from the Congo to 
China. And there are also cinemas showing Arabic- 
speaking films in several French towns, in North and 
South America and in Africa South of the Sahara. 
The Moslem Hollywood 
he emergence of Cairo as the Hollywood of the Moslem 
world coincided with the second World War; and 
wireless and gramophone records playing in cafés and 
squares helped to increase the distribution of Arabic- 
speaking fllms, in ‘which singing and dancing play an 
important part. Even fifteen years ago there were towns 
in the Middle East where people paid twice as much to 
see an Arabic film as to see an American or European one. 
Perhaps not all the hundreds of films made in Cairo since 
1940 are of a high standard, but no list of the world’s best 
film producers would be complete without the names of 
the phate Kamal Selim, Salah Abu Seif and Youssef 
Chahine. 
Between 1945 and 1950, a few Moroccan films were made 
at Rabat; and the Tunisian cinema made a promising 
start with Goha on which Tunisians collaborated with a 
Frenchman, Jacques Baratier. 
Africa South of the Sahara however remains a blank 
on the map of film production. Sixty years after the 
invention of the cinema, no major film, as far as I know, 
had yet been produced, photographed, written and scripted 
in their language by African Negroes. Their participation. 
in general, has been limited to acting. In other words, 
there are 200 million coloured people who have still not 
been able to make full use of the cinema to express 
themselves; and since statistics show that there are still 
regions where, on an average, an African buys a cinema 
ticket only once or twice in twenty years (1), the cultural 
influence of the cinema here is limited. 
Figures for cinema attendance usually coincide with 
illiteracy areas—and “hunger areas”. Since the end of 
the Second World War, however, the geography of the 
cinema and the film industry has been changing radically 
from year to year. Film making will soon cease to be one 
of the most unevenly distributed things in the world. For 
fifty countries today—perhaps a hundred tomorrow—the 
cinema represents an important cultural medium and a 
rich vehicle of expression. 
(1) See Unesco's “Film and Clnema Statistics” (Report N° 1); 
“World Communications” (1956); and “Facts and Figures” (1957). 
17

## [Page 18](065221engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

a
 i 
a 
W
A
 
M
L
 
F
T
 
hr
 
ll 
I
 
—
—
—
.
—
_
—
—
_
 
: 
- 
: 
. 
. 
FF
 
F
R
 
1 
~ 
P
E
E
 E
T
.
 
T
E
 
A
R
R
 
B
R
 
T
R
E
 
r
T
 
an
e 
r
T
 
— 
F
E
E
 
. 
- 
    
 : a 2 3 Ray 
 
 
AN 
ad 
FILM MAKING (contd) 
7 Aa 
aa 
TE re TO A TIT NE TT FRESE TITY 
 
 
Le AT had “etal 3 ef A 
 
 
CR CET NTR Tl EY TEA = 
FF
 
 
 
Sr SR eC Nh” | gr a de Tp A Ma Pt re Ls id ul 
  
pa 
The Unesco 
  
oh Ah TS | La At 
Courier. — 
 
 
 
 
April 1959 
vy Bl RT 
3 
3] 
- £1 
N 
  
A
 
C
N
T
 
e
e
 
T
E
 
I 
S
v
e
a
 
N
r
 
e
u

## [Page 19](065221engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

## [Page 20](065221engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

In Yugoslavia 
 


### 65222: Teen-agers from four continents build a modern highway in Yugoslavia

TEEN-AGERS FROM FOUR CONTINENTS 
BUILD A MODERN HIGHWAY 
  
  
    
GREETING THE NEW ARRIVALS. Between ten and thirteen thousand young people worked each 
month from March to November last year on the construction of the 87-miles long Ljubljana-Zagreb sec- 
tion of Yugoslavia's international cross-country highway. During the holiday months their numbers rose 
to the peak figure of 18,000 and by the time this section of the highway was completed, some 60,000 volun- 
teers had done their share (out of some 200,000 who made application to participate). Here, at the 
Kovenitka Camp, near Ljubljana, “veterans” of the volunteer brigades welcome a group of newcomers. 
by Bertha Gaster 
HERE have been hundreds of ways of making roads 
in the past—slave labour, serf and feudal labour, 
communal levies, convict labour, But nowadays 
the most common way is to do it on strictly commercial 
lines. The authorities hire surveyors and engineers; 
construction and road gangs, and in due course the road 
is made, costing a certain sum. It is a plain, straight- 
forward business affair, and the profit and loss accounts 
are there in two parallel columns for all to see. 
But there is also another way—to whistle up boys 
and girls from the ends of the country, farmhands, 
students, secondary school children, waitresses, clerks, 
then give them picks and shovels and let them go to it, 
singing. By and by they will go home again, leaving a 
road behind them, and however trained accountants work 
out costs and expenditure, the full profit and loss on that 
road will be hidden forever from business eyes. 
This is the way Yugoslavia is building her “autoput”, 
or motor road, the new international highway which by 
1960 should be crossing the land from the north-west to 
20 
the south-east. On November 23 1958 the newest stretch 
was formally opened by Marshal Tito, a week before the 
scheduled date. It is 140 kilometres (87 miles) long, 
linking Ljubljana and Zagreb, the capitals of the Slove- 
nian and Croatian Federal Republics, and joining the 
480 kilometres (300 miles) of highway already constructed 
in the same way between Zagreb and Belgrade. And a 
great part of it 'was the work of young Yugoslavs come 
from all parts of the country in an enormous youth 
project which lasted from March to November. 
To find out how it ‘was being done I had to go to Otocec, 
halfway along the route, where the organizing staff of 
the Youth Movement had its headquarters. We drove 
from Zagreb through the low rolling hills of Slovenia, 
beside rich meadows and wooded uplands and along the 
banks of the winding Krkva river, sometimes on the old 
road, soon to be relegated to slow farm traffic, sometimes 
over a stretch of the newly cemented “autoput”. 
Otocec itself was a surprise, an ancient manor house 
with pinkwashed plaster walls and corner turrets and an

## [Page 21](065221engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 65222: Teen-agers from four continents build a modern highway in Yugoslavia

arcaded courtyard, standing in a tiny island of flowers 
and green gardens along one of the loveliest reaches of 
the river. Now thé property of the State, it has been 
loaned to the Youth Movement for the duration of the 
“action”. Next year it is planned to turn it into a hotel. 
It was José Hardmann, a young lawyer seconded to the 
staff organisation handling the job there, who told me 
the first part of the story. He was practical. He dealt 
with facts and figures. At the beginning of the year 
there were eighty kilometres (50 miles) of the new Ljubl- 
jana-Zagreb stretch of highway still to be built. There 
was the Youth Movement of Yugoslavia which clamoured 
And from there, through for a share in the building. 
all the preliminary 
planning, it seemed 
but a step to the 
single wooden barrack 
set up by paid la- 
bour on each of the 
proposed camp sites, 
which were taken over 
by the first volunteer 
youth brigade arriv- 
ing in the slush and 
snow of March to 
prepare the ground. 
With the exception 
of the electrical bri- 
gade,” they ‘were all 
untrained, but within 
twenty days sixteen 
full working camps 
or colonies — another 
was added later—had 
been built in the 
‘countryside along the 
designated route. 
Water and electricity 
had been laid on—at 
least one small village 
in the neighbourhood 
got electricity as a 
res ul t—telephones 
connected, approach 
roads built, wooden 
barracks and huts 
assembled, tents 
pitched, and all stores 
and equipment distri- 
buted, from bunks, 
benches and tables, 
blankets and sheets, 
crockery and food, 
down to the radio 
and first aid installa- 
tions in each small 
wireless station and 
clinic, The girls’ 
The Unesco Courier. — April 1959 
tween the first and the last stages, like the filling of a 
sandwich, came the young volunteers in their thousands 
to dig and clear and level the road and lay the rubble 
and shingle foundations. 
Thousands is not an exaggeration. The students, secon- 
dary school children and foreign contingents, who came 
during the summer holidays, stayed only one month: land- 
workers,. who came largely in the slack season in May 
and June, stayed two. But it was reckoned that there 
were between fen and thirteen thousand young people 
working on the road each month, rising to the peak figure 
of eighteen thousand in the July and August holiday 
months, and that when the work was completed in 
november, something 
 
 
like sixty thousand 
must have passed 
through the colonies, 
out of the 200,000 
who had put in 
applications to come. 
I learned some 
more from the hand- 
ful of young men 
who have been, res- 
ponsible for most of 
the organizing work, 
forty in ‘all, twenty 
of them seconded for 
the duration of the 
project from univer- 
sity and training 
schools and first jobs 
—all of them having 
been active in youth 
work for a long ‘while 
—and more from the 
boys and girls I talk- 
ed to as I went up 
and down the road. 
Staff and rank and 
file alike wore the reg- 
ulation khaki drill 
blouses and slacks of 
the brigades, with 
the little “titovka” 
caps of the Partisans, 
flashes on their 
shoulders show- 
ing their ranks and 
- the names of thelr 
brigades. 
That loose working 
garb soon became 2 
familiar sight to me 
whether in a singing 
column ‘with picks 
and shovels and fly- 
school taken over in 
Novo Mesto as a tem- 
porary hospital had 
also been fully 
equipped and staffed, 
though, as the head 
doctor told me later 
—"“fortynately, most of our beds have been consistently 
empty”. On April 1, as planned, the digging began. 
José Hardmann also explained the way the scheme func- 
tioned, pointing out on the map the line picked by the 
professional surveyors from Ljubljana who mapped out 
and designed the road. “Some of it runs straight along 
the old Roman road from the north,” he said. There 
were thirteen professional construction gangs, with paid 
labour, stationed along the road, responsible for the later 
stages of skilled work such as transporting and mixing 
the cement and laying the final coats of bitumen and 
cement— “particularly hilly parts or curves will be laid 
with cobbles to give cars a grip; our icy winters here are 
no joke for drivers”, said José Hardmann. And in be- 
FLAGS OF THE NATIONS fly over the international camp at Kronovo where 
120 volunteers from abroad were living. These young people came from the United 
States, England, Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Sweden, France, Poland, 
Italy, Germany, Tunisia, Morocco and Israel, and worked with their Yugoslav com- a 
rades last July. Here, foreign volunteers return to camp after collecting their bedding. 
ing flag, setting off 
for the morning or af- 
ternoon shift on the 
road—six hours, and 
compulsory two 
hour’s rest afterwards 
--or in a lorry load 
lumbering by on an excursion to Zagreb or Ljubljana 
or even further afield; or simply worn by boys and girls 
swinging hands as they strolled up and down the broad 
streets of the little half-way town of Novo Mesto on their 
free day. Even here however, the girls had managed to 
introduce a touch of fashion; it ‘was definitely the done 
thing, I noticed, for all the girls, unlike the boys, to wear 
their trousers half twisted up the leg. 
I learned from Dragoslav Petrovic and his friend Milu- 
tin Damjanaovic, two eighteen-year-old farm labourers 
from one of the Serbian brigades, that it was the local 
youth organizations who handled the recruiting end, and 
sifted applications to make up each brigade, four com- 
panies of thirty each, 120 in all, with an average of 
 
CONT'D CN NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 22](065221engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 65222: Teen-agers from four continents build a modern highway in Yugoslavia

Teen-agers build 
a higWaY (coronie 
Working dress for staff and rank 
and file on the Youth Road 
is khaki drill blouses and slacks 
and the small *titovka” caps, 
worn by the youths (right) from 
Bosnia, who are trying on the 
new boots that have just been 
issued to them. For heavy work 
like mixing cement on a hot day, 
(photo, far right) regulation dress 
is abandoned in favour of shorts. 
Yugoslav Youth Movement photos 
twenty-five girls to each brigade, ages ranging from fifteen 
to twenty. 
The educational whys and wherefores of a youth project 
on this national scale are many—historical, social, poli- 
tical, even economic, Historically, the unity of the Yu- 
goslav lands has been bedevilled for centuries by local 
rivalries and jealousies, Serb against Croat, Catholic 
against Greek Orthodox, submerged Macedonians, dual 
nationality border folk, rivalries exploited with cunning 
effect, for instance, by the Nazis in the last war. Bringing 
  
COOKHOUSE SESSION. A professional cook is attached to each 
camp, but the rest of the cooking and work is done by relays of volun- 
teers like this group from Belgrade shown busily peeling potatoes. 
22 
 
the young folk together, Serbs, Croats, Bosnian Moslems, 
border minorities, working and playing side by side on 
a road which has been given for name the old Partisan 
slogan—"“The Brotherhood and Unity Road”—is a step 
towards mutual understanding. 
Politically, in a socialist country, it mixes up classes 
and types, students and farmer boys, factory workers and 
secondary school pupils, living and eating and digging 
as one, and learning from each other. Socially it gives 
the young people of the more backward parts of the 
country a chance to see something outside their own vil- 
lage, learn some of the simple rules of hygiene, and 
acquire a few of the elementary skilis badly needed in 
the national drive towards industrialization and mecha- 
nization. 
Young Memic Shemso, for instance, who at twenty had 
never been out of his Bosnian village, had learnt a lot 
of things. He told me some of them. How to clean a 
house. How to make a bed. How to keep -a settlement 
neat. And he, in common with many others, had taken 
advantage of the courses provided for leisure hours to 
learn to ride a bicycle and motor cycle. In the first four 
months some eleven thousand young men had gone 
through bicycle, motor cycle and car courses, as well as 
considerable numbers who took the tractor-driving course. 
Classes in photography and wireless mechanics were also 
available for students and others with higher qualifi- 
cations. 
The pretty young waitress serving me at the Otocec 
canteen was another example of how different sorts of 
training schemes were dovetailed into the main plan. 
Franska Basaj, seventeen, is learning to be a waitress 
at the school for restaurant workers in Ljubljana, and 
she was one of the seven students from the school who 
were doing a three weeks’ stint at the headquarters’ 
canteen. “When we go, other students will come”, she 
explained. “By November everyone in the school will 
have had a turn.” Franska ‘wasn’t sure she was enjoying 
it very much. The ‘work was hard and the hours were 
long. “It’s lovely here, but we don’t get enough time to

## [Page 23](065221engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 65222: Teen-agers from four continents build a modern highway in Yugoslavia

The Unesco Courier. — April 1959 
  
   
  
 
enjoy it. 
practice.” 
Still, she added philosophically, “it’s all good 
There was plenty of evidence of spare time amusements 
scattered about the camps; bright modernist designs and 
a futurist frieze along the hut walls left by the Belgrade 
art students of an earlier brigade; a small model of the 
Zornik hydraulic dam in Bosnia modelled in mud and 
plaster by a brigade from Zvornik; patterns and slogans 
carried out in coloured pebbles decorating the entrances 
of the camps and edging barracks and tents. There ‘was 
football and sport for those who liked them, though 
swimming in the river had been forbidden, to the chagrin 
of many, since two brigadists had been drowned. Cul- 
tural activities included occasional visits from theatrical 
groups and orchestras, lectures organized and given by 
students. Best of all, there were the long evenings round 
camp fires with singing and dancing and walking and 
talking under the shadow of the pine trees. 
And economically—did it pay? Funnily enough, said 
José Hardmann, it did. Providing voluntary labour in 
the form of a Youth Project is reckoned to cost seven 
per cent more than by employing strictly commercial 
methods with paid labour, But the social value, the edu- 
cational benefits of such “actions” in helping to raise the 
general level, has long justified such a loss in the eyes of 
the authorities. In point of fact, however, it was ex- 
plained, since the 5,600,000 dinars which the road costs 
comes from a Government loan on which interest has 
to be paid, and since there is no paid labour force avail- 
able in the country big enough to do the job in less than 
three years, it is calculated that the saving of interest 
charges by finishing the work in one year, under the 
youth project, thus saving two years’ interest, more than 
covers the extra seven per cent. 
To this must be added the fact that a great deal of the 
prefabricated barracks, tents and equipment of the youth 
camps ‘will be dismantled and used again in the coming 
year on the next stretch of road to be constructed in the 
south. 
    
    
    
TIME OFF FOR DANCING. There is no shortage of music during off- 
duty hours. Many volunteers bring accordions, guitars and other instru- 
ments with them for folk and modern dancing and camp sing-songs. 
23

## [Page 24](065221engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

\ 


### 65223: Driverless tractors: the latest thing in mechanized farming

 DRIVERLESS TRACTORS: THE LATEST 
THING IN MECHANIZED FARMING 
    
Re Te ay Ld : Sav ag Oo. yo he #8 A > 48 ar 
‘ Se rl a 5 RK, ; = 
don : dh . . 14 
Bg A gd aby A . - A 
f ow ad eat yd b Ey Ne We espa a5 gL) “ kg 
RRR IR a Ll 
as Pn x x Se oN HR diy : Ah 
RA € cs IN S01 Se Ta 0 el 
by E.W. Golding 
Toda new methods of mechanization and automation are giving a tremen- 
dous boost to agricultural efficiency, making the farmer's job easier 
and more profitable. Better still, they point the way to a solution of food short- 
ages brought on by a massive and ever-accelerating increase in the world’s 
population. 
The whole world depends upon the farmer whether he grows wheat in Kansas, 
coffee in Brazil or cotton in Egypt. Since the start of this century, thanks to 
the invention of new kinds of farm machinery and the willingness of farmers 
to adopt them, agricultural methods have changed out of all recognition. 
In the U.S.A., for example, between 1938 and 1958, farmers more than trebled 
their ownership of tractors to a total of 4,700,000. Since 1945 they have increased 
the number of newer work-saving machinery by 1,200 %, investing over 17,000 
million dollars in combines, cornpickers, pickup hay balers, field forage har- 
vesters and other machinery. Now, taking another big step from mechaniza- 
tion to automation in the raising of animals and fowl they are copying the 
assembly line techniques of industry. 
One of the most striking examples is the giant “production line” for eggs 
of a U.S. layer-breeder. whose hens are kept in individual cages, feed from a 
continuously filled feed trough on one side and drink from a fountain on the 
other. They drop their eggs on an inclined wire floor and these roll out through 
an automatic counter onto a conveyor belt that takes them to a human sorter 
who boxes them. One man can easily take care of 7,000 birds with an output 
of 4,000 eggs a day. 
Farming, the greatest industry in the world, is now adopting techniques which 
have proved their worth in other industries. More and more ways are being 
found to use electricity in farming, and research in this field has made pos- 
sible the development of such remarkable devices as the British experimental 
automatic farm tractor described in the following article. 
24 
   
    
  
farm tractor without a driver, 
which sets out from the farm- 
yard, makes its way round the 
field where it performs tasks automa- 
tically, and finally comes to a halt 
back at its starting point, was seen 
recently at Sonning Farm, near Read- 
ing in the South of England. 
The demonstration was staged 
jointly by the Farm Mechanization 
department of the University of 
Reading and the British Electrical 
Research Association, which has its 
rural electrification field station at 
Shinfield, near Reading. The two 
groups are collaborating in this and 
other research involving the use of 
electricity in agriculture and horti- 
culture, 
The tractor is a standard model but 
it is fitted with special coils of ‘wire 
—“search” coils—which are mounted 
at the front of the machine a few 
inches above the ground. These coils 
pick up signals from a current- 
carrying wire which can be laid on 
the ground or buried just below the 
surface. The current is alternating 
and is supplied from a small genera- 
tor, at a low voltage so that there is 
no danger of electric shocks being 
received by the fleld workers. 
The search coils receive signals 
from this directing ‘wire and, through 
a controlling circuit, operate the 
steering of the tractor by means of

## [Page 25](065221engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 65223: Driverless tractors: the latest thing in mechanized farming

  
  
solenoid-operated hydraulic valves 
and a double-acting hydraulic ram. 
Movement away from the wire pro- 
duces a stronger signal in one search 
coil .than in the other; an out-of- 
balance is created and the effect is 
to correct the steering to bring the 
machine back “on course”. In this 
way the tractor is made to follow, 
closely, the path traced out for it, 
while signals passed along the wire 
can stop it, or can make it do a num- 
ber of simple jobs, All this is achiev- 
ed without any human supervision; 
there is no radio control and no press- 
ing of buttons. 
There is a telescoping bumper 
mounted in front so that, if the trac- 
tor collides with something, the 
engine is shut off by the movement 
of the bumper closing contacts in the 
electrical control circuit. At the 
demonstration, the machine started 
out from the farmyard, passed 
through a gate, across the roadway— 
obeying red and green traffic control 
lights—passed through the field gate 
-and then made a circuit round the 
field distributing fertilizer or drop- 
ping bales of hay at selected places. 
It also sounded its horn automatically. 
The University and the E.R.A. have 
worked out this device as the first 
step towards a much fuller system of 
automatic operation of machines in 
the field. It is only a beginning: a 
  
  
good deal more research will be need- 
ed to follow out the succeeding steps 
which may lead one day to automa- 
tic ploughing, cultivating, harvesting, 
seeding, hoeing and other jobs. 
At present, the performance is 
confined to a very simple routine in 
which the machine moves along a par- 
ticular route and performs a number 
of pre-selected tasks. Even so, a 
considerable saving in labour could 
be achieved by dispensing with a 
tractor driver when carting silage or 
collecting grain from a combine har- 
vester and taking it back to the 
farmyard for unloading, Of course, 
the tractor has to be fitted with the 
search coils and hydraulic controls, 
and the directing wire has to be laid 
out. But these adjuncts, with the 
generator for the controlling signals, 
are not very expensive items and the 
power needed for the control is so 
small that costs are negligible. 
Another obvious advantage of a 
driver-less tractor is that it can be 
used for carrying out noxious or 
dangerous operations, such as spread- 
ing toxic weed killers or carting the 
radio-active materials which may be 
employed if certain techniques now 
proposed are adopted. 
One can also foresee the develop- 
ment of a self-navigating device 
allowing the tractor to move away 
from the wire, with perhaps a 
The Unesco Courier. — April 1959 
The time when a farm tractor 
will continue to work unattended 
at night while the farmer sleeps 
is perhaps not so far off as one 
might imagine. 
the Farm Mechanization Depart- 
ment of Reading University has 
already developed a system of 
automatic control which enables 
a tractor to carry out pre-selected 
tasks without any human super- 
vision. 
tion the machine set out from 
the farmyard, crossed a road, 
obeying red and green traffic 
control 
a gate, then made a circuit of 
a field, distributing fertilizer or 
dropping off bales of hay at 
selected places. Photo left, shows 
the driverless tractor being fitted 
with auto-controls; far left, a 
trial run during research into 
the use of automatic controls. 
In Great Britain 
At a recent demonstra- 
lights, passed through 
Photos Central Office 
of Information, London 
magnetic tape record which the 
tractor will “play” to itself to guide 
its more complicated motions and 
conduct it back to its shed for the 
night. But need it stop at night? 
Could it not go on with its work while 
its owner slept? 
These may seem fanciful ideas but 
there is no reason why automation, 
which is becoming so much fashion 
in industrial processes, should not be 
adopted on the farm. Indeed, there 
are very good reasons why it should. 
Labour saving in agriculture is 
becoming increasingly important in 
the more industrialized countries 
where farm workers are continually 
drifting away to other industries. 
And there is a need to allow standards 
of living to rise in the countries which 
are less developed industrially, by 
releasing agricultural workers for in- 
dustrial work. Increased productivity 
is the key to advances in this direc- 
tion. 
Automatic operation in poultry 
keeping—by the use of a travelling 
“canteen” bringing food to hens in 
laying batteries— and in pig rearing, 
by the use of automatic feeding, air 
conditioning and cleaning, have 
already been introduced. Automation 
in the field is certainly more difficult 
to accomplish than in fixed indoor 
installations, but its potentialities are 
perhaps even greater. 
25

## [Page 26](065221engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 65226: Khujir: island capital on the world's deepest lake

KHUJIR: ISLAND CAPITAL ON 
THE WORLD'S DEEPEST LAKE 
RG Bore waiehds ¥ “i FEAR Lea Dp PRIS 
(52 Lt oY 
  
    
  
   awe SL 
  
   
  
= ys oil = Sx od 
od > * oh © PN uk oF als EY BE 
PsA " > > A Br CIR iy ET af wig 
a he gt Ea RSet le oe py 
. - “or vo. . . BN . a 
: a " " > he . ” ad ww a : - gt od - No i Tad lL 
ps Te Ma iden. aero, Deh Mi 
i“ 2 Yes. nin 3 * . he 4 > = or § ” pv 
ad - J A 
» i. ya 
ert gh 
i 
  
THE ISLAND OF OLKHON, ON LAKE BAIKAL: A WINDSWEPT SIBERIAN LANDSCAPE OF BARE HILLS, SAND DUNES AND LOG CABINS. 
by Evguéni Veltistov 
middle of Lake Baikal —the deepest and one of the 
coldest lakes in the world. The climate is harsh, 
for the Baikal is a tremendous inland sea, nearly 
400 miles long and between 15 and 50 miles ‘wide, 
surrounded on almost all sides by snowy mountains. 
On the island the wind blows ceaselessly, year in year 
out, so strongly that even in the heart of winter the snow 
never settles on the ground: it is swept away by the wind. 
The landscape of Olkhon is also windswept—a sym- 
phony in red and yellow tints with its bare hills, sand 
dunes and log cabins. 
In winter, the island is joined to the mainland by a road 
across the ice. It is a dangerous crossing. Even 'when 
the thermometer registers forty degrees below zero 
(72 degrees of frost Fahrenheit) you have to keep a sharp 
look-out, for crevasses are apt to appear suddenly in front 
of your truck, and the best brakes in the world are useless 
on such a skating rink. 
Khujir, the island capital, is built on a high bank over- 
looking the lake. You get an excellent view of it as you 
approach the island from across the water. The big trays 
on which the fish are laid to dry stand out against a 
background of yellow sand; you see the plank walks that 
lead up the bank and the salting and curing sheds. Up 
on top of the cliff are solid-looking log houses, pine trees 
and more sand. 
On a sunny day, the whole town shines and sparkles like 
the decorations on a Christmas tree, for all the houses 
are made of pine-wood from the floor to the roof-top. 
Khujir is a fishing village and Lake Baikal provides a live- 
lihood for most of its menfolk. The fishermen are tough 
and sturdy and spend their lives on the water. In 
26 
T mE island of Olkhon lies in the heart of Siberia, in the summer, they cast their nets far out in the lake; in winter, 
they go back and forth across the ice, checking the holes 
they have cut in the ice by plunging their hands into the 
freezing water, until they find that their nets are full of 
fish. 
Like all small towns Khujir has its chronicler—the local 
school-master, Nicolai Reviakin. He witnessed the birth 
and the development of the town, since he arrived on the 
island a quarter of a century ago when the site on ‘which 
Khujir now stands was nothing but a wilderness. It ‘was 
inhabited by a lone fisherman who had settled there in 
spite of the fact that the Shamans (local priests or sor- 
cerers) considered the spot to be peopled by evil spirits. 
The Buriats had brought offerings there from time imme- 
morial, and the womenfolk used a roundabout ‘way to 
avoid the “Shaman’s Stone.” But the first fisherman's 
example was contagious; others, seeing that the bay ‘was 
an ideal place for fishing soon settled on the island. 
Khujir has changed a good deal since those early days. 
To-day, no one could imagine life there without a school 
and a library, a clinic, a sewing centre and a hostel. Yet 
twenty-five years ago none of these institutions existed; 
and the newcomers had great difficulty in explaining to 
the Buriats what a bath was used for and ‘why you needed 
a doctor. : 
It is still mid-winter and bitterly cold, but the island 
tailors are already busy prepararing for the spring season; 
at the library people are queuing up for the books, papers 
and periodicals which have just arrived from Irkutsk, the 
biggest town in the area; in the afternoon, children play 
round the “Shaman’s Stone”, searching for old coins in its 
cracks and fissures; and in the evening the fishermen’s 
club is thronged ‘with people who come to dance, to listen 
to a concert or see a film show. 
ho 
v J x 
a A 150 op Tl

## [Page 27](065221engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 65226: Khujir: island capital on the world's deepest lake

In spite of its remoteness Khujir does not feel cut off 
from the rest of the country. This is immediately noticed 
in the local museum ‘which Reviakin has set up with the 
help of the schoolchildren. It is no coincidence that the 
museum should be named after Vladimir Obruchev, the 
great Russian geologist. In December 1956, the scientist 
wrote from Moscow describing his trip to the island in 
1889, enquiring about conditions there today, and asking 
for samples of local ores, 
Soon a regular exchange of correspondence started up 
between Moscow and the island. It was cut short unfor- 
tunately by the scientist’s death. But good results had 
been achieved. The school now has an exhibition room 
where various discoveries are on view together with stuffed 
animals and a collection of ores. The children of Khujir 
write regularly to other schoolchildren in the U.S.S.R. 
telling them of their life on Lake Baikal, and 
describing the flora and fauna. 
No, Olkhon certainly does not feel isolated from the rest 
of the ‘world. The island keeps in touch with other parts 
of the Soviet Union and even further afield. The local. 
fishermen send their catch to Irkutsk regularly, and last 
year 25 barrels were shipped to the World Fair at Brussels 
where tourists from all over the world ‘were able to taste 
fish from Lake Baikal. 
The little port hums with activity. Two months ago, 
despite the intense cold, trucks of all kinds and sizes were 
coming and going across the ice; the noise of the power 
station on the cliff mingled with that of the workshops 
where motorboat engines were being repaired, and with 
the creaking of the winch which, in anticipation of the 
summer months, was already extracting great bloks of ice 
from the lake for the cold storage rooms. 
Khujir is growing fast and so is its population. The 
nursery school is now too small and a new one is being 
built. Old huts where some of the fishermen used to live 
are being replaced by comfortable, modern houses; and 
the water supply is being laid on. 
Many things still remain to be done, but the fishermen 
of Olkhon have begun the job and will see it through. 
 
The Unesco Courier. — . April 1959 
b. 
N 
Official Soviet photos 
BARRELS pile up in a cooper's yard. Last year 25 barrels 
of fish were shipped from Olkhon to the Brussels World Fair. 
  
27

## [Page 28](065221engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 65228: Current misconceptions about the Australian Aborigines

  
CURRENT 
MISCONCEPTIONS 
ABOUT THE 
AUSTRALIAN 
ABORIGINES 
by Ronald M. Berndt 
Professor of Anthropology, University 
of Western Australia 
28 
osT people, through the ages, have regarded those 
living outside their normal range of experience not 
only as strangers, but as fundamentally different 
from themselves. The less association they have with 
ther em, the greater is the margin for distortion. To some 
tralian Aborigines, for instance, their not-so-distant 
el were “cannibals” or “promiscuous creatures 
with no marriage rules”. Disparaging others was one way 
of emphasizing their own superiority. 
Thus a number of Australian tribes referred to them- 
selves by words meaning “men”, or “human beings”: but 
they took it for granted that this status was peculiarly 
their own and did not apply to outsiders. They inter- 
preted what they saw and heard of the behaviour of 
others in the light of their own preconceived views. In 
this ‘way, quite trivial differences were sometimes mag- 
nified until they came to seem overwhelmingly important. 
On a larger scale, this is just what has happened in the 
case of Europeans coming in contact with Australian 
Aborigines as well as with other non-literate peoples. The 
opvious differences in their ways of living were so great 
that some of the newcomers claimed the Aborigines could 
not be regarded as human. Not all of them went as far 
as thls. Nevertheless, the Aborigines have heen popularly 
and sweepingly categorized as the most “primitive” people 
on earth, and labelled by words like “stone-age”. 
Certainly some such arbitrary label has been attached 
to all sorts of people living in a wide variety of societies, 
and scattered all over the world. Perhaps this didn’t 
matter much as long as people remained *“pigeonholed”, 
so to speak, with spatial mobility at a minimum; but the 
situation to-day has changed so drastically that it has 
quite serious implications. Anthropologists, who should 
have been the first to point out the insidious character of 
such terms, have lagged sadly behind—although it has not 
always been their fault since, like most if not all scientists, 
gr ———

## [Page 29](065221engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 65228: Current misconceptions about the Australian Aborigines

  
they are essentially culture-bound: and in this they do 
not differ radically from other members of their society. 
Much of the blame here can be laid at the door of the 
archaeologists, who in order to fill in gaps in their 
archaeological evidence turned to living peoples who 
possessed similar technical equipment, or used what 
seemed to be the same kind of tools. These were, for the 
most part, people who kept no ‘written records; the 
Australian Aborigines, among others, were vulnerable on 
this score, and did not even realize that they were being 
equated with early man. This Is not a legitimate 
approach. Yet it has survived right up to this day, and 
has had an immense bearing on the general use of such 
labels. 
Although technological complexity is important in our 
own kind of society as in many others, there are other 
kinds of cultural complexity which do not necessarily 
coincide with this. Simply because the Australian 
Aborigines used stone tools, had the minimum of material 
objects, did not live in houses, ‘wore little or no clothing, 
hunted for and collected their food, we cannot compare 
them in more than a superficial way with (for example) 
Palaeolithic man. They are “modern men” (*) as we 
ourselves are, not representatives of the “Stone-Age”, in 
the accepted archaeological use of that term. 
A vague, emotionally loaded term such as “primitive”, 
when applied to any contemporary people, has a strong 
connotation of “early type”, perhaps “stone-age”, but 
certainly “crude”, “mentally backward”, and so on. Many 
of us to-day prefer to use the term non-literate (not 
illiterate or preliterate), to distinguish people like the 
Australian Aborigines from those who share a tradition, 
(*) See e.g. 8. LL. Washburn in E. A. Hoebel, J. D. Jennings and 
E. R. Smith's Readings in Anthropology, McGraw-Hill, 1855, p. 108. 
The Unesco Courier. — April 195% 
RL rT TT y re onde of | 
Official Australian photos 
or norm, of literacy; even this is not entirely satisfactory. 
Yet the bogey of “mental backwardness” or “inferiority” 
has persisted from the past and is still with us. As a 
catch-phrase, it is often used by members of one group 
to downgrade another— particularly as applied to people 
attempting to adjust to a situation in which the speakers 
themselves feel quite at home. People take their own 
background of experience and their own way of life very 
much for granted; and some of them find it hard to 
believe that any “normal” person should have trouble 
in acquiring the same familiarity with it. 
Too many assessments of intelligence have been made 
on just this basis: testing in an unfamiliar situation, often 
artificially constructed, against a range of “givens” 
relevant to the culture of the person carrying out the test. 
And as far as the Australian Aborigines are concerned no 
reliable information is available one way or the other. 
There is ample material to show that these people can 
adjust to changing conditions, under favourable circum- 
stances; and there is nothing, as far as we know, holding 
them back mentally. 
But, of course, any situation of adjustment which in- 
volves learning a new way of life is fraught with dif- 
ficulties which are not always linked with mental ability. 
The Australian Aborigines are responsible people, with 
a complex cultural background, and a fully developed 
social organization—but one that is different from our 
own, with differing values and a different outlook on life. 
There is nothing embryonic or primitive about them; their 
development has merely taken place along different lines. 
Traditionally, the Australian Aborigines were semi- 
nomadic. The Continent was inhabited by many tribes, 
their boundaries not as firmly fixed as has sometimes been 
suggested. Each, however, was an autonomous political 
unit, although there were some exceptions, notably among 
the Wulamba of Eastern Arnhem Land and the “Narin- 
CONT'D PAGES 30-31 

## [Page 30](065221engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 65228: Current misconceptions about the Australian Aborigines

MISCONCEPTIONS 
ABOUT AUSTRALIAN 
ABORIGINES 
(Continued)     
yerl” of the Lower River Murray, South Australia. There 
were some large cultural blocs, such as the Bidjandjara 
and related groups of the Great Victoria Desert, stretching 
across South Australia into Western Australia and Central 
Australia. Also there were many languages, and diversity 
in a wide range of other aspects as well. When we speak 
of the Australian Aborigines as a whole, then we can do 
so only in the most general terms. (In other words the 
Aranda or Arunta, so well-known from the publications of 
Spencer and Gillen, cannot be taken as “typical” Abor- 
igines.) 
As far as traditional culture and soclety are concerned, 
misconceptions about the Aborigines are numerous; but 
two of these are especially important. One is that Abori- 
ginal society is (or was) static, that ideas and techniques 
as well as behaviour patterns had not appreciably changed 
over thousands of years. This is linked with the notion 
of “primitiveness” already mentioned, with the implication 
that their way of life had been somehow arrested in time. 
It takes the form of such questions as: “Why didn't they 
cultivate the land?” “Why didn't they have any domestic 
animals except the dingo?” “Why didn’t they try to exploit 
their environment instead of just adapting to it?” 
Cultivation of plants 
‘contrary to nature’ 
HANGE, of course, is inevitable in any social situation, 
and the Australian Aborigines were no exception. It 
does not take outside impact to bring about change, 
although this may speed it up. At the same time, in 
most Aboriginal societies there was an emphasis on “non- 
change”, an essential conservatism. This did have certain 
Not a primitive ‘Stone Age’ people; 
Not cut off from the outside world 
far-reaching effects—notably in circumscribing personal 
experience, and discouraging drastic innovation. In part 
it stemmed from the basic tenets of their religious tradi- 
tions. Although for general purposes the distinction be- 
tween past, present and future was quite clearly recognized, 
the religious view suggested a merging of one with the 
other—expressed, for instance, in the belief that the 
Ancestral Beings who lived on earth at the beginning of 
time are as much alive to-day as they always were, and 
will continue to be so. 
Further, in their fundamental “world view” man was 
part of nature, not opposed to it, and not sharply distinct 
from other natural species. (This is, of course, in marked 
contrast to our own approach.) The sacred life was of 
utmost importance; but, contrary to what is held by some 
anthropologists, the division between the sacred and the 
profane was not always tightly defined, and women played 
a greater part in religious activities than has sometimes 
been acknowledged. 
Against this background, we can appreciate better the 
economic limitations of an environment in ‘which, apart 
from the fertile coastal areas, European settlers them- 
selves have not found it easy to exist without considerable 
help from outside. Most of the Aborigines believed that 
food of various kinds, like water, had been provided for 
them by the Ancestral Beings: that their own part in this 
lay on the one hand in the everyday tasks of collecting 
or hunting for it, and on the other in performing the 
rituals which would ensure that the supplies were maint- 
ained. In this view, the cultivation of plants was not only 
unnecessary but, one might say, “contrary to nature”, 
Another source of misunderstanding has to do with 
kinship. It has been said that Aborigines are predomin- 
antly interested in this, and that the social arrangements 
  
HALF TRUTHS still exist about the *‘psychic powers” of the Abori- 
gines, their supposed mental telepathy and ability to work sor- 
cery or black magic. The romantic picture of Aborigines perform- 
ing spectacular dances and ceremonies also persists despite all 
evidence to the contrary. Above, meditation over the sacred 
boards, most sacred Aborigines’ symbol of their desert culture. 
30 
FAMILY LIFE. It has been said that social arrangements based on 
kinship among the Aborigines were rigid and unyielding. In practice, 
Australian Aboriginal systems of kinship terms and behaviour associated 
with them are fairly flexible. Aborigine, seen here with two of his 
wives and their children, has a “Macassan” type beard—a relic of earlier 
days. In centre, foreground, is his wooden pipe with painted design.

## [Page 31](065221engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
based on it were rigid and unyielding. Yet this is simply 
part of the fabric of most social systems, emphasized more 
in some than in others. In practice, Australian Aboriginal 
systems of kinship terms and the behaviour associated 
with them were fairly flexible. As far as choice of a 
marriage partner was concerned there was much variation 
‘within a limited range, allowing room for romantic love, 
in spite of the emphasis on ideal marriage patterns. 
The ghost of “primitive communism” has often been 
conjured up in connexion with all this. But personal 
ownership, and personal rights of distribution, were well 
entrenched; the sharing of food or the rendering of 
services nearly always took place on a kinship basis, with 
the expectation that they would be reciprocated in due 
course. 
Another point about which a great deal of nonsense 
has been written concerns the Australian Aborigines’ 
“instinctive” ability in tracking both human beings and 
animals. Statements of this sort do not recognize that 
such skills must be learnt and practice in them maintain- 
ed; Aborigines who have been drawn increasingly into 
the Western European orbit quickly lose them. Again, 
Aborigines, and particularly the men, are accused of being 
lazy. The most popular example of this is that when on 
a hunting or foraging trip an adult man usually walks 
ahead of his womenfolk, who trail behind heavily laden, 
while he carries only a spear and thrower. People who 
cite this overlook or brush aside the fact that he must be 
unencumbered so that he can use his weapons should 
the need arise. 
To dismiss the Aborigines as “naturally lazy” is to forget 
that in their traditional environment, in most parts of 
the Continent, they had to work hard for their living 
or die. To say that they have “no sense of time” is to 
forget that clock-watching is not the only means of reck- 
oning this. They are looked down on as. dirty, living 
under insanitary conditions, by those who have seen only 
the dilapidated shanties, or the static camps around out- 
back settlements. 
In the bush the scene is different. In the necessity of 
moving from waterhole to waterhole, from camp to camp, 
The Unesco Courler, — April 1959 


### 65228: Current misconceptions about the Australian Aborigines

RITUAL CEREMONIES 
among the Aborigines are 
things about which many 
erroneous ideas have grown 
up. Present-day reality is 
far removed from the stories 
that circulate. Except on 
rare occasions, naked Abo- 
rigines no longer roam free- 
ly over the tribal lands. 
Only in isolated areas can 
one find these people living 
approximavely as they did 
in the past, and then only 
a small handful, increasingly 
depleted. While in some 
places indigenous religion 
is still a powerful force, 
rituals are performed less 
frequently and with modi- 
fications. Photo shows a 
sacred clan emblem being 
painted on the chest of 
a postulant for ritual at 
Yirrkalla, N.E. Arnhem Land. 
Photos Ronald M. Berndt 
each new site was abandoned before it had a chance 
to become dirty; and any refuse left behind would he 
absorbed easily into the natural environment—as the tins 
and old rags, so common to-day, are not. Then again, 
there are the half-truths about psychic matters; mental 
telepathy; the reading of smoke signals; the power to 
work sorcery or black magic; resistance to pain; the 
“instinctive urge” to go walkabout, and so on. 
But to speak of the traditional societies and cultures 
of these people is to speak of the past. The contemporary 
scene is very different. There are no Aborigines in the 
whole of Australia who have not felt, in some measure, 
the impact of the introduced way of living. There are 
very few people to-day who roam freely, living a tradi- 
tionally-oriented life: and it is safe to say that none of 
them are unaware of Europeans. 
Naked Aborigines no 
longer roam the land 
HE Pintubi (so-called Bindaboo) who were recently 
“discovered” had been contacted more than 20 years 
ago—and were not really far, as distances go in Aus- 
tralia, from Mission areas. In Arnhem Land, that 32,000- 
odd square mile of Reserve in the Northern Territory, alien 
contact has been quite intensive for centuries. Long 
before Europeans appeared, traders from what is now 
Indonesia had established bases around the coast, and to- 
day Arnhem Land is virtually encircled by mission stations 
where most of the people congregate. 
South and east, in the coastal cities where most 
Australian-Europeans live, there are comparatively few 
people of Aboriginal or part-Aboriginal descent. Only in 
isolated areas, such as in North-Western South Australia; 
and East-Central Western Australia (where the activities 
of the Atomic Energy Commission, and plans to open up 
country for pastoral enterprises, threaten to curtail tribal 
movements more drastically than in the past), can one 
find these people living approximately as they did in the 
past—and then only a small handful, increasingly deplet- 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 32](065221engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 65228: Current misconceptions about the Australian Aborigines

Their culture swept 
into the mainstream 
of Australian life 
(Continued) 
ed through the attraction of settlements of various kinds 
on the fringes of this semi-desert country. 
Except on very rare occasions, naked Aborigines no 
longer roam freely over these tribal lands. ‘While in 
some places indigenous religion is still a powerful force, 
rituals are performed less frequently and with modifica- 
tions: and this is true for all aspects of their activity. The 
romantic picture of Aborigines living in a traditional 
fashion, performing spectacular ceremonies and dances, 
has persisted in spite of all evidence to the contrary. 
There is still 2 great deal of Aboriginality to be found, but 
it is becoming mixed increasingly with introduced 
elements. 
Change, that inherent quality present in all social living, 
has not left the Australian Aborigines untouched. The 
picture to-day is of a people spread unevenly across the 
Continent and not even now, under outside pressures, 
viewing themselves as united. As in the past, although 
now in a different setting, there is little interaction be- 
tween those in different parts of the Continent, and so far 
little acknowledgement of any common heritage. 
The dice are both 
loaded and cast 
osT of them live in scattered groups in the poorer 
M quarters of the cities, or on the fringe of country 
towns, pastoral stations, or mission and Government 
settlements, incorporated in varying degrees into the wider 
Australian community. They range from the unsophisti- 
cated to the virtually assimilated, with many in between; 
but all have been caught up in the trend toward Euro- 
peanization, toward eventual assimilation—if not phy- 
sically, then culturally and socially. 
Although the policies of the various States and of the 
Commonwealth itself differ on a number of points, they 
all agree on one basic aim: that these people must be 
absorbed into the mainstream of Australian life. Of 
course, this will not be achieved by all of them at one and 
the same time; but it can be hastened, as is the official 
intention to-day. The outcome, however, is a foregone 
conclusion; the dice are too heavily loaded for anything 
else to happen. 
The greatest misconception has been, and is, to regard 
these contemporary Australian Aborigines, or at least all 
but a few, as being primarily Aborigines in the traditional 
sense. The majority have grown up under the shadow 
of the European; and although in the remoter regions a 
modified form of camp life persists, each year sees them 
being committed irrevocably to more and more aspects 
of European life. Once this process has begun, there is no 
turning back... 
Misconceptions block our understanding and apprecia- 
tion of traditional Aboriginal life as it was in the past, 
and as it Is partly in some areas to-day. And these mis- 
conceptions inevitably have their repercussions in the 
present, since they not only influence Government policy 
in relation to these people but distort our appraisal of 
the total situation. 
32 
fa 
i 
ABORIGINAL 
X - RAY ART 
Although the materials 
and the colours of the 
Aboriginal artist are very 
limited, he uses the same 
principles of line, colour, 
balance and spacing of 
degign elements present 
in all great art. Photo 
right, shows Arnhem 
Land artist doing one 
of the curious “X-ray” 
paintings, so called be- 
cause internal as well as 
external details are por- 
trayed. Below, “X-ray” 
painting of a kangaroo. 
4 
2 
’ 
' 
/ 
/ 
nd Ts ly: 
; No hf 
! RATE £5 ATE 
Photo © Unesco. From ‘‘Australia— Aboriginal Paintings—Arnhem Land", in the 
Unesco World Art Series. Available in all good bookshops at a maximum price 
of $18.00 or its equivalent in other currencies. Also obtainable from New York 
Graphic Society, 95 East Putnam Avenue, Greenwich, Conn. U.S.A., and Zwemmer 
Galleries, Charing Cross Road, London. 
: 4 
Sn 
worry 
  
BE eR a a a ED A a a i A dR A a EA a ER er BE aN

## [Page 33](065221engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Letters 
SIZE OF THE ‘SNOW WHITES’ 
Sir, 
In your February issue, I read with 
interest the article onthe experiments I 
am carrying out with several collea- 
gues in my laboratories at the College 
de France on changes of physical cha- 
racteristics induced in ducks by injec- 
tions of desoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). 
1 fully approve of your text, but I am 
sorry to say that the relative dimensions 
of the four subjects whose photographs 
you published were not shown correctly. 
The relationship of these sizes is impor- 
tant. The height of the subjects known 
as “Snow Whites” is less, in fact 
much less than those of the Peking 
breed ducks. This is one of the basic 
characteristics of the results which we 
have obtained, but it is far from obvious 
in your photographs. The photograph 
of the Peking breed duck (N° 1) is, for 
example, just over ‘one inch too short 
as compared to N° 3. Here are the pro- 
portions which should have been shown 
for the subjects you reproduced, the 
measurements being made from tip of 
beak to tip of tail. If Photo 3 is taken 
as a standard of measurement, the dis- 
tance beak-tail should have been just 
over one inch longer for Photo 1, 
.787 inches longer for Photo 2 and, on 
the contrary, 3.1 inches shorter for 
Photo 4. 
M. J. Benoit 
Histophysiological Laboratory, 
Collége de France, Paris 
UNIVERSITY OF THE NATIONS 
Sir, 
The time has come, I feel, to take 
another step on the tong and arduous 
road of international education: the 
foundation of a truly international 
university. There is no need to dwell 
on the necessity of making science 
accessible to all nations and there is no 
doubt that this must be a chief aim of 
Unesco. It seems to me that there 
cannot be many ways more likely to 
achieve this effect, or at least to further 
it, than the establishment of an Inter- 
national University. By this I mean a 
university of the highest standing, 
staffed by outstanding scientists of all 
countries, for students of any nation, 
race and creed, who apply for admission 
and are in possession of the necessary 
degrees of their respective countries, 
i.e. matriculation-papers or similar. 
Courses should be given in the main 
languages, English, French, Spanish and 
Russian, e.g. the degrees won by the 
students must of course be fully 
recognized by all member-countries. A 
useful stipulation might be that the 
history of a certain country, or 
continent, must never be taught by a 
national of the same area. 
The organizational effort could well 
be directed by a committee of scientists 
of high repute working under the 
auspices of Unesco. It seems easy to 
predict that many member-countries 
would agree to sponsor one or the other 
the 
institute, i.e. build it, staff it and run it. 
Let us say that France might take upon 
herself the establishment of a school of 
philosophy, Britain the department of 
Economics, Russia an Institute of 
Mathematics, the U.S.A. Chemistry, etc. 
The first International University 
might be opened in a small neutral 
country, like Switzerland, the idea being 
that eventually similar universities would 
be founded in many, if not all countries 
of the globe. It is recognized that this 
is a programme for many years to come 
and that achievement will not come 
easily. But this seems to be only one 
more reason to start now, 
Harry Pollak 
Nabhariah, Israel 
tO 
Sir, 
What we need is a United Nations 
University. A school financed by all 
the countries on their ability to pay, but 
a school where the top crop of the 
world, no matter which country they 
are from, can come. The students of 
this United Nations University would 
be citizens of the world. 
Robert F. Atkins 
Hawthorne, California, U.S.A. 
PLACE FOR YOUTH 
Sir, 
In my own name and in those of 
many friends of mine I should like to 
back up the proposals of Stan Marks 
(Letter to the Editor, December 1958) 
concerning a U.N. Youth Council. It 
is a great hindrance to the idea of 
internationality that many nations are 
ruled by politicians whose ages are, on 
the average, between sixty and seventy. 
Less conservative, youngsters with more 
spirit and driving power should be in an 
organization as a permanent part of the 
United Nations, 
Wont de Maat 
The Hague, Netherlands 
WORKING FOR PEACE—-AT HOME 
Sir, 
In a leaflet distributed at the Brussels 
International Exhibition I read: "Since 
wars begin in the minds of men, it is in 
the minds of men that the defences of 
peace must be constructed.” (From the 
Preamble to the Unesco Constitution.) 
It is not only on the international level 
that antagonisms exist. Daily life is 
full of them. Do you not think that 
efforts to smooth out the differences 
within a nation, within a social group 
or within a family should be linked with 
those which you are making on an 
international scale? Is it not the state 
of mind created by the antagonisms 
poisoning their private lives which makes 
men tacitly accept the prospect of 
armed conflict between nations? And 
is not the same fear of being crushed 
by others found just as much in the 
daily struggle for existence as in a war 
between nations? 
Do you not think that if, by your 
activities, you manage to replace the 
The Unesco Courier. — April 
Editor 
latent or active antagonisms of everyday 
life by a spirit of mutual understanding 
you will uproot the source of warlike 
inclinations? 
I believe that this great effort to 
remove the causes of hostility is one in 
which everyone ready to accept social 
responsibilities should join. Thus, the 
head of a business can bring his 
influence to bear on his employees and 
on his business competitors, a school 
teacher on his class, a lawyer on his 
clients and a journalist on his readers. 
I am sure that if UNESCO initiated such 
action it would soon be joined by 
thousands of men and women of good- 
will. 
M.A. Brodsky 
Brussels, Belgium 
LITTLE-KNOWN JAPANESE ART 
Sir, 
As an admirer of Japanese art 1 
derived great pleasure from your issue 
of June, 1958 (Masterworks of Japan's 
Stone Age Art). If you could publish 
colour reproductions of a good selection 
of Japanese colour prints it would 
undoubtedly be a revelation to those 
people in Europe who known nothing 
of this artistic production. I am, of 
course, referring to modern prints with 
their forceful, glowing colours, although 
these may perhaps be too “gaudy” for 
the tastes of some lovers of art. In the 
exhibition of Japanese art which came 
to London directly from Paris there was 
not a single example of this work. I 
was surprised and disappointed as I 
believe this art should be better known 
in Europe... 
A. Scott 
London, England 
OUT OF PLACE IN PARIS 
Sir, 
I shall not be renewing my sub- 
scription to THE UNEsco COURIER for 
1959. I made this decision after 
reading your November 1958 issue 
devoted to the new Unesco Head- 
quarters. I think it is both shameful 
and improper that France should have 
contributed, through its share of the 
Unesco budget, to the construction of 
this building, of which the least one 
can say is that it is out of place in 
Paris... It is distressing to think of the 
millions of francs that have been paid 
to “artists” for works like that of 
Picasso in the Delegates’ Lobby, like 
Calder’'s mobile or Moore's “Reclining 
Figure”. I consider that when an 
international organization like UNEsco 
has the honour to be offered a home 
by France in a city like Paris, it should 
draw some inspiration from the good 
taste of its host rather than to try to 
introduce a frigid and lifeless style 
which seems to have more in common 
with the insane asylum than with art 
and which is bound to clash with our 
millenary culture and to mar a city as 
beautiful as Paris. 
B. Amphoux 
Paris, France 
1939 
33

## [Page 34](065221engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Newsroom. 
L oan AT WORK: A $5,000,000 
loan for road construction granted by 
the World Bank to the Government 
of Salvador is going to mean land, 
work, homes and economic be- 
.tterment for an area in the south 
of the country bordering on the 
Pacific. It will be used to construct 
a network of 21 branch roads to- 
talling some 200 miles where at 
present only earth tracks exist. It 
will thus be possible to settle agri- 
cultural and other ‘workers in the 
area, thus relieving population pres- 
sures elsewhere and reducing un- 
employment. Land opened up ‘will 
be used for stock-rearing and to 
grow wheat, rice and vegetables. 
m ATOMIC NEEDS IN ASIA: 
A team of eight scientists recently 
returned to Vienna after a five- 
week mission to Burma, Thailand, 
Indonesia and Ceylon lo survey 
conditions and possibilities in the 
field of nuclear energy. The 
survey, undertaken by the Inter- 
national Atomic Energy Agency in 
Vienna at the request of the four 
countries visited by the mission, 
included studies of those sectors of 
industry, agriculture and general 
economy likely to be affected by 
the applications of atomic energy. 
Also examined were the possi- 
bilities of using isotopes in agri- 
culture, biology and medicine, the 
development of reactor projects, 
the training of technicians; the 
adoption of adequate safely regu- 
lations; and availability of raw 
materials. 
KE Ast-wEsT STUDIES AT OX- 
FORD: Oxford University will this 
year be the scene of an experiment to 
introduce oriental studies more gene- 
rally in the flelds of adult education, 
teacher training and student acti- 
vities. The scheme, supported hy 
the United Kingdom National Com- 
mission for Unesco, is in line ‘with 
-Unesco’s Major Project for encourag- 
ing better understanding between 
East and West. It includes special 
university courses of lectures on 
Asian art, oriental religions and 
Asian thought, and lectures on 
oriental civilizations given at nearby 
teacher training colleges. The 
Oxford Museum of Eastern Art is 
providing a travelling exhibition of 
oriental art, and student activities 
include an inter-university con- 
ference, the preparation of an Asian 
Film Festival and the publication of 
a special edition of a student peri- 
odical devoted to the Unesco East- 
West project. 
HE EDUCATION THROUGH ART: 
In almost every country in the 
world there is now a realization 
that education through art is a 
subject that transcends narrow 
categories of vocational or spe- 
34 
cialist education, writes Sir Her- 
bert Read in the introduction 
to “Education Through Art in 
Australia”, recently published in 
Australia by the Melbourne Uni- 
versity Press. Edited by Dr. Ber- 
nard Smith, a member of the 
Australian UNEsco Committee for 
Letters, this book was stimulated 
by the discussions of the UNEsco 
Seminar on the Role of the Visual 
Arts in Education, held at Bristol, 
(U.K.) in 1951 and the Unesco Ari 
Education Seminar, sponsored by 
the Australian Advisory Committee 
for Unesco and held in Melbourne 
in 1954. Leading Australian edu- 
cation officials, art educators 
museum directors and psycho- 
logists have contributed to this 
publication which will serve as a 
guide to creative art education in 
Australia. 
Rumania LIQUIDATES ILLI- 
TERACY: Some two decades ago illi- 
teracy was still a mass problem in 
Rumania: a 1930 census had shown 
an average illiteracy percentage of 
38.2, rising as high as from 43% to 
56% in certain districts. A 1945 
estimate placed the number of the 
country’s illiterates as four million. 
Even after three years of trade union 
action for education there were still 
over three million illiterates, mostiy— 
2,800,000— in rural areas. In 1948 
Rumania’s Grand National Assembly 
passed an educational reform law 
and the liquidation of illiteracy 
became a State affair, crowned with 
success during the country’s second 
five-year plan. Along ‘with the 
abolition of illiteracy cultural re- 
sources increased: libraries increased 
from 30,000 to 38,000 between 1046 
and 1949; volumes increased from 
14,544 million to 63,875 million 
between 1946 and 1956. ‘The number 
of cinemas, theatres, radio sets and 
museums showed increases of three 
to five times, 
m TAKING ART TO THE PEOPLE: 
A Gallery of Colour Reproductions 
of Masterpieces of Fine Art has 
been established in Belgrade wilh 
material consisting of repro- 
ductions of collections of old and 
modern art given to Yugoslavia 
by Unesco. The first exhibition 
of reproductions of modern paint- 
ings held last October and No- 
vember was seen by more than 
16,000 visitors, including many 
schoolchildren and students for 
whom lectures on “Trends in the 
Art of the 20th Century” were 
given. This exhibition is fo cir- 
culate in rural areas. 
  
MAINLAND CHINA POPULATION 
RISING 10 MILLION A YEAR 
The present world population of 2,800 million may rise to between 4,900 mil- 
lion and 6,900 million in the next forty years and there are reasons to believe 
that it will already have increased by 100 million at the end of next year. A 
disturbing fact is that the growth of population is greater in the less advanced 
than in the industrial countries. 
Figures such as these highlight the problems created by the rapid increase 
in the world’s population, and underline the urgency of a recent recommen- 
dation of the United Nations Population Commission that broader studies and 
analyses should be carried out. 
The Population Commission, which concluded its 10th session in Geneva 
recently, suggested that a world conference on population should be convened 
by the United Nations in 1964. More accurate census figures will then be avail- 
able as the U.S.S.R. has just carried out its first census since 1939 and India 
is to carry out a census in 1961. According to the Commission the birthrate on 
the mainland of China is now probably 37 to 42 per 1,000, while estimates of 
the deathrate vary from 17 to 21 per 1,000. This indicates an annual natural 
increase of roughly two per cent. At this rate the population on the mainland 
of China increases by more than ten million a year. 
In its report to the U.N. Economic and Social Council, the Commission 
regards it “as a grave responsability” to call attention to "the unprecedented 
rapidity of the earth’s current population increase and to the fact that this 
increase may be still more rapid in the near future.” The Commission regrets 
the lack of trained demographers and points out that the less-developed coun- 
tries have the fewest. In view of the grave issues raised by population growth, 
the Commission feels that the services of the United Nations in this field should 
be strengthened.   
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.

## [Page 35](065221engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

   
ra 
x i 
Spit 
as 
: 
edn 
| | 
Pen 
1 
; 
¥ 
i 
i 
3 
| 
| 
: 
ia 
] 
A
 
I
N
 
N
G
 
C
H
O
I
 
LS
 
LEIGH 
    
B
a
 
E 
> 
a
a
 
a
e
s
 
5 
: 
 
bd
 
~~ UNESCO'S 'DO 
  
 
  
 
  
 
£ 
= 
Q NRE SEE 
8. EE 
| S$ | > 
i | 
& source book 
(7) : = 
for science 
| Ym [ 
. - teaching 
@ 
@ > 
= 
. 2 3 : 
3 T° | £9 | AA 
= \ NO 
Ae AN] 
| ; { 
| ! 
EL a NE A / PN 
Be NRA En, (EA 
A BS Fad a a EE by SO 
— Enh vr 
GL Eh. Will 
a \ ok 
to CRA he nl MALE Cr RN 
= unesco 
of 
| T 
YOURSELF’ 
unesco SCIENCE BOOK 
(2nd. printing) 
Material for making laboratory equipment exists every- 
where—in the home, around the schoo! itself, in the 
junkyard, at the food market, in the garage and in the 
countryside, to mention but a few sources. Science 
teaching facilities and resources are all around us and just 
waiting to be made use of. 
In 220 pages the Unesco Source Book For Science Teaching 
tells you how to do it. There are directions for making 
- general pieces of equipment such as balances, heat sources, 
filters, pumps, tweezers, ring stands. Experiments and 
-material for the study of plants are described. Directions 
for the study of animals tell how to make a collecting 
cage, a wormery, homes for spiders and ants, aquariums. 
Astronomy, meteorology, hydrology, machines, mass and 
force, heat, sound, light, electricity, and magnetism are 
covered by a wide range of simple, inexpensive apparatus 
and revealing experiments. More than 300 diagrams 
render the use of the volume very easy. 
The Unesco Source Book For Science Teaching answers 
the needs of teachers all over the world who clamour for 
ways to plan and carry out science programmes in which 
the subject is experienced and not just learned. 
Paper : 8 2.50; 12/6 (stg.); 700 frs. 
Cloth : § 3.00; 15/- (stg.); 875 frs. 
WHERE TO OBTAIN UNESCO PUBLICATIONS 
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country (See list below; 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request). 
Payment is made in the national 
currency ; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. — Panuzai, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Ministry of 
Education, Kabul. 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. 1, Victoria. (A. 13/-) 
AUSTRIA. — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& C-,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (sch. 
37.50.) 
BELGIUM. — For The Unesco Courier: 
Louis de Lannoy, 47, rue du Midi, 
Brussels, C.C.P. 338.000. (ir.b. 100.) 
Other publications: Office de Publicité, 
22, Place De Brouckére, CCP 285-98; 
N.V. Standaard-Boekhandel, Belgiélei | 51, 
Antwerp. 
‘BURMA, —S.P.C.K. (Burma) 549, Merchant 
Street, P.O. Box 222, Rangoon. 
of Ceylon Ltd., Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road P.O. Box 244, Colombo 
2. (Rs. 9) : 
CANADA. — Queen's Printer, Ottawa, 
Ont. ($ 3.00). 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, Lake House Bookshop, 
[00 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo 2. (Rs, 9). 
CHINA. — World Book Co. Ltd, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section I, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA. ~— Libreria Economica, Pte Zayas 
505-7 Apartado | 13, Havana. 
TT i —— 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. — Artia Ltd, 30 
Ye Smeckich, Prague 2. - 
DENMARK, — Ejnar Munksgaard Letd., 
6 Nérregade, Copenhagen K. (Dkr. [2) 
ETHIOPIA, — International Press Agen- 
cy, P.O. Box |20, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskacu, Helsinki, (F.mk. 540) 
FRANCE. — Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris, 7°. C.C.P. [2598-48 
(600 fr.) 
GERMANY. — R. Oldenbourg K.G., 
Unesco-Yertrieb fir Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerscrasse 145, Munich 8. (DM. 6) 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28 
rue du Stade, Athens. . 
HONG-KONG. — Swindon Book Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon, 
HUNGARY. — Kultura, P.O, Box |49, 
Budapest, 62. : 
INDIA. — Orient Longmans Private Ltd. 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay I; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyde- 
rabad, |; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P. O. 
Box 386, New Delhi, |; Sub-Depots : 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., Scindia 
House, New Delhi; Rajkamal Prakashan 
Private Ltd., Himalaya House, Hornby 
Road, Bombay I. (Rs. 6.70) 
INDONESIA. — G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co., 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Posttrommel 85, 
Djakarta. 
IRAN. — Iranian National Commission for 
Unesco, Avenue du Musée, Teheran. 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
IRELAND. — The National Press, 2 Wel- 
lington Road Ballsbridge. Dublin. (10/-) 
{SRAEL. — Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd., 
35, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja- 
min Street, Tel-Aviv. (£.1./4.--,) 
ITALY. ~—. Libreria Commissionaria San- 
soni. Yia Gino Capponi 26, Casella Pos- 
tale 552, Florence. (lire 950) 
JAMAICA. — Sangster's Book Room, 91 
Harbour Street, Kingston. 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. (10/-) 
JAPAN, — Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. (Yen 500) 
JORDAN. — Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, 
Amman, 
KOREA. — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, Ministry of Education, Seoul. 
LUXEMBOURG. — Librairie Paul 
Bruck, 33 Grand'Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. — Peter Chong & Co. 
Post Office Box 135, Singapore, 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kings- 
way, Valetta. (10/-) 
MONACO. — British Library, 30 Bid. des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo, (600 fr.). 
NETHERLANDS. — N.V, Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl. 6) 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Christ- 
church. (10/-.) 
NIGERIA. — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. (10/-) 
NORWAY. ~ A.S. Bokhjornet, Stortings- 
plass 7, Oslo. (N. kr. 10) 
PAKISTAN. — Ferozsons ; 60 The Mall 
Lahore : Bunder Road, Karachi and 
35 The Mall, Peshawar. (rs.6) 
PANAMA. — Cultural Panamena, Ave- 
nida 7a, No. Ti-49, Apartado de Correos 
2018, Panama, D.F. 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. . 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620. Manila. 
POLAND, — Osrodek Rozpowszechniania 
Wydawnictw Naukowych PAN. Palace 
Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw. (ZI. 50). 
PORTUGAL. — Dias & Andrada Lda, 
Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, 
Lisbon. 
SOUTH AFRICA. — Van Schaik’s Book- 
store, Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. 
Box 724, Pretoria. (10/-) 
SWEDEN. For The Unesco Courier: Sven- 
ska Unescoridet, Vasagatan [ 5-17, Stoc- 
kholm, C (Kr. 7.50) other publications: 
A/B C.E. Fritzes, Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
SWITZERLAND. — Europa Verlag, 5 
Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40 rue du Marché, Geneva. CCP, 
1-236. For The Unesco Courier only: 
Georges Losmaz, |, rue des Vieux-Gre- 
nadiers,Genéve, C.C.P. 1.48lIl (frs.S. 6.50) 
THAILAND. — Suksapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
TURKEY. — Librairie Hachette, 469 Isti- 
klal Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT).— 
La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo. 
UNITED KINGDOM. — H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E. 1, (10/-) 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 801 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y. ($3.00.) and (except periodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. 
U.S. S. R. — Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA, — Jugoslovenska Knjiga, 
Terazije 27{1 1, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](065221engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
   
    
  
    g eo” tat WN De ™ : 
0 rg RE ES