# [073886](073886engo.pdf) 28

## [Page 1](073886engo.pdf#page=1) 3

### IGNORE

FV VEY VY 
  NAPPA PPPOPPP OPPO PPP 
      
LA 4 
Including 8 page 
SUPPLEMENT : 
AARP PIPPIN 
  
IH RYER 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION ° 
No a 
| es ation Ho, 
Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 25 Francs DECEMBER 1948 — JANUARY 194¢. 
 


### 73888: Duty-free film agreement up for world ratification

  
  
Duty-Free Film Agreement 
Up For World Ratification 
A draft agreement providing for the duty-free importation of educa- 
tional and scientific films was submitted to the governments of 
Unesco Member States. early in January 1949. 
 
REPRINTED IN U.S. 
We take pleasure in notify- 
ing our readers in the United 
States that, beginning with the 
present issue, the Unesco 
Courier will be reprinted in 
New York every month, In 
addition, the Columbia Un- 
iversity Press, has been design- 
ated as the official agent in 
the United States for the sale 
and distribution of the Unesco 
Courier as well as other 
Unesco publications. 
Subscriptions to the Unesco 
Courier may now be obtained 
by writing to: 
Columbia University Press 
Columbia University, 
New York, 27, N.Y. 
A full year’s subscription is 
still only one dollar (US). 
We draw the attention of our 
readers inside and outside of 
France, who use French Francs 
purchasing the Unesco Courier, 
to the following new prices: 
Year’s subscription: 
France .......... Fr. Franes 259 
Other count.... Fr. Francs 300 
Single Copies: 
France ............ Fr. Francs 25 
Other countries. Fr. Francs 30   
“COURIER” NOW| 
  
The agreement which will 
become operative after acceptance 
by ten states, is the first interna- 
tional agreement drawn up by 
Unesco. 
In addition to films the agree- 
ment applies to sound recording 
and other audio-visual material 
of an educational, scientific and 
cultural character, when it is so 
certified by the exporting coun- 
try. This material includes film 
strips and microfilm, glass slides, 
models, wall charts, maps and 
posters. Came 
New agreement planned 
for books and newspapers 
Besides abolishing customs du- 
ties, the agreement also does 
away with quota retsrictions on 
the types of material covered. As 
a protection to commercial in- 
terests within the importing 
country, use of the material may 
be restricted to non-profit-mak- 
ing purposes. 
The draft agreement has been 
described as an important step 
in Unesco’'s campaign to lower 
technical, economic and political 
barriers to the free flow of in- 
formation. 
Another agreement, approved 
in principle at Beirut, is being 
drafted to deal with free importa- 
tion of books, periodicals and 
newspapers. 


### 262402: Jaime Torres Bodet elected Director-General

  
Director - 
  
Elected 
General 
  
HEN the President of the Beirut Conference, M. Hamid Bey Frangie, Lebanese Minister of Educa- 
A tion and Foreign Affairs, rapped the gavel on the evening of December 11. 1948, he entrusted 
Unesco to another Foreign Minister and Minister of Education, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet of Mexico. 
The new Director-General, who was elected by the delegates to the Third Session of Unesco's 
General Conference on November 26, succeded Dr. Julian Huxley whose term of office as first head 
of the Organization had ended. The Conference also elected seven new members of the Executive Board, 
which, in turn, voted Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (India) its Chairman, and Dr. C. Parra-Perez 
(Venezuela) and M. Roger Seydoux (France) Vice-Chairmen for 1949. 
Immediately following the election of the new Director-General, M. Frangie cabled to Dr. Torres 
Bodet in Mexico, on behalf of the Conference, inviting him to come to Beirut, te participate in the 


### 73887: Human Rights Day urged by UNESCO Head

  
‘““ Human Rights Day 
  
Urged By Unesco Head 
HE celebration of December 10th as “Human Rights Day” in ail 
1} schools has been recommended to Unesco Member States by 
Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director General. 
In a message sent on December 30th, Dr. Torres Bodet recalls that 
ot the close of its Third Session at Beirut, on December 1ith, 1948, 
the General Conference of Unesco 
greeted with enthusiasm the In- 
ternational Declaration of Human 
Rights which had been adopted 
the day before in Paris by the 
General Assembly of the United 
Nations. 
At the same time, the General 
Conference instructed the Direc- 
tor-General to take all necessary 
steps to publicize this document 
of historical significance and to 
encourage its study and use by 
TInesco in all its activities. 
In pursuance of these instruc- 
tlons, the Director-General has 
invited Member States of the Or- 
ganization, to support Unesco and 
the United Nations in their joint 
efforts to make the Declaration 
of Human Rights as widely known 
as possible. 
In his message, the Director- 
General says: 
“The world yearns for an age 
of peace and justice which shall 
give to all the opportunity to de- 
velop to the fullest their creative 
faculties in the cause of right 
and progress. Peace and justice 
require above everything else the 
strengthening of that intellectual 
and moral solidarity, without 
which, in the words of Unesco’s 
Constitution, the political and 
economic arrangements of Gov- 
ernments alone could not secure 
the lasting and sincere support 
of the peoples of the world. But 
for that solidarity to be the ex- 
pression of a true harmony of 
minds and not a mere passive co- 
incidence of wills, there is one 
fundamental condition, namely, 
respect for the human being with 
his essential integrity and with 
all this manifold diversity. 
To Unesco the International 
Declaration of Human Rights af- 
fords support and encouragement. 
Recognition of the principles 
therein proclaimed and their dis- 
® The Story of Torres 
Bodet’s Life. (P. 2.) 
® Inaugural Address of 
new Director Gen- 
eral. (Centre Page.) 
® Farewell Address of 
Dr. Huxley. (Centre 
Page.)      
semination through education will 
help to strengthen the faith of 
every human being in the dignity 
of his own experience, and to 
fortify the urge to brotherhood 
which bids civilization by common 
action.” 
The Director-General further 
suggests that, in order to imprint 
upon the imaginations and hearts|. 
of youth the memory of that his- 
toric moment when the value of 
human personality was universally 
proclaimed the Tenth of Decem- 
ber of every year should hence- 
forth be devoted, in the pro- 
gramme of all schools, to render 
homage to the principles of free- 
. dom and the dignity of man. 
  
- Mrs. Roosevelt Links U.S. 
And U.N. Rights Declaration 
Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt in a 
special statement, on December 
15, paid tribute to the newly- 
adopted U.N. Declaration of 
Human Rights as a “milestone” 
in the progress of people every- 
where, 
The statement was made on 
the anniversary of the Bill of 
Rights drafted 157 years ago as 
the first 10 amendments to the 
U.S. Constitution. Citing the 
common goals of the Bill of 
Rights and the U.N. Declaration, 
Mrs. Roosevelt called for a joint 
celebration in the United States 
this year, honoring both docu- 
ments.   
  
  
——— —— 
   — 
closing days of the Session. 
On December 10, the newly- 
elected Director-General made his 
appearance before the delegates 
to the Third Session. In his in- 
augural address he assured his 
listeners “that I shall dedicate 
myself unreservedly to Unesco’s 
service” and stressed that Unes- 
co’s most urgent duty was to 
defend the moral and intellectual 
rights of man. (The full text of 
Dr. Torres Bodet’s address will be 
found on the centre page of thig 
issue). 
For three and one half weeks, 
from November 17 to December 
11, the Third Session worked 
methodically in elaborating the 
new programme during morning, 
afternoon and often evening 
meetings of Plenary Sessioas, 
Commissions and Sub-Commis- 
sions. In a similar fashion, ques- 
tions concerning Unesco's budget, 
administration and external rela- 
tions were the subject of careful, 
detailed examination and study. 
At the end of their delibera- 
tions, the delegates agreed not 
only on snecific, practical activ- 
ities for the year 1949, but on a 
broad educational programme for 
the years to come which would 
assure continuity in Unesco’s work 
and facilitate greater unaerstand- 
ing and participation by the gen- 
eral public. (For details of Unes- 
c0’s new pregramme please sce 
special SUPPLEMENT). 
THE General Conference opened 
with an impressive flourish. 
As delegates poured into the Con- 
ference Hall, cameras clicked and 
movie men filmed the proceedings. 
Inside Klieg lights occasionnally 
intensified the lighting for the ca- 
merame: . 
Dr. Francisco del Rio y Canedo, 
Mexican Ambassador to Paris and 
chairman of the Mexican delega- 
tion delivered the opening speech 
as temporary President of the 
Conference, He was followed by 
M. Hamid Bey Frangie, who was 
later that day to be elected Presi- 
dent of the Third Session. 
(Continued on Page 8 
——— 
    
| fo — reve i _ ~~ dn 
BC iit” Sn WE Eres | 
. View of main Conference Hall of the “Palais de I'Unesco” in Beirut

## [Page 2](073886engo.pdf#page=2) 4

### 73902: On the threshold of 1949: the new UNESCO programme

### 73904: Reconstructing the damages of war

UNESCO COURIER December 1948—January 1949 
 


### 73889: Education: a doctrine for peace; story of Torres Bodet's life

EDUCATION : A DOCTRINE FOR PEACE 
Story of Torres Bodet's Life 
Em 
ence, is one of the youngest statesmen and educators to lead a United Nations international 
A T 46, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, newly elected Director-General of Unesco at the Beirut Confer- 
organization. 
Born in Mexico City on April 17, 1902, the former Foreign Minister of Mexico has had a dist- 
inguished career as poet, novelist, essayist, critic, educationist, diplomat and international statesman, 
. coupled with a reputation for driving energy, vigour and hard work, 
Dr. Torres Bodet was educated at the Teacher's College of Mexico, the National Preparatory Col- 
lege and the Faculty of Philosophy and Letters of the University of Mexico. His first book of verse, 
“Fervor”, was published at the age of 17, with an introduction by the great contemporary poet of 
Mexico, Enrique Gonzalez Martinez. 
At 19, already steeped in French literature, he completed the translation into Spanish of several 
of the works of André Gide. 
‘When in 1922, the Libraries De- 
partment of the Ministry of Edu- 
cation was created, the Mexican 
Government asked 20 year old 
Torres Bodet to step in and get 
the Department under way. 
Libraries Campaign 
Developed 
Torres Bodet immediately de 
veloped an ambitious libraries 
campaign to make good books 
better known throughout Mexico. 
He set to work on a programme 
of translation of the world’s 
classics, edited by the Mexican 
Government, organized a series of 
“travelling libraries”, installed 
- reading centres for workers in 
industrial regions and for farmers | 
and peasants in rural centres. In 
the short period between 1923-24, 
- young Torres Bodet had circulated 
- and distributed several millions 
of books to villages, hamlets and 
industrial towns throughout: Mex- 
ico. . 
At the same time, his own. lit- 
erary efforts were appearing in 
private bookshops throughout the 
country. In 1923, two books of 
poems were acclaimed by critics: 
“4.5 Casa” and “Los Dias”. Tn 
1924 his famous “Poemas” appear- 
ed. and in 1925 “Paravento” and 
~ “Biombo” were published. 
From 1924 to 1928 he occupied 
~ the Chair of French Literature at 
the University of Mexico. As a 
poet and writer, these years were 
_ perhaps the most decisive for 
‘ Torres Bodet. For it was during 
. this period that the most import- 
. ant publishing house of the 
Spanish speaking world, Espasa 
. Calpe, included a selection of his 
- works in its famed “Coleccion 
' Contemporanea”.. 
“The Mexican poet “Torres Bodet, 
immediately gained international 
fame in the new school of Amer- 
ican and European poets. The not- 
ed Spanish critic, Gomez de Ba- 
quero, saw in his poems the mar- 
riage of classic and modern fresh- 
ness.. a. sculptured, lyrical cry- 
transmitting the voice of a living, 
modern poetry”. French critics, 
including Jean Cassou, also hailed 
the young Mexican poet. 
A Leading Literary 
Fi igure 
Thus, in 1929, when he entered 
the Mexican Foreign Service and 
reached Madrid as Secretary of 
the Mexican Legation, he was 
greeted as a leading literary fig- 
ure of his country. 
In the pages of the Spanish rev- 
iews “El Sol” and “La Revista de 
Occidente”, his latest literary 
works began to appear along side 
those of José Ortega y Gasset, 
Gabriel Miro, Garcia Lorca 4nd 
other Spanish writers of note. It 
was during this period that chap- 
ters of his novels. which were lat- 
er to be published under the 
titles “Proserpina rescatada” 
(1931) and “Estrella de dia” (1933), 
first appeared in “La Revista de 
Occidente”. 
Between 1932 and 1940, his dip 
lomatic career took Torres Bodet 
to Holland as Chargé d’Affaires, 
to Paris as Secretary of the Mex- 
jcan Legation (1933-35) and to 
Argentina. Returning to Mexico 
jn 1936, Dr. Torres Bodet was nam- 
ed Director of the Diplomatic 
Department in the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, a position he oc- 
cupied until 1937. 
In 1938, he returned to Europe 
as Chargé d’Affaires in Brussels, 
leaving Belgium with the German 
invasion of the Low Countries in 
1940. Shortly after his return to 
Mexico, in December, 1940, he was 
 
"ates. 
Torres Bodet addresses new liter- 
in village of Guelatao, 
- Mexico. 
appointed Under-Secretary for 
Foreign Affairs by President Ma- 
nuel Avila Camacho. 
Educating Mexico’s 
Millions 
airs for three vears until one day, 
towards the end of 1943, the Mex-’ 
ican President began looking a- 
round for someone capable of tak- 
ing over the tough job of educat- 
ing the Mexican masses. 
Millions of Mexicans, 
hygiene and 
‘crying out for help. The country 
was desperately in need of a rev- 
and 
“administrator as head of the Min-" 
olutionary-minded educator 
istry of Education. President Ca- 
macho pointed to Torres Bodet, 
then only 41 years of age. 
Torres Bodet’s three’ years as 
Minister of Education mark one 
of the most brilliant phases in the 
history of Mexican education, 
To him, the problem of educa- 
tion, whether in Mexico or in othar 
parts of the world, was not merely 
one of teaching people to read and 
write. He saw it as a world battle 
for peace, for democracy and for 
human justice. 
“If victory”, Torres Bodet said 
in 1945, “‘is to guarantee the princ- 
iples for which the free peoples « f 
the world have fought, the first 
standards that nations must 2d- 
opt in education, will be to make 
it a permanent doctrine for peace, 
both on the international and the 
national level. 
..For so long as liberties are 
enshrined in treaties and in chart- 
ers only as faculties devoid of 
reality, and so long as individ- 
uals in different countries do not 
“have full opportunity of enjoying 
them, peace and democracy will - 
continue to be in danger”. 
Torres Bodet therefore attack- 
ed the problem at its very base. 
To teach his countrymen the basic 
elements of education, Mexico 
needed good teaghers more than 
anything else. 
His first job was to galvanize 
into action the existing profes- 
sional teachers and to inspire them 
with his new principles for teach- 
ing the younger generation. Fe 
completely re-cast the then exist- 
ing educational programmes and 
textbooks, and set about builaing 
up-to-date modern training schools 
for young instructors and schools 
for new students. 
Then in August 1944, with this 
programme already under way, he 
launched three full-scale cam- 
paigns to eradicate illeteracy. 
Many were sceptical. For-as Dr. 
~unaple - 
‘either to read or write, unfamiliar 
with the ‘elementary principles of 
sanitation were 
Francisco Latrroyo writes in “Mex- 
ico y la Cultura”: “No campaign of 
such scope had ever before been 
undertaken in Mexico”. 
Torres Bodet, however, adopted 
an unusual technique. 
Each one teach one 
He issued an urgent call to 211 
educated Mexicans between the 
ages of 18 and 60 to become “em- 
ergency” teachers for at least one 
of their illiterate countrymen in 
the 6 to 40 age bracket. Personally 
touring Mexico's villages and 
towns, he aroused and inspired 
the population to take up the 
challenge. The movement caught 
on and began to sweep across the 
entire nation. 
Soon over 60,000 collective teach- 
ing centres had been organized 
throughout Mexico. Lawyers, doc- 
tors, business men, industrialists, 
farmers and landowners all began 
“pitching in” to make the cam- 
‘paign a success. 
Such was the enthusiasm arou- 
sed, that country doctors, for ex- 
ample, began forming special 
classes in their offices, devoting 
one and two hours daily to teach- 
ing the first two “R’s” to their 
neighbours. 
Thus the campaign not only 
. made headway, but actually took 
Torres Bodet kept his post as 
Under Secretary for Foreign Aff-- 
on: the character of a national ed- 
ucation “race”. 
groups began vying with one an- 
other to obtain the best results in 
the shortest time. 
Sewing Machines | | and 
Farm Tools 
dustrial leaders and landowners 
took to organizing Sunday fies- 
tas in their factories and hacien- 
das so as to spur their students 
on and guarantee promptness at 
classes. Free lunches and special 
prizes were awarded to the bright- 
est students. “Give-aways” includ- 
ed such useful and prized objects 
as sewing machines for women, 
tools and farm. equipment for 
country workers. 
But for these people, Torres Bo- - 
det knew, there had to be some 
kind of simple, easy reading ma- 
terial, if their new knowledge wag 
not to be quickly forgotten. Print- 
ing presses started rolling and 
special newspapers began appear- 
ing on the walls of Mexico's towns 
and villages. Over 10,000,000 ele- 
  
Over 1.200.000 Mexicans learned to read, write 
literacy campaigns. 
welcome 
through Torres Bodet’s 
Above model students 
Minister 
mentary reading books and prim- 
ers began flooding the country, 
containing not only the Spanish 
ABCs but brief history lessons and 
short chapters on good citizenship 
and simple hygiene. 
But a part of Mexico’s popula- 
tion is made up of Indians who do 
not speak Spanish. For these 
people, Torres Bodet had special 
primers prepared in their own 
language. These he thought, would 
serve as a basis for later instruc- 
tion in Spanish. In many cases, the 
alphabets of these languages had 
never been ‘written down. The 
Minister of Education called in a 
Individuals and . 
November 1945, to 
country’s delegation to the Unesco! 
In the interior of Mexico, in- 
From 1943 to 1946, as Mexican 
Minister of Education, Torres 
Bodet initiated and developed 
an intensive campaign against 
illiteracy unparalleled in 
Mexican education,     
team of linguists who accomplish- 
ed the job. 
When, after only two years of 
work, the results had bcen tab- 
ulated, the sceptics were con- 
vinced. More than 1,200,000 Mex- 
icans had been taught to read 
and write. This was an unparall- 
eled achievement in the history of | 
Mexican education. 
Becomes Foreign Minister 
While Minister of Education, 
Dr. Torres Bodet was selected, 'n 
lead his 
Preparatory Commission in Lon- 
don, His name appears as one of |. 
the signatories of the Charter ‘of 
Unesco. 
A year later,” he was named 
Foreign Minister of Mexico and 
“occupied this position until Pec- 
“ember 1948, when he was elected 
Director-General of Unesco by the | 
General Conference in Beirut. 
As Foreign Minister, Torres Bo- 
det led the Mexican delegation to 
the Inter-American Conference for 
the Maintenance of Peace and 
Continental Security, heid at 
Petropolis, Brazil, in the summer 
of 1947. At the Second Session of 
the UN General Assembly (Sep- 
tember 1947) he was elected Vice- 
President, and at Bogota early in| 
1948, he led the Mexican delega- 
tion to the Ninth-Inter-American 
Conference. 
For his outstanding reeord In 
‘the educational and international 
field, the Universi- 
ty of Mexico 
sity of Southern 
California (USA) 
conferred on him 
the title of Doctor 
of Letters, Honoris 
Causa. 
Dr. Jaime Torres 
Bodet’'s written 
works to date in- 
clude the following 
books: 
Poetry: Poesia 
(Poems) Madrid 
1926; “Destierro” 
(Exile) Madrid 1930 
“Cripta” (Crypt) 
: Mexico City 1937; 
Education Novels : “Marga- 
rita de Niebla.” 
(Margarita of the Mist) Mexico 
1927; “La Educacion sentimen- 
tal” (Sentimental Education) 
Madrid 1929; “Proserpina resca- 
tada” (Proserpina Redeemszd) 
Madrid 1931; “Primero de€ 
Enero” (New Year's Day) 1934; 
“Sombras” (Shadows) 1937; 
“Nacimiento de Venus y otros 
relatos (Birth of Venus and 
Other Stories) 1941. 
Essays: “«Contemporaneos” 
(Contemporaries) 1928; “Educa- 
cion Mexicana (Mexican Educ- 
ation) 1944; “Educacion y Con- 
cordia internacional” (Educat- 
ion and International _Under- 
standing) 1948. 
 
 
| brotherliness was a campaign 
and the Univer- 


### 73890: Appeal to world press

  
Appeal 
To World Press 
Early in January Dr. Torres 
Bodet, Director-General of 
Unesco, was the guest of hon- |. 
our at the weekly lunch eof 
the Anglo-American Press As- 
sociation in Paris. 
Addressing the journalists, tne 
Director-General emphasized 
the importance of close col- 
laboration between Unesco and 
the press. Recalling that 
Unesco aims above all at estab- 
lishing a true “brotherliness 
of the mind”, he pointed out 
that the first condition of that 
against the ignorance of the 
masses; but that that condition 
was not enough in itself. 
“Education is one thing, pro- 
paganda is another”, declared 
Dr. Torres Bodet. To spread 
the rudiments of learning 
among the masses and then 
to expose them to the dangers 
of demagogy and propaganda. 
he continued, was in contra- 
diction to the end in view: 
While education aimed at 
putting the individual in com- 
munion with mankind, propa- 
ganda often imprisoned him 
in the fiercest forms of na- 
tionalism. 
Serving Truth 
The work of Unesco the 
Director-General said would 
therefore be useless unless the 
press, for its part, placed at 
the service of education, that 
is, of truth, its own potent 
means of persuasion. It was 
for.the press to form the judg- 
ment of the masses, by giving 
them impartial information 
without flattering their foibles. 
~ Dr. Torres Bodet stated that 
Unesco in its turn was anxious 
to help the press. He then gave 
special attention fo its prob- 
lems, particularity to the ques- 
tion of freedom of information, 
the universal character of 
which had just been proclaim- 
ed in the International De- 
claration of Human Rights. 
. The Director-General men- 
tioned the inquiries carried 
out by Unesco all over the 
world into the technical needs 
of the press, radio and films, 
emphasizing the importance 
given by these inquiries to the 
professional training of journ- 
alists. 
Mobilize Opinion 
The information thus ga- 
thered, he added, would “en- 
able Unesco to take positive 
action in full knowledge of the 
facts.” Such action would of 
course be difficult, because 
Unesco is an inter-govern- 
mental Agency and the press 
had to keep free of govern- 
mental power. 
It was also difficult, he said, 
because Unesco was an intel- 
lectual organization and could 
not make a direct impact on 
economic and political factors. 
It was therefore for the press 
itself to assist Unesco’s efforts 
and make its action effective     by mobilizing opinion | 
rr i ———

## [Page 3](073886engo.pdf#page=3) 3

### 73905: A Broad educational programme for people of all ages

UNESCO COURIER 
 
December 1948— January 1949 
  
Although food production is 
nearing prewar level... 


### 73891: Food and people: UNESCO issues challenge to society and science

  
Unesco Issues Challenge 
To Society and Science 
started has mostly been 
alarmist and pessimistie, ~ science plays in our everyday life. We begin by taking the daily 
comfcrts and achievements for granted; and then some out- 
standing advances suddenly make us aware how remarkable is the 
world which science is re-creating around us. In the last few years 
everyone has been taken ‘by surprise by the achievements of science 
VERY generation has to learn afresh the growing part which 
‘They have helped to create in 
the minds of simple people every- 
where an enormous increase of in- 
* terest -in science, and of respect, 
almost awe, for it. But because all 
this has happened in war-time, 
because ‘much of it was first 
applied to destruction, this in- 
terest and this respect have carri- 
ed with them an unmistakable 
pessimism and even fear. Science 
) wd 


### 73892: Weekly radio review to start February 19

Weekly Radio Review 
‘To Start February 19 
N February 19, Unesco is presenting to world radio organizations 
[ its first programme for weekly broadcast, 
Sub-titled “A Weekly Radio Review on Education, Review”, 
“Unesco World 
‘Science and Culture”, it is the result of months of research and testing 
~ by the Projects Division of Mass Communications. 
Fven before last October, when a Conference of Radio Experts from 
eighteen countries meeting in Unesco House gave its complete approval] 
to the idea, members of the Divi- 
sion have been planning the ap- . 
proach. 
The problem was to present 
developments in the fields of 
Unesco interest, to show concrete 
examples of international co- 
. operation within these areas, and 
in those of other UN Specialized 
Agencies, and to make these items 
alive and interesting. 
For people of different countries 
do work together, there are steps 
being taken towards a better life 
for all. There is an interdepend- 
ence between men and women of 
various nationalities and many 
things that are happening to-day 
. transcend narrow nationalistic 
ideas. There are many examples. 
A broadcast giving these can be 
a real weapon for peace. 
FOR instance, recently an art 
exhibition was held in Italy 
to pay for the reconstruction of 
a war-damaged bridge; 3,000 
British students, 15 to 18 years 
old, met in London during the 
Christmas holidays to debate 
problems facing their country and 
the world. 
It is news when countries dif- 
fering in political ideology co- 
~ operated to aid blind people re- 
* gain sight through the Eye Bank, 
‘co-operate in attempts to curb 
traffic in drugs. It is news when 
modern science helps grow more 
food for the world, elsewhere 
aids the figth for world health. 
Constant interchange of scholar- 
ships takes place between the 
countries of the world. Besides 
this, new methods in medicine 
are being discovered to prolong 
human life; arts and the theatre 
daily cross national barriers. It 
was thought that these events 
leading to international wunder- 
standing should be brought to the 
attention of the world and that 
~ their application in every-day life 
~ should be stressed. 
~~ Mass Media experts are con- 
© vinced that a definite interest in 
. constructive achievements exists 
- and that they can be presented 
in attention-holding fashion. In 
the “Unesco World Review”, 
the listener will not be preached 
. to, nor will any particular cul- 
"ture be stressed above others. 
; THE programme is divided into 
: three parts. The first five 
" minutes consist of a round-up of 
- short items which might other- 
: wise be missed in the hurried 
: world of to-day. The next two 
{ periods, also of five minutes each, 
, are devoted to features dealing 
with the news behind the news. 
In preliminary searches for the 
first section, much of interest has 
- been uncovered. Items have come 
from international organizations, 
_ conferences, medical associations, 
} teachers. 
- Items which contribute to in- 
* ternational understanding are still 
being sought. Members of Na- 
tional Commissions and of other 
Unesco groups may send such 
news to Mr. Melton Davis, Mass| _ 
Communications, Room 323, Unes-| 
co. Provision has been made to 
treat events such as the millenary 
of Ibn Sina, better known as Avi- 
cenna, in the “Unesco World 
Review”. 
It should be clearly understood 
that the programme does not in- 
tend to publicize Unesco, but to 
place before as wide a public as 
possible those ideals for which 
Unesco stands. 
The {five-minute features are 
being produced in collaboration 
with personalities qualified in the 
particular subject treated. It is 
here for example that the back- 
ground of new scientific dis- 
coveries will be given. 
Food and People, chosen as the 
discussion theme of the project 
on the Social Implications of 
Science, will also be the subject 
of 5-minute “features”. 
Plans have been made to in- 
clude frequent items resulting 
from the Declaration of Human 
Rights, passed by the UN As- 
sembly at its last session. Since 
Unesco is charged with publiciz- 
ing the Declaration, features are 
being specially prepared to carry 
out this mission. Thumb-nail bio- 
graphies of men who have been 
leaders in the fight for human 
rights are being scheduled. 
A book of the month which, in 
the opinion of Unesco, deserves 
wide publicity because of its con- 
tribution to international wun- 
derstanding, will also be pre- 
sented. 
The first trial “Unesco World 
Review” programme, made up 
for the radio conference, included 
a story from the Unesco Calendar 
of World Affairs. It told of a 
poor coolie who conducted a one- 
man campaign against illiteracy 
in the villages of North China 
He had begun by selling his pig- 
tail to start a fund for building 
schools. 
Certain of the programmes will 
be sent by air-mail, others may be 
broadcast over UN short wave 
stations and then re-transmitted 
to local networks. It is not known 
at present how many radio sta- 
tions will carry the programme 
from its start since most radio 
schedules have been made up 
months in advance. But it is hop- 
ed that members of interested 
groups will keep in touch with 
their local radio stations in order 
to learn when they will be able to 
hear “Unesco World Review”. 
Much of the eventual success 
of this important and ambitious 
project depends on the help given 
it by the national radio organiza- 
tions of the world. At Unesco 
every effort will be made to see 
that the programme—on educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural 
events— will be human, interest- 
ing and constructive, and that it 
will appeal to popular taste. In 
the final analysis, this can really 
be “Peoples speaking to Peoples”.   
© during the war: by radar and rockets, by penicillin and atomic energy. 
is running away with us, people 
- say, it is getting out of control; 
‘who knows but that it will destroy 
us? 
There are two things to be said 
EEN 
  
- By 
J. BRONOWSKI, 
Head of Projects Division, Mass 
Communications Department.   
“about this pessimism. In the first 
~ example, 
should be met, and a challenge to- 
itself 
these problems were handed to us 
by Nature and we had no other 
choice but to sit and starve. -° 
Unesco will be presenting these 
problems, not as .matters for 
alarm but as a. challenge; a chal- 
lenge to science to show how, for 
‘world. food shortages 
humanity to put into practice the 
solutions which science has al- 
ready made possible. 
We want to bring this challenge 
into the conscience of everyone in 
every country and at every level 
‘These discussions and this cam- 
paign are not for scientists alone, 
because the: problems are not only 
scientific ones. 
place, it is of course quite mis- . ° 
taken. In every generation, and 
even during the recent war, the 
* positive gains from science have |“ . 
positive g S “scientific member of 
far outweighed the destruction; 
only they don’t get as much pub- 
licity. Everyone remembers the 
..80,000 dead at Hiroshima." 
population of the world was 
at the beginning? 
more important. People feel that 
science is running away with 
them personally because they 
don’t understand how it works, 
and what are its underlying ideas. 
No one has shown them how and 
where science fits into their daily 
lives. They need help to see 
. science in its perspective, and only 
so can they in turn help us to 
guide 
peace and the fulfilment of hu- 
man needs. 
 | LW) 
«~.That is no longer enough... 
This is an important task for 
Unesco, in which a number of 
Departments are working together. 
It must be carried out broadly, 
must have a wide appeal, and 
must address itself above all to 
matters which are urgent and 
immediate and within the under- 
standing of people everywhere. It 
is not enough to talk of the im- 
pact of science on society; we 
must bring home to everyone the 
impact of “science on their lives. 
For this reason the Director 
General, after going over this 
problem with members of the 
Secretariat, decided to pick a 
single theme for the campaign, 
to popularize it, and to discuss 
it in all its implications. 
The theme that has been chosen 
for 1949 is “food and people”. Un- 
der this title two related problems 
are presented, the growth of world 
population and the strain on the 
world’s food resources now and in 
the future. In a number of coun- 
tries people have already begun {o 
think about these problems, 
though few people yet understand 
how very much they are their 
daily concern and will be the con- 
cern of their children. 
And such discussion as has been 
But 
‘how many people know that the 
greater at the end of the war than 
But the second point is even 
scientific . work towards 
£ 
  
Dr. J. Bronowski is a mathema- 
tician and statistician. He was a 
the British 
‘Mission which in 1945 visited Hiro- 
{*shima and Nagasaki to assess ‘the 
| damage done. by the atomic ‘bombs. 
He has also written ‘books on lite- 
rature, including an authoritative 
life of the English poet, artist and 
mystic, William Blake.     
‘We want to make everyone see 
how much science has already 
done and how much more it can 
do; and we want them to feel 
that it is their business to see 
that what can be done shall be 
done. We want to create an in- 
formed and an active public ~Opi- 
“nion. 
Details of the ‘campaign will be 
given in these pages regularly; and 
we shall also publish here extracts 
from the work of 
the many dis- 
tinguished au- 
thors who are 
helping us. The 
first step in the 
campaign is the 
production of a 
series of discus- 
sion pamphlets by 
writers of repute 
who can present 
the contribution 
of their branch of 
science clearly 
and simply and in 
a non-technical 
way. 
There will be 
four levels of 
such pamphlets, 
ranging from the 
most popular to 
a comparatively 
scientific level; 
though even such 
scientific subjects 
as Nutrition or 
Population Ba- 
lance will be pre- 
sented in a man- 
ner which, while intelligent, does 
not demand a specialized scien- 
tific background. 
A list of the pamphlets and the 
authors who are writing them 
appears on this page, and is itself 
as if 
- Ce 
Growth — Dr. Kingsley 
Ce Davis; ' oo 
Bi b) Areas of Low Population — 
Dr. G. Loye;- 
  
Unesco Discussion Guides 
The following is a list of the 
pamphlets which Unesco will 
publish during 1919 as part of its 
‘| effort to arouse discussion ou the 
major Unesco theme of - the year 
FOOD AND PEOPLE. 
A. General pamphlet on Food 
and People — A. Huxley and E.J. 
Russell. 
B. Background pamphlets for pop- 
ular level discussions: 
1.Population., Facts and Pros- 
pects—Mrs A, Myrdal & Dr, P, 
Vincent; 
2. Food : Facts and Prospects ... 
Dr. E. Kellogg. 
Background pamphlets ) for 
semi-popular levels: 
1. Fundamental Education and 
Natural Resources (Fundamental 
Education experiments in Mexico 
and Latin America) — Dr. Guil- 
lermo Nannetti; 
2. Family and Food Habits 
(Anthropological study) — Mrs, 
Margaret Mead; 
3. - International Co-operation 
(Summary discussion on behalf of 
Specialized .Agencies and United 
Nations) — (Author still indefi- 
nite); ’ oe 
4, Child Nutrition — (Author 
still indefinite). - 
D. Background pamphlets for 
academie levels: 
1. Science, Technology and Peo- 
pulation —- - Dr. Warrén S. ‘Thomp- 
son; 
2. Balance and Movements of 
. Population, including three papers: 
a) Areas of Rapid Population 
¢) Movements of Population — 
Dr, Julius Isaacs. 
3. Population Problems of China 
— Dr. Ta Chen; 
4. Population Problems of India — 
Dr. S. Chandrasekhar; 
5. Genetics, Food and People 
{General story ou genetics) — Dr. 
C.H. Waddington; . 
6 .Food and Nutrition, ‘ncluding: 
a) Introduction: food and wel. 
fare — Dr. André Meyer; 
b) South America — (Author 
still indefinite); 
¢) Eastern Europe -- (Author 
still indefinite); } 
d) Switzerland — or — United 
Kingdom — (Author still 
indefinite). 
7. Scientific Advances in Agri- 
- culture — Dr. B.A, Keen; 
8. Soil, Forests and Water — 
Dr. Raymond Furen; 
9, Food from Stream and Sea — 
Dr, H, B, Belgvad; . 
10, Full Development of the 
World’s Food Resources — Dr, E 
de Vries; } 
11. Distribution of the World's 
Food — Dr. S. Kroelikowski,     
a guarantee that the material will 
be lively and universal; and fur- 
ther details will be given from 
time to time. 
But the campaign will not stop 
at the pamphlets or at the discus- 
sion which will be organized on 
the basis of this material. We 
shall popularize the topic on the 
radio and in the press, we shall 
draw the attention of people to 
films that deal with it, we shall 
put it on wall charts, and we 
shall do everything to bring it 
into the homes of people. 
FOOD AND PEOPLE will be a 
Unesco subject to which a great 
effort will be devoted in 1949; and 
we hope that it will be a model 
for other campaigns in the future 
for mass education, 
  
. . It wasn’t enough before the war, and there are 200 million more 
people now. Population increase is not matched by production.

## [Page 4](073886engo.pdf#page=4) 4

### 73906: The Natural, the social sciences

### 73908: The UNESCO budget for 1949

### 73893: We must raise the moral and intellectual conditions of the masses

“We Must Raise the Moral 
And Intellectual Conditions 
Of the Masses” 
TORRES BODET 
  
10, 1948:    
gm Wish first of all, Gentlemen, to express my deepest and sincerest 
geatitude. 
I am profoundly moved by the honour you have shown me in 
appointing me Director-General of Unesco. I am quite aware that I 
should regard this honour, above all, as the symbol of a great responsibi- 
lity, which I should not be justified in accepting unless I tried to deserve 
it by my loyalty to Unesco and my devotion to the task before us. 
Your confidence must be matched by the entire seif-dedication of the 
“man in whom you repose it. I want to assure you today that I shall 
dedicate myself unreservedly to Unesco’s service. 
- 7 I have always had the most complete faith in Unesco. Before assisting 
"at its birth, I had opportunities of appreciating the work of the Allied 
* ‘Ministers of Education who, during their meetings in Great Britain, took 
© advantage of one of the darkest days of the struggle to reflect on the 
!. destinies of a civilization which cannot be based on hatred and ignorance. 
In 1945, I took part in the London Conference, as delegate of Mexico. In 
transmitting the good wishes of my country to that Assembly, I renewed 
~ my assurance that I would do my modest best to advance the noblest 
~ cause of humanity: to establish peace in truth, on truth and by truth. 
NO DIVIDING LINE BETWEEN 
EDUCATOR AND DIPLOMAT 
N Mexico, I have been Minister of Education and Minister for Foreigh 
Affairs. In these two posts, I came to realize that there could be no 
sharp dividing line between the duties of the educationist and the 
obligations of the dinlomat. If the teacher trains the new generations to 
intolerance, in obedience to a blind and exclusive nationalism. the 
diplomat in his turn will be compelled to pursue a policy of aggression or 
revenge. 
Peoples, in their international conduct, show themselves no other than 
they are in their school class-rooms, in their books, in their dramas, or 
in their laboratories. It is therefore futile for diplomats to seek to shape 
the figure of concord in the perishable clay of treaties, if the educationist 
continues to model the spirit of the mighty into the countenance of 
despotism, or to carve into the minds of the weak the features of 
abnegation. i : 
Truth is universal. Those who deny that first principle and found their 
hegemony on biased and incomplete reasoning preach lies. Hence the 
importance of Unesco’s task, because Unesco, truth and peace constitute 
essentially a single enterprise. 
- serious and disquieting doubt at present prevails among all nations 
about the power of our Organization It would be a betrayal of the 
ideas we preach to ignore this doubt. To recognize its existence, as I do 
now however, in no way implies that we share it. Quite the contrary. But 
we must realize that many of the aims which inspired us in creating 
Unesco are now in jeopardy. Nonetheless, far from allowwmng ourselves 
to be disheartened, it is our duty to work with added zeal to restore the 
real value of those aims. The United Nations are the body politic of a 
new world, and Unesco is its conscience, Unless that conscience triumphs,. 
it will be difficult for the new World Order to assert itself durably. 
In pondering over the present world crisis. we realize that the discords 
of the time constitute the most eloquent proof of the distress of the 
pecples in their efforts to attain at one pound, to the three aims: Liberty, 
Equality, Fraternity, proclaimed by the French Revolution, There are 
still individuals and groups who place the ideal of liberty above that of 
equality. Other groups and individuals set the ideal of equality above that 
of liberty. 
Both of them suffer, for both of them forget that, without equality of 
opportunity, liberty becomes a vain symbol, to the advantage of the 
readier and more powerful; and that, without individual liberty, equality 
weuld speedily become a sorry, undistinguished thing. 
- Furthermore, how is it possible to achieve fraternity without a proper 
balance between equality and liberty? I.ooking back over a century and 
a half. we now perceive clearly the necessity which justified the indis- 
soluble link between the three great principles enunciated by the men 
of 1783. EE . 
’ HE most distressing feature in the drama of our civilization 1s that 
the two main actors are society, on thie one hand, a joint and 
inseparable whole, which it is, alas, so difficult to guide and 
st:mulat= in one direction; and, on the other, individual Man. In other 
words, the whole and tné individual, the universe and the atom, the 
d:scourse of the ages and the syllable of a moment... N 
In the endeavour to reconcile these two terms, the world has. after 
every great struggle, believed that a saving formula had been discovered 
in a treaty of international co-operation. The 1914 war led to the Treaty 
of Versailles, the war of 1939 to the San Francisco Charter 
The League of Nations. The United Nations. But how can secure an 
effective union of nations without a previous union of the minds which 
are the common denominator of each nation? And bow can these be 
united, and their individuality safeguarded, without the help of education, 
science and culture? ’ 
The machinery of the State must constitute a bridge for geod under- 
standing between man and humanity. This is Unesco's goal, since the 
promotion of the spirit of peace—which Unesco must encourage every- 
where—aims at a single victory by way of a double achievement: the 
happiness of man and the progress of mankind. 
E were well aware, when we founded Unesco, that the new institu- 
WwW tion would be faced with obstacles of every kind. We never sought 
to hide the formidable difficulties inherent in the fulfilment of 
its purpose: “to determine the general aims of man’s education”— 
difficulties due to the cultural diversity of the modern world, a diversity 
which is further emphasized by the imminent crisis in every culture. 
Ne also knew that Unesco’s ideals could not be attained if, although 
supported by the teachers, scientists, artists and poets, they were under- 
rated in the prevailing economic and political systems. Let me say, in 
passing, that this shows how unjust it would be to hold Unesco alone 
responsible for the inadequate results so far achieved. 
Of all the various international hadies which have heen established, 
T= following is the complete tex? of the 
    
  
inaugural address delivered by Dr. Jaime 
Torres Bodet, Director-General of Unesco, on the occasion of his presentation tO 
the Third Session of the General Conference of Unesco at Beirut, Lebanon, on December 
  
Unesco is the only one which claims te touch man directly, It is not 
unfair to say that the others regard human conditions in their external 
manifestations, seeking to prevent or to remove sources of conflict. 
NESCO, in its turn, owed its creation to the belief that “wars begin 
in the minds of men”. Unless we accepted this postulate, our institu- 
tion would be meaningless. Peace, like war, is above all, a state of mind. 
We have no hesitation in affirming that to all of us who went to Londen 
at the request of our Governments, this was our fundamental idea. 
We believed, and still believe, that in whatever philosophy man 
seeks the reason for his being, he is a living centre of seli- 
determination. Neither the backwardness of material life, nor the 
evolution of science could urge man irresistibly to war, had his 
mind not already been invaded by a hostile determination. 
That being so, the essential purpose of the United Nations: “to 
-save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”, will be vain 
and sterile unless we strive te dislodge war from its most secret 
stronghold: the human mind. it is a good thing to organize a 
security system, ready to mobilize all the resources of constraint 
to combat any threat te peace. It is clear, however, that measures 
We publish below the full text 
of Dr. Julien Huxley's final address 
as Director-General of Unesco, to 
the Third Session of the General 
Conference in Berut, delivered on 
December 10, 1948: 
regrets at leaving an infant 
whose development I have 
heiped to foster and to guide, just 
when it is becoming really interest- 
ing. I cannot claim, like some of 
those here present who took part in 
the discussions of. the Committee 
of Allied Ministers in exile during 
the late war, to have known 
Unesco from the time when it was, 
if I may say, no more than “a gleam 
in its father’s eye” or, if I may 
adopt a paraphrase, no more than 
a reaction against the glare of the 
bombs falling on London; but I 
have now been serving the Organiz- 
ation for nearly three years, and 
some regrets are, as I say, inevit- 
able. 
I CANNOT help feeling some 
However, any regrets that I feel 
are much tempered by the know- 
ledge that I am -handing over my 
office to a man of the calibre of 
H.E. Sefior Torres Bodet. You all 
know his distinguished record; 3s 
what I may call an international 
statesman; as Minister of Foreign’ 
Affairs of his country; as Minister 
of Education, in which function he 
rendered notable services to the 
cause of education, not only in his 
own country but in the whole 
world; as poet; as writer. 
But I would like here to pay my 
personal tribute to him. I have had 
the good fortune to have had deal- 
ings with him on three several oc- 
casions: in 1946, when I visited a 
few Latin-American countries on 
behalf of the Preparatory Commis- 
sions, in the early summer of 1947, 
when I was helping to prepare for 
the Conference in Mexico City, and 
again during the Conference itself; 
‘and can testify to his deep personal 
interest in education in its broad- 
est sense, including matters such as 
the necessity of educating all the 
peoples in regard to the conserva- 
tion of natural resources, a question 
too often neglected by educators I 
can testify to his broad culture, his 
intellectual energy, his deep sincer- 
ity; and thus in passing over the 
reins of office, I. am happy to be 
doing so to a man whom I not only 
respect, and admire but one whom 
I am happy to be able to call my 
friend. Ce a I 
of expediency are not enough; 
else, is a sound foundation. 
[NTERNATIONAL action to promd 
has its field in the deep forces of 
mere intellectual agreement has DIC 
century the mistake was made of thi 
automatically follow if the peopies: 
reality of scientific truths. 
For this reason, we gave Unesco a 
culture, which covers both man’s intel 
of his aesthetic sense and moral ing 
the preamble to Unesco’s Constitution 
the intellectual and moral solidarity 
< INTELLECTUAL SOLIDARITY 
achieve. Scientific truth, indeed, cons 
which is comprehensible to all and ° 
problem here is to discover the 
knowledge as widely as possible. 
exchanges of books and information 
measures. 
6&¢ MORAL SOLIDARITY, on the 
and we might easily be discouraged ! 
systems and the variety of ways of 10 
We do not, of course, claim that a 
should agree on the philosophical prt 
be a naive illusion and would imply 
desirable If there has been talk of a 
not of this type. But it would be enou 
maxims, such as respect for freedon 
conditional preference for a peace foi 
as an instrument of hegemony, the ¢ 
but an end, the condemnation of al 
religious discrimination, and similar 
“WE ARE MOV 
A NEW H 
HE interdependence of peoples, 2 
confined to the political and e 
te the spheres of culture and th 
voices proclaim that we are moving to 
that we can no lenger accept, unmodi 
that classical humanism bequeathed t 
Each day brings home to us more. 
based almost exclusively on the tel 
acceptance. It has not even succeed 
problems peculiar to our Western civ: 
all its latent energies in the field «¢ 


### 73894: A Dual duty for UNESCO and its Members: Huxley's parting words, a call to all nations for self-inquiry

A DUAL DUTY FOR UNE 
HUXLEY’S PAI 
A Call To 
or oelt 
TI would like to take this opport- 
unity of making a few observations 
here which, while retrospective 
from my point of view, may per- 
haps have some prospective value 
for my successor. 
First of all, I think I am expressing 
not only my own opinion, but that 
of the great majority of delegates at 
this Conference, and indeed that of 
the Organization as a whole, that 
the progress made by Unesco in the 
first two years of its life has heen 
not merely encouraging but remark- 
able; and that it has been equally 
remarkable to note the degree of 
agreement — indeed of cordial 
agreement—attained in the dis- 
cussions and operations of Unesco as 
compared with that attained in 
some other Organizations and Ag- 
encies of the United Nations. 
While this happy result is due 
largely to the interest and energy 
of our Member Governments, of 
their delegations and National 
Commissions, of the international 
non-governmental organizations 
which aid us in our work, of the 
general public, and of the Secret 
ariat, it is, I am sure, also proof 
of the fact that Unesco fills a vital 
need in the present circumstances 
of our planet, the fact that the 
world has become ripe for tne 2m- 
ergence of an international organ- 
jzation dealing with the things of 
the mind and spirit. 
Individuals and governments who 
disagree elsewhere and on other 
matters find that they can agree 
here on the practical projects includ- 
ed in Unesco’s programme. They 
find that they can agree upon 2a 
common aim, in trying to make a 
more civilized world; a world which 
can become more civilized as it be- 
comes more unified, but also can 
become more unified as it becomes 
more civilized. There is no common 
ideology involved in this, but a. 
common practical idea; and find- 
ing that all can agree on such a. 
 
practical idea and participate In 
such a common aim is undoubtedly 
proving a source of inspiration. 
We Must Reduce 
Psychological Distances 
Between Peoples and 
Nations 
WOULD like to reiterate here 
what 1 said on other occas- 
ions, namely that no peace will be 
permanent unless it is based on 
co-operation in scientific and cult- 
ural affairs. To achieve this may 
be a long and not always spectacul- 
ar job, but it is none the less a ne- 
cessary one. As was well said during 
discussions at this Conference, to 
have reduced the physical distances 
between countries is of no avail, 
unless at the same time we reduce 
psychological distances between 
peoples and nations. In fact, in the

## [Page 5](073886engo.pdf#page=5) 4

### 73907: Cultural activity: philosophy and humanistic studies

### 73906: The Natural, the social sciences

### 73908: The UNESCO budget for 1949

h; what is needed, above everything 
note friendship between the peoples 
f feeling and thought. In this respect, 
roved inadequate. In the nineteenth 
iinking that peace and concord would 
s could unite in demonstrating the 
a task not only in science but also in 
electual progress and the development 
1dinations. We therefore affirmed in 
on that peace “must ke founded upon 
ty of mankind”. 
’Y is, in appearance, the easier to 
nsists of a body of objective evidence 
| whose validity all must admit. The 
# means of disseminating scientific 
sis depends on educational policy, 
n, and the taking of other similar 
e other hand, bristles with difficulties, 
. by the number of different existing 
looking at the world and at life. 
all men, in every part of the world, 
dnciples of their conduct. This would 
ly a degree of uniformity not even 
a philosophy of Unesco, it was surely 
rugh to agree on a certain number of 
ym, the renouncing of violence, un- 
pended on justice, as opposed to war 
conviction that man is not a means 
sexual, racial, linguistic, social or 
> ‘universal standards. 
VING TOWARDS 
IUMANISM” 
an overriding necessity today, is not 
economic fields; it applies as much 
the mind. In every part of the world, 
owards a new humanism, This means 
lified, the idea of man and of culture 
to us. 
e. clearly that humanism, which was 
slect, no longer commands universal 
ded, as can be seen, in solving the 
vilization. The intellect has exercised 
of technology, in the subjection of 


### 73894: A Dual duty for UNESCO and its Members: Huxley's parting words, a call to all nations for self-inquiry

  
‘TING WORDS = 
All Nations 
-Inquiry 
long run, peace depends on Unesco. 
J Here I would go further than 
ome who assert that Unesco 1s not 
merely devoted to the cause of 
peace, but itself depends on the 
maintenance of peace; on the 
contrary, I believe that if — which 
God forbid — a new war should 
‘break out, Unesco would still con- 
tinue to exist (as did the ILO dur- 
ing the First World War) and be 
ready to begin its fruitful work 
again immediately afterwards. 
Twelve Probing Questions 
This brings me to my second 
main point. It has often—and 
rightly been said that Unesco can 
only operate efficiently wih the 
active co-operation of Member 
Btates—through their governments, 
their National Commissions, their 
specialists and experts in the fields 
pt education, science and culture, 
wnd the general mass of their 
peoples. 
In relinquishing my office, I 
would like to thank all Member 
States for all that they have done 
to make it possible for us on the 
ecretariat to get on with the exe- 
tution of Unesco’s programme. But 
[ would also like to ask them to do 
something more, namely to exa- 
mine critically and dispassionately 
what they themselves are doing in 
:ducation, science and culture, 
against the yardstick of the aims 
ind purposes laid down in our 
constitution, and the directives set 
lorth in our programme, and also 
1s measure against the achieve- 
nents of other nations. 
I will give a few examples of 
rhat IT mean: 
P ARE YOU EXAMINING 
JCIENTIFICALLY YOUR PROBL 
IMS OF GOVERNMENT AND OF 
 
nature to man, but has proved incapable of firing the train of virtue 
and harmony. 
AFTER centuries of rationalism, disillusionment with rationalism has 
caused many to fall a prey to the irrationalism of dictatorship. What, 
therefore, has to be done is, without sacrificing the intellect, to combine it 
harmoniously with other human virtues, which we may learn from cultures 
ment, in all their diversity, shall not 
perish from the face of the earth? 
&¢ HAVE YOU TAKEN ADE- 
QUATE STEPS TOWARDS THE 
CONSERVATION OF NATURE IN 
YOUR COUNTRY — whether for 
economic, or social, or aesthetic 
reasons, a question one asks onecs- 
elf with added force in this region 
where mountain sides which we 
know in biblical times were covered 
with forests are now largely bare 
where great regions of once fertile 
land which helped to nourish Rome 
are now barren or even desert, and 
where birds and beasts have de- 
creased to such an alarming extent. 
4 WHAT HAVE YOU DONE TO 
  
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC OR- 
GANIZATION, with the aid of ad- 
vice from the best social scientists 
and economists, and in a dispass- 
ienate spirit of science; or are you 
treating them ad hec on an essen- 
tially political basis, and in the light 
of emotional or material interests? 
Are you profiting by the experience 
of other countries in the field of 
administration, by studying their 
methods and sending your young 
men to be trained abroad? 
€ ARE YOU ALLOWING THAT 
FULL FREEDOM OF PRESS AND 
OPINION, OF EXPRESSION, RE- 
SEARCH AND TEACHING, which 
is Jaid down in our Constitution? 
. @ Are you profiting by the expe- 
rience of the various countries which 
have been attempting, in such fields 
as radio or film to combine freedom 
in presenting different pomts of 
view with some reasonable degree of 
control? 
4 ARE YOU ATTEMPTING TO 
USE NATURAL SCIENCE TO THE 
FULL — whether in education to 
give to your citizens a proper under- 
standing of the method and the act- 
ual and potential achievements af 
science, or in practice, in the act- 
ual solution of concrete problems? 
I may mention that my own 
country has recently made a survey 
of the number of trained scientists 
it requires and has decided that it 
must attempt to double the output 
of scientific graduates in the next 
twenty-five-years. 
4 ARE YOU TAKING STEPS 
TO PRESERVE THE POPULAR 
TRADITIONS OF YOUR COUN- 
TRY in ballads and songs, in cos- 
tume, in art and craftmanship, and 
to adapt them to the changed con- 
ditions of modern life, so that these 
rich sources of cultural achieve- 
PRESERVE AND MAKE KNOWN 
YOUR CULTURAL HERITAGE? 
Have you taken steps to preserve 
your historical and ancient monum- 
ents, to unearth further remains of 
your past history, to exhibit its 
treasures and make them known 
to the world at large—another ques- 
tion one asks here, in this region of 
ancient history and incomparable 
cultural diversity, still too litle 
known by the peoples of other 
lands. 
6 HAVE YOU TAKEN STEPS 
TO REMOVE THE SCOURGE OF 
JLLITERACY FROM YOUR 
PEOPLE; and have you profited to 
the fullest 2xtent by the experience 
of other nations in this important 
field? 
& HAVE YOU PROVIDED THE 
POSSIBILITY OF HIGHER EDU- 
CATION FOR ALL CLASSES OF 
YOUR POPULATION? Here again 
the knowledge of what some colon- 
ial powers have recently done for 
their colonial peoples might serve 
as an incentive, not only for other 
colonial powers, but for some 
countries without colonies hot 
with large classes and sectors of 
educationally under-privileged peo- 
pie. 
4 HAVE YOU TAKEN PAINS 
TO PROVIDE THE BEST ARCH- 
ITECTURE FOR YOUR PUBLIC 
BUILDINGS, and in this domain 
to consider not only material cost 
or practical efficiency, but also the 
worthy expression of public spirit 
and national pride? 
4 HAVE YOU ENCOURAGED 
THE CREATIVE ARTIST, whether 
in painting or music, in literature 
or drama, to express the spirit of 
his country and to make life more 
interesting and more worthwhile for 
its people? 
(Continued on Page 8) 
  
other than our ¢wn. Classical humanism was at one time restricted to the 
Mediterranean region. Modern humanism must know no limit or frontiers. 
It is Unesco's supreme task to help to bring this new type of humanism 
to birth. 
HE Specialized Agencies oi the United Nations for education, eco-. 
i] nomics and health respectively, form a trmle front in the battle 
against the greatest enemies of human progress—ignorance, hunger and 
disease. I have already had occasion elsewnere to emphasize the value 
of these Agencies. } 
1 then said that for the purpose of consolidating peace there ‘had been 
no happier idea than the founding of the Specialized Agencies as an 
integral part of the structure of the United Nations. If 1 return to the 
theme today. it is because the good wcrk of these Agencies cannet be 
sufficiently emphasized; that work is often fcrgotten in the concentration 
of most men’s interest on political problems. 
Y connecting culture with health and economics, I want to stress the 
humanitarian and, in the broadest sense of the term, democratic 
character of Unesco. We must never forget that the intellectual and 
moral solidarity at which we aim will be but a beautiful dream so long 
as men Jack health and sustenance. Nor must we lose signt of the fact 
that, just as Unesco’s sister organizations are concerned with man’s 
essentia' Needs. Unesco too must work for the good of the greatest number, 
If leading scientists and educationists are to pool their cfforts 
within Unesco, the cbject of this is not to form a centre of 
intellectual co-operation for the benefit of a select minority, but 
to improve the moral and intellectual conditions of the great mass 
. - eof the people. : y 
JERE Fad Ce an 
© “LET US KEEP TO ESSENTIALS” 
ANY difficulties lie in Unesco’'s way, one of which is particularly 
dangerous: the multitude of projects and programmes which have 
so far not commanded popular acceptance. We must make a 
choice and try to set to work without undue hesitation. The peoples 
expect of Unesco concrete work. which shall make a direct and immediate 
appeal to the wishes of mankind in general 
& SINCE we know the limits of our resources, let us not be diverted 
to too many projects, and so dissipate our energies and resources. Let us 
keep to essentials and, if need be, reduce the area of our activities so as 
to ‘be able to pursue them thoroughly and to a finish. 
¢ THE SECOND difficulty is the idea, to my mind false, that Unesco 
has become an instrument of propaganda for one way of thinking and 
in favour of one system of cultural policy. I do not think I need spend 
much time over such a completely wrong and tendentious view as this. 
There is and always will be room among us for all schools of thought, 
as long as they contribute loyally to international understanding and te 
friendly association between cultures, in an atmosphere of peace. Chinese 
and Peruvians, Arabs and Frenchmen, Australians and Turks, Czechs and 
Poles, Anglo-Saxons from Great Britain and from the United States, 
negroes from Liberia or Indians from Mexico or Bolivia—all make their 
own distinctive contribution. 
We are persuaded that only by respecting the individuality ef 
each country and by hearkening te its characteristic accent shall 
we attain to that full co-ordination which is essential to any concert, 
be it of instruments, wills, races or doctrines, 
Our one wish is to set a fair and just goal to private ambitions, namely, 
service to man as man. Unesco does not claim to impose peace on a world 
permanently based on victors and vanquished. Born of the war, its mission 
is to fight against war. And it is precisely the slender nature of the ineans 
available to us in this fight that brings me to the third difficulty. 
  
BPEL RO 
EE TE    
   
SPEARS AND SHIELDS OF SOVEREIGNTY 
ERY often, words have little relation to the true implications of 
ideas. A disastrous gulf has opened between sveech and action. In 
the presence of this danger, Unesco must build up a rampart of 
truth against the eloguence of officialdom, sll too ready to make promises 
but tardy in keeping them. 
The difficulty in this, as in so many other matters, is due *o the 
atmosphere of transition in which we are now living. Undivided sov- 
ereignty of the State is today a legal survival which there is no eluding. 
The strong brandish it like a spear; the weak shelter behind it as behind 
a shield. So internationalism is as yet merely a noble hope for the {uture. 
To expect Unesco, by its mere existence, to change the innermost nature 
of men, is to expect a miracle which Unesce can never perform. We do 
not possess a magician’s skill, but we have our principles. For the ful- 
filment of our mission to advance the welfare of man, 4 path has been 
marked out for us which we cannot ignore. To follow this path, we must 
have the consent of governments. . 
The National Commissions, it is true. make up for certain constitutional 
restrictions upon our Organization. but have we made sure that in all 
countries the National Commissions are able to operate on the scale which 
the problems of our times require? . 
This is a very delicate task. Unesco has no right to interfere in the 
domestic affairs of governments. We have neither the power nor the wish 
to transform the Organization into a world Ministry of Educaticn. Nor do 
we want to burden the impoverished countries still further with unjusti- 
fiable bureaucratic machinery. a IO UIAl 
UR work must be based, abcve all. on two factors for which no 
substitute has so far been found: the good faith of governments and 
the persuasive force of principles. We shal: continue to- demand these 
essential conditions, for, without them, it wculd be wiser to postpone our 
hopes to better days. 
Fortunately, that is not necessary We do not view the future with 
pessimism. Much has been accomplished by Unescn since the London 
Conference. It is only fair to recognize that all the members of the 
Executive Board, as well as the whole staff of the Secretariat, have 
contributed in a marked degree to these successes; and I will ask them 
to collaborate with me in the same spirit in which they worked with my 
distinguished predecessor, Dr: Huxley. 
In naming that eminent representative of contemporary learning, I 
realize how much Unesco has lost by his departure. For us, the memory 
of Dr. Huxley's gifts and authority will be imperishable. Unesco owes him 
the highest possible tribute. 
The applause which follows him as he goes brings home to me the 
tremendous effort I shall be called upon to make. And, in the accomplish- 
ment of that effort, I shall need your constant goodwill and support. 
+ 
THE MINES OF INTOLERANCE 
ENTLEMEN, during the summer of 1947, we read of an event which 
( filled our hearts with dismay. I refer to an accidant that occurred 
off the coast of Italy. Some fifty children, on holiday, were taking 
a sea trip, when their boat struck a mine laid during the war. All the 
unhappy victims were killed by the explosion. 
This posthumous act of vengeance by the war may serve us as a 
symbol. Conflicts never cease at a given time or in a given place. Those 
responsible for them leave concealed in the waters, theoretically restored 
to peaceful traffic, many deadly mines. The most dangerous of them all 
is intolerance. 
To perpetuate intolerance would be to allow our way to be strewn with 
a mechanism as fearful as that which caused the death of those Italian 
children on that bright summer’s day. But, in our case, should we forget 
our duty, we should be risking the final destruction of the basic principles 
of human civilization, the abandonment of all hope in a new world. To 
remove the lurking mines of enmity and discord is surely the duty of all 
men of goodwill. 
et us shoulder that duty, gentlemen, and thus fulfil Unesco’s noble 
mission, Cr

## [Page 6](073886engo.pdf#page=6) 4

### 73909: Cultural interchange between countries

### 73896: Noted Indian thinker heads Executive Board

### 73910: UNESCO's fellowship programme

6 UNESCO COURIER December 1948— January 1949 
NOTED INDIAN THINKER 
  
N 1 December 1948 Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, the eminent Hindu 
humanist, 
Fellow of All 
President of the Indian University Commission and a 
Souls’ College, Oxford, where he also holds the Spalding 
Chair of Oriental Ethics and Religions, was appointed to the impor- 
tant nost of Chairman of the Executive Board of Unesco. 
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, who is known all over the world for 
his works on philosophy, succeeds Dr. E, Ronald Walker, Counsellor of 
the Australian Embassy in Paris. 
Dr. Walker had bgen appointed 
in Mexico for one year in place 
of the former Chairman of the 
Executive Board, H.E. M. Victor 
Doré, Canadian Ambassador in 
Prussels. 
At the same time that it elected 
Sir Sarvepalli, the Board elected 
its other officers, choosing as its 
two Vice-Chairmen M. Parra- 
Perez (Venezuela) and M. Reger 
Seydoux (France). 
The Executive Board, which 8 
responsible to the General Con- 
forence for the carrying out of 
the Programme consists of eight- 
een members, of whom one-third 
are re-eligible every year. 
At Beirut the General Confer- 
“ence re-elected for three years 
five of the six members of the 
Board whose term of office expir- 
ed in 1948. These are Shafik 
Ghorbal Bey (Egypt), Professor 
Louis Verniers (Belgium). M. Vic- 
tor Doré (Canada), Professor 
‘Alex Photiades (Greece) and Sir 
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. M. Ro- 
ger Seydoux, who replaced M. 
Pierre Auger when the latter re- 
signed his membership of the 
Board to take over Unesco’'s Nat- 
ural Sciences Depertment. was 
confirmed in his office until ex- 
piry of the original term in 1949. 
Stefano Jacini of Italy 
On the same occasion, Decem- 
ber 1. the Conference elected 
Count Stefano Jacini (Italy) for 
three years in the place of M. Jan 
Opocensky (Czechoslevakia) who 
had expressed his wish not to 
stand for membership a second 
time. } 
In recognition of his services to 
Unesco while. on the Board, M. 
Opocensky was invited by his 
former colleagues to sit with 
them in an advisory capacity un- 
til the end of the Board's Thir- 
teenth Session. 
During that Thirteenth Session 
the Board received a telegram of 
resignation frqm one of its mem- 
pers. Dr. Benjamin Carrion 
(Ecuador), whose duties had pre- 
vented him from going to Beirut. 
To replace him on the Board, the 
General Conference chose a proms- 
inent South American in Dr. 
Guillermo Nannetti of Colombia. 
While the General Conference 
was meeting in Beirut, the Execu- 
tive Board cencluded its Twelfth 
Session, the first meetings of 
which had been in Istanbul, and 
began the Thirteenth Session, 
which was completed at Cairo 
after the Conference closed. 
These two sessions, besides 
reaching several very important 
decisions, enabled the Board to 
make close contact with cultural 
circles in the Middle East, from 
Istanbul to Cairo, and to make 
Unesco’'s work and purposes 
known to the inhabitants of the 
region. 
In particular, the Executive 
Board received an application for 
membership of Unesco from the 
Government of Ceylon. As is the 
rule =n such cases, this applica- 
tion has been transmitted for the 
opinion of the Economic anda So- 
cial Council of the United Na- 
tions. 
The Board further decided to 
give the Director-General of 
Unesco all latitude as regards the 
steps to be taken, by the means 
of mass communication at his 
disposal, to make the interna- 
tional Declaration of Human 
Rights known both to govern- 
ments and to Nationa] Commis- 
sions. 
Among the other decisions 
taken by the Board since Novem- 
ber, are: the approval of an agree- 
ment concluded between Unesco 
and the International Theatre 
Institute; and the approval of 
contracts concluded with the 
Interim Committee of the World 
Conference of University Repre- 
sentatives; with the International 
Association for Exchanges of 
Students for technical training ; 
with the Internafional Union for 
the Scientific Study of Demogra- 
phic Problems, the Permanent 
Commission for Industrial Medi- 
cine, the Anti-Cancer Union, the 
World Health Federation, the Ins- 
titute of Statistics, and the Union 
for the Protection of Nature. The 
Board also approved the granting 
of further financial aid to the 
International Unions of Chem- 
istry, the Biological Sciences and 
the Histery of Science. 
During the five days spent in 
Turkey, the members of the 
Board were received by the Gov- 
ernor-Mayor of Istanbul and by 
the Vice-Chancellors of the two 
Universities there. A visit to a 
“People’s Institute” allowed the 
Board to see at work some of the 
men who have carried out in 
Turkey one of the finest experi- 
ments in fundamental =sducation 
in existence. 
3S EXECUTIVE BOARD 
 
  
Biographical Notes 
On Sir S. Radhakrishnan 
PROFESSOR Sarvepalli Ra- 
dhakrishnan, M.A. D. Litt, 
LL. D., DL, F.B.A, Leader of tii 
Indian Delegation to the Third 
Session of the General Confer- 
énce of Unesco and newly elect- 
ed Chairman of the Executive 
Board for 1948-49, was born on 
September 5, 1888. He is Fellow 
of All Souls College, Oxford, and 
Spalding Professor of Eastern 
Religions and Ethics. 
Career: Assistant Professor of 
Philosophy, Presidency College, 
Madras, 1911-16; Professor of 
Philosophy, Presidency Collage 
Madras 1916-17, University Prof- 
essor of Philosophy, Mysore, 
1916-21; George VI Professor of 
Philosophy, Calcutta Univers 
1921-31; Haskell Lecturer n 
Comparative Religion, Universiiv 
of Chicago, 1926; Upton Lectur- 
er in Manchester College, Oxford 
1926 and 1929-30; Vice Chancellor 
Andhra University, Waltair 1931- 
36 . Professor of Philosophy, Cal- 
cutta University 1937-41; Vice 
Chancellor of Benares Hindu Un- 
iversity, 1939-47; Chairman Indian 
University Commission. 
Public Activities: General Pres- 
ident, Third Session of Indian 
Philosophical Congress, Bombay, 
1927; Chairman Executive Coun- 
cil Idian Philosophical Congress, 
1925-37; President Post-Graduate 
Council in Arts, 1927-31; Hibbert 
Lecturer 1929; Member of Intern- 
ational Committee on Intellectual 
Cooperation of the League of Na- 
tions, Geneva, 1931-39; Honorary 
Fellow Royal Asiatic Society of 
Bengal; Leader of the Indian De- 
legation to Unesco at the Second 
General Conference in Mexico 
City; Member Indian Constituznt 
Assembly 1947. 
Publications: The Reign of Rel- 
igion in Contemporary Philosophy, 
1920; Indian Philosophy in the 
  
“World School” 
for peace planned 
for United States 
Plans are being made for an 
“American World School” to 
educate youths from all nations 
in international understanding 
and peace. Proposed by Dr. Frank 
S. Hackett, headmaster and 
founder of the Riverdale Country 
School, Riverdale, New York, the 
plan calls for construction of an 
eight million dollar institution 
at which pre-college instruction 
would be given to about 600 
students from all over the world. 
Dr. Hackett plans to raise the 
necessary funds through public 
subscription. : 
Dr. Hackett stressed that world 
citizenship is dependent upon 
enlightened leadership and that 
the proposed school would be 
designed to prepare ifs students 
for such leadership. He expressed 
the hope that the “Riverdale 
idea” would be emulated by 
schools all over the world and 
that eventually there would be 
developed a “Council on school 
education for peace”. 
ity 
Library of Philosophy volume I 
1923, volume II 1927, 2nd Edition 
1930 and 1931. The Philosophy of 
Upnishad, 1924, 2nd Edition 1935; 
The Hindu View of Life, 1927; 
Fifth Impression, translated nto 
French and German, etc.; The 
Religion we Need, 1928; Kalki or 
the Future of Civilization, 1929, 
2nd Edition 1934; An Idealist’s 
View of Life 1932, East and West 
in Religion 1938; Eastern Religions 
and Western Thoughts, 1939, Edit- 
or of Mahatma Gandhi, 1939, 
Joint Editor “Contemporary Ind- 
ian Philosophy”, India and China, 
1944; Education, Politics and War, 
1944; Religion and Society, 1945; 
Is this Peace? 1945; Articles on 
India Philosophy in Encyclopedia 
Britannica and Religion in Mind, 
International Journal of Ethics, 
Hibbert Journal and other reviews. 
Siam Joins Unesco 
The Government of Siam 
became the 45th Member 
State of Unesco on January 
1949, after signing the Consti- 
titution of Unesco and deposit- 
ing the Instruments of Accep- 
tance with the Foreign Office 
of the United Kingdom.     


### 73897: New book currency now in circulation

    
New Book Currency 
ya EE ER 
Now In Circulation 
SINCE December 8 a new international currency, created by Unesco 
xclusively for the purchase of books and publications, has been 
in circulation in thirteen countries of Western and Eastern [Europe 
and of the Middle and Far East. : ~r . | [ Lo Est Sy 
This currency is Unesco’s “Book Coupon”, - “- = + ~& oI. 
“{with foreign 
  
Philippine Libraries 
Offer Book 
Exchanges 
An exchange of locally 
published books and other 
printed matter with publica- 
tions of similar nature in 
foreign countries will be 
sponsored by the Philippine 
Bureau of Public Libraries in 
connection with its present 
exchange service. 
Heretofore, in the course 
of its exchange relations 
libraries, the 
Bureau of Public Libraries 
was frequently asked for pub- 
lications that were essentially 
private or non-governmental 
in nature. Because of the 
dearth of materials, the ex- 
change in the past has been 
limited . to government publi- 
cations. 
One way of broadening the 
scope of the present literary 
exchange service and at the 
same time “sell” the Phil- 
ippines abroad is to en- 
courage local writers and 
authors to exchange their 
works for similar publications 
in other countries. Authors 
and writers are requested by 
the Bureau of Public Libra- 
ries to submit at least three 
copies of each of their works 
intended for exchange, two 
of which will be sent at the 
expense of the Bureau of 
Public Libraries to foreign 
countries, and one retained in 
the Library files. 
Upon receipt of the 
foreign publications, one will 
be delivered - to the local 
author concerned and the 
second copy will remain with 
the Library. Developments 
along this line will be com- 
municated to the “Unesco 
Bulletin for Libraries” which 
will be asked to co-operate 
with the said Bureau in 
| effecting the desired ex- 
change.     
  
Unesco Signs Agreement 
With World Theatre Institute 
An agreement has been sign- 
ed detween the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cul- 
tural Organization and the Inter- 
national Theatre Institute. 
Under the terms of this agree- 
ment, Unesco grants the LT.IL 
a subsidy of $20.000 for the year 
1949 and, against payment, cer- 
tain administrative services. The 
ITI will “provide expert tech- 
nical advice 'on Unesco’s activi- 
ties in the field of the theatre 
and offer Unesco world-wide 
liaison services and other profes- 
sional and non-professional con- 
tacts and sources including the- 
atre artists”. The LT.I. also 
agrees to consult Unesco on 
Executive Board To Mest 
The Executive Board of Unesco 
will open its Fourteenth Session 
at Unesco House, Paris, on 17 
February. Sir Sarvepalli Rad- 
hakrishnan, who was. elected 
Chairman for 1949, by the Beirut 
General Conference, will be pre- 
siding. 
The Board will discuss the 
Director-General’s report on pri- 
orities to be given to items with- 
in the programme for 1949 and 
1950, as well as progress made 
in the diffusion of the Declara- 
tion of Human Rights.   
matters falling within the Ilat- 
ter’s scope of interests. 
The terms of the agreement 
had earlier been approved by 
the Executive Board of Unesco. 
Dr Jaime Torres Bodet, Direct- 
or-General, signed for Unesco, 
and Mr Llewelyn Rees, Chairman 
of the Executive Committee, for 
the I.T.I. 
The International Theatre In- 
"stitute was formed last year with 
the assistance and under the 
sponsorship of Unesco. At a meet- 
ing in Prague last summer thea- 
tre personalities from twenty 
countries agreed on a Charter 
which brought the body into 
being. 
The purpose of the Institute 
is to promote international 
exchange of knowledge and 
practice in theatre arts; in other 
words, to help each nation make 
known its best theatrical pro- 
ducts. It also aims at lowering, 
if not eliminating, the obstacles 
which interfere with the inter- 
national movement of new 
playscripts, opera and ballet 
scores performing companies and 
the various types of informa- 
tion, leading to increased and bet- 
ter professional relations between 
theatre circles of all countries. 
The headquarters of the LT.IL 
are provisionally at Unesco 
House. N CL. 
Loe 
Two ceremonies early in Decem- 
ber — one at the Organization’s 
Headquarters in Paris, and an- 
other at the seat of the General 
Conference in Beirut—celebrated 
the first distribution of about 
150,000 dollars worth of Book 
Coupons to the representatives of 
thirteen countries who have join- 
ed with Unesco to release part 
of the international trade in edu- 
cational, scientific and cultural 
books from the obstacles of cur- 
rency restrictions. 
In putting the first Book Cou- 
pons into circulation, Dr. Julian 
Huxley, and E.J. Carter, Head of 
the Libraries Department—at 
Beirut-—and Mr. Gordon Menzies, 
then Acting Director-General in 
Paris, emphasized Unesco’s wish 
to contribute by this means not 
only to the international circula- 
tion of ideas, but also, and more 
particularly, to the restoration of 
cultural institutions in the war- 
devastated countries. One of the 
obstacles to their recovery is the 
scarcity of hard currencies. 
Of the 150,000 dollars of Cou- 
pons issued by Unesco, approxi- 
mately 50,000 dollars have been 
given as a gift by the Organiza- 
tion to the following countries: 
Austria, China, Greece, Hungary, 
Indonesia, Iran, Italy, the Philip- 
pines, Poland and Czechoslovakia. 
The remaindsr of the issue will 
be offered for sale in China, 
France, India, Poland, Great Bri- 
tain and Czechoslovakia. 
The main purpose of the Book . 
Coupon is to enable educational 
and scientific institutions in soft- 
currency countries to buy books 
and publications in hard-currency 
countries and to pay for them 
in their own money. The neces- 
sary guarnatee in hard currency 
is furnished by Unesco. For 
example, American booksellers 
who accept Book coupons from 
abroad as payment will be 
refunded in their national cur- 
rency. The American booksel- 
lers’ Association a powerful 
professional organization of 
United States bookshops, has in- 
formed Unesco that it has agreed 
to accept Book Coupons in 
payment of orders received from 
abroad. British, French and 
Czech booksellers will alsq_ accept 
Coupons for purchases from 
other countries. 
As was pointed out to the repre- 
sentatives of the countries, cult- 
ural institutions and the press 
who were present at the distribu- 
tion in December, this endeavour 
by Unesco to make up for the 
scarcity of hard currency which 
hampers the international circul- 
ation of books and publications 
is regarded fcr the time being as 
a one-year experiment. 
At the end of 1949, Unesco will 
review the question in the light 
of that experiment. If it is suc- 
cessful, the Organization will con-> 
tinue it on a wider basis and will 
consider extending the scheme to 
facilitate the international ex- 
change of other educational and 
scientific material, particdlarly 
the circulation of educational 
films.   “Universities In Need” 
Published 
An illustrated booklet, “Unis 
versities In Need”, has recently 
been published by Unesco in 
co-operation with the World 
Student Relief Organization of 
Geneva Switzerland. 
Describing how striken uni- 
versities in war-ravaged areas of 
Europe and Asia are struggling 
to resume normal activities with 
few books and almost no equip- 
ment, the booklet depicts ihe 
hardships of young men and 
women students, who, are 
endeavouring to gain a higher 
education. 
The booklet is designed to 
stimulate the collection of funds, 
books, scientific and other equip- 
ment for distribution to needy 
students and universities.

## [Page 7](073886engo.pdf#page=7) 4

### 73898: Study abroad: over 10,500 awards in fellowship handbook

  
  
 
December 1948—January 1949. UNESCO COURIER 7 
 "sTuDY ABROADY Fie nl EDUCATION MISSIONS LEAVING 
: 0 ¥ E R 1 0 . h 0 0 AWA R D S Accomplishments 
W
r
e
n
 
E
E
 
»-
 
Wn Fellowship Handbook 
French printer in the little town of Fontenay-aux-Roses, near 
Paris, oiled up his presses on November 17, 1948 —the same day 
as the opening of the General Conference in Beirut—and began 
running off final proofs in English of a unique Unesco publication 
called “Study Abroad—International Handbook of Fellowships, Schol- 
arshipsand Educational Exchange”. 
The first volume of its kind ever to appear, the Handbook covers 
. over 10,500 opportunities for in- 
. ternational study in 166 subject 
fields in twenty-seven countries. 
The largest number of awards 
is available in the various 
branches of science, especially 
‘medical sciences and public 
health, engineering, technology 
and chemistry. The second sub- 
ject is education and the third 
social sciences. 
In addition, the Handbook con- 
tains notes on the fellowship pro- 
gramme of the United Nations 
and the Specialized Agencies as 
well as summaries on the tech- 
niques of fellowship administra- 
tion for those engaged in planning 
fellowship programmes. Fifteen 
per cent of the reported opper- 
tulities are unrestricted both as 
to the nationality ef eligible can- 
didates and the subject field of 
study. 
The aim of the publication is 
to increase the number and qual- 
ity of candidates applying for 
fellowships, to suggest to pros- 
pective donors where new pro- 
grammes may be developed, and 
te bring into perspective possible 
everlappings of emphasis and 
areas of outstanding need. 
The reporting countries are 
© Australia, Belgium, Burma, Can- 
ada, China, Colombia, Czecho- 
slovakia, Ecuador, Eire, Finland, 
France, India, Italy, New Zealand, 
Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, 
South Africa, the United King- 
dom and the United States of 
America. These have also sup- 
plied information on seven other 
. countries, 
As Dr. Julian Huxley writes in 
a Preface to the Handbook: This 
inaugural edition . . . is the first 
of a series designed to provide 
details of all available opportun- 
ities for trans-national study and 
organized arrangements made in 
this field. 
“It should therefore, 
practical assistance for 
be of 
those 
wishing to travel out of their own 
countries for purposes of study.” 
The Handbook is published in 
English and French and will be 
distributed to Ministries of Educa- 
tion, National Commissions of 
Unesco, International non-govern- 
mental organizations, universities. 
educational periodicals and li- 
braries throughout the world. It 
is also on sale for individuals at 
Unesco House, Paris, and Unesco 
sales agents throughout the world, 
at the price of $1, 300 French 
francs, or 5 shillings sterling, plus 
postage. 
 
| Canadian Council 
Grants $15,000 
To Pasteur Institute 
GIFT of $15,000 to the Pas- 
teur Institute of France by 
the Canadian Council for Recon- 
struction through Unesco has been 
presented to Dr. Jacques Tréfouel, 
Director of the Institute, by Dr. 
James A. Gibson, Chairman of 
the Executive Committee of the 
CCRU. 
The money kas been put at the 
disposal of the Institute to be 
used for the purchase of scientific 
equipment. 
In addition, the Institute has 
been offered, for a period of three 
. years, subscriptions to a number 
of learn~d and professional period- 
icals. 
At oo short ceremony at the 
Institute on 5 January, Dr. Gibson 
read a letter from Mr. Mackenzie 
King, until] recently Prime Minis 
ter of Canada, saying this gift is 
designed to help the institution 
" ernmental organizations dealing] 
“to continue the scientific and 
humanitarian services which have 
earned for it the highest recog- 
nition throughout the world.” 
The CCRU is a national body 
which groups some sixty non-gov- 
"with educational and social prob- 
lems in Canada. : 
  
“History has shown that tyraats 
can hold their sway for awhile, bat 
the human instinct for freedom 
and liberty will finally prevail, and 
it is that "instinct to which Unesco 
must appeal,” declared U.S. Assis- 
tant Secretary of State George 
V. Allen, head of the U.S. delega- 
tien to Beirut, in a discussion over 
the National Broadcasting Company, 
with Dr. Luther Evans, Librarian 
of Congress and also delegate to 
the comference,   


### 73899: National groups end first world meeting

  
  
  
National Groups End 
First World Meeting 
O other fnternational 
with the masses 
institution cooperates so 
as Unesco”, 
closely 
said Dr. Jultan Huxley last 
November 15. He was welcoming the representatives of 
28 National Cemmissions who had met in Beirut for a two day con- 
ference immediately before the opening of the General Conference. 
For the first time an inter-governmental organization had invited 
persons whe directly represented the citizens of their countries. 
Unesco’s primary object was to 
enable its national co-operating 
bodies to become better acquaint- 
ed with one another. 
And, indeed, when submitting 
their reports on what they had 
done to carry out Unesco’s pro- 
gramme jin their own countries, 
the Commissions were able to 
compare the problems they had 
to cope with in 1948 and the 
solutions they had found for 
them. These exchahgegs were use- 
ful, especially for countries which 
still lack the experience gained 
by some of the others, either be- 
cause their Commissions are of 
recent creation or because they 
have not yet been sufficiently 
developed. 
Y convening the meeting at 
Beirut two days before the 
General Conference, Uneseo also 
‘gave the National Commissions 
a. chance to put forward con- 
crete suggestions on what Member 
States can do to help Unesco 
on the national level and on what 
Unesco itself can do in return. 
Most of these suggestions were 
accepted by the General Confer- 
ence unamended and appear 
among the recommendations and 
binding resolutions which make 
up Unesco’s new programme. 
  
Milton S. Eisenhower, chairman 
of Commissions meeting 
In formulating these sugges- 
tions, the Conference of National 
Commissions was inspired by a 
principle which its President, Mr. 
Milton S. Eisenhower, defined as 
follows: 
“The total programme of Unes- 
co must be developed in a manner 
which would permit National 
Commissions throughout the 
world to develop common pro- 
grammes of action involving the 
maximum number of citizens.” 
In order to mobilize this public 
opinion, several methods were re- 
commended to the National Com- 
missions. They were invited to 
set up in 1949 national Com- 
mittees of journalists and writers, 
such as already exist in some 
countries, in Great Britain and 
the United States, for instance. 
The duty of these writers and 
journalists is to prepare articles 
and pamphlets on the major 
themes with which Unesco is 
concerned. 
THESE questions, it was said at 
Beirut, should also be treated 
on the radio by the arrangement 
of broadcasts and radio forums. 
Obviously such broadcasts could 
do a great deal to make 
listeners as interested in Unesco s 
efforts to obtain duty-free im- 
portation of educational film, to 
take one instance, as in the other 
subjects which habitually occupy 
their attention. 
The topic of “Food and 
People”, discussion of which Unes- 
co wishes to develop in 1949, 
would thus, because of its many 
educational and scientific aspects 
of immediate and world-wide in- 
terest, be treated on the air by 
experts who would know how to 
approach it from such an angle as 
to catch the ear of the public in 
their different countries. 
Among the other forms which 
this programme might take, the 
National Commissions mentioned 
the organization of travelling 
exhibitions on Unesco. 
A method recommended to the 
National Commissions for giving 
their work the desired drive is 
the establishment by each of them 
of specialized committees made 
up of distinguished representa- 
tives of culture in each country. 
That, however, as the National 
Commissions Conference acknow- 
ledged, raises many questions 
which only the governments can 
settle: first of all, the question 
of personnel. 
HILE certain Commissions 
have adequate funds, others 
made no secret of the fact that 
‘they would think themselves 
lucky to receive the equivalent of 
only 2 per cent of their country's 
contribution to Unesco. Member | 
States were therefore asked to 
furnish their. Commissions with’ 
the funds required to establish 
the necessary secretariats and 
for the organization of meetings 
of the Commissions, their com- 
mittees and their other subsidiary | 
bodies. 
To ease the work of those who 
"are to be in charge of the Com- 
missions, Unesco will, In 1949, in- 
vite the Secretaries of about i5 
Commissions to pay short visits 
to Unesco House. It was recom- 
mended that the Director-Gen- 
eral and other senior members 
of the Organization should visit 
Member States and National 
Commissions in 1949 in order to 
strengthen the links between the 
Commissions and the Paris 
Secretariat. . 
This liaison often takes the 
form of the exchange of informa- 
tion between the Commissions 
and Unesco. These exchanges were 
closely examined at Beirut and 
both parties suggested measures 
to facilitate in particular, the 
co-operation needed in carrying 
out the Organization's surveys. 
The Commissions further stress- 
ed the necessity to secure the 
widest possible circulation of 
Unesco’s publications. As regards 
the “Unesco Courier”, Member 
States were asked to consider the 
possibility of reproducing Unesco’s 
monthly journal in their own 
country, 
The Commissions were asked to 
keep Unesco’s Public Information 
services regularly informed of 
their activities so that its period- 
icals could tell their readers how 
Unesco’s campaign for closer un- 
derstanding between the nations 
is progressing in all its different 
fields.   


### 73900: Education missions leaving for Philippines, Afghanistan

FOR PHILIPPINES, AFGHANISTAN 
JAE in January 1949, an in- 
ternational team of specia- 
lists is leaving for the Philip- 
pines to launch a survey of the 
educational system of this war- 
devastated country. This marks 
the first of a series of Edueca- 
tional Missions which will be 
undertaken by Unesco in differ- 
ent parts of the world. A se- 
cond Mission is expected to de- 
part shortly for Afghanistan on 
a similar job. 
On December 29 a contract, 
defining the terms of the Phi- 
lippine Mission, was signed at 
Unesco Headquarters in Paris. 
Dr. Gabriel R. Manalac, head of 
the Philippine delegation to the 
Beirut Conference, signed the 
contract for his government, and 
Dr. Torres Bodet, in one of the 
first official acts since he be- 
came Director-General, signed on 
behalf of Unesco. 
Under the terms of this con- 
tract, the Mission will assist the 
Government of the Philippines 
in developing its primary and 
adult education and will also 
study the problems of education 
and training in citizenship. 
The international team will 
start work in the Philippines at 
the beginning of February and 
will study the existing system of 
schooling for a period of about 
five months. On completing its 
task, the Unesco Mission will sub- 
mit its recommendations to a 
commission which has been ap- 
pointed by the government tw 
reorganize its education system. 
“We Need a Survey Badly” 
In a special statement to the 
Unesco Courier on December 29, 
Dr. Manalac expressed his coun- 
try’s appreciation for Unesco’s 
help, and confidence in the re- 
sults of the Mission. 
“For 400 years”, he pointed 
out, “we have lived under the 
Spanish educational system, for 
50 years under American educa- 
tional methods, and during the 
late war, we lived in a complete 
educational blackout under Jap- 
anese control. Since 1946 we have 
gained independence and with 1t 
a change in our political and 
mentaj outlook.” 
“Our social conditions”, Dr. Ma- 
nalac added, “have changed very 
much and our educational 
system must keep pace with these 
social changes. Wz nead a survey 
very badly in our country.” 
Referring to the Mission as the 
“type of help extended by Un2asco 
which can easily be appreciated 
by. the masses of the people”, Dr. 
Manalac voiced his belief that “it 
will serve both as an pie 
and encouragement to the coun- 
tries of the Far East and other 
parts of the werld.” 
Mission to Afghanistan 
The Unesco-Philippine contract 
is the second of its kind to be] 
concluded with a Member State. 
The first was signed at Beirut on 
Degember 8, during the General 
Conference. 
HE. M. Nadjit Ullan Khan, 
Minister of Education and repres- 
entative of Afghanistan at the 
Beirut Conference, signed in the 
name of his country. The Mission. 
which will begin work in the 
spring, will study elementary and 
secondary education and partic- 
ulary questions of vocational 
guidance and technical training 
in this Middle East country. 
Unesco Educational Missions 
are undertaken on request of 
Member States, after the conclu- 
sion of a formal agreement. Ex- 
penses are shared by Unesco and 
the signatory country. 
The missions will only begin to 
exercise their effects after their 
work is officially completed. The 
report submitted to the gcvern- 
ments will certainly not be inten- 
ded to justify a mission's existence 
by the publication of an “inter- 
esting” report. It will contain a 
definite plan of action. Unesco 
could not itself accept the 
responsibility for enforcement ; 
nevertheless, it is ready at any 
time to help the Member State in 
whatever work of reorganization it 
decides to undertake. 


### 73901: Experts make plans to assist intellectual and M.E. refugees

  
Experts Make Plans 
To Assist Intellectual 
And M.E. Refugees 
THE problem of resettling 
intellectual refugees and 
of bringing educational relief 
to refugees who have been 
driven from their homes by 
the war in the Middle East 
has been discussed at a two- 
day conference of educational 
reconstruction experts which 
was held early in January at 
Unesco House, Paris. 
The experts, who represent- 
ed some four hundred non- 
governmental organizations, 
agreed to plans for raising 
$50,000 to meet the emergency 
needs of four hundred thou- 
sand refugees in the Middle 
East. They also made plans to 
try to resettle as many as pos- 
sible of the 40,000 intellectual 
refugees, at present in the 
keeping of the International 
Refugee Organization, in Ger- 
many, Austria and Italy. 
Among other questions re- 
viewed by the Conference, 
which was called by the Re- 
construction Department of 
Unesco, was the problem of 
war-handicapped children, and 
ways and. means of raising 
more funds in 1949 for emer- 
gency educational reconstruc- 
tion. 
It was agreed to call upon 
national organizations of Mem- 
ber States, and particularly, 
the United States, the United 
Kingdom and Canada, to co- 
operate fully with Unesco and 
among themselves in order to 
solve these problems.  Par- 
ticular stress was laid on-cam- 
paigns to obtain assistance 
from all sources and to bring 
‘home to people the urgency 
and importance of educational 
reconstruction throughout the 
world. 
Among those who attended 
the conference were Dr. T.G. 
Pullen, Chairman of the Com- 
mission for International Edu- 
cational Reconstruction (USA), 
and Dr James Gibson (Ca- 
nada), Acting Chairman of 
the Temporary International 
Council for Educational Re- 
construction.   
of Unesco. 
Kleber. Paris-16e., France. 
Australia: 
Canada : 
Cxechoslovakia : 
Denmark : 
orders). 
Castle Street -— Cardiff: 
Tower Lane — Belfast: 
France: 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, 
India: 
w Countries: N.V.   
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Bureau 
One Year Subscription — $1.00 or 5/ — or 250 French 
Francs (Outside France = 
Please write to the Unesco ¢ agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A. Alsina 500. Buenos-Aires 
H. A. Goddard Ltd. 255a, 
The Ryerson Press, 2199 Queen St. West. Toronto 
Cuba: La Oasa Belga, R de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana. 
Librairie F Topic. 11 Narodni, Prague. 
Einar Munksgaard. 6 Noérregade, Copenhagen. 
Great Britain: HM Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
: P.O Box 569, Lond, SE. 
— Manchester 2: 39/41 King Street — Edinburgh 2: 
1 St Andrew's Crescent. — Bristol 1: 
. 80 Chichester 
Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris. Se. 
way (Retail Counter Service) 
Librairie internationale. Athens. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Oo., Scindia House, New Delhi, 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackensie. Booksellers, The Bookshop. Baghdad. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle, Av. des Prancals, Beirut, 
Martinus 
9 Lange Voorhous. The Hague 
Sweden: Ab C. E PFritses, Predsgatan 3, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot. Lausanne 
U.S.A, Columbia University Press, Columbia University, New-York 21. 
300 French Francs). 
George St. Sydney. 
(Post 
13a 
Street 
Nijhoff, Afd. Fondsaministratie 
fore [RE   

## [Page 8](073886engo.pdf#page=8) 2

### 262402: Jaime Torres Bodet elected Director-General

UNESCO December 1948—January 1949 
 
“Unesco Month” in Beirut 
Attracts Thousands of Visitors 
{Continued from Page 1) 
H.E. Sheik Bechara El-Khoury, 
President of the I«banese Re- 
public, then began his stately 
address in French with a quota- 
tion from a Latin poet: “I am 
a man; nothing human is alien 
to me.” He welcomed the Confer- 
ence to “this s0il of ancient 
civilizations, this... crossroads of 
Eastern and Western cultures.” 
Towards the close of his speech, 
he touched upon the “intellectual 
spiritual and human efforts whicn 
may one day clash with the law 
of force, that ultima ratio regum 
of old, with the unleashed forces of 
atomic energy.” But te assured 
his audience that “the stakes are 
worth the effort and that the risk 
deserves to be run since these 
stakes are world peace.” 
Among the many eminent per- 
sonalities who attended the Gen- 
eral Conference were Mr. DR. 
Hardman, Permanent Parliamen- 
tary Under-Secretary to the Brit- 
ish Minisiry of Education: Mr. 
George V. Allen, U.S. Assistant 
Secretary of State for Public 
Affairs; M. Georges Bidault. 
former Prime Minister of France; 
M. Camille Huysmans, Belgian 
Minister of Education; M. Paul 
a co-ordinated programme Of 
mutual aid for the coming 
months. “This”, Dr. Eisenhower 
remarked, “is an important eveat 
in current history.” 
1950 Conference in Italy 
The General Conference voted 
to change the time of year of its 
annual meetings, beginning with 
the 1950 Assembly which will be 
convened in Italy, following an 
invitation extended bv the Italian 
Government, This has been done 
to comply with a United Nations 
recommendation that all Speclal- 
ized Agencies hold their annual 
conferences in the first half of 
the year. 
Because of this change, the 
1949 Conference will be held at 
Headquarters in Paris, during the 
autumn, and will devote itself to 
a more limited number of con- 
siderations. 
Unesco Month 
As has been the case in previous 
Conferences one of the more col- 
ourful highlights of the Beirut 
Conference was the organization of 
a special “Unesco Month” pro- 
gramme by the Lebanese Govern- 
ment and particularly Monsei- 
gneur Jean Maroun, his country’s 
COURIER 
  
  
Rostrum of Main Conference Hall (above) during opening mecting of Beirut Conference. Building was 
‘a
'i
k 
. 
. 
Bh
at
 | 
.
 
re
 
A)
 
F
o
 
b
r
 
~ 
> 
specially constructed for Unesco sessions. 


### 73894: A Dual duty for UNESCO and its Members: Huxley's parting words, a call to all nations for self-inquiry

HUXLEY’S PARTING WORDS 
A Call To All Nations 
For Self-Inquiry 
 
Simultaneous Translation 
Saves Time at Beirut 
The radio system of simul- 
taneous translation, which 
saved so much time at the 
Beirut Conference, was first 
used at a world conference 
of teachers in Endicott, New- 
York State. Since then, the 
pocket radio — or “personal” 
radio — has been adopted by 
(Continued from Page 5) 
And so I might continue with 
questions in respect of the various 
abroad, the utilization and conser 
vation of-natural resources, the mak 
ing available to the world the treas 
ures of national art and history, the 
removal of those sources of social 
discontent which are too often the 
seeds of war, and so forth. 
In this regard as well as in meas- 
uring your own achievements a- 
gainst those of other nations, 
Unesco’s Secretariat, through their 
clearing house functions, can be of 
real service. 
It has been my privilege to assist, 
with your aid and that of my vecr- 
etariat, in the {first phase of 
Unesco’s development, when the 
broad outlines of its structure and 
its mode of working have become 
established, and it has beén able io 
embark on ag number of valuable 
and practical projects. I venture to 
suggest that an essential further 
step in its growth will be for it to 
develop, in addition, the maturer 
functions of reflection and celf- 
criticism, and that these can be ex- 
ercised through the process of crit- 
ical but constructive stock-taking 
which I have just outlined. 
Rivet, Director of the French fields of Unesco's work. However, 
I will merely ask one final but over- 
riding question. 
4 HAVE YOU LOOKED AT 
YOUR PROBLEMS FROM A 
UNESCO ANGLE—that is to say 
not merely as national problems 
but as part of a single world prob- 
lem, where the several nations must 
learn to make adjustments in the 
interest of the whole body of na- 
tions? I think of such problems as 
over-population, facilities for study 
delegate to the Unesco Assembly. Unesco for its important 
“Conferences. 
The strap which is placed 
around the neck, serves in 
fact as an aerial, being two 
thin wires encased in a ribbon 
of plastic. Three frequencies 
were used at the Beirut 
Conference, for the Arabic, 
French and English languages 
and towards the close of the 
Conference a fourth—for 
Spanish was added. 
ar,       
Some Statements Made 
During General Conference 
as anyone could be in his time, 
said thaf science without conscience 
was the ruin of the soul. That is 
a maxim which every scientist 
should adopt.” 
  
H.E. Hamid Bey Frangié (Leba- 
non) : “International understanding 
does not clash with that other 
tendeney of man to be an indivi- 
dual.., a citizen of a nation. In 
trying to make man 2 citizen of 
      
Over 22,000 people attented the Plenary Sessions of Unesco’s General 
Conference in Beirut. Above, a large audience in Main Conference Hall, 
Musée de I'Homme:; M. Nadjib 
Ullah Khan, Afghanistan Min- 
ister of Education, and Mrs. Anne 
O'Hare McCormick, world-famous 
journalist. 
Toward the close of the Third 
Session, the General Conference 
paid its tribute to another dis- 
tinguished personality: its first 
Director-General. A resolution, 
passed unanimously, ‘pays tribute 
to the striking contribution which 
Dr. Huxley has made to the de- 
velopment of Unesco since the 
days of the Preparatory Commis- 
sion and during the first two 
years of its existence.” 
“If Unesco is today established 
on firm foundation”, the resolu- 
tion continues, “and is beginning 
its concrete achievements in ans- 
wer to the hope which men of 
goodwill have placed in it. this 
is mainly due to the indefatigable 
work of the pioneer who was its 
first Director-General” 
Prior to the opening of the 
General Conference, members of 
32 National Commissions gathered 
in Beirut “not as official spokes- 
men for our governments”, as Dr, 
Milton S. Eisenhower, President 
of the meetings, pointed out. “but 
as representatives of the educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural for- 
ces of our countries.” 
This was the first time that a 
meeting of this kind had ever 
taken place. It afforded a unique 
opportunity for pooling ideas con- 
cerning the development of Na- 
tional Commissions, and permitted 
This year “Unesco Month” was 
principally devoted to the theme 
of Arab culture. It included. a 
series of lectures on the coatribu- 
tions of Arab science, literature 
and art, to world civilization, ex- 
hibitions on the History of the 
Lebanon, on Lebanese and Middle 
Eastern artists, and educational 
exhibits devoted to books, science 
and various aspects of education 
in the Arab countries. By this 
means, delegates and visitors were 
afforded an unusual opportunity 
to study and appreciate the rich 
cultural heritage of the Arab 
countries. * 
That the Lebanese Government 
succeeded in arousing the interest 
of the public in the work of 
Unesco and in “Unesco Month” 
was shown by the fact that more 
than 20,000 people attended the 
specially organized lectures given 
by delegates and other person- 
alities, 22,000 persons attended 
Unesco’s Plenary Sessions alone, 
and over 70,000 people visited the 
exhibitions 
To thank the people of the Le- 
banon for the hospitality, co- 
operation and interest they had 
shown in the work of Unesco, the 
General Conference, at its last 
meeting on December 1}, voted a 
resolution establishing three 
fellowships, to be known as 
“Unesco Conference Fellowships”. 
These are to be awarded to qual- 
ified citizens of the Lebanon to 
study abroad for six months in 
subjects related to Unesco's pro- 
the world UNESCO does not 
propose to tear him away from the 
peculiar and concrete reality into 
which he fits, a reality from which 
he draws his drive and will to live. 
UNESCO does not ask for the 
abolition of Stafes or frontiers. It 
aims at shaping minds that can 
cross them.” 
Mr. George V. Allen (U.S.A) : 
“Unesco ig not a luxury or a side 
issue, as some observers are inclined 
fo believe. I am convinced that if 
Unesco fails, the United Nations 
itself cannot succeed. Unesco's par- 
ticular task is to bring about bet- 
ter . human understanding and 
sympathy among all the peoples of 
the world... I am fully convinced 
that Unesco is one of the principal 
pillars on which a solid United 
Nations structure must rest.” 
M. Georges Bidault (France) : 
“Scientists cannot be held responsible 
for the uses to which science is 
put... It is not scientists as such, 
but unfortunately men as such, who 
sometimes misuse science. Frangois 
Rabelais, a western scientist as far 
ay 
Dr, Paulo de Berredo Carneiro 
(Brazil) : ‘’A Unesco man’, the 
bearer of Unesco’s message, 8 man 
inspired by feelings of dignity and 
liberty and inheriting all that is 
best in our tradition... to subordi- 
nate his personal interests, his na- 
tional and regional inferests to the 
universal interest of mankind. He 
would inherit all our efforts, be 
an agent of peace; he will be the 
cement of human brotherhood and 
solidarity, It is for this man of 
the future that the men of the 
past have worked; we are only a 
passing link, but we carry with as 
the flag and the message of the 
future.” 
Mr. King Chu (China) : “We 
stress the importance of cultural 
activities, first because they have 
more direct bearing on international 
understanding and sympathy. and, 
second, because we like to under-| 
stand by the word ‘culture’ not 
something belonging to the elite, 
but something which is deep down 
in the traditions of the péople, 
something which plays a great part 
in‘ the shaping of their everyday 
life.” 
  
World Citizens 
of the Human Mind 
Another forward step which, jn 
my belief, it is essential that Unesco 
should soon take, is that it should 
adopt the policy of calling upon 
distinguished men and women in 
their individual capacity to assist 
in its task. As I suggested in my 
limitations to 
what delegates at our Conferences 
can say or do—Ilimitations imposed 
by the very fact that they are offic-~ 
ial representatives of Governments. 
and 
scientists, artists and philosophers, 
who have by virtue of their indi- 
vidual genius become truly citizons 
of the world, who are in advance of 
individual Governments and of the 
thinking. 
report, there are 
But there do exist writers 
common manin their 
We need to call on them to give us 
a lead in our thinking, to give us a 
bold clarification of our general 
aims and of the paths we should 
pursue in realizing them. 
I am very glad that this Confer- 
ence has agreed on one step in this 
direction; that at our next Confér- 
ence in Paris there should be dis- 
cussion of one or two themes of gen- 
eral importance, and that we should 
call on distinguished public figures 
in their individual capacity, to take 
part in these discussions. 
However, I believe that we should 
go further, and deliberately adopt 
the poilcy of relying wherever pos- 
sible on these citizens of the One: 
World of the human mind, «nd 
helping them to find their place 
in some form of organization which 
would make it possible for them to 
render help more efficiently to 
Unesco and to the cause in which 
“lit and they believe. 
I have every confidence that 
Senor Torres Bodet will enjoy the 
the representatives to formulate gramme, fullest success in directing the 
further development of our youthful 
but vigorous organization, and in. 
that confidence, I welcome him . 
here, on your behalf, as well as my ~~. 
own, as the man on whom will fall, © 
immediately after the close of this . | 
Conference, the responsibilities of . 
the Director-Generalship. . © « _- 
4 
Ee. SE 
Above, Esplanade of the Flags, Main Street of Unesco site in 
Beirut. Buildings will be used to house future Lebanon University. 
   Editorial Offices : Umeseo, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (16). 
- S.M, KOFFLER, Director : H, KAPLAN, ) Editor : 
I All Reproductions Authorized | 
IMPRIMERIE DU “NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE”, 21, Rue de Berri, Paris (8e) \ 
Unesco Publication 248 
    . 
[I H 
BOI Sd a

## [Page 9](073886engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

FJUPPLEMENT     
   
   
COU PUBLICATION OF THE. UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
EY 
Volume I.— No 11-12, DECEMBER 1948 — JANUARY 191%. . 
v 
 
 
; Our cover photo, taken on the future site of the United Nations headfuarters in New York, is reproduced from the U.N. film “Clearing the Way”. 
Through its new programme presented on the following pages, Unesco hopes that it, too, will help clear the way for international understanding 
among all peoples of all ages everywhere. EN 
Coen. - . - -— Dans

## [Page 10](073886engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER SUPPLEMENT , December 1948—January 1949 
 
  
agency of the United Nations, 1s now cnteriilg 
on its third year. 
It has before it a new world programme and at its head 
NESCO, the educational, scienlific and cultural’ 
a new Director-General, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, a 
Mexican poet and former Foreign Minster and Minister 
of Education. A noted Indian philosopher and educator — 
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan — is ncw the new Chairman 
of its Executive Board. 
The new Unesco programme, the result of three and a 
half weeks of careful deliberation and study by the Thra 
Session of the General Conference which met in Beirut, 
‘Lebanon, from November 17 to December 11, is a more 
closely knit, mere integrated attempt to get people working 
tcgether across national frontiers through educalion, 
science and culture — and thus to get a litle sanity into 
the “minds of men”. 
T° carry out this task Unesco has been given a 1948 
budget of $7,780.000, an increase of $97,363 over 1948. 
Of this $7,780,000 total, the Beirut Conference voted 
$ 4,357,936 vhich will be used for the development of 
Unesce’'s sx major programine activities as follows : 
Reconstruction -........c0 ererresaves sreees $ 420,638 
Education . .......cociciievenniaien cerenngesnne 810.165 
Natural Sciences ..........ooeoievvescieiens 679.505 
Social Sciences and Humanities ...... 405,913 
Cultural Activities ...... Co eertreiearaes 523,667 
Communications (Exchange of Per- 
sons and Mass Communications)... 1.515,048 
In addition, the sum of $275,700 will be used by Unesco’s 
Bureau of External Relations to encourage a greater 
participation in the Organization's work by its Member 
States, their National Commissions, and private inter- 
national organizations, and to extend parts of ils pro- 
gramme to occupied countries such as Germany and 
Japan. and to autonomous and Trust territories. 
Unesco has jound that the National Commission is an 
essential vehicle for getting its message directly to the 
  
  
THE DECLARATION 
OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
§ Unesco's General Conference drew to its end 
on December 11, 1948, in the last hour of the 
last Plenary Session, the announcement came 
that the United Nations Gzneral Assembly in I'aris 
had adopted the Internaticnal Declaration of Hu- 
man Rights. 
Following this announcement, the Unesco dele- 
gates unanimously and dramatically voted one of 
the most important resolutions of the pro 
gramme, calling upon the Director - General 
to employ all of Unesco’s facilities, especially the 
press, film and radio, to bring this document- 
which has been compared to the Magna Charta 
of Great Britain, the French Declaration on the 
Rights of Man. and the Constitution of the United 
States—to the knowledge of men and women 
throughout the world. 
The newly elected Director-General, Dr, Jaime 
‘Torres Bodet, rose to pledge his full efforts and 
those of the Unesco Secretariat in publicizing the 
Declaration and in working towards its ultimate 
world realization. “The United Nations”, Dr Torres 
Bodet added, “have just provided Unesco with an 
excellent basis for support.” 
The entire Conference rose to its feet and 
applauded for five minutes to mark the solemn 
accasion.     
people. By January 1949, thirly-three Commissions had 
been set up oul of a total of 45 Member States. Unesco 
is working for the development and strengthening of 
those already in operation and towards the formation of 
similar Commissions in the remaining 12 countries, 
Unesco is now ready, too, after a preliminary study 
of the problem in Germany and Japan, to extend paris 
of its programme to these countries. During the coming 
months, Unesco will launch a plan to help develop 
democratic ways of thinking in Germany and Japan by 
encouraging renewed scientific, educational and intellec- 
tuul contacts between the occupied countries and the 
rest of the world, Nor will the Organization neglect 
action on behalf of the non-autonomous and Trust terri- 
tories which come within its scope. 
As a member of the United Nations family, Unesco 
wll continue to build a spirit of close co-operation with 
its parent organization and the other Specialized 
Agencies. 
IY this special Supplement, the Unesco Courier presents 
the new programme of Unesco. This programme, 
cd-pted by the General Conference at Beirut, is Unesco’s 
“Oreration Education Science and Culture” for the year 
1949, And yet it is more than just that. 
In many respects it is a continuation of the basic 
programme adopted in 1947 by the General Conference 
at Mexico City and as such emphasizes lie long-terit, 
continuous nature of Unesco’s work. 
But above all, “Operaiion Education, Science and Cul- 
ture’ is Unesco's, only in the sense that iis Director- 
General and its Secretariat are the international servants 
of all the peoples throughout the world, whether they be 
Lebanese, Indian, American, French or Chinese, 
As Dr. Julian Huxley recently remarked. 
“Alone, Unesco can accomplish nothing. Just as this 
Specialized Agency of the United Nations is a product of 
increasingly widespread belief in the necessity and the 
practicabil.ty of an ordered world, so the activities under- 
taken to implement that belief cannot be carried out alone 
by a secretariat in Paris. The measure of Unesco’s progress 
and the measure of its worth will be the degree to which 
there is co-operation and participation in its work by the 
people of the world.” 
econstructing the Damages 
faced with two critical problems of educational 
reconstruction : a material problem of rebuilding 
and re-equipping destroyed schools and universities, mus- 
‘eums and libraries ; a human problem of rebuilding 
‘the shattered lives of thousands of children and young 
people who have been almost totally deprived of normal 
schooling, - 
Unesco's basic role in educational reconstruction is to 
hunt down the facts, find out what human and material 
reconstruction is needed, and where, and bring this 
informat:on to the attention of the public. 
By this “brass tacks” method of procedure, Unesco 
has been helping to arouse public opinion in many 
countries and to stimulate the efforts of voluntary 
organizations which in 1948 alone contributed over 
$100,000,000 in funds and materials. The job, howsver, is 
far from completed. 
¥ INCE the end of the last war, the world has been 
Here is how Unesco intends to tackle the two problems: 
of human and material reconstruction during 1949. Let 
us look first at the human side of the problem, 
The Human Problems 
Aid to Youth 
ETWEEN 1939 and 1945 thousands of children sud- 
denly found themselves without homes and 
without parents. Many of these war orphans 
wandered about the war-torn countries and were later 
- found and given care and attention in spontaneously 
created “Children’s Villages”, “Children’s Communities” 
and “Children's Republics’. 
Today, however, these same children are no longer 
children. They are growing up and are ready to learn a 
useful trade as citizens of society. 
Unesco strongly feels its responsibility in facing the 
problem of the education of these young workers. In 
1949, therefore, in co-operation with the ILO and the UN 
Social Commission and other Specialized Agencies, 
Unesco will devote part of its attention to the organiza- 
tion of the technical and professional training of adoies- 
cent workers. This. Unesco believes, is a matter of urgent 
necessity. 
Until now, intelnational and national voluntary agen- 
cies which have organized work camps have drawn 
largely on student and teacher groups. Unesco feels that 
young workers and young farmers should also be in- 
cluded in the work camp movement. 
URING 1949, Unesco will consequently approach trade 
unions and workers’ educational associations as well 
as the United Nations organization mentioned above, to 
arouse their interest and inspire their collaboration in 
the apprenticeship problems of war-handicapped adoles- 
cents. 
At the same time Unesco will seek to broaden the 
recruitment basis for youth camps so as to include these 
groups of the younger generation which until now have 
not received sufficient attention. 
In addition Unesco will expand its overall programme 
of aid to work camps generally through greater assis- 
tance to these organizations in developing their educa- 
tional programmes, supplying libraries on international 
affairs and other subjects. 
Youth Camp Leaders 
NE of the weaknesses of the youth camp movement 
lies in the present lack of trained leaders. To meet 
this need in part, Unesco, working with the organizations 
responsible for such movements, will publish in 1949, the 
of War 
first handbook of its kind in the world for camp leaders. 
This handbook will treat all the varied aspects cf the 
organization and work of voluntary youth camps. 
Unesco had already begun preparation, with the Inter- 
national Federation of Children's Communities,” crea‘ed 
by Unesco last year. for the organization during the 
summer holidays of 1949, of a big international children’s 
convention as well as a holiday camp in cne of the French 
“Children's Republics”. This convention wiil bring together 
boys and girls from different national children’s villages 
to get them te learn one another's way of .iving. 
Child Editors 
pneEsco also hopes to be able, with the Federation, to 
initiate the publication of an international children’s 
newspaper, in which children themselves—all citizens of 
different “villages” and “communities”—wili be able to 
express their ideas and build an international cham 
of friendship and brotherhood. 
Plans for this newspaper are being worked out as part 
of a proposed World Community Centre to be built in 
Pestalozzi Village, Switzerland. The Centre would serve 
as a meeting place for educators engaged in work on 
war-handicapped children, and as a nucleus of specia. 
training courses for camp leaders. 
Refugees 
THER new phases of Unesce's “human” Reconstrue- 
tion programme, as formulated by the Beirut Con- 
ference, include assistance to refugees driven from their 
homes by military operations in the Middle East and aid 
to refugee intellectuals everywhere. 
In collaboration with officers delegated by the UN to 
examine refugee problems in the Middie East, Uresco 
has already completed a study of the educational needs 
of 800,000 refucees. Of these, 200,000 are of school age. 
The study will be used for stimulating campaigns to 
provide these refugees with basic educational needs. 
Unesco will also co-operate with the IRQ in order to 
find suitable employment for refugee intellectuals. Unesco 
Member States will be asked to call upon their educa- 
tional institutions to aid this employment programme. 
The Material Problems 
HEN microscopes and other scientific equipment 
W arrive by plane over thé waters of the Pacific 
and start a run-down Philippine lsboratory going 
again; when a standard library with its 30 books becomes 
a prized possession of an Austrian university and rapidly 
achieves a long waiting list of readers; when a scientific 
review received in a youth camp library 1s prized as the 
only copy in all rorthern Italy and helps, in its small 
way, to bridge the years of intellectual isolation caused 
by the war, Unesco feels that the laborious job of re- 
building and re-equipping the damaged institutions of the 
world is achieving results. 
Millions of people in many countries have found in 
educational reconstruction a positive, concrete way of 
expressing their goodwill towards other nations and their 
fervent desire for a decent and peaceful world. 
The core of the problem, in reality, lies in what 
Americans call “know-how’—that is in knowing and 
ensuring that the right things are sent to the right 
places. 
Through its. fact-finding surveys, Unesco has been 
attempting to- bring te light the “right things needed 
in the right places”. 
Thus, Volume II of the Book of Needs, which will 
appear early in 1949, as a result of Unesco's 1948 surveys, 
will point up the acute shortages and the pressing prob- 
lems of the devastated countries of Asia. 
In a similar effort to give the facts and arouse the 
people’s conscience to the needs of the war-hit countries, 
Unesco will publish, early in 1949, a series of booklets 
showing how libraries, art galleriés, museums and 
scientific laboratories have suffered as a result of war- 
damage. Special pamphlets will also appear on the prob- 
lems of child war victims and children’s communit.es. 
In collaboration with the United Nations Film Board 
and the United States National Commission, Unesco is 
preparing two films for 1949. The f.urst will depict the 
vast cultural destruction suffered by invaded countries 
and efforts being made tc repair those losses. The second 
film will tell the tragic story of child victims of the war, 
Emergency Aid 
F Unesco’s budget for 1949, $175,000 has been set aside 
for its Emergency Aid Fung to meet some of the 
special high-priority needs cf the war-hit countries. 
This necessarily limited contribution, however, can meet 
only a tiny fraction of the total needs. Even if the entire 
Unesco Reconstruction budget of $420.000 were ear-marked 
for direct re-building purposes, it would hardly suffice to 
build one up-to-date school. . 
The main task of raising funds and organizing other 
forms of aid had been undertaken by national and inter- 
national voluntary organizations, with Unesco assisting 
them as a stimulating and co-ordinating agent. We have 
already seen that, thanks to this effort, over $100,000,000 
was collected in 1948. 
Unesco will therefore continue to encourage national 
campaigns and help voluntary agencies to iacrease their 
already outstanding efforts. 
Many of these agencies are now working in unison as 
members of the Temporary Council for Educational 
Reconstruction (TICER) whose headquarters are located 
at Unesco House in Paris and whose secretariat is provided 
by Unesto. TICER member-agencies now total 28 and 
represent over 700 national organizations in more than 
60 countries. : 
Unesco will also continue to work closely with the 
International Children's Emergency Fund so that part 
of the funds raised by its campaigns is devoted to educa 
tional needs. . 
Transition to Construction 
The Beirut Conference, while fully recognizing that 
the needs of devastated countries must continue to have 
priority, resolved that Unescd will, in future years, effect 
a gradual transition from reconstruction te a long-term 
constructive programme of development of education, 
science and culture in all countries and in under- 
developed areas in particular, 
During 1949 Unesco will accordingly develop a study- 
plan, with the International Bureau of Educaticn, to 
determine the needs of countries which have been unable 
for social and economic reasons to reach adequate educa- 
tional levels. This study will give preliminary indications 
as to the degree and time of Unesco's transition rom 
reconstruction to construction,

## [Page 11](073886engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

December 1948—January 1949 UNESCO COURIER SUPPLEMENT 
A BROAD EDUCATIONAL 
    
PROGRAMME 
FOR PEOPLE 
OF ALL AGES 
. {ll N his inaugural address on December 
10, 1948, before the General Con- 
ference in Beirut, Dr. Torres Bodet, 
Director-General of Unesco, pointed out 
that “noe clear-cut line can be drawn 
between the duties of the educator and 
.the obligations of the diplomat”. 
“For”, he said, “if the former brings up 
new generations to believe in intolerance, 
in conformity with some inhuman form 
“of nationalism, the diplomat in his turn 
will find himself compelled to pursue a 
‘policy of aggression or to practise tactics 
“dictated by spite or envy. Peobles, in their 
“jnternational conduct reveal the same 
characteristics that they have revealed in 
“the class-room at school.” 
Unesco feels, in effect, that by getting 
teachers to think internationally and to 
understand other customs and habits, it 
will be paving the road for global thinking 
by the younger generations. 
The Beirut Conference called upon all 
teachers and educationists to make every 
effort “in primary and secondary schools... 
both in teaching and in framing pro- 
grammes of study, to avoid inculcating 
‘by word or implication, the belief that 
lands, peoples and custoins other than 
one’s own are necessarily inferior, or are 
otherwise unworthy of understanding and 
sympathy”. 
International-Minded Teachers 
resco itself has mapped out a pro- 
+ gramme designed to encourage inter- 
national-mindedness amongst teachers 
and young people alike, through educa- 
  
tional seminars, the revision of textbooks, 
educational missions, competitions for 
youth and through its work towards an 
Educational Charter for Youth. 
Unesco will, of course, continue to 
develop its overall programme to im- 
prove educational standards generally 
throughout the world, by serving as an 
educational “exchange and mart”, and 
providing information on the contributions 
of each country and its most pressing 
needs in education. 
Among the more active methods which 
will be carried out during the next twelve 
months for bringing about this cross 
fertilization of educational ideas, are the 
following. 
Schools and Youth 
: NESCO will attempt to find ways of 
associating the youth of the world 
with all of Unesco’s programme in 
general. Last year, for example, the Or- 
ganization launched two competitions—an 
essay and a poster contest—to arouse 
interest in TUnesco's work. Entries for 
these competitions must be posted before 
July 1, 1949, and later in the year Unesco 
will announce the winners and make the 
awards, These will consist of grants for 
travel abroad, either for study or to 
attend a conference on world affairs, or 
to purchase books and other educational 
material, 
Unesco, however, is only one part of the 
family of the United Nations. The 
Teachers’ Seminar held in New York last 
year prepared a large number of materials 
to help in teaching about the UN and its 
Agencies. These are now being edited and 
will be sent to Member States early in 
1949, along with a forthcoming publication 
on “Suggestions and Recommendations on 
Teaching about the UN and its Agencies”. 
During 1949, Unesco will place special 
emphasis on the development of inter- 
national understanding through geography 
teaching, A Teachers’ Guide, showing 
how, by using an historic approach, pupils 
between 15 and 18 years of age can be 
interested in the DECLARATION OF 
HUMAN RIGHTS will also be prepared. 
Unesco will continue to work toward an 
international Chacter for Youth. 
This Charter, which would complement . 
the Declaration of Human Rights, would 
specify that distinctions of colour. race, 
sex or religion should not operate against 
any group of young people and that no 
young person should be deprived of in- 
struction suited to his capacities by reason 
of financial handicap. 
In many of its activities to encourage 
education for international understanding 
in schools, Unesco will continue to work 
3 
  
in close collaboration with the United 
Nations itself, and with other interna- 
tional organizations such as the Interna- 
tional Bureau of Education (IBE) in 
Geneva. . 
Educational Missions 
E of Unesco’'s chief functions in the 
field of Education is to find out the 
most urgent needs of its Member States 
and to help out, where it can, in meeting 
these needs. 
Several of Unesco's Member States have 
asked the Organization to send “Educa- 
tional Missions” to help them survey and 
improve their educational systems. Two 
missions have already been arranged for 
1949 to visit the Philippines and Afghanis- 
tan. : 
The Philippine Government is considexr- 
ing the re-organization of its Educational 
system, and with this in view, has asked 
Unesco to undertake a survey of its 
elementary, secondary and adult educa- 
tion. The mission will probably begin work 
at the end of January 1949. 
The Afghanistan Mission will study the 
vocational education system of the country 
as well as elementary and secondary 
education. 
It is hoped that a third Mission will be 
organized in 1949. i 
. Educational Seminars 
WW HAT started out as an experiment 
two years ago in bringing teachers 
and educators from different parts 
of the world together to talk over their 
special problems and getting to under- 
stand one another’s ways, has had such 
success that Unesco's General Conference 
in Beirut decided to put its international 
teachers’ Seminars on a more permanent 
footing. 
Unesco will therefore arrange for two 
more Seminars in 1949 and prepare for a 
further two in 1950. 
The first 1949 Seminar, to be held in 
India, will discuss adult education in rural 
areas. The second (in Brazil) to be 
planned as a joint enterprise of the Pan 
American Union, the Government of 
emphasis on history books. 
Brazil and Unesco, will have as its theme 
the problem of combatting illiteracy. 
In addition, Unesco will begin the prep- 
aration of materials and documentation 
for the two 1950 Seminars, one on the 
teaching of geography in relation to inter- 
national understanding, and the other on 
the revision of textbooks, with special 
- 
Improvements of Textbooks 
HIS Seminar on textbook vevision will 
undoubtedly serve to ‘highlight fhe 
work carried out by Unesco in. 1948 and 
1949 in the general field of textbook im- 
provement. 
Unesco has already worked out a set 
of principles and criteria as well as a 
Model Plan that will help countries to 
analyse their school textbooks to prevent 
cxaggerated national bias. These criteria 
and the Model Plan will be published as a 
handbook by the end of January 1949. 
Work with Universities 
AS another step in its programme fo 
bring world educators together to talk 
over their problems and learn each other's 
ways, Unesco called a conference of 
university leaders in 1948. This meeting 
decided to create a world Universities 
* Bureau which will be set up in 1949 and 
will serve as a clearing house for ail 
matters of interest to colleges and uni- 
versities the world over. 
x kx Xk 
E have seen that Unesco is striving 
to build the will for world peace 
by reaching out to the minds of 
young persons in elementary and secon- 
dary schools, that it is drawing teachers 
and university leaders together from all 
corners of the globe. 
Unesco’s aim, however, is to reach out 
to the minds of ordinary citizens every- 
where. This means that Unesco cannot 
neglect the education of the whole adult 
population and that it must look to the 
needs of the millions who still lack the 
very basic elements of education (Funda- 
mental Education). 
Adult Education 
AY important change has taken place 
in recent years in the very conception 
of Adult Education. In many countries it 
was originally conceived to fill the gaps 
left by inadequate schooling or to provide 
apprenticeship training for a trade. 
Today, adult education is also concerned 
- with meeting the neads for further edu- 
cation of those who have even had a 
university education. 
“Today adult education activities range 
from evening courses to musical and 
. dramatic performances. It includes do- 
mestic and technical training and 
nourishes such leisure-time interests as 
the arts and crafts, folk-dancing and 
hobbies. 
Unesco feels that the time is ripe for 
the pooling of techniques and experiments 
in this rapidly developing field. To provide 
workers in adult education with their first 
opportunity since the war for exchanging 
ideas on the most characteristic develop- 
ments in each country and to ensure 
among them a feeling of common respons- 
ibility, Unesco is calling a Conference on 
Adult Education in 1949, 
Every country in the world—whether a 
member of Unesco or not—will be invited 
to send representatives to the meetings 
which will be held in Denmark. To prepare 
adult education leaders for this con- 
ference, Unesco has already published an 
attractive pamphlet on Adult Education 
which is being distributed throughout 
Member States. . 
In addition, Unesco has been gathering 
information on adult education develop- 
ments all over the world which will be 
incorporated into an International Direc- 
tory on Adult Education, to be published 
in 1949. 
Fundamental Education 
IV many parts of the world, millions of 
men, women and children still live 
in the most primitive ignorance and su- 
perstition. These people lack the basic 
intellectual tools of modern existence. Not 
only must they learn to read and write, 
but they must also be taught how to 
check disease, how to use machines, how 
to grow their food more efficiently. They 
must also acquire the ability to govern 
themselves. Only thus can they become 
useful partners in a world community. 
The Fundamental Education campaigns 
carried out during the past years by coun- 
tries such as China, Mexico. and Turkey 
represent only a “drop in the fundamental 
education bucket”, as it were. 
Similar experiments are being carried 
out effectively in many remote spots on 
the globe. Until now, the results of these 
efforts have not been available in syste- 
matic, co-ordinated form, so that work in 
one country has rarely benefitted workers 
in another. 
Unesco’s Clearing House in Funda- 
mental Education is an attempt to pool 
such information, analyze it and make 
it available to field workers everywhere. 
In 1949, Unesco will begin publication of 
a Quarterly Bulletin of Fundamental 
Education as well as a Monthly Abstract 
Service of articles to fill this much-needed 
gap. : 
HAITI PILOT PROJECT : In 1948.Unesco 
undertook preliminary surveys for a 
Pilot Project in the Marbial Valley of 
Haiti. Pending a report from the 
  
United Nations Mission to Haiti, on 
which Unesco was represented, final 
decisions as to the nature and scope 
of the project was held up. In the 
meantime, however, there has been 
quite a remarkable upsurge of spon- 
taneous activity amongst the inhabi- 
tants of the Marbial Valley as a result 
of Unesco’s preliminary survey. During 
the coming year it is hoped that this 
undertaking will be able to show posi- 
tive, definite results. 
CARTOONS FOR EDUCATION : 
In 1949, Unesco began work on a Fun- 
damental Education exveriment, rich 
in potentialities, in which an animated 
cartoon specialist will attempt to 
“marry” the work of Chinese artists 
with Western techniques of animation. 
In this wholly new enterprise, Unesco 
is co-operating with Jimmy Yen's 
famous Mass Education Movement in 
China in the production of sample 
films, film-strips, charts and other 
materials for the education of illiterate 
adults. 
The first theme .on which materials 
are being prepared for 1949 is “A 
Healthy Village”. The Mass Education 
Movement in China will provide a 
testing ground for all the teaching 
materials produced.

## [Page 12](073886engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

December 1948—January 1949 
  
UST as Unesco’s chief aim in Eduea- 
‘IB tion is te help raise living standards 
everywhere by encouraging the shar- 
ing of the world’s knowledge and using 
all the means we have for learning to 
live together in peace, so Unesco’s prin- 
cipal aim in the Natural Sciences is to 
help international collaboration among 
workers in science and technology, te im- 
prove man’s understanding of the world 
he lives in, and to overcome the inequa- 
tities in living standards which are a con- 
tributing cause to international war. 
To promote international co-operation 
and undersi.anding among sclen..suws, and 
to aid in the pooling and sharing of 
existing scientific knowledge, Unesco's 
programme includes a wide field of activ- 
ities rang.ng from Science Co-operation 
Offices spread around the globe to a 
broad plan for financial assistance to 
international scientific organizations. 
Unesco provides a World Centre of Scien- 
tific Liaison and has developed an exten- 
sive programme for arousing public in- 
terest in the impact of modern scien- 
tific development on society. 
  
WORLD CENTRE 
OF SCIENTIFIC LIAISON 
Aid to Organizations 
in the Pure 
and Applied Sciences 
INCE its creation in 1946, Unesco has 
J recegnized the important contribu- 
tion made by international non-gov- 
ernmental organizations in the fields of 
the pure and applied sciences in further- 
ing the aims and purposes of Unesco and 
in showing how people of all countries 
can work together on concrete problems. 
Through grants-in-aids and contracts to 
organizations. such as the International 
Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and 
its ten federated Unions (Astronomy, 
Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Crystallo- 
graphy, Geography, Geodesy and Geo- 
physics, History of Science, Pure and 
Applied Physics, Scientific Radio. and 
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics). the 
World Power Conference, the World 
Engineering Conference and various In- 
ternational Medical Congresses, Unesco 
has given renewed life and vigour to the 
work of international scientific collabora- 
tion. 
In the fields of Agricultural and Medi- 
cai Sciences Unesco’'s work is closely co- 
ordinated with the Food and Agricultural 
Organization and the World Health 
Organization. 
Aid to Over 100 Enterprises’ 
N reviewing the effectiveness of 
Unesco's grants-in-aid for the pure 
sciences, the General Conference at 
Beirut voted to increase the proposed sum 
for 1949 from an originally planned $192.- 
010 to $200,000, and approved a substan- 
tial amount for contracts for the applied 
sciences. In this way, Unesco will stimu- 
late greater teamwork between professors, 
students, research workers, engineers and 
doctors all over the globe and will fur-. 
ther help these groups to develop a truly 
international spirit based on common 
work 2nd common ideals. 
The grants-in-aid and contracts will 
make possible over one hundred different 
enterprises, including international sym- 
posia on impertant and urgent scientific 
subjects, increased travel grants to enable 
scientists to pursue work in countries 
other than their own, the publication of 
the reports of international congresses, 
organizational assistance to nascent in- 
ternational bodies, preparation of special 
studies for Unesco, etc. 
In April 1949, a meeting to create a 
Permanent Council for the Co-ordination 
of International Congresses of Medical 
Sciences will be held in Brussels, Belgium, 
in collaboration with WHO. The World 
Health Organization has allocated the 
sum of $20.000 for 1949 to assist in the 
organization of this Council. The Coun- 
cil will be an independent non-govern- 
UNESCO COURIER SUPPLEMENT 
mental organization, with agreements 
with Unesco and WHO. The Council will 
press forward the publication of the re- 
sults of the Congresses to spread new 
medical knowledge to the widest inter- 
national public. 
a os 
Scientific Literature 
ONSIDERABLE progress has al- 
ready been made on the interna- 
tionally vital problem of what is 
called “Science abstracting”. As in most 
other parts of Unesco's programme, this 
work is carried on in close co-operation 
not only with other aspects of the Organ- 
jzation’s programme (Libraries), but 
with other Agencies of the United Na- 
tions (WHO, FAO). 
It is estimated that about a million 
technical articles are published in differ- 
ent countries each year, Since ne scien- 
tist can possibly hope to read all the arti- 
cles even within his special field of in- 
terest, abstracts or resumés of these 
articles are published. However, some 
articles are abstracted many times and 
others not at all 
Unesco has sel itself the goal of at- 
tempting to achieve a co-ordination of 
the activities of different abstracting 
organizations. Already an Interim Co- 
ordinating Committee on Medical and 
Biological Abstracting has been formed 
under the auspices of Unesco and WHO. 
A world Conference on science abstract- 
ing and other problems concerning scien- 
tific literature will be held in Unesco 
House in June 1949. 
Mulii-lingual 
Scientific Dictionaries 
URING the next twelve months, 
Unesco will also begin preliminary 
studies for the preparation of authorita- 
tive multi-lingual scientific dictionaries by 
establishing "co-operation between pub- 
lishers and scientific bodies. Such co-oper- 
ation is greatly needed at the present 
time and its scope is such that only an 
international organization such as Unesco 
could successfully stimulate it. 
In collaboration with FAO, Unesco’ will 
aid in maintaining and operating the 
Library of the International Institute of 
Agriculture in Rome during 1949. Unesco 
will provide an emergency grant of $15,- 
000 towards the upkeep of the Rome 
Library. 
  
Scientific Apparatus 
HE Beirut Conference approved the 
further development of the Scien- 
tific Apparatus Information Service 
(SAIS), whose establishment was recom- 
mended by the Conference of Allied Min- 
isters of Education in London. This novel 
service answers queries concerning scien- 
tific and technological apparatus for edu- 
cation and research. 
In order to extend the available services 
of information. assurances of close co- 
operation have been obtained from repre- 
sentatives of scientific equipment manu- 
facturers in nine countries. Such contacts 
are being further extended to include - 
universities, research associations and 
international scientific organizations. 
There has been a long-felt need among 
science teachers the world over for an 
internationally agreed standard of basic 
equipment for teaching science in pri- 
mary and secondary schools, universities 
and technical colleges. 
To meet this need Unesco has obtained 
the services of experts in five leading 
countries to compile such inventories. and 
it is planned to publish them during 
1948 in French, English and Spanish and 
later in Chinese and Arabic. 
Scientific Reconstruction 
URING 1948 Unesco purchased about 
a quarter of a million dollars worth 
of scientific equipment for the war- 
devastated countries of Europe and Asia. 
In addition to this Unesco has been asked 
to spend a quarter of a million dollars 
for Educational Reconstruction on behalf 
of the London Lord Mayor’s Fund. 
In 1949 a sum of $175.000 has been set 
aside by Unesco for Reconstruction of 
war-devastated countries. Of this sum. it   
is. estimated that approximately 50 per 
cent will be spent on scientific equipment. 
Credits will be allocated to various insti 
tutions in these countries for the pura 
chase of scientific equipment, of their 
own choice, through Unesco. 
SCIENCE CO-OPERATION 
OFFICES 
HROUGH its four Science Co-opera- 
1) tion Offices. located in the Middle 
East (Cairo), East Asia (Nanking 
and Shanghai), South Asia (Delhi) and 
Latin America (Montevideo), Unesco is 
overcoming the feeling of isolation and 
even abandonment in which many scien- 
tific groups still find themselves in vari- 
ous parts of the world. 
These stations or science “bases” will 
continue to aid scientists and technicians 
to raise the local standards of living and 
to facilitate the exchange of scientific *’ 
knowledge and information within the 
regions and with the rest of the world. 
The peoples in the regions are thus given 
a feeling of being a part of the world 
community and of taking part in its 
modern development. 
In view of the success of these Offices, 
the Beirut Conference agreed that such 
activities should be maintained “as an un- 
dertaking of the highest prierity in the 
Natural Sciences programme”. 
in 
SPECIAL PROJECTS 
      
Popularization of Science 
and its Social Implications 
HE principal goal of Unesco in the 
1 field of sciente popularization is to 
make available to the general pub- 
lic information on new scientific and 
technological discoveries and to spread 
‘understanding of the scientific attitude 
and methods. 
During 1949 it is planned to dissemin- 
ate reports prepared by experts familiar 
with popularization of science through 
the press, radio. films and museums. It 
js also planned to call a meeting of 
science club organizers to consider ways 
of increasing the international effective- 
ness of such clubs and to co-operate in 
the development of Unesco’s Adult Educa- 
tion programme. 
At Mexico City Unesco decided to 
launch a programme to initiate in Mem- 
ber States discussions each year on a 
AANA AAANAAAAAAAAAAAAALAAALAAAAAAAAAAAALAALAAAN 
ATURA 
  
SCLE 
scientific theme of current international 
importance. For 1949 the theme selected 
is FOOD AND PEOPLE (for further de- 
tails see Mass Communications, Projects 
Division, Page 7 of this Supplement.) 
Conservation of Resources 
and Protection of Nature 
calling a Scientific Conference on 
the Conservation and Utilization of 
Resources. Unesco has participated in the 
preparations for this Conference especial- 
[ N July 1949 the United Nations is 
  
ly concentrating on the problems of edu- 
cation for conservation. 
Unesco is calling, jointly with the new- 
ly established International Union for 
the Protection of Nature, an Interna- 
tional Technical Conference on the Pro- 
tection of Nature. It will be held in the 
U.S.A. immediately following the United 
Nations Conference. 
International 
Scientific Institutes 
HE International Institute of the 
Hylean Amazon is expected to start 
on its first programme of research 
during 1949. At Beirut a $12,000 subven- 
tion to the new Institute was approved to 
cover projects of special interest to 
Unesco. 
A new venture along this line was pro- 
posed by India and approved by the 
Beirut Conference. During 1949 Unesco 
will study the possibilities of establishing 
an INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF 
THE ARID ZONE which would devote ts 
efforts to the problems of the ever-ex- 
panding desert areas that now cover one- 
fourth of the earth’s surface. } 
Another new aspect of Unesco’s 194 
programme in the Natural Sciences will 
be a preliminary study towards the pos- 
sible establishment of an international 
computation centre. 
Today few countries possess modern, 
high-speed calculating equipment capabe 
of making complex computations needed 
in many branches of pure and applied 
science. An International Computation 
Centre, especially available to countries 
lacking specialized equipment, is con- 
sidered of great value. 
ANAAAAL AAA AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAALAAAAAAAAAALAAANAAA YS 
VAN OWN WINE EE VY IE VY Naa a a a alata ala at Al a al al Al al ah a Al 2b ala oh 4 
THE UNESCO Bi 
NN NWA WWII EE 
$7.780,000. 
Following the procedure they 
adopted at Mexico City in 1947, the 
delegates to the Beirut Conference 
began, on 23 November, by fixing the 
ceiling budget for the financial year 
1949, before discussing the Programme 
in any detail. This was 
8.000.000 dollars, and finally reduced to 
$7,780,000. : 
The budgetary ceiling which the Con- 
ference set itself, enabled the delegates 
to zelect the most important and urgent 
among the projects which had been sub- 
mitted, and to define clearly the prac- 
tical scope, in 1949, of those adopted. 
The Programme budget for Unesco’s 
six Departments, in order of size of the 
appropriation, follows: ’ 
1 HE budget of Unesco for 1949 totals . 
Dollars 
Communicaticn, Exchange of 
Persons and Promoiion......... 1,518,043 
~ Education cerreecreerereneeees 810,165 
Natural Sciences  ......ccceeceeeee. 679,505 
Cultural Activities ...... vesroenrens . 523,667 
Reconstruction ..................... 420,638 
Human and Social Relations... 405,913 
placed at 
This makes a total of 4,357,936 dollars 
for the development of Unesco’s pro- 
gramme activities. 
It should, however, be noted, as Dr, 
Julian Huxley pointed out when present- 
ing the Organization's budgetary esti« 
mates to the Beirut Conference, that 
part of the appropriation for adminis. 
trative expenditure also includes active 
ities directly involved in the carrying 
out of the Programme. 
This applies particularly to "he sums 
allocated to the Bureau of External 
Relations for the purpose of extending 
to Germany and Japan a part of Unesco’s 
programme. 
The heading “Administration” also 
jncludes the Director-General’s Office 
and the Bureau of Conference Planning. 
The other sections of the Budget are 
the following: 
Dollars - 
General Conference and Execu- 
tive Board .....iiiiiiiiniinenns 268,740 
General Administration ......... 2.019,798 
Common Service Costs ....ceeeneen 1,000.000 
Budgetary Reserve ............... 133.526 
The details of the appropriation for

## [Page 13](073886engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

December 1948— January 1949 UNESCO COURIER SUPPLEMENT 
HL 
AN has now reached a stage 
in his history where he can 
study scientifically the causes 
of the tensions that make for war”. Eight 
prominent social scientists, brought to- 
gether by Unesco during 1948, worked out 
and signed a common statement on the 
causes of world friction beginning with 
the words just quoted. 
“Modern wars between nalions and 
groups of nations”, this 12-point statement 
continues, “are fostered by many of the 
myths, traditions and symbols of national 
pride handed down from one generation 
to another”. 
  
ee 
Study of Fascism in Germany 
and Italy 
AS part of its broad programme on 
Tensions Affecting International 
Understanding, Unesco is undertaking in 
1949 an important study of some of these 
myths, traditions and symbols of national 
pride which lay at the root of Fascism in 
Germany and Italy. 
It is true that the origins of German 
Nazism and Italian Fascism have been 
the subject of study by individuals before. 
Unesco feels, however, that by getting 
social scientists from all parts of the 
world to work together on this subject, . 
and by organizing intensive research with 
documentary material now available but 
not yet adequately exploited, it will be 
able to achieve new and more revealing 
results. In this way, Unesco hopes it can 
assist in the early recognition of similar 
movements of this kind in the future. 
Community studies 
HE study of the origin and develop- 
ment of Fascism is only one new 
development in Unesco’s “Ten- 
sions” programme. In 1949, Unesco will 
also undertake a series of intensive 
studies of individual commu ‘ies to 
“determine the distinctive character of 
the various national cultures”. 
These enquiries will be arranged as a 
number of “pilot studies” in four coun- 
tries — France, India, Hungary and Aus- 
tralia — presenting widely varying cultur- 
al patterns. In each country at least {wo 
distinctly different communities will be 
selected for study to determine whether 
“national” characteristics emerge in 
spite of the differences between one 
community and another. The studies will 
be carried on under the direct super- 
vision of scientific organizations in these 
four countries. 
A preliminary meeting of a small group 
of special scientists — anthropologists, 
social psychologists and psychiatrists — 
will be held at Unesco House from 
January 24-28, to prepare the way for 
SMAAMAAAAAAAALAALAALAANAAAAAAANNAAAAAAAAAAAANAALALAAA A NA AA AAPA L CA AAAALAAA AA 
0 
this whole investigation. Among these 
experts will be representatives from the 
WHO and the World Federation of Ment 
al Health. 
“Way of Life” series 
THE community studies will in no way 
duplicate or replace the “Way of 
Life” series begun in 1948 which will be 
continued in 1949. They will serve rather 
to supplement that series by the use of 
more intensive methods. 
Early in 1948, Unesco enlisted the co-op- 
eration of the Infernational Siudies Con- 
ference to prepare a series of monographs 
on the “Way of Life”, of various peoples 
of the world, including France, Norway, 
Poland. Switzerland. Canada. India and 
Hungary. 
A number of additional countries are 
being asked to prepare similar memoranda 
during the next twelve months, and 
Unesco will pubiish several volumes in 
this series. 
Population and Technological 
Change 
NOTHER new aspect of Unesco’s 1949 
“Tensions” programme deals with the 
relations between population problems 
and technological changes on the one 
hand, and international tensions on the 
other. 
Two studies will be undertaken in this 
field. One on the effect of modern tech- 
nology on international tensions (in collab- 
oration with the International Labour 
Organization). The other on the relation 
between population problems, especially 
as related to gninority and immigrant 
groups, and international relations, This 
latter work will be carried out in collab- 
oration with ECOSOC. 
What do you think of your 
neighbours ? 
PURING the past twelve months Unesco 
asked various organizations to help 
in studies to find out what people in one 
country think of their own and other 
nations. 
A number of surveys of the 
opinion” type were conducted in the 
U.S.A., Trance, UK, Australia the 
Netherlands, Norway, Italy, China and 
Mexico. Studies were also completed of 
the treatment of certain foreign groups 
in U.S. films and in the American press 
and radio. The results of these studies 
wil be published in 1948. 
“public 
N all of its activities in the field of 
Tensions”, Unesco is seeking to en- 
courage and facilitate co-operative 
international research by social scientists. 
It is gathering together and examining 
critically the resuits of such research and 
is serving to make these results available 
to social scientists. educators and others 
throughout the world. 
As the social scientists who drafted the 
  
DGET FOR 1919 
= La I ES 
Co each part of the Programme itself - are 
as follows: 
RECONSTRUCTION: Reconstruct; ion 
Campaigns, $151.040; Emergency Action 
by Unesco, $226,743. 
EDUCATION: Clearing ‘House Activ- 
ities, Seminars and Improvement of 
Teaching Materials, $291,272; Fundamen- 
  
tal Education, $241,645: Schools and 
Youth (Education for International 
Understanding, Teachers’ Charter and 
Educational Charter for Youth, Science 
and the Arts in General Education. etc ). 
$121.652; Higher and Adult Education, 
$94,690. 
NATURAL SCIENCES: Science Co 
Operation Offices, $221,856; World Cen- 
4,0 B 
tre of Scientific Liaison, $146, 111; 
~ Books, $33.751; 
operation with United Nations, Specializ- 
ed Agencies and Non-Governmental 
Organizations (Grants-in-Aid to Scientific 
Bodies, Institute of the Hylean Amazon, 
etc.), $242,374; Popularization of Science, 
$14,476. 
HUMAN AND SOCIAL RELATIONS: 
General Social Science Activities (Study 
of International Collaboration, etc.), 
$74,291; Tensions, $148,058; Social Im- 
plications of Science, $10,633. 
PHILOSOPHY AND HUMAN 
TIONS, $119,399. 
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES: Arts and 
Letters, $140,266: Translation of Great 
Museums, $71.651; Libra- 
ries, $147,740; Copyright, $63,401: Cultural 
Liaison Office for 
$29,849, 
COMMUNICATION: Exchange of Per- 
sons, $119,012; Mass Communications. 
$569.671 (This includes : a. — Technical 
Needs, $109,505; b.— Removal of Obstacles, 
$77.200; c¢ —Prcjects Division, $382,966); 
Exchange of Information (Archives, 
Publications, ete.), $311.584; Programme 
Promotion (National Commissions. Pu- 
blic Information, ete.), $428,421. 
RELA- 
the Middle East, 
A
A
A
A
A
 
A
L
A
N
A
 
A
A
L
S
 
A
A
A
A
L
A
L
A
L
A
A
A
A
A
A
L
A
A
L
A
A
A
A
A
A
L
 
L
A
 
A
L
A
A
 
A
A
L
A
N
A
A
A
 
A
L
A
A
 
A
L
A
L
A
 
S
A
L
A
S
 
D
A
I
L
 
A
I
A
L
D
 
A 
A
I
D
 
A
 
al
 
al 
at 
go
 
a 
VV
 
VY
 
N
A
N
A
 
A
N
N
N
Y
   
statement on the causes of tensions which 
make for war so aptly put it: 
“The social scientist can help make 
clear to people of all nations that the 
freedom and welfare of one are ultimat- 
ely bound up with the freedom and 
welfare of all, that the world need not 
continue to be a place where men must 
either kill or be killed”. 
Standards of political science 
URING 1949, the Social Sciences 
Department of Unesco will continue 
research into the technique of internat- 
ional conferences in order to develop more 
effective methods of planning and con- 
ducting such conferences. 
Unesco will also continue its work on 
the methods and techniques in Political 
Science, A report, stressing recomnienda- 
tions for the promotion of international 
standards in political science, will prob- 
ably be published in 1949 
  
OCIAL scientists have long felt the 
7 need for a world organization, similar 
to the International Council of Scientifie 
Unions, which would knit their work 
together on an international level and 
increase their effectiveness. 
Unesco is actively engaged in aiding 
three of the principal social sciences 
(economics, sociology and political" 
science) to set up international associa- 
tions — for the first time in their nistory. 
In each of these three disciplines an in- 
ternational Congress is planned for 1949. 
By this means Unesco hopes to advance 
the scientific standards in each of these 
fields, and to promote the setting up of 
national associations of economists, sociol- 
ogists and political scientists in countries 
where no associations at present exist. 
Eventually, Unesco hopes that an Inter- 
national Council of the Social Sciences 
will also be created which will speak for 
social scientists as 2a whole the world over, 
CULTURAL ACTIVITY 
Philosophy and Humanistic Studies 
LTHOUGH in the field of the 
Natural Sciences Unesco’s ideal is 
unqualified universally, the same 
principle cannot be applied in the field 
of the Humanistic Sciences. Here diversity 
is legitimate and any attempt at artificial 
levelling would spell death for cultures, 
which are the natural products of the 
history and living conditions of every 
human group. Here too, however, Unesco 
has a vital role to play in securing univer- 
sality of a kind, but the universality which 
must be sought is that of mutual under- 
standing and not of levelling. 
In organizing its Philesophic Round 
Tables Unesco’s aim js to consuit the pest, 
the clearest, and the most sensitive minds 
of the contemporary world, to enable them 
to clarify its work, and to associate them- 
selves with its endeavours, These Round 
Tables will supply a meeting place for 
people in different fields: writers, artists, 
scientists, men of action, or philosophers, 
and they will have as their subject these 
problems of values which are central to 
Unesco's task. 
| 1919 Unesco will organize a Round 
Table discussion on the complex gues- 
tion of the freedom and responsibility of 
the artist. This will be designed to isolate 
the underlying significance of the concept 
of freedom of artistic ereation, without 
neglecting the concomitant problem of the 
relationship between (he artist and the 
public, and of the artist’s responsibility 
(see next page “Freedom of the Artist”). 
In another series, Unesco will endeavour 
to convene leading men of letters and 
thinkers, and will ask them to determine 
the position of modern intellectuals 
‘towards the problem of peace in a world 
which has never been more highly con- 
scious, but which at the same time, has 
never been more disturbed. 
Inquiry into Ideological Conflicts 
HERE are some problems so grave 
1 and complex that more elaborate 
methods must be adopted to explore 
them properly and to arrive at conclusions 
capable of application in the present state 
of international affairs. A mere d.scussion, 
‘however profound, between prominent 
personalities would be inadequate in such 
a matter as the misunderstandings so 
often implicit in the use of the commonest 
political concepts. 
. Words like “democracy”, “equality”, 
“law” seem clear enough. In fact, however, 
each is a tangled complex of ideas which 
must be patiently unravelled in order to 
eliminate the powers of suggestion and 
the possibilities of discord which arise 
from the ambiguous use of such words. 
It is with this in mind that Unesce will 
complete, in 1949, an inquiry begun in 
1948 into the varying connotations of 
democracy. Unesco has chosen the concept 
of democracy because it has felt that ijt is 
the most important stake in contemporary 
political discussions. 
Unesco drafted a detailed. precise gues- 
tionnaire which was sent to National 
Commissions and to a large number of 
specialists in Member States. During the 
coming months, a Committee will study 
the replies received and sum up its 
findings. The result will provide a veri- 
table catalogue of the accepted meanings 
of the word “democracy”, and of the 
misunderstandings revealed by the in- 
quiry, 
Comparative Study of Cultures 
OWEVER, if the study of political 
iE concepts is at the core of the 
whole task of pacification, it must. 
not be forgotten that these comparatively 
clear and easily defined ideas are only a 
small part cf the complexity of a partic- 
ular culture. - 
t is often said that civilization is pas- 
sing through a crisis, that mankind is 
no longer agreed on the content of a 
common civilization which all nat:ons 
could adopt, and whieh teachers could 
propagate; each people feels that it has 
an original contribution to make to the 
joint creation of the human civilization 
of to-morrow. But what 1s that contribu- 
tion? And how frequently is the idea of . 
an original contribution clouded by pide 
or an inferiority commpiex—both of which 
are often inter-related? . 
In view of this, Unesco has undertaken . 
an inquiry to determine how far the 
cultures of the various world areas either 
do, or without much difficulty could, in- 
fluence each other. Conversely Unesco 
wants to find out how. much mutual 
understanding, and a possible pooling of 
certain elements, are checked bv deep- 
seated antipathies which could be isclated 
and eventually eliminated. 
Scientific and Cultural History 
of Mankind 
NESCO feels that a scientific and 
cuitural history of mankind, pre- 
pared with a trulv international 
spirit and mn keeping with all modern 
scientific data is strongly needed to-day. 
Such a history, Unesco feels, should be 
widely distributed throughout the world, 
once it is completed. 
This, however, is a long-term task which 
can best be carried out in two stages: 
first the preparation of small textbooks 
for pupils and teachers in schools all over 
the world. These textbooks would tell the 
story of man's progress, not by eciting . 
examples of war, or oolitical deals devoid . : 
of any humane significance, but by show- 
ing the slow rise of civilization through 
the combined efforts of all peoples. 
The second stage would utilize all 
modern scientific means to draw up a 
great synthesis of the history of mankind 
from the point of view of scientific 
progress and cultural achievement. 
ne necessary that Unesco bring together 
the world’s best minds as often as 
possible. More than that, however, it 
must also encourage and support the 
great international learned societies of the | 
world which can ensure the continuity of 
relationships and exchanges necessary for 
the creation of a commen outleok trans- 
cending national frontiers and the strict 
confines of particular subjects. 
Unesco. therefore. will continue in 1949 
the work begun in 1948 for the foundation 
of an International Council of Philoscphy 
and Humanistic Studies. To this end it 
will encourage the formation of intern- 
ational societies or federations of philo- 
sophers, historians. linguists. anthropo- 
logists and archaeologists, and will asso- 
ciate them in a Council where the various 
groups may exchange notes and strive to 
avoid the perils of excessive specialization. 
International Couneil 
accomplish all these tasks it is

## [Page 14](073886engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

é. UNESCO COURIER SUPPLEMENT December 1948—Jannary 1949 
CULTURAL INTERCHANGE 
[
E
s
 
Pap
s 
BETWEEN COUNTRIES 
ARTS AND LETTERS 
HOUGH supported financially by 
Unesco, the International Theatre 
Institute, with headquarters at 
Paris, is a young independent organiz 
ation working to encourage and facilitate 
theatrical exchanges of all types. 
At present, Unesco is making prepara- 
tions for the foundation, on similar auto- 
nomous lines, of an International Or- 
ganization for Music. The preliminary 
investigation has been made and a com- 
mittee of experts and of representatives 
of specialized international organiza- 
tions is to meet at Unesco House to con- 
sider the possibility of such an organiza- 
tion of its programme and its comnstitu- 
tion. 
Unesco has also undertaken the pre- 
paration of catalogues of existing re- 
corded music, which, it is hoped, will 
prove of the utmost value to the general 
public, schools and projessionnal musi- 
cians of all countries. Three catalogues 
are in course of preparation and will 
cover Western and Oriental classical 
music and folk music. . 
Reproductions of Paintings 
similar effort is being made regard- 
ing art repreductions, Unesco is 
preparing lists of the {ine repro- 
ductions currently available in all coun- 
tries. A catalozue of reproductions of 
western paintings since 1860 is in course 
of preparation and will be followed this 
year by a second catalogue covering 
paintings prior to that date. Catalogues 
on oriental painting will also be com- 
pleted. 
The finest reproductions, selected with 
the assistance of highly qualified experts, 
and covering major periods in the history 
of art, will be made available to school 
and other education groups, so that they 
may arrange travelling exhibitions for 
the countries most lacking in original 
works. i 
Closely connected with the preceding 
projects is Unesco’s task of encouraging 
Member States to take steps to strengh- 
then the role of the arts in teaching and 
general culture. Committees are in 
course of organization in several coun- 
iries, and an international committee 
wille be convened at Unesco in 1949 (o 
report on this subject and publish its 
results, 
Literary Pool 
N the field of Letters the Interna- 
fl tional Pool of Literature enables 
reviews of all countries to offer to 
their readers articles published in the 
reviews of other lands, and sometimes 
original works, through a scheme of 
translations and exchanges. During 1549 
it will devote special attention to forg- 
ing closer links between distant cultures. 
Unesco is now carrying out a plan 
drawn up by the international committee 
of experts, which met in Paris in 1948, 
to increase the translation of literary, 
philosophic and scientific works. Steps 
have already been taken for the trans- 
lation of world classics into Arabic, and 
of Arabic classics into other languages. 
A similar programme has begun for 
Latin America, and will be applied later 
t0 other regions of the world. 
Unesco is also to resume the publica- 
tion of the Index Translationum formely 
published by the International Institute 
of Intellectual Co-operation, 
Freedom of the Artist 
N addition to the programme out- 
lined above, the Arts and Letters 
Division will this year undertake an 
inquiry into the way in which artists 
can serve the ends of Unesco and into 
the obstacles of all kinds preventing the 
free exercice of their art. This inquiry 
will enable the Director-General to 
submit to the next General Conference 
concrete plans designed to improve the 
working conditions of artists in the 
world. 
Unesco will also study the possibility 
of creating a series of annual awards 
to be made on the recommendation of 
recognized international authorities for 
the best musical, theatrical, artistic and 
literary works produced during the pre- 
ceding twelve months. 
MUSEUMS AND HISTORIC 
MONUMENTS 
TURING the coming months Unesco 
will devote considerable effort to 
the questions of scientific, technic- 
al and art museums, work on which in 
1948 has already made considerable 
OETESS, 
Consideration will also be given to the 
problem of the protection and conserva- 
tion of ancient monuments of artistic 
and cultural significance. 
The projects now in hand stress the 
international contacts and future ac- 
tivities to be effected through museums. 
"The most important of these projects 
calls for the co-operation of Member 
States of Unesco in a scheme for the 
organization of international exchange 
of exhibitions, It is based on reports 
furnished by the International Council 
of Museums and by experts from all parts 
of the world. These reports bring out 
the present difficulties and make re- 
commendations for surmounting them. 
The second volume of Museum, the 
quaterly review of museographical 
technique, will be published during 1949. 
It will include issues on the conservation 
of works of arts, archeaological sites and 
ancient monuments, on the new tech- 
niques perfected in Swedish museums; 
on the teaching role of museums and the 
technique of its application. Co-opera- 
tion with the International Council of 
Museums, with its world experience and 
world-wide influence will be intensified. 
On the basis of the inquiries con- 
ducted in 1948 and of the report sub- 
mitted by the experts of the Interna- 
tional Council of Museums, the Secreta- 
riat will prepare draft proposals design- 
ed to secure access to archaeological sites, 
which will be submitted to Member 
States for consideration. 
The problem of the protection against 
destruction, and, where necessary the 
restoration, of ancient monuments and 
historic sites is assuming an alarming 
degree of acuteness and gravity in many 
Member States. The Secretariat has been 
instructed by the General Conference to 
investigate, in co-operation with the In- 
ternational Council of Museums, the 
desirability of setting up, under Unesco's 
auspices, an international committee of 
experts and the possibility of creating 
an international fund to subsidize the 
work of preservation and restoration. 
COPYRIGHT 
FTER overcoming the initial dif- 
ficulties of a new activity and the 
establishment of a truly effective 
network of international relations, the 
Copyright Division completed in 1948 the 
launching of the vast inquiry into com- 
parative law. 
In 1949, the Copyright Division will 
study replies received to its 1948 inquiry 
on comparative law. The results will 
then be submitted to Unesco’s Member 
States. Thereafter the result of the in- 
quiry and the remarks of Member States 
will be submitted for study by an inter- 
national copyright committee, which will 
decide on the future drafting of a Uni- 
versal Copyright Convention. 
~ Unesco’s 
Fellowship Programme 
HERE are thousands of people today 
who would like to study in other 
countries and exchange ideas with 
those from whom they have been isolated 
for many years. While many governments, 
universities, foundations and charitable 
institutions are actively promoting inter- 
national study. veey often information 
about such opportunities is not easily 
available to those who could best benefit 
from them. } 
Unesco's programme in 1949 for the 
interchange of persons will attempt to 
remedy this situation, at least in part, by 
expanding the work already begun in past 
years. Unesco will carry out its programme 
by means of three chief methods. 
First by gathering together, analyzing 
and making available information on in- 
ternationa! fellowship programmes and 
similar opportunities for study abroad. 
Second, by planning and encouraging new 
fellowship schemes in its Member Staies, 
National Commissions and interested 
agencies. Third, by promoting and ad- 
ministering both TUnesco-sponsored and 
Unesco-financed fellowships. 
Although Unesco's major Job will 
continue to be to stress fellowship oppor- 
tunities for mature persons such as 
scientists, librarians, museum personnel 
and radio and film technicians, ete. 
attention will also be given to the prob- 
lems of young peoples’ exchanges. 
Fellowship Handbook 
HE most important tool developed by 
Unesco for the stimulation of study 
in other countries js Uneseo’s “Study 
Abroad - International Handbook of 
Fellowships, Scholarships and Educational 
Exchange”, the first volume of which was 
published early in January 1949. The 
volume, which is the first comprehensive 
mapping of an important aspect of inter- 
national cultural relations, covers more 
than 10,000 fellowship awards for 1943-49 
and includes data from over 20 countries. 
The Handbook also contains analyses of 
national programmes and other problems 
related to the movement of scholars, scien- 
tists, technicians and students from coun- 
try to country. } , 
Survey Brings Results ~~ 
TUDY ABROAD" is a result of 
a detailed enquiry sent to 
countries throughout the world 
and long months of painstaking inves- 
tigation undertaken during 1948. It is a 
croncrete example of how the quesiion- 
naire—enquiry technique adopted by 
Unesco can be made to work. For it has 
undoubtedly served as an “eye-opener” for 
certain countries, where this type of in- 
“e 
formation had never before existed in 
collected form, by making them aware of 
the facilities available in their own coun- 
tries. 
In April 1949, Unesco hopes to publish 
a supplement to Volume I of “Study 
Abroad” and later in the year a second 
volume will appear containing material 
on facilities available in 1949-58. 
The participation of the nations of the 
world in preparing material for these 
periodic reports will, Unesco hopes, 
stimulate new fellowships and increase 
the interest of the various countries in 
international study. 
New Fellowships ' 
HE information obtained from the 
i | survey, together with the advice of 
other programme Departments of 
Unesco, will enable the Organization in 
1949 to develop plans for new fellowship 
programmes in various Member States. 
Special attention will be given to fellow- 
ship programmes aimed at developing 
trained personnel for press, radio and 
film, the social implications of science, 
public administration. certain branches 
of education, and certain aspects of the 
cultural programme of Unesco. 
Scholarships for Young People 
HE Beirut Conference urged the 
| extension of Unesco’s international 
fellowship programme beyond the 
more academic area to include all ‘vpes of 
artists, technicians, ¢ivil servants, indus- 
trial and agricultural workers. 
In this work, the Exchange of Persons 
Department is already working closely 
with the Reconstruction Department, 
particularly with respect to the work 
camps programme (see Chapter on Re- 
construction : Human Problems), and 
with the Education Department for 
the promotion of world understanding 
through Seminars and summer Courses. 
In addition, a consultant has been 
engaged to conduct a specia! investigation 
into exchange schemes for young persons. 
Unesco will also study ways of extending 
the fellowship programme beyond war- 
devastated Member States to include the 
needs of under-developed areas and trust 
territories, 
225 Fellowships Administered 
T the present time approximately 225 
fellowships are being administered by 
Unesco. During 1949, Unesco will be res- 
ponsible for about 20 new Unesco fellow- 
ships and for such new opportunities 
which the Organization may be called 
upon to sponsor im the course of the 
coming year. 
CULTURAL LIAISON 
OFFICE FOR 
MIDDLE EAST 
N the basis of the report submitted 
to it, after the most thorough in- 
vestigation by the Director-General, 
the General Conference voted to set up 
within the Secretariat, a cultural liaison 
office with the special task of encourag- 
ing the exchange of ideas, documentary 
information, material and persons, be- 
tween the coulitries of the Middle East 
and between those countries and other 
parts of the world. 
This unit, though small in number, 
will endeavour to draw up, in consulta- 
tion with the governments and national 
Commissions of the countries concerned, 
a programme of cultural liaison in the 
field of arts, letters, philosophy and 
humanistic studies, in which the first 
step will be to encourage translations of 
world masterpieces and collaboration 
among the libraries of the Middle East. 
BOOKS AND LIBRARIES 
S an outcome of contacts establish. 
ed during the Beirut Conference 
Unesco will publish a guide to 
Middle East libraries as a practical con- 
tribution to the work of the Middle East 
Cultural Liaison Office and fo cultural 
contacts between the Middle East and 
the rest of the world. Also, as another 
publications project the reproduction is 
being organized of a number of highly 
important out-of-print periodicals. 
Unesco will especially undertake the 
publication of manuals in promotion of 
public library work and assistance te 
public libraries. This is largely based 
on the valuable discussions held during 
the 1948 Unesco Summer School for 
Public Librarians. 
Libraries Reconstruction 
O a large extent Unesco’s libraries 
programme is directly concerned 
with the establishinent of libraries 
—particularly public libraries for the 
general reader—with the technical ef- 
ficiency of libraries, the education of 
Jorarians and with the background 
library services of bibliography and 
documentation. 
But in the foreground of this coming 
year’s work, as of previous years, js the 
problem of library reconstruction widely 
conceived as the problem of international 
library communications and the distri- 
bution of publications. All libraries 
everywhere are inter-dependent and the 
problem of recomstruction cannot be 
isolated as affecting only libraries in 
war-damaged countries. 
The largest part of the Division's work 
is concerned with the operation of 
Unesco's Clearing House for Publications, 
as an advice centre in connection with 
all book distribution and exchange ac- 
tivity and the promotion of national book 
exchange centres. } 
Bulletin for Libraries 
HROUGH the Clearing House, 
donors of books and periodicals can 
obtain accurate and up-to-date ad- 
vice on library needs of war-damaged 
countries; the libraries in these countries 
can be helped to find the books they need 
and, to a limited extent, direct purchase 
is made of publications and equipment 
for reconstruction area libraries. 
A main Clearing House activity is the 
publication of a monthly Bulletin for 
Libraries, in which needs and offers of 
donations and proposals for inter-library 
exchange are advertised. The Bulletin 
goes free to 6,500 libraries and has prov- 
ed its value as a unique and essentially 
practical journal of international library 
communication. 
A fundamental obstruction to all 
library development is the lack of in- 
formation on what publications exist 
and the deficiencies in bibliographical 
services. No librarian can build up his 
collection and no scholar conduct his 
studies unless he has good bibliographies 
on which to base his purchases and 
reading. 
This complex and vast problem is 
being studied cooperatively with the U.S. 
Library of Congress and other national 
libraries as a long term survey project, 
leading towards proposals for practical 
jimprovemen* in bibliographical services. 
During 194% an attempt will be made 
to prepare guides to the main biblio- 
graphical sources in various Unesco 
fields.