# [081543](081543engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](081543engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

VOLUME Ill — N° 8 
  
  
   
i lL 
SINE w= UNESCO + - a " { whe h ” ws 
PRICE : 10 Cents (U. S.), 6 Pence (U. K.), or 20 Francs (FRANCE). 
Publication No, 12) 
SEPTEMBER 1950 
    
  
 
  
"> 
Mod dl - 
> : 
yo ud he TTARE 
‘¢ THE PRINT COLLECTOR ¥3 by Honoré Daumier (1808-1879) 
As Beethoven died deaf, Daumier died blind. The judgment of posterity was long delayed: 
‘‘Daumier’s painting seems to stand above Time... It is accessible to every age...” * Dau- 
mier ”, by Jacques Lassaigne, Paris and New York, 1938.) 
He is only one of the great artists of whom this may be said—and the solace and inspiration 
onoré Daumier was born during the First French Empire as a subject of Napoleon I. He saw 
the fall of the Empire and the Restoration of the Bourbons. He saw the final fall of the Bourbons, 
the coming and going of the House of Orleans, the birth and death of the Second Republic, 
the beginning and end of the Second Empire and the 70 days of the Paris Commune. He died at 
the age of 71 as a citizen of the Third Republic. 
In his lifetime, war, revolution and enemy occupation were more commbnplace than peace. 
In such a time, Daumier produced 3.958 lithographs, 300 drawings and 200 paintings—and never 
ceased to work and fight for human rights and human dignity. As a painter, he was one of the 
founders of foastn art. As a man of courage, he inspired other men—in his time and in later 
times as well. 
of their work will be living realities in future centuries as in past centuries, in hard times and in 
good times. The *‘print collectors’ will survive. 
To help bring great art closer to the people, in the troubled days of mid-1950—days which 
still await the judgment of history—Unesco has completed and published a catalogue of the finest 
reproductions available of paintings which cover the five-century span up to 1860, 
For more details, and a selection of works from the catalogue, turn to pages 6 and 7.

## [Page 2](081543engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 


### 74404: A Hundred groups with a common aim

A HUNDRED GROUPS 
WITH 
A COMMON AIM 
This is the fourth in a series of special articles describing 
the work of some of the 100 international non-governmen- 
tal organizations whose co-operation with Unesco helps 
the accomplishment of its programme. 
ONG before modern psychologists 
had stressed the importance of 
pre-school education, *“ The 
child is father to the man” was an 
old saying ‘which reflected the 
importance of childhood experience. 
The great seventeenth-century phi- 
losopher Spinoza said that if he were 
given a child to educate for its first 
seven years, any education or lack 
of it which followed would make 
little difference. 
In this formative period, children’s 
capacities for mutual understanding 
grow by degrees — the first difficult 
adjustments to the rights of others. 
If directed toward the wrong ends, 
as it was among the Nazis, it leads 
to a corrupt view of mankind ; if 
handled properly, it develops into 
the tolerance and understanding 
which the world requires of its 
mature citizens to-day. ? 
Many aspects of the fundamental 
needs of young children including 
education, health, school buildings 
and children’s gardens, were consid- 
ered at a conference called by the 
World Organization for Early Child- 
hood Education last month in 
Vienna. This conference, held with 
Unesco’s aid, enabled psychologists, 
pedagogues and anthropologists to 
discuss children’s needs and the 
requirements of society. Delegates 
from pre-schools in Mexico, Great 
Britain, and Israel described what 
each jof their various systems 
considers a well-spent day for a 
small child. 
The World Organization for Early 
Childhood education is one of the 
non-governmental groups morking 
under consultative arrangements 
with Unesco, and its efforts are 
extremely valuable since it is the 
only international organization acting 
in this field, with national commis- 
sions in eleven countries. 
The recognition of children’s rights 
is mn essential foundation of any 
civilized society. One of the orga- 
nizations working to defend chil- 
  
cation, science and culture. 
French Francs. 
get them to subscribe too. 
Netherlands : 
Quiapo, Manila. 
Sweden : 
Union of South Africa : 
United States of America : 
27. N.Y.   
  
The UNESCO COURIER is an international periodical devoted to the work 
of UNESCO and to activities and developments throughout the world in edu- 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 US., or 5/- or 200 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France. Co 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamerica S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos-Aires. 
Australia : H. A. Goddard Ltd, 255a, George St., Sydney. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, Graben 27, Wien I. 
Belgium : Librairie encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio-de-Janeiro. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299, Queen Street West, Toronto. 
Che : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Mr Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 9a, 1791, Bogota. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, Sr. D. René de Smedt, O'Reilly, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Narodni, 37, Praha XII. 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6, Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan, 118, rue Emad el Dine, Cairo. } 
France : Maison du Livre Frangais, 4, rue Félibien, Paris (6¢). (Booksellers only)*. 
Great Britain : HM. Stationery Office : London : York House, Kingsway (Retail Counter 
Service) : P.O. Box 569, London S.E.I. (Post orders). - Manchester 2 : 39-41 King 
Street. - Edinburgh 2 : 13a Castle Street. - Cardiff : 1 St Andrew's Crescent. - 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens. 
Hungary : “Ibusz” Akademia-u. 10, Budapest V. 
India : Oxiord Book and Stationery Co, Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Israel : Leo Blumstein, Book Shop, 35 Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Italy : Messaggerie Italiane, Via Lomazzo, 52, Milano. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Universelle, Avenue des Francais, Beirut. 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, Mexico DF. 
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout 9, The Hague. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 7, Oslo. 
Pakistan : Thomas & Thomas, Fort Mansions, Frere Road, Karachi 3. 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Pert, S.A. Girén de la Unién, Lima. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co, Inc.,, Corner Tanduay and Vergara Streets, 
Portugal : Uniao Portuguesa de Imprensa, 198 Rue de S. Bento, 3° Esq., Lisbon 
C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland : Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich. 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469, avenue de l'Indépendance, Beyoglu, Is*anbul. 
Van Schaik's Bookstore, Pty. Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broadway, New York 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacién Cientifica, Avenida Agraciada 1875 Montevideo. 
* For France : Retail sales: Unesco Sales Service, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (16e). 
dren’s rights and to help children in 
distress is the International Union 
for Child Welfare, which has already 
helped over 4000 children, many of 
them war victims. Recent conferen- 
ces have been held by this group on 
“ Juvenile delinquency provoked by 
war” and “ Methods of protection of 
children”, and Unesco has contri- 
buted to aid another conference of 
experts on social aspects of the 
educational problems of child war- 
victims. 
International 
understanding 
—— the personal approach 
HE picture which young people 
get of a foreign country from 
history and geography texts 
becomes much more real once they 
have been in direct contact with the 
youth of these countries. To make 
such contacts possible, the Inter- 
national Federation for School Cor- 
respondence and Exchange works 
with other groups in twenty-five 
countries, + encouraging correspond- 
ence among students which brings 
opportunities for international under- 
standing to a personal level. Work- 
ing under consultative arrangements 
with Unesco the Federation publishes 
bulletins in which Unesco’s activities, 
especially the part its education 
programme plays in better inter- 
national understanding, are des- 
cribed. 
A typical international problem 
among the world’s universities today 
is the linequality of academic de- 
grees. A student who graduates 
from a university.in one country and 
continues his studies in ‘that of 
another may find that he receives 
little or no academic credit for the 
work he has already completed. 
The International Association of 
University Professors and Lecturers 
contracted with Unesco to study this 
problem. This group ‘works to 
  
  
 
  
In the formative period up to seven years of age, children’s capacities for mutual under- 
standing grow by degrees — the first difficult adjustments to the rights of others. Properly 
handled this develops into the tolerance and understanding which the world requires of its 
mature citizens. Many international non-governmental organizations are today working with 
Unesco to improve the techniques and to apply pre-school education towards this ead. 
- conference in Paris 
facilitate the exchange of professors 
and students and to help students 
from countries, whose educational 
facilities are underdeveloped, to 
study in other countries. 
Students’ problems are the concern 
of the International Student Service, 
which, with two other associations 
has formed la European fund for 
students in need. During and after 
the war it distributed more than five 
million dollars to universities and 
students in Europe and Asia. 
One special way in ‘which the 
Student Service helped Unesco was 
by providing information which was 
invaluable in setting up the Inter- 
national Bureau of Universities. 
This Bureau, created under Unesco 
auspices at the conference at Utrecht 
two years ago, assembles complete 
documentation from universities, so 
that professors and students the 
world over can obtain information on 
educaticnal opportunities, scholar- 
ships and conditions of admission in 
other countries. 
The right to education 
—= without distinction of 
sex 
HE history of education shows us 
T only too clearly how women’s 
educational opportunities have 
been much slighter than those of 
men. Even today this situation still 
exists in some countries. Unesco has 
been greatly aided by ‘women’s 
organizations from many countries 
in its effort to end this discrimination. 
In a study of the situation at a 
last winter, 
reports showed that obstacles to the 
educational equality of women were 
sometimes legal or social, or based 
simply on prejudice. 
In a number of countries, the law 
forbids the entry of women into 
certain professions, and thus few or 
none study in fields for which they 
have great aptitude. Even in some 
countries where women theoretically 
hold equal rights, there are ten times 
as many schools for boys as there 
are for girls — a result of the ancient 
custom of confining women in 
harems. In one country girls 
are not permitted to attend secondary 
schools ; in another, girls must go to 
work at an early age; in a third 
women are legally allowed to 
practice law but fear to do: so 
because of prejudice. 
The International Federation of 
University Women, with 130,000 
members in thirty-three countries, 
has helped many university-educated 
women who could not get the work 
they deserved because pf race, 
religious or political beliefs. This is 
one of the organizations represented 
at the Paris conference, which passed 
a number of resolutions aimed at 
breaking down the barriers of 
prejudice against women. Another 
Conference resolution requested 
Unesco to promote short-time resid- 
ential courses for women, both on 
their domestic problems and their 
duties as citizens. 
All of the women’s organizations 
which work under consultative 
arrangements with Unesco have done 
a great deal in making known to the 
world the Universal Declaration of 
the Rights of Man, as well as their 
own campaigns for equality for 
women in every field.   
" Recont 
Unesco 
Publications 
Last month, the first of a series 
of newsletters — “A Reader's Guide 
to Unesco Publications” — was sent 
out from Unesco House to ail parts 
of the world... The purpose of the 
newsletters is to keep people in 
formed about new Unesco publica- 
tions, giving prices and languages 
in- which they appear, together 
with advance news about works In 
progress. Facts about three recent 
Unesco publications referred to In 
the first Newsletter are given below, 
* 
WORLD COMMUNICATIONS : 
PRESS, FILM, RADIO 
(200 pages) 
“World Communications”, the 
first single-volume survey yet pu- 
blished on world facilities in press, 
radio, [films and television, has 
been widely acclaimed by mnews- 
papers and communications erperts 
in many countries. Published last 
May, the book was prepared in the 
Free Flow of Information Division 
of Unesco’'s Department of Mass 
Communications. 
Unesco sales agents report a 
heavy demand for copies, and Ame- 
rican schools of journalism are 
arranging to use the publication as 
a textbook. 
Press reports from Argentina, 
Belgium, India, Morocco, Scandina- 
via, the United Kingdom and the 
United States show that “ World 
Communications” is not only being 
widely read but is providing much 
information hitherto little known 
in many countries. 
Points which have aroused par- 
ticular comment include the follow- 
ing: Brilons read the most news- 
papers; India is the second-largest 
producer of feature films; the So- 
viet Union is the third largest user 
of television. 
The book was compiled at the 
request of the United Nations Sub- 
Commission on Freedom of Infor- 
mation and of the Press. 
“World Communications” can be 
obtained through Unesco sales 
agents. It is priced at $1.20 or 7s. 
sterling or 350 French francs. 
TRAINING FOR RADIO 
(105 pages) 
Factual information on courses in 
radio at present being offered by 
radio organizations themselves or 
by schools. Contains dala suppli- 
ed by 17 radio organizations, 10 
colleges and training schools in 16 
countries. Price : § 0.40 2/-F. 100. 
PUBLIC LIBRARY EXTENSION 
(113 pages) 
Discussion of the methods of 
extending public library activity to 
meet the needs of scattered and 
rural populations and special 
groups in the community. Price 
$65 4/- F. 200,  

## [Page 3](081543engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
Economic and Social Council of the United 
Nations, on July 21st, M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
concluded his speech by referring to the Orga- 
nization’s contribution to the United Nations’ 
work for peace. 
P RESENTING Unesco’s Annual Report to the 
M. Torres Bodet said : 
“ Lastly, we come to a question which set the tone 
for the whole of the proceedings in Florence, that of 
Unesco’s contribution to the United Nations’ work for 
peace. 
“The General Conference was unanimous in consi- 
dering that this was Unesco’s essential function. 
“It also felt that our Organization’s contribution 
should not take the form of more or less spectacular 
enterprises independent of the programme, for these 
might cause confusion and deflect us from our proper 
and important tasks. Rather was it thought that the 
obligation could be fully met by effective execution 
of the Programme. 
“True, this Programme, by Unesco’s very terms of 
reference, is concerned with non-political problems. 
It is, however, no less certain that directly or in- 
directly, those problems have political repercussions, 
relating as they do to nothing less than the social 
and spiritual fabric of civilization, Only it must be 
realized that in the complex action of the intellectual 
on the political, there is little prospect of any im- 
mediate effect on the world’s fate. The deeper that 
action goes, the longer will be the time needed for 
its effects to be felt. We must have the courage to 
recognize the fact and the patience to accept it. 
“Courage and patience alike have never been harder 
of attainment than in the anxious days through 
which we are living, when peace is assailed by threats 
so urgent. Yet for that very reason both have never 
been more necessary. At a time when the political 
problems of peace have reached their acutest stage 
and when the balance of physical power is becoming 
an increasingly important element in them, the 
assertion of the primacy of the social and in parti- 
cular of the spiritual factor - the postulate on which 
all our work is based - is an example of the highest 
value. Such an affirmation of faith in human pro- 
gress is an affirmation of confidence in peace, and 
that in itself makes for peace. 
A World Will To Unity 
“| T is regrettable that the fact of the material inter 
dependence of states has won acceptance more 
swiftly than has the intellectual and moral soli- 
darity of peoples. Nevertheless, international co- 
operation requires, above all, an international spirit. 
That was fully appreciated by the authors of the San 
Francisco Charter. When they took up the work of 
the League of Nations, they recognized the importance 
of undertakings such as the International Labour 
Office and provided for a series of Specialized Agencies 
“It is in the hours of difficulty... 2 
  
whose explicit purpose is to awaken and develop the 
international spirit by giving to our interdependent 
world the will to unity as a rock to build on and 
setting up that unity’s attainment as its labour’s 
crown. 
“These Agencies are the principal novelty in the 
United Nations system. The difficulties of the hour 
must not make us forget the great promises which 
accompanied their birth nor the constructive possi- 
bilities inherent in them. On them largely depends 
the establishment of that twentieth-century human 
order which has still to be built and even to be 
conceived. 
“It is, of course, natural that the United Nations 
and their Specialized Agencies in action should have 
met with a thousand obstacles. They demand from 
us all unceasing sacrifices which do not always nor 
easily awaken enthusiasm. The need was to streng- 
then the political security machinery of the United 
Nations and at the same time to assemble resources 
great enough so that the Specialized Agencies might 
be able to carry out a fruitful work and one which 
might not lose sight of the practical reality of daily 
life. All this requires great and unceasing generosity. 
¢¢ Peace - An Unending Creation *’ 
¢¢([C VEN among men of good will I know that there 
are many who ask themselves rather doubtfully 
whether the provision of education for the 
ignorant, care for the sick and food for the hungry 
will really serve to hold off war. Yet, if there be one 
truth that we should ever keep in mind, it is that 
there is no real peace without economic justice and 
social progress. To extend the political responsibi- 
lities of the United Nations without increasing to a 
corresponding or even greater degree the economic 
and social activities of the Specialized Agencies would 
be to throw the whole system out of balance and to 
repudiate the principles on which it is based. As 
things are today, it would mean yielding, under the 
guise of realism, to the most disastrous defeatism. 
More than ever it is essential that international co- 
operation should achieve acceptance by the scope and 
effectiveness of what it does, and that the Specialized 
Agencies set up to that end should show the people, 
by practical achievements and no longer merely by 
symbolic illustrations or exhortations, all the dignity 
and happiness that peace brings with it. 
“peace has been defined as unending creation. It 
is in the hours of difficulty that it is most important 
to remember this. It is then above all that humanity 
must be made to understand that agencies such as 
the International Labour Organization, the World 
Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Orga- 
nization and the United Nations Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Organization were not created to 
knock together a jerry-built world of tomorrow during 
an uneasy truce, but to pave the way, despite tensions 
or even wars, for the dawn of the economic and 
social justice without which there is no true peace.” 


### 81544: United Nations Economic and Social Council praises UNESCO's priority work programme

UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL 
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
 


### 74408: ECOSOC resolution on Korea: UNESCO Executive Board meets

ECOSOC RESOLUTION 
ON KOREA; 
UNESGO EXECUTIVE 
BOARD MEETS 
T following is the text of a resolution 
unanimously adopted by the Econo- 
mic and Social Council of the United 
Nations, meeting in Geneva, on August 
14th. 
"THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL 
COUNCIL, 
Profoundly concerned over the hardship 
and suffering wrought upon the people of 
Korea by the unlawful attack of the North 
Korean forces. 
Determined to do everything in its power 
for the relief and support of the civil popu- 
lation of Korea. 
Having given due consideration to the 
resolution adopted by the Security Councli 
on 31 July 1950 and the request addressed 
to it in that resolution, under the terms 
of Article 65 of the Charter, 
Bearing in mind the agreements between 
the United Nations and specialized agencies 
which provide for the co-operation of these 
agencies with the Economic and Social 
Council in rendering such assistance to 
the Security Council as that Council may 
request, and 
Deeply conscious of its functions and 
responsibilities under Chapters IX and X 
cf the Charter, 
1. 
A. 
Declares its readiness to provide for 
such assistance as the Unified Command 
may request in accordance with the 
above-mentioned resolution. 
- B . 
. Requests the specialized agencies and 
appropriate subsidiary bodies of the 
United Nations to lend their utmost 
support in providing such assistance as 
may be requested by the Unified Com- 
mand through the Secretary-General for 
the relief and support of the civilian 
population of Korea, and authorizes the | 
Secretary-General to transmit directly to 
them such requests for assistance as 
fall within their respective fieids of 
competence ; 
. Invites Governments Members of the 
United Nations, the Secretary-General, 
and appropriate non-governmental orga- 
nizations, particularly those in consul- 
tative status with the Economic and So- 
cial Council, to assist in developing 
-among the peoples of the world the 
fullest possible understanding of and 
support for the action of the United 
Nations in Korea and requests the 
Secretary-General to seek on behalf of 
the Council the co-operation of special- 
ized agencies as appropriate for this 
purpose ; PRAISES UNESCO'S PRIORITY WORK PROGRAMME 
CTION taken by Unesco to 
concentrate and co-ordinate its 
work through the adoption of a 
system of priority tasks was strongly 
approved by members of the Co- 
ordination Committee of the U. N. 
Economic and Social Council at 
Geneva on July 21st, following presen- 
tation of Unesco’s annual report by 
M. Jaime Torres Bodet. 
M. Georges Boris (France) said that 
Unesco’s report and the decisions of 
its General Conference at Florence 
showed that it had explored the whole 
of the province committed to it. It 
had also gained an awareness of the 
techniques and methods which it must 
apply in order to achieve effective 
results. The French delegation, he 
said, wished particularly to congratu- 
late Unesco on results it had obtained 
in the field of specialist collaboration 
and exchanges of technical informa- 
tion. 
Mr. Kotschnig (United States) 
remarked that even as recently as this 
year’s Florence Conference as many as 
200 new projects had been proposed. 
Seen against such a background, the 
most striking characteristic of the Or- 
ganization’s report was the great 
progress made in concentrating pro- 
grammes. Unesco was moving towards 
the establishment, not only of priori- 
ties, but of the classification of its 
major programmes in terms of its 
limited resources. Unesco, he said, 
was the proper international organi- 
zation to concentrate upon the promo- 
tion of the effective methods of 
educating the peoples of under- 
developed countries. IIRL 
Threefold Technical 
Assistance Work 
EVERAL. speakers referred to 
Unesco’s part in United Nations’ 
technical assistance activities. Mr. 
Entezam (Iran) declared that through 
scientific research, the modernization 
* of education and the dissemination of 
educational and cultural material 
Unesco was already making a very 
considerable, if indirect, contribution to 
the welfare of under-developed coun- 
tries. Pledging Belgium’s support for 
Unesco’s technical assistance work, 
M. Delhaye reiterated his country’s 
desire to see qualified refugee intellec- 
tuals associated in the programme. 
Unesco’s initiative in undertaking 
the creation of an International 
Copyright Convention and its efforts to 
publicize the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights were welcomed by Mr. 
de Alba (Mexico) and Mr. Cabada 
(Peru). : 
Contribution To Peace 
and Security 
NESCO’S work was the subject of 
several resolutions adopted by the 
Economic and Social Council on 
August 9th. 
The first of these commended 
Unesco’s efforts to establish priorities 
in its work programme and invited its 
members to concentrate in future pro- 
grammes on projects designed to ad- 
vance Unesco’s contribution to peace 
and security. The same resolution 
expressed the hope that this concentra- 
tion of effort would result in a reduc- 
tion of the number of meetings and 
conferences to allow adequate prepara-  
M. Georges Boris (France) shown here with 
M. Henri Laugier, Assistant Secretary Gene- 
ral, United Nations Department of Social 
Affairs (right), addressed the Co-ordination 
Committee of the Economic and Social 
Council during its consideration of the Unesco 
annual report. In the face of the special 
difficulties of the existing international 
situation, he told the Committee, Unesco. 
and especially its Director-General, were 
trying to bring the work which Unesco must 
carry out for the peace of the world, into 
closer touch with present-day realities. 
tion and proper implementation of 
their findings. The resolution asked 
Unesco to give special attention to the 
programme of technical assistance for 
under-developed countries. 
Other Council resolutions were 
aimed at co-ordinating activities relat- 
ing to the freedom of information 
carried out by the United Nations and 
by Unesco and to drawing attention of 
Member States to the practical value 
of the Unesco Agreement designed to 
abolish import duties on educational, 
cultural and scientific materials.   
4, Authorizes the Secretary-General to 
invite appropriate non-governmental or- 
ganizations to give such help as is 
within their power for the relief of the 
civilian population in Korea, and requests 
him to make suitable administrative 
arrangements in this connection; 
C. 
. Requests the Secretary-General to 
render progress reports to the Economic 
and Social Council on action taken under 
this resolution and to include when 
appropriate such other information and 
observations as may be helpful for the 
consideration of longer-term measures 
for economic and social assistance to 
the people of Korea; 
[3
 
D. 
6. Decides not to close the present ses- 
sion when the Council has disposed of 
the present agenda but to adjourn it 
temporarily, and authorizes the Presi- 
dent, in consultation with the Secretary- 
General, to reconvene the Council at 
United Nations Headquarters whenever 
necessary in connection with matters 
requiring action under this resolution. 
* 
As this edition of the Courier was 
going to press, Unesco’s Executive 
Board began a special meeting called 
by the chairman on the request of 
eight members to discuss : « The 
contribution of Unesco to the action 
of the United Nations and Specialized 
Agencies following the aggression 
against Korea. » The Board was also 
due to consider the concentration of 
Unesco’s 1951 programme and the 
extent of the Organization’s activities 
in Germany.  

## [Page 4](081543engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 


### 81546: Libraries: a neglected resource; UNESCO Seminar proposes active programme for adult education

LIBRARIES — A NEGLECTED RESOURCE 
Unesco Seminar proposes active 
programme for adult education 
14 UBLIC libraries can be and indeed in some cases are among the 
most effective agencies now existing for the continuing educa- 
tion of great masses of people”, according to a resolution of 
the Unesco Seminar on libraries in adult education just held 
in Malmo, Sweden. 
The “can be” is the justification for this four weeks’ workshop for 
professional librarians specially interested in adult education, arran- 
ged by Unesco. The fact is that the potentialities of public libraries 
are far from being realized or even recognized in many parts of the 
world. It is also true that the public library movement is on the 
move. This is clear from recent advances made in many countries 
and from the place public library development oceupies in Unesco’s 
programme. 
The progress is very uneven, 
however; indeed in some regions 
it has mot even s’4rted. The cen- 
tral idea of this seminar was 
to pool the best practices and 
theories, to focus attention on the 
role of libraries as educational 
agencies and to reach agreement 
on standards. 
By the end of the seminar, the 
48 participants from twenty 
countries had produced a number 
of clearly formulated recommend- 
ations as to how libraries best 
can aid popular education. 
Some of these recommendations 
are directly addressed to Unesco, 
others should rather be regarded 
as pointers to everyone engaged in 
public library work and planning. 
libraries as places 


### 81547: UNESCO activities in Germany

  
UNESCO ACTIVITIES IN GERMANY 
 
N 1948, following the General 
Conference resolution passed at 
Mexico City in 1947, Unesco, 
acting in agreement and co-- 
operation with the appropriate 
Allied Authorities, extended its acti- 
vities to Western Germany and 
opened its first office in Stuttgart. 
A year later further offices were 
opened at Mainz and Diisseldorf. 
One of the first tasks of these 
offices has been to make known 
the aims and purposes of the 
Organisation, both to the German 
public generally by means of press, 
radio, exhibitions and lectures, as 
well as by the distribution of Unesco 
literature and pamphlets translated 
into German for this purpose, and 
- also to academic and other interested 
circles by means of free distribution 
or sale of Unesco’s more specialised 
publications and periodicals, as well 
as by personal contacts. Requests 
for material for distribution in 
schools, for student libraries, for 
exhibitions or for special broadcasts, 
to mention but a few of the pur- 
poses, are constantly increasing and 
the needs are fulfilled as far as is 
possible by these three offices. 
Other important fields of activity 
extended to Germany within the 
framework of Unesco’s programme 
include the exchange of publications, 
the exchange of persons, the study 
of textbooks and the social sciences. 
The exchange of publications bet- 
ween German libraries and the li- 
braries of Member States has been 
greatly facilitated by the creation of 
an Exchange Centre at Bad-Godes- 
berg, financed by the Notgemein- 
schaft des Deutschen Wissenschaft 
(Emergency Council for German 
Science). The extension of the 
Unesco Book Coupon Scheme to Ger- 
many, where it will shortly come 
into operation, will provide a further 
  
Both kinds constitute impulses to 
action on the local, national and 
international plane. ) 
Director of the seminar, which 
used the discussion group {echni- 
que, was Dr. Cyril O. Houle, Dean, 
University college, University of 
Chicago, who also led the work of 
the group studying the organization 
and administration of library adult 
education programmes. 
BOOKS — ONLY THE BEGINNING 
HE modern conception is 
much broader than the one 
once commonly held of public 
where indi- 
viduals can borrow books and scan 
newspapers. The modern public 
valuable means for German libraries 
to acquire much needed foreign books 
and periodicals without the compli- 
cated procedure and long delays 
which are at present inevitable. 
Frequent enquiries are received at 
the offices in Germany concerning 
the possibilities of exchange and 
study abroad by students, teachers 
and many young people anxious to 
come into contact with young people 
of other nationalities. Information 
is given on exchange agencies in 
other countries and where possible 
contacts are facilitated. The hand- 
book “Study Abroad” has proved a 
much sought after publication in 
German universities, and the offer 
of the first Unesco fellowship — in 
the field of Youth Education — in 
Germany has aroused a large res- 
ponse. 
N co-operation with the appro- 
priate programme departments of 
Unesco several studies have been 
initiated in Germany. One of these 
has been concerned with the post-- 
war preparation and production of 
textbooks. Within the field of 
Unesco’s Tensions Project a sociolo- 
gical study is at present in progress, 
which is particularly concerned with 
the attitudes of youth. In addition 
studies are being carried out on the 
problems and experiments in dealing 
with war-handicapped children on 
the problems with which youth is 
faced with the purpose of enabling 
those concerned with youth ques- 
tions to gain a better understanding 
of the problems of youth in Ger- 
. many and of their relationship to 
other members of the international 
community. 
The Director-General, following 
the recommendation of the General 
Conference at its Third Session, esta- 
blished a Committee of Experts to 
A 
One of the aims of Unesco’s work in Germany is to encourage the activities of orga- 
- nizations carrying out adult education there. One of these organizations is the 
Federation of German Trade Unions for Western Germany under whose auspices the 
Ruhr Theatre Festival was held this Summer. During the Festival, whose «im is to 
bring to the workers an understanding of European culture in its widest sense. German 
actors (above) presented Shakespeare's “King Lear”. 
“1 
LJ 2 - 
- 
Td 
adh 
| al 
a 
4 
¢ 
yg 
u
g
 
5 Tet 
     
  
Library services in India, Ceylon. Egypt. the Argentine, France, Italy and Great 
"Britain are represented among these members of a study group at the Unesco 
Seminar on Libraries in Adult Education, held at Malmo, Sweden. This group 
was concerned with the ways in which libraries can help mass education in 
the large under-developed areas of the world. : 
library is a service organization 
bringing educational and recrea- 
tional aids to the people. These 
aids are not only made out of 
printed words. The spoken word 
through radio, gramophone and 
lecture, the image through film, 
lantern-slide and poster and even 
the combination of these two 
modern techniques in television 
advise him on matters affecting the 
programme of Unesco’s work in Ger- 
many, and this Committee convened 
for its first session in May 1949. 
The Committee is composed of re- 
presentatives from Belgium, Czecho- 
slovakia, France, Netherlands, Nor- 
way, Poland, Switzerland, United 
States of America and the United 
Kingdom, who meet periodically to 
study the progress of Unesco’s acti- 
vities in Germany and to advise on 
its future programme as well as on 
any special projects which might be 
carried out in that country. 
The Committee of Experts met 
recently in Unesco House, Paris, to 
consider the creation of an inter- 
national centre for youth activities, 
an international social sciences ins- 
titute and an international pedago- 
gical institute in Germany. The 
Committee welcomed Unesco’s pro- 
posal to support special projects in 
these fields, but felt convinced that 
if these projects were to be carried 
out full collaboration from German 
circles anxious to work in the inte- 
rests of international understanding 
would be essential. The Committee 
made a number of recommendations 
designed to ensure the permanent 
and international character of these 
institutes. 
ROM the time that Unesco 
started its activities in Germany 
keen interest has been shown by 
Germans in the Organisation’s work 
in their country. In response to an 
increasing desire to participate more 
actively, a group of personalities re- 
presenting all spheres of cultural life 
in Germany met last January in 
Bad-Soden near Frankfurt to consi- 
der the means by which Unesco’s 
activities could be furthered through 
German initiative, and to this end 
decided that preparatory work for 
the creation of a German Committee 
for Unesco Activities should forth- 
with be undertaken. An Interim 
Committee was formed and has been 
co-operating since that time with the 
Secretariat Offices in Germany in 
various fields of their work, such as 
in the selection of participants for 
Unesco meetings and seminars, in 
many cases also providing financial 
aid to such participants for their 
travel. Assistance has also been 
given in obtaining German contri- 
butions to recent Unesco publications, 
such as the Index Translationem 
and the Catalogue of Photographic 
Archives of Works of Art. 
It is expected that the permanent 
Committee will be finally constituted 
at a meeting to be held at the end 
of September. In order to cover the 
various activities of Unesco the Com- 
mittee will comprise the following 
groups : Arts and Literature ; 
Science: Education: Press; Radio 
and Film. It will receive direct 
financial support from the German 
Federal Government. 
It is hoped that the formation of 
the Committee will lead to increased 
active participation in Unesco’s work 
and afford to Germans greater 
opportunities for partaking in and 
contributing to international co-- 
operation in the fields of education, 
science and culture.   
now belong within the domain of 
the librarian in the service of the 
community. 
This study-group formulated a 
minimum, median and maximum 
programme for the audio-visual 
services of libraries. The mini- 
mum programme which the Seminar 
commends to all libraries requires 
at least the establishment of an 
effective community film inform- 
ation service. 
Unesco was asked to publish an 
international list of selected films 
of universal interest in the field 
of adult education. 
The work and recommendations 
of this group have meant a real 
step forward towards the recogn- 
ition of the film’s rightful place 
in public library services. 
“An effective library service 
forms an indispensable and integral 
feature of any fundamental eduction 
programme”, the third study-group 
stated. This group was concerned 
with libraries in the aid of mass 
education in the large wunder- 
developed areas of the world and 
many of its recommandations were 
addressed fo Unesco, an organisation 
which since its start has devoted 
much of its programme to funda- 
mental education. 
LIBRAIRIES — AND ILLITERACY 
HIS group had to consider the 
| librarian’s problem in a 
community that is mainly 
illiterate but in the process of 
learning how to read and write. 
The school system in such an area 
is still inadequate, no libraries 
exist. The educational experiment 
to introduce reading materials is on 
a “ pre-book” basis. The librarian 
has to be a pioneer clearing new 
paths, often in the face of op- 
position and despondency and with 
very scanty material means. 
The forty-page report preduced 
by this group, in the work of which 
professionals from all the conti- 
nents participated, is itself a 
valuable handbook in library 
planning and practice in the under- 
developed regions, 
The group chairman was the li- 
brarian of the Musée de I'Homme in 
Paris, Mlle Yvonne Oddon, whose 
experience in the field, includes 
Unesco’s fundamental education 
pilot project in the Marbial valley, 
Haiti. 
The whole Seminar benefited 
from the fact that the modern 
town library of Malmo had been 
chosen as the site. This model li- 
brary is a fine example of the pro- 
gressive Swedish public library 
system and many of the participants 
could not but feel envious when 
they saw what excellent library 
facilities are at the free and easy 
use of the people of Malmo and 
the province of Scania. 
The results of a seminar cannot 
be judged only from the reports 
and recommendations produced. 
The real results will come when 
the words are translated into action, 
when the new techniques have 
been put into practice, new build- 
ings erected, services expanded 
and improved. This will happen 
when the participants are back in 
their communities and after their 
colleagues and public opinion have 
been given the opportunity to 
benefit from their widened outlook 
and improved skills.

## [Page 5](081543engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
sickness, hunger, weak- 
ness, lassitude, ignorance 
— and again the sickness 
and hunger — Unesco during 1949 
organized an experiment in 
collaboration with the Chinese 
Mass Education Movement, which 
was already carrying out practi- 
cal fundamental education work 
there. 
The purpose of the project was 
to prepare sample materials — 
particularly audio -visual aids for 
fundamental education — which 
could be of use to educators in 
other parts of the world. The 
subject to be dealt with was given 
the title of “The Healthy Village”, 
and the international team car- 
rying out the project set out to 
produce, with the help of local 
artists, materials designed to en- 
courage hygiene and defeat 
disease. 
By May, these artists, adapting 
themselves to entirely new condi- 
tions, had produced a first series 
of posters, mobile posters, book- 
lets and film strips dealing with 
the causes of and protection 
against such diseases as small- 
pox, trachoma and tetanus. 
It was difficult at first to per- 
suade the Chinese artists to draw 
anything as repulsive as a child’s 
face marked with smallpox or 
eyes inflamed with trachoma. 
But, once convinced that people 
must be shocked into action by 
seeing the terrible effects of these 
diseases, they -brought to their 
work the patience and delicacy 
which characterize the Chinese 
artist. 
T interrupt the cruel cycle of 
~ Filmstrips Without 
A Camera 
OME months later, Unesco sent 
S out to China Norman McLaren. 
a young Canadian who had 
been working for several years 
with the Canadian National Film 
Board. Under his guidance and 
inspiration, the art centre at 
Pehpei produced an impressive 
total of static and mobile posters, 
wall sheets, picture books and film 
strips all teaching a simple but 
vivid lesson in hygiene and the 
prevention of disease. 
When these materials were 
“tested” in the local villages it was 
found that the greatest effects 
were achieved through the use of 
film strips and mobile posters. 
McLaren therefore began to ex- 
periment with new methods of 
filmstrip production. His efforts 
led to some striking results by the 
use of direct art work on the film. 
Instead of using the normal film- 
strip technique of drawing pictures 
and then photographing them, 
McLaren and his team did their 
pictures directly on 35 mm motion 
picture film. 
Pictures were made on both 
clear and black film by two basic 
methods: (a) applying ink, paint or 
colour to the film with pen or 
brush and (b) removing the black 
photographic emulsion (also ink, 
paint or colour applied to the film) 
y etching or scraping with a sharp 
Cross combinations of 
these methods produced a further 
variety of mixed methods. 
One advantage in using this di- 
rect method was the speed of pro- 
duction. This was found to vary 
between one quarter to one tenth 
the time required by the standard 
method. In other words, the same 
idea executed by painted drawings 
instrument. 


### 81549: Chinese artists and UNESCO experts find new roads to The Healthy Village

  
CHINESE ARTISTS 
And Unesco Experts 
Find New 
 
One of the most successful audio-visual devices to 
“THE HEALTHY VI LLAGE” 
Roads To 
teach health lessons 
developed by the Unesco Project in China was the rotating wheel poster. This 
photo, taken near Pehpei, shows a health worker demonstrating one of the 
posters illustrating in eight stages how eyes inflamed by trachoma become 
bright and healthy again with regular treatment. After a talk on trachoma, 
the Unesco health worker would examine and treat people, leaving the poster 
for the crowd to look at and operate themselves. 
   
» we - ! 
2 \  7¥ 
Two-way posters were used by the Unesco team in Pehpei 
to convey two alternative and contrasting health messages. 
such as “Do” and “Don't” on a certain topic. or “The good 
way’ and “the bad way”. In these photos, the two posi- 
Instead of using the normal f{filmstrip method of drawing 
pictures and then photographing them, Unesco Project artists 
drew directly on 35 mm film. The Chinese artist (above) 
is working on clear film on which ink, paint or colour can 
and later photographed which took 
six weeks to carry out would take 
about six days if translated directly 
on film. 
The fastest production at Pephei 
was an 84-frame filmstrip made in 
14 days and even the longest, a 
o4 frame filmstrip, only took six 
ays. 
Put To The Test 
HEN completed these {filmstrips 
\ X/ were taken with other audio- 
visual materials for testing 
in local villages. Members of the 
Unesco team, including Dr. Clara 
Nutting, the American head of the 
Health Department, Mr. EJ. Fan, 
Chinese head of the Field Depart- 
ment and a Chinese commentator 
and projectionist, travelled to the 
villages, their car piled high with 
films, equipment and medical sup- 
plies. 
"Chinese music. 
   | eo NJ 
These posters 
In the evenings they pul on 
shows in the village schools or 
squares showing four or five film- 
strips interspersed with records of 
These ended with 
an announcement telling people to 
come back for a medical examipa- 
tion the next day. 
Sometimes as many as 600 people 
turned up to have their eyes exam- 
ined for trachoma and often one 
third of them were found to be 
suffering from this disease which, 
if left unchecked, can cause total 
blindness. In one period of 
23 days, Dr. Nutting examined 6.389 
persons — 47 per cent of the po- 
pulation — and found that 25% 
1ad trachoma. 
The 
“actors” in several “actuality” 
filmstrips. Pictures were taken- of 
the village folk attending a film 
show or receiving treatment and 
these were then projected in slide   
easants themselves became 
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
form when the village was visited 
a second time. 
Seeing themselves on the screen 
was a novelty which attracted the 
people in hundreds and created a 
warmth of interest which helped 
them to understand why they 
should get vaccinated against small- 
ox and continue regular treatment 
or trachoma. Above all, it made" 
them health conscious and more 
ready to co-operate in the cam- 
paign. 
All Educators Will Benefit 
HE work of the Pehpei project 
has come to an end, but world- 
wide use is to be made of the 
reports which cover the adminis- 
trative, art production, field work 
and health activities carried out by 
its members. 
The reports, illustrated by pic- 
tures taken during the work, are to 
be published by Unesco in the 
form of a monograph and made 
available to all educators in the 
field of fundamental education. 
Copies of the audio-visual mate- 
rials prepared by Norman McLaren 
and his team are being made and 
 
tions of the same poster show (left) a trachoma victim 
who failed to take regular treatment and (right) the same 
man when his trachoma was cured after a 21-day treatment. 
successfully brought home the lesson. 
be applied with paint or brush. A second method (above, 
right) was to use black film, making pictures by the 
removal of the black photographic emulsion (also ink, paint, 
or colour applied to the film) with a stylus or knife. 
will be loaned to governments, or- 
ganizations and individuals carry- 
ing out other projects where this 
type of work has started or is about 
to begin. 
Unesco filmstrips showing de- 
tails of the various techniques used 
by McLaren will be made and the 
young Canadian is himself prepar- 
ing a special post-project report 
outlining the methods he developed 
at Pehpei and the equipment he 
used. 
In breaking new ground, espe- 
cially by developing the use of di- 
rect art work on filmstrips and 
filmslides, and by providing ans- 
wers to some of the problems in- 
volved in reaching and driving 
home health lessons to large num- 
bers of people, Unesco’s Project has 
done valuable work. Its results 
will be appreciated and used wher- 
ever men and women are striving 
to help their fellows to live better 
and fuller lives.

## [Page 6](081543engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 81550: World's finest colour prints catalogued by UNESCO

UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 
A a 
    
P
N
P
 
I
 
A
R
 
eT
 
T
e
 
 
2
 
  
     
| 2 3 
i “The Birth of Venus” (detail), Sandro 
* BOTTICELLI (1444-1510), Italy. 
2 “George Washington”, Gilbert STUART ‘ ’ 
(1755-1828), U.S.A. 
T O help bring wider understanding 
    
  
* 1576), Italy. ) works of art to the largest . o.- possible number of persons, Unesco 
4, “Portrait of Moretto”, Hans HOLBEIN a has published a 180-page catalogue of (1497-1543), Germany. fine colour reproductions of great 
paintings done before 1860, which are 
available at moderate prices. More 
than 500 years of painting are 
‘a represented by 418 of the works of 
170 masters, chosen from among more 
& than 2,000 reproductions offered by 
the principal publishers of the world. 
The great majority of people in the 
world can never hope, for geographical 
reasons alone, to enter the museums 
and galleries where most of the 
famous art treasures are housed, 
points out Dr. H. Gerson, Deputy- 
Director of the National Bureau for 
the Documentation of Art History, 
The Hague. Dr. Gerson, one of the 
experts who made the selection of 
reproductions for Unesco, wrote in 
his introduction to the catalogue : 
“Unesco, an organization whose" 
scope is world-wide and which is 
unhampered by prejudice or the 
burden of any particular tradition, is 
acting on behalf of the millions of 
people who live far from museums and 
galleries”. : 
The standards of choice of the 
reproductions contained in the catalo-. 
. gue were the significance of the 
artist, the importance of the painting, 
and the fidelity of the reproduction. 
But the element which makes the 
work an especially useful instrument 
in Unesco’s programme of demo- 
cratization of art is the revelation 
that colour reproduction of some of 
the world’s finest paintings are 
available at low prices. There are 
Fra Angelicos, Bellinis and Goyas 
which can be bought for 25 cents 
each ; a dozen different Giottos at 
$1 each; and even the more costly 
reproductions are priced no higher 
than $15 to $ 20. 
The working party of experts who 
made the selections at meetings held 
at Unesco House in Paris, was nomin- 
ated by the International Council of 
Museums. It included, in addition to 
Dr. Gerson, Charles Sterling and 
Héléene Adhémar of the Louvre in 
Paris, Sir Philip Hendy of the National 
5 “Don Manuel de Zuniga”, Francisco 
* de GOYA (1746-1828), Spain. 
6 “The Judgement of Paris”, Anton Van 
* DYCK (1599-1641), Flemish. 
7 “A Man and a Tea House Maid”, KIYO- 
* NAGA (1742-1815), Japan. TT 
ES
 
r
e
 
o
u
 
| 
 
  
  
 
   
   
   
   
 
8 “Man in Red”, SHAH MUHAMMAD 
v* (Tabriz School, XVIth century), Persia. 
9, “Man with Golden Helmet’, REM- 
* BRANDT (1606-1669), Netherlands. 
| 0 “The Forest of Coubron”, Jean-Baptiste 
* COROT (1796-1879), France.     

## [Page 7](081543engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 81550: World's finest colour prints catalogued by UNESCO

  
~ 
Gallery in London, Professor Mario 
Salmi of Rome, and Professor J. Pijoan 
of Chicago. 
Each reproduction is printed in the 
catalogue in black and white, accom- 
panied by precise details in French, 
English and Spanish about the 
painting, the painter, and also the 
reproduction. In each case, the 
reader can learn exactly where he can 
buy the reproduction and at what 
price. 
The catalogue brings to completion 
a Unesco project of compiling a list of 
good available colour reproductions 
begun last year with the publication 
of a similar volume, containing 423 
separate items covering the period 
from 1860 to 1949. It was pointed out 
by Jean Cassou, Director of the 
Museum of Modern Art of Paris, who 
wrote the introduction to the earlier 
volume, that “Colour reproduction 
stands in the same relation to visual 
art as does the radio or gramophone 
record to music: it is an inter- 
mediary”. 
Unesco aims to do more than to 
help make more pictures available to 
more people. For one thing, the 
catalogues draw the attention of 
publishers of colour reproduction to 
the fact that many great paintings 
have never been properly reproduced. 
Publishers have already begun to fill 
in existing gaps. 
Another purpose is to encourage 
publishers to improve the standards of 
colour prints. Three-quarters of the 
prints submitted for use in the second 
volume of the catalogue had to be 
rejected. It is hoped that publishers, 
recognizing in the catalogues a 
potential frame of reference of excel-, 
lence in the field, will seek to bring 
their prints up to a standard meriting 
inclusion in future editions. 
The Two Unesco Catalogues of Colour Repro- 
ductions of Paintings may be obtained from 
Unesco Sales Agencies, listed on Page 2 of this 
issue, or from the Division of Distribution and 
Sales, Unesco, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (16°). 
The price of the catalogue of paintings prior 
to 1860 is82, 10, 600 francs; the price of the 
catalogue of paintings from 1860 to 1949 
ts $1.50, 8/-, 400 francs.     
F
E
R
R
E
)
 
P
L
A
S
 
F
O
N
 
. 
RR
 
. 
- 
f
a
"
 
T
O
R
)
 
INTS (ATALOGLED BY 
   
  
  
  
Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
> 
-
_
 
~ 
2 
“Christ the Mediator”, William BLAKE 
(1757-1827), England. 
“The Gypsy”, Franz HALS (1580-1668), 
Flemish. 
“View of Toledo", EL GRECO (1545 
1614), Spain, 
“The Grand Canal, Venice", William 
TURNER (1775-1851), England, 
“The Kiss of Judas™, GIOTTO (1276 
1337), Raly. 
“The Conjurer”, BOSCH (Hieronymus 
Van Ashen) (1460-1516), Netherlands. 
“The Holy Trinity”, Andre] RUBLEV 
(XVih century), Russia. 
“Musical Mode", RAJPUT (beginning of 
XViith century), Unknown Indian Artist 
‘Raftsmen Playing Cards”, Geor 
Caleb BINGHAM (1811-1879), USA 
“Music Lesson”, Jan VERMEER (1632. 
1675), Netherlands.   

## [Page 8](081543engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER ~ Page 8 


### 81552: An Indian girl with a lesson for humanity

AN INDIAN G IRL WITH A 
LESSON FOR HUMANITY 
of mankind differ in their innate mental characteristics, whether in 
scientists — designed to expose the hateful myth that one 
“race” is inherently superior to another. 
O ~ July 18, Unesco issued a statement — the work of twenty 
On the basis of known facts about human race the anthro- 
pologists and sociologists were unanimous in their opinion that racial 
discrimination has no scientific foundation in biological facts. 
To make known this important statement — the first step in a cam- 
paign against racial prejudice and ignorance — Unesco mobilized all 
, its resources. The radio division sent out more than 400 releases, and 
special recordings in ten languages reached 48 countries. Feature 
articles went to more than 1500 newspapers around the world while 
press releases were sent to newspapers, magazines and all United 
Nations and Specialized Agency offices. 
Thus, millions of men and women in all parts of the world read the 
following assertion in one paragraph of the declaration : 
“According to present knowledge, there is no proof thal the groups 
~ the Parana forests of Paraguay 
live the Guayaki Indians, one of 
the most primitive and least 
known Indian tribes of South 
America. M. J. Vellard, a French 
ethnologist working for the Musée de 
I’Homme in Paris, had spent many 
months wandering through _ the 
forest in search of these Indians 
“when, exactly eighteen years ago, he 
unexpectedly found himself face to 
face with them. 
He went toward them, but the 
answer to his gestures of friendship 
was a flight of arrows; his Para- 
guayan guides opened fire and the 
Indians fled in terror into the 
undergrowth abandoning their stone 
axes, their primitive huts and their 
enormous arrows pointed with wood. 
A few hours later Vellard’s guides 
returned with an unusual prize. 
They were carrying, slung on a pole, 
a small brown creature which Vel- 
lard at first took for a monkey. To 
his astonishment and indignation he 
discovered that it was a little girl of 
two whom his men had gagged with 
leaves and whose arms and legs they 
had bound so as to carry her more 
easily. They were hoping to sell her 
to some farmer in the district for a 
hundred pesos or so. 
The Guayaki Indians are the last 
representatives of a very primitive 
and rudimentary culture. Like their 
neighbours they speak Guarani, but 
unlike them are not sedentary. They 
live almost exclusively by hunting 
and gathering fruits, and wander at 
large in the forest. Their hunting is 
done with bows and arrows, the 
latter being among the longest in the 
world, while they use stone axes to 
open up tree trunks and extract 
honey, of which they are particularly 
fond. : 
UNESCO NEEDS THE 
SUPPORT OF WOMEN 
call to women throughout the 
world to “follow, support 
and aid Unesco’s work” was 
made by M. Jaime Totres Bodet, 
Director General, before a ga- 
thering of delegates from thirty 
countries attending a conference 
of the International Federation of 
University Women at Zurich. 
The Conference marked the thir- 
tieth anniversary of the Fede- 
ration’s foundation. 
The fields in which their assis- 
tance was especially necessary, 
M. Torres Bodet said, were 
popular culture or, more accu- 
rately, adult education, the pro- 
blem of -maladjusted children 
and teaching for international 
understanding. There are few 
forms of injustice graver than 
those which cut off whole classes 
or populations from civilization. 
“But throughout the world, adult 
educgtion experls are only a 
handful of men and women over- 
whelmed by the sheer vastness 
of their task. Who will help 
them if not you?” the Director 
General asked. 
Of maladjusted children he 
<aid, in part : “ If our generation 
resigns itself to a wicked indiffe-. 
rence toward these children, il 
must also abandon every hope of 
peace and justice ; for these, the 
unfit, ignorant, destilute and des- 
perale are the citizens of tomor- 
row’.     
Unchanged Way of Life 
HEIR worldly goods are very few 
— baskets which they make 
water-tight with wax, tools of 
bone, a few necklets and lengths of 
rope. Their dwellings are huts of 
 
One of the few photographs ever taken of a 
member of the Guyaki tribe. Roaming the 
dense forests of eastern Paraguay this man 
and his fellows are limited by circumstances 
to a primitive life. Yet, as «a child he 
possessed all the latent capacities for civil- 
ized life in any part of the modern world. 
boughs which they can erect in a few 
minutes in the deep forests where 
they ilive withdrawn from other 
men. Probably their way of life is 
very little different from that of the 
first bands of men who colonized the 
empty spaces of South America, 
thousands of years ago. 
As a result of being hunted by 
other Indian tribes and Whites alike 
the Guayaki have become timid and 
suspicious. Today we know little 
more about them than was known 
to the Jesuits who tried to convert 
them in the 17th century, and we 
have only been able to secure a little 
hazy information about their customs 
from the few captives serving 
farmers or settlers in Parana as 
slaves, } i 
Their primitive state might be 
logically ascribed to racial inferiority, 
but it is here that the story of the 
captive «child takes on -its full 
significance. 
Out of pity, Vellard bought her for 
a few pesos without thinking much 
about what he would do with her. 
It was only later that he began to 
wonder whether chance had not 
given him an opportunity to show 
that education and cultural back- 
ground were more powerful than 
the so-called laws of race alleged to 
govern the development of the 
individual. 
Like A European Child 
E had grown fond of the child 
with her gentle face and 
friendly eyes. So, the little 
Indian was christened Marie-Yvonne 
respect of intelligence or temperament. The scientific evidence indi- 
cates that the range of mental capacities in all ethnic groups is much 
the same”." 
Reading these words, many people wanted to know if there are 
actual case histories which can “prove” to laymen the facts known 
to the scientists. On this page the Courier presents the remarkable 
story of Marie-Yvonne Vellard, a child of one of the most primitive 
tribes on earth, found as a baby in the Parana forests of Paraguay 18 
vears ago. Today, aged 20, she works as an assistant to her adoptive 
father, the French ethnologist who found her, and is regarded as 
“superior fo most white girls. of her age in intelligence and ability” 
The story of Marie-Yvonne Vellard is far from unique, for the 
whole world is full of proof that : “..given similar degrees of cul- 
tural opportunity to realize their poleniialities, the average achicve- 
ment of the members of each ‘ethnic group is about the same” 
and brought up by Vellard’s mother, 
exactly like a French child. A few 
months after her capture and 
adoption she was already beginning 
to speak a few words of French and 
behave like a European child of the 
same age. With her high cheek- 
bones and black eyes she could have 
passed for a Japanese or even a 
child from the Northern provinces of 
Argentina. 
Less than a year after the start of 
her new life her speech and manners 
were better than those of a European 
child of the same age. At the age 
of seven she was already speaking 
French and Portuguese and liked to 
ask questions about Greek my- 
“thology. 
Art among the Guyaki people is 
limited to the decoration of weapons, 
calabashes and implements with dots, 
dashes and strokes, yet, at an early 
age, Marie-Yvonne was able to draw, 
although she had never received in- 
struction. 
 
SLAVE OR SCHOLAR? For this little Guyaki 
girl, whose photograph was taken about 
1899, the answer was probably slavery. 
There was a happier answer for another 
little Indian girl found eighteen years ago 
in a Paraguay forest by the French scientist 
Jehan Vellard. She is now his adopted 
daughter and a member of a cultured socie- 
ty. The only difference was ...opportunity. 
A European scientist who has 
followed the case of Marie-Yvonne 
from the time she was brought back 
to Lima, Peru, where she still lives, 
has described her as “ perhaps 
superior to most white girls of her 
age.” She was, in fact, usually top 
in every class at school and today, 
as a biology student, she assists her 
adoptive father in his laboratory. 
Cultural Transformation 
HE was brought up exactly as a 
white girl and though she is 
completely aware of her origin, 
she takes no notice of the fact that 
her skin is of a different colour te 
that of her white friends. 
Today, the Indian child, whose 
kinsfolk are perhaps still hunting in 
the Parana and felling trees with 
stone axes, is an attractive, intelligent 
girl of twenty and a typical product 
of the cultural environment in which 
she has lived for 18 years. 
The story of Marie-Yvonne is not 
unique. Hundreds of similar cases, 
involving young native children born 
among what are judged as extremely 
primitive peoples, can be cited. 
Providing a child is removed from 
its cultural environment before it is 
old enough to have been influenced, 
it can be completely assimilated into 
“ THE ONE TRAIT WHICH ABOVE 
ALL OTHERS HAS BEEN AT A 
PREMIUM IN THE EVOLUTION OF 
MEN’S MENTAL CHARACTERS HAS 
BEEN EDUCABILITY, PLASTICITY. 
THIS IS A TRAIT WHICH ALL 
HUMAN BEINGS POSSESS. IT 1S, 
INDEED, A SPECIES CHARACTER 
OF HOMO SAPIENS, * . 
Extract from the Unesco Declaration 
on Race, July 18th, 1950.     
new surroundings. Like all human 
" beings it has innate aptitudes, but 
none which can be considered as 
belonging exclusively to the race of 
- which it is issue. 
The lesson taught by the story of 
Marie-Yvonne and hundreds like it 
is that all human beings of normal 
intelligence are capable of playing 
their part in any form of civilization. 
And it highlights one of the state- 
ments made in the Unesco Race 
Declaration — “ The myth of race 
still prevents the normal develop- 
ment of millions of human beings 
and deprives civilization of the 
effective co-operation of productive 
minds. ” 


### 74416: Study of Brazilian ethnic groups will help UNESCO to fight race prejudice

Study of Brazilian 
ethnic groups will 
help Unesco to 
fight race prejudice 
tion in South America is full of 
countless tales of bloodshed. 
Brazil is no exception. It has been 
the scene of bitter fighting between 
different ethnical groups which some- 
times ended in appalling massacres. 
Yet this hostility never assumed any 
permanent, collective form. Brazil is 
one of the few countries which has 
never known those systems of legal 
oppression practised by ruling whites 
over the slave masses and known as 
the “Black Laws”. The abolition of 
slavery, which created such grave so- 
cial problems in the United States, 
was effected in Brazil without inci- 
dent. Racial prejudice, cause of 
bitter conflict in so many parts of the 
earth, is so slight that it is frequently 
confused with class prejudice. 
What is the reason for this? It is 
difficult to find a satisfactory answer. 
Unesco is making a study of ethnic 
groups in Brazil as part of its general 
campaign against race prejudice, 
which is such a serious threat to world 
peace. At the last General Conference 
at Florence a resolution was passed 
to make researches into Brazilian 
anthropology, sociology and social 
psychology for the purpose of discov- 
ering the reasons for this historical 
development. 
There is much more than scientific 
interest in this undertaking. The 
results which can be anticipated from 
such a wide enquiry will probably give 
precise details of the origin of racial 
prejudice. Then it will be possible to 
attack this problem at its source and 
endeavour to eradicate conditions 
favourable to its development. 
T 5 history of European coloniza-

## [Page 9](081543engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
TEE - 9 al a Ae a" a. tT th TE ZR ee LY 


### 81553: New UNESCO bulletin stresses social implications of modern science

NEW UNESCO BULLETIN STRESSES SOCIAL 
IMPLICATIONS OF MODERN SCIENCE 
ow Sco 
Affects Society 
CIENCE impinges on society in 
two main ways : techno- 
S logically, by changing the 
material conditions of life, 
work and production ; and intel- 
lectually, by changing the way in 
which men think. The former is 
the more striking, since at least in 
the more advanced countries every- 
body is in minute - to - minute 
contact with things that have 
arisen from scientific research. 
Clearly a high standard of living 
is dependent on the use of devices 
produced by scientific technology 
or the use of more traditional 
articles, now produced more chea- 
ply and abundantly by science. 
Many of the problems that face 
the world today can be solved only 
with the aid of science. The 
problem of world food shortage—a 
doubling of output is required to 
S$, se 
important’ literature in English. 
by the world’s leading scientists. 
75 francs per issue.   
give everybody a sufficiency—can 
be greatly alleviated and eventually 
solved by the proper application of 
science. 
The application of science does 
not merely solve a few problems; 
its cumulative effect changes the 
shape of social life, as can be seen 
by considering the consequence of 
the development of electrical 


### 81554: Science clubs teach Canadian youth to protect its country's natural riches

SCIENCE CLUBS TEACH CANADIAN 
~~ YOUTH TO PROTECT ITS 
COUNTRY’S NATURAL RICHEY 
  
The world-wide mo- 
vement of science 
clubs covers many 
aspects of the study of 
science. In Canada 
there is «a great 
emphasis. for example, 
on the protection of 
nature (described in 
the article below). 
Finland has, in many 
respects, been «a 
pioneer country for 
gcience clubs. It was 
the first country to 
give science club 
members free admis- 
pion to the laboratories 
and other facilities 
of the universities 
and technical schools. 
This photo shows 
Science Club members 
attending «a course in 
chemistry at « Finnish 
university. 
and girls are learning to combine 
a knowledge of science with an 
interest and respect for the natural 
riches with which nature has endowed 
their country. 
They are members of Canadian 
Science Clubs, whose general aim is to 
keep young country people from leav- 
ing the soil and to create an outlook 
favourable to the protection of Cana- 
da’s natural riches. 
As might be expected in a country 
abounding with natural resources, 
where the use of the soil, forests, 
mines and fisheries plays an impor- 
tant part in the nation’s economy, the 
work of the clubs has so far been 
devoted to natural science. 
A report on the activities of the 
clubs specially written for Unesco by 
the ¢“ Association Canadienne-Fran- 
caise pour I’Avancement des Sciences ”, 
reveals the rapid progress they have 
made in the last twenty years. 
A good example of this growth is 
offered by the *“Cercles de Jeunes 
Agriculteurs " formed about forty years 
ago with the aims of introducing 
young country people to agriculture 
and communal life, giving them prac- 
tical knowledge of agriculture and do- 
mestic economy, encouraging the use 
of improved methods on the farm and 
in the home and training boys and 
girls to be good citizens. 
The movement spread slowly at first, 
but after the first world war it increas- 
ed its membership rapidly until, in 
1931, there were 21,000 members in 
1,215 groups. Following the second 
world war new impetus was given to 
the movement and at the end of 1948 
it reached the record number of 3,478 
groups with 45,337 members. 
I: Canada today over 100,000 boys 
 
is "Les Another active movement 
Cercles de Jeunes Naturalistes” which 
now comprises over 20,000 members in 
1,148 groups. This movement for 
young naturalists formed in 1931, has 
spread beyond the Province of Quebec: 
In addition to groups in Canadian pro- 
vinces there are others in the United 
States, France, the West Indies and 
India. 
Similar aims are pursued by another 
group of Canadian clubs, “Clubs Audu- 
bon pour les Jeunes”, organized, on 
the same basis as the American 
Audubon Junior Clubs, under the 
patronage of the Audubon Society of 
Canada. At present, there are 1,250 
clubs in Canada with a total mem- 
bership of 25,000 boys and girls. 
To make young people realize the 
importance of forests as a source of 
national wealth and the urgent need 
to protect them, especially against fire, 
is the main purpose of the “Clubs de 
Jeunes Gardes-Forestiers” (Junior 
Forest Wardens), a movement which 
covers all parts of British Columbia. 
It is estimated that over 20,000 young 
people have been trained by the clubs 
and the present number of trainees is 
5,000. 
The effectiveness of the work done 
by the clubs’ is shown by the fact that 
some years, the Junior Forest Wardens 
have discovered or helped to fight over 
- 200 forest fires in British Coluiabia. 
In certain districts there has been a 
marked decrease in the number of 
fires since the clubs have been oper- 
ating regularly. 
Similar work to that done by the 
junior wardens in British Columbia is 
carried out in Quebec by the 4-H 
clubs founded in 1942 by the “Asso- 
ciation Forestiére Québecoise™. 
ASED upon the belief that to-day there is more need than ever before to under- 
stand the full significance of the impact of science on society, Unesco has begun 
Entitled ‘‘Impact’’, this bulletin collects 
information on the various aspects of the international and social implications 
of science and presents the material in the form of abstracts. 
The first issue contains an introductory statement on the impact of science 
on society (published on this page) and a bibliography of the main ‘‘historically 
publication of a bulletin of abstracts. 
The second issue (July-September, 1950) contains details of the papers pre- 
sented at the important Fourth World Power Conference held in London in 
July, 1950. Also a bibliography of films on world power and energy. 
There are current abstracts in the form of reports of recent addresses given 
‘impact’, a quarterly bulletin, is obtainable from Unesco, | 9, Avenue Kléber, 
Paris, France, or from the usual Unesco sales agents. 
"mity to coal mine or wharf ; 
from telegraph, 
Price 26 cents, is.6d.,     
science—the redistribution of in- 
dustry, released by electric power 
from its former compulsory proxi- 
the 
levelling up of amenities between 
town and country ; the changes in 
world communications resulting 
telephone and 
radio (and the international poli- 
tical consequences of this) ; and 
many others. Some of the social 
effects create serious new problems 
—the threat of atomic war, tech- 
nological unemployment, or the 
dislocation of traditional family 
life that has been produced by the 
car, the cinema, and the like, 
““The Idea Of Progress” 
HE intellectual social effects of 
T science are less obvious but no 
less real. The “idea of pro- 
gress "—the idea that the world 
can be progressively improved if 
men act appropriately—is taken 
for granted today. Before the 17th 
century, it was virtually unknown. 
And Bury (1920) has shown that 
the origin and growth of this idea 
is largely attributable to the 
impact of scientific discovery on 
men’s thoughts and the attitude of 
mind adopted by scientists. In 
many other ways the spread of the 
spirit of science can change— 
usually for the better—man’s 
outlook on life. 
It may well be that ultimately 
the intellectual impact of science 
will be far more important to 
humanity than its contribution to 
material welfare. But “ man must 
eat before he can think ” and in 
the present state of the world it is 
not practical politics to envisage 
the spreading of the scientific 
attitude to mankind as a whole. A 
necessary prelude is to feed the 
starving millions, and even in the 
advanced countries to provide 
those greatly improved conditions 
of life and leisure which, as history 
shows, are the necessary basis for 
scientific thinking. 
It is therefore natural -that 
discussion about the social impact 
and social function of science 
concentrates mostly on the ma- 
terial and technological aspects. 
This need not damage the intellec- 
tual progress of science, since even 
from the most material point of 
view fundamental research pays 
the largest dividends. 
Six Basic Questions 
N a conscious approach to the 
problems raised by the social 
impact of science, the basic 
types of questions to be answered 
are : 
(1)>-What are the more important 
ul ea i 
problems of material welfare 
today ? 
(2)—What lines of research are 
most likely to contribute to their 
solution ? 
(3)—A discovery or invention 
seldom has only the effects that 
were intended. Hence the more 
general question that must be 
answered before taking decisions 
based on (2) : What are the 
probable total social effects of a 
given scientific discovery or of a 
proposed line of investigation ? 
(4)—What changes in the organi- 
zation of scientific effort are 
required in order that the inves- 
tigations suggested by (2) and 
(3) may be efficiently pursued 
and the results quickly applied ? 
(5)—As a basis for answering (4), 
what is the present organization 
and how efficient is it? And 
more generally, what factors, 
social or individual, ultimately 
decide the course of scientific 
advance ? 
(6)—What changes in general 
social organization are made 
advisable by the advance of 
science ? 
The bibliography in Impact 
gives a survey of the main attempts 
to answer these questions in recent 
times. It makes no attempt at 
completeness. A number of his- 
torical works are included because 
it is clear that the answering of 
questions (3) and (56), and to a 
lesser extent the others, can be 
greatly helped by historical studies. 
  
FOOD AND PEOPLE 
PAMPHLETS IN U.S. 
In the last issue of the Courier, 
the price of * Food, Soil and 
People”, by Charles E. Kellogg, was 
incorrectly given as 50 cents. 
The price of this pamphlet, one 
of the siz in the American series of 
Food and People pamphlets pu- 
blished by the Manhatten Pu- 
blishing Company, New York, is 
60 cents. 
ASSOCIATION OF SCIENGE 
WRITERS 
FORMED IN FRANGE 
HE formation in Paris of the 
“Association des Ecrivains 
Scientifiques’ makes France 
the fifth country where science 
writers’ associations now exist, 
the others being the United States, 
Great Britain, Denmark and Aus- 
tria. 
Set up with the assistance of 
the Division for the Teaching and 
Popularization of Science in 
Unesco’s Natural Sciences Depart- 
ment, the new body has as its 
“Président d’Honneur’’, Prince 
Louis de Broglie, Secrétaire Per- 
pétuel de I’Académie Francaise. 
Its chairman is M. Francois Le 
Lionnais and its Secretary, M. 
André Fortin. 
At the foundation meeting of 
the Association letters of good 
wishes were received from the 
National Association of Science 
Writers (U.S.A.) and from the 
Association of British Science 
Writers.     

## [Page 10](081543engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 


### 81556: The Mountain is green: new French film recounts life of Victor Schoelcher, fighter for human rights

“THE MO 
New French film 
recounts life of 
Victor Schoelcher 
—fighter for 
Human Rights 
N 20 May 1949 Paris witnessed 
O a solemn procession which 
brought the ashes of Victor 
Schoelcher and Félix Eboué to the 
Panthéon, the mausoleum reserved 
for France's greatest servants. 
Most Frenchmen remembered 
Governor-General Eboué as the 
man who was able to combine 
championship of the people of 
Africa with love and active loyalty 
to France, but it is likely that the 
name of Victor Schoelcher, libera- 
tor of the slaves in the Antilles, 
conveyed little to most of the 
crowd that watched the cere- 
mony. 
Now, a little more than a century 
after his greatest accomplishment, 
worthy tribute is paid to 
Schoelcher, one of the “forgotten 
men” in the struggle for human 
rights, in a new French film, “La 
Montagne est Verte”. 
Slavery was finally abolished: in 
all French colonies in 1848. While 
due honour must be paid to the fine 
example of the Abbé Grégoire and to 
resolute action of the Convention in 
1794 the principal credit for 
liberation must go to Victor Schoel- 
cher, 
CREDITS 
   
Title : La Montagne est Verte. 
Scenario and Direction : Jean 
rissey. 
Production : 
Paris. 
Cast : Michel Vitold, Jacques Henley, 
André Reybaz and the Folklore 
Society of Martinique. 
Length : 1,000 metres X35 mm. 
Lehé- 
J. K. Raymond-Millet, 
    
Mission For Mankind 
CHOELCHER first visited America 
S and the Antilles in 1829 as the 
representative of an Alsatian 
factory, and the condition of the 
slaves in Martinique and Guadeloupe 
filled him with horror. He deter- 
mined to devote his life to their 
emancipation, and launched a big 
campaign to stir up French public 
opinion. He had attended sales of 
slaves by auction ; he had witnessed 
floggings on the plantations; he had 
taken part in a man-hunt to recover 
an escaped slave; he had seen a 
revolt of desperate slaves . 
». : * 
| Film 
notes 
! in 
1 brief 
x CZECHOSLOVAKIA 
* At the Film Festival held at Kar- 
lovy-Vary (Carlsbad), the Grand P’rir 
was awarded to the Russian filin The 
Fall of Berlin. The Russians also 
received the Work Prize for The 
Cossacks of Kouban. About 40 films 
of different kinds received mentions, 
among them: World Youth ({lungary 
und China), The Man we like the Best 
France), Things have changed in the 
south (ftaly), Horses (Germany). The 
prize for best photography went to 
Mexico for The Countrywoman. 
special mention was awarded to    
THE EMANCIPATOR AND THE SLAVE. Visiting the West Indian islands of Martinique and Guadaloupe in 1829, Victor Scheelcher was 
horrified by the working and living conditions of the slaves there. 
largely as the result of his efforts. 
Twenty years later slavery was finally abolished in all French colonies 
In the film, “The Mountain is Green”, the role of Schoelcher is played by Michel Vitold (above. leit) 
and the slaves he fought to free are portrayed by a Martinique folk-lore group. 
   
The sight of slaves being examined and sold like cattle at public 
auctions in the French West Indies and the harsh treatment 
they underwent in the plantations stirred Victor Scheelcher to 
work for their emancipation. 
  
When it was learned in Martinique that the decree abolishing 
. slavery had been signed in Paris, the beating of drums and 
blowing of conch shells carried the news across the island. 
He saw slavery as an accursed 
thing and understood that the only 
remedy was outright abolition of a 
shameful and degrading institution 
which degraded masters as it did the 
slaves. : 
Despite the mockery of a satirical 
press, Schoelcher pursued his mission 
without faltering and won to his 
cause such men as Lamartine, Ledru- 
Rollin, Edgar Quinet and Victor 
Hugo. A month after the pro- 
clamation of the Second Republic on 
25 February 1848, Schoelcher, a 
Victor Scheelcher. 
member of the provisional govern- 
ment, was appointed chairman of a 
commission to draft the decree of 
emancipation. However, he still had 
to fight temporizers and the adminis- 
trative delays of even a libertarian 
government. 
Meanwhile the slaves 
colonies were growing restive and in 
May 1848 there was a revolt in Mar- 
tinique of such dimensions that the 
Governor proclaimed the abolition of 
slavery at the request of the planters 
themselves. In so doing, he did no 
Edward Dmytryk for Give us this 
Day. (Great Britain). 
DENMARK 
* Carl Th. Dreyer, the Danish pro- 
ducer well-known for his moving 
film Joan of Are and, more recently, 
Day of Wrath, is planning to produce 
a film on “The Life of Christ” in 
Israel with the assistance of Israeli 
actors. The project ill take about 
two years, and will portray Jesus in 
the social and political atmosphere of 
his times. To help recreate this 
atmosphere, the Roman characters in 
the film will speak in Latin, the 
ordinary people of Israel in Ilebrew 
and the cultured classes in Greek. 
FRANCE 
* The French film critic Lo Duca re- 
cently produced a documentary film 
on the work of the French painter 
Rousseau. Another journalist and 
film critic, Jean Vidal has used 19th 
century engravings in his film on 
Balzac. 
MEXICO 
* During 1949 more than 100 full- 
length films were produced in Mexico. 
Production of shorter films amounted 
to about 5, not including the hundred 
or so documentaries made up from 
old newsreels, 
INTERNATIONAL 
* The first film club of its kind has 
been estublished in Paris, to provide 
for film exchanges which will help 
10 create understanding and collabo- 
ration between peoples, and to support 
freedom of artistic expression in all 
its forms. Similar film clubs are 
also being formed in Belgium, Eng- 
land and Italy. .A4mong the commit- 
tee members of the club in Paris are 
Alexandre Arnoux, Marcel Carné, 
René Clair and Jean Cocteau.   
Each year the people of the French West Indies 
in the 
French actors. 
emory of 
Gathered around his statue they still sing the 
simple, heartielt words of “The Mountain is Green”. 
h r the 
more than anticipate his orders, for 
the decree of emancipation had 
meanwhile, at long last, achieved 
signature in France and very soon, 
through Schoelcher’s tenacity, there 
were no more slaves on French soil. 
Song Of Gratitude 
A CENTURY has passed since then 
and human memories are short. 
Yet the coloured folk of the 
Antilles do not forget their liberator. 
Today, as on the day when their 
emancipation was proclaimed, their 
gratitude finds expression in a folk 
song moving in its simplicity, “ La 
Montagne est Verte ”, 
The name of the song was chosen 
by Jean Lehérissey as the title of his 
film of the life of Victor Schoelcher. 
It is an historical documentary made 
in the Antilles with the assistance of 
the Folklore Society of Martinique, 
with the historical réles played by 
The part of Schoel- 
cher is taken by Michel Vitold. The 
restraint and historical accuracy of 
the scenario and the pictorial quality 
of the photography deserve the 
highest praise. Many scenes, such as 
the announcement of the great news, 
with the initial doubt exploding into 
joy, or the birth of the first freeborn 
Negro child, cannot fail to stir the 
spectator, and make this film a great 
and moving work of art. : :

## [Page 11](081543engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 81560: The Saucepan radio shows "a good chance of new life"

THE SAUCEPAN 
RADIO SHOWS 
«A GOOD CHANCE 
OF NEW LIFE” 
by Cyril RAY 
USAKA is a one-street Central-African town of 
one-storey buildings. One almost looks to see 
the horsemen of a Western film gallop in 
and hitch their horses to the rails outside the 
store. 
But overshadowing the one dusty street are the 
towering radio masts that are the monument to an idea 
— an idea that is already beginning to change the face 
of the vast tropical territory of Northern Rhodesia and 
to change the lives not only of its two million people 
but of peoples in underdeveloped territories throughout 
the world. 
Northern Rhodesia is impoverished by soil erosion, 
the present and future of its illiterate people threatened 
and overshadowed by superstition, bad farming, 
ignorance of the simplest principles of personal and 
domestic hygiene. 
How best to teach them the need for hard work and 
for education, for water-conservation and better 
hygiene, for the protection and care of pasture and 
forests? 
Pamphlets and posters are useful — but not so useful 
if only one African in every ten or so can read. More 
and more African children are learning to read and 
write, it is true, but how many years before a 
completely literate generation has grown up? And 
what of the soil in the meantime? 
A semi-amateur radio 
station had been set up at 
Lusaka in 1941 
Furopeans and Africans 
informed about the progress 
of the war and to stimulate 
their war effort. It was 
found that the African, 
unused to reading, was both 
a readier talker and a better 
listener than the European 
— at home both at. the 
microphone and at the 
receiver. It was decided 
that broadcastingloAfricans 
~ must not only survive the 
wartime need but develop to 
to keep 
Hygiene, Husbandry 
And Law 
HEN 1 toured Africa 
\X/ early this year as one 
of Unesco’s field sur- 
veyors to examine the needs 
and the progress of the 
various methods of mass 
communication, I found the 
Lusaka radio station broad- 
casting in simple English 
and in five African ver- 
naculars, five hours a day, 
to the native populations of 
Northern Rhodesia, South- 
ern Rhodesia and Nyasaland. 
  
Page |1 — UNESCO COURIER 
 
Chief Siamaundu of the Tonga tribe buys a “saucepan special’ radio in a Rhodesian store. 
Letters received by the Lusaka Broadcasting Station show that the average number of liste- 
ners to each set is about ten. When it was suggested that “saucepan” owners should keep «a 
box for visitors to drop a penny in as a fund for battery renewal, the Africans replied: “This 
is not according to our custom: it would shame us.” 
programmes of European 
and African music, news, 
plays and talks and dra- 
matized feature programmes 
on hygiene, husbandry and 
the rule of law. The station 
had a potential listening 
public of five million people, 
perhaps eighty or ninety per 
cent of them illiterate, 
spread over an area as big 
as Western Europe, or as 
the states of Arkansas, 
Louisiana, Oklahoma, and 
Texas put together. 
But the best broadcasting 
in the world is of no use to 
a population that cannot 
afford the means to listen. 
An answer to this need 
is the “ saucepan special ” 
—- a radio receiver that will 
stand up to a tropical 
climate and to clumsy hand- 
ling, that can be used miles 
from electric current, repair 
shops, and battery chargers, 
and be sold at a price within 
reach of a considerable 
number of Africans. 
In the Unesco survey of 
broadcasting in Africa is a 
short-wave dry-battery set 
which begins : 
“The cabinet of the 
receiver is in effect a large 
aluminium saucepan (with- 
“out handle) of nine inches 
diameter, with a back-plate 
screwed and scaled, and a 
gauze-covered opening at 
the front of four inches 
diameter”. And it is in- 
teresting to observe that 
included in the notes on 
such up-to-date and matter- 
of-fact subjects as valves 
and voltages is the sentence, 
“It is painted blue, since 
research in the various 
colonies in Africa revealed 
the fact that ore tribe or 
another had some kind of 
superstition about almost 
“every other colour ”. 
” 
«...Whole World 
In My House” 
TT" saucepan special is 
sold for five pounds 
sterling, with a dry 
* battery for another twenty- 
- Mwitwa Amisi, 
“the whole world 
listeners of whom more 
than three hundred have 
already written to Lusaka 
to express their delight — 
a high proportion, when it 
is remembered how few of 
the listeners are literate. 
A Chief from the most 
primitive part of the ter- 
ritory wrote a letter expres- 
sing his joy that his people 
were learning from the radio 
“ care of children, education 
of girls, sanitation, house- 
wifery, improved methods 
of agriculture and many 
other things”, adding that 
“ particularly do the people 
in this District desire to 
hear more about care of 
dams and how water can be 
usefully reserved ”. 
“I feel proud”, wrote 
“when I 
switch on my set and have 
mn my 
house ”. 
But it was perhaps John 
Somati who best summed up 
what the cheap radio set 
can do for a simple and 
primitive people when he 
meet the post-war needs. Lusaka was putting out technical description of a five shillings. 
  
  
“It was just a year ago to-day... It was ten 
years ago... This is our Golden Jubilee... This is 
the centenary... Just about a thousand years 
» ago... 
The birthdays of a child, events in the lives 
of individual men and women, commemoration 
of the births and deaths of men and women 
who have lit torches along the road of history, 
red-letter days marking the advance of mankind 
—these are dates traditionally noted in the arbi- 
trary system of reckoning which we call the 
calendar. 
Not forgetiing the unknown and unsung per- 
sons and events, perhaps of equal grealness 
making no claim at completeness, here are some 
note-worthy dates in September, ninth month 
of the Gregorian calendar. 
JANE ADDAMS 
She was bom on 6 Sepiember 1860. In 1883 she 
opened a social settlement in a poor district of Chicago, 
which “respectable people” soon came to regard as 
a hot-bed of revolution. Worse was to come when 
Miss Addams obtained passage of a law regulating 
the employment of women and children in factories. 
She attempted, in the middle of the first world war, 
to unite all the women of the world in the interests ot 
peace, and continued to preach peace until her death. 
“People do not make war for honour or understanding”, 
she used to say, “but for destruction. We shall not 
put an end to war by outlawing it, but only by foster- 
ing an intelligent development of life's values.” 
ANDRE LENOTRE 
One of the most pleasing features of the court of 
Louis XIV, the “Sun King”, was the fact that a peasant 
like Lenbtre, with his broad shoulders and mud-stained 
coat, making his way with scant ceremony through 
the crowd of courtiers, enjoyed such eminence. We 
are constantly reminded of the age of Louis XIV by the 
work this peasant did — the parks, terraces and orna- 
mental water which we have been content, tor three 
centuries, to preserve unchanged. His work still gives 
pleasure at Vaux-le-Vicomte, Versailles, Chantilly, 
Saint Cloud and Saint Germain, and since he also 
" worked for King Charles of England, at Greenwich and 
in St. James's Park. When he died, on 15 September 
1700, he had brought tq life again in Europe some of 
the forgotten splendours of Babylon, Egypt and China. 
  
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA IS 
FIFTY YEARS OLD : 
It took fourteen years of conferences, planning, dis- 
putes and referenda to bring about the political union 
of the six self-governing states of this sparsely 
populated continent. After repeated - experiments, a 
federal government modelled mainly on American and 
British lines, with innovations adapted to the new 
young Commonwealth was chosen. The British Par- 
liament approved the constitution of the new .Common- 
wealth, with its administrative and commercial indepen- 
dence, and, on 17 September, 1900, Queen Victoria 
issued a proclamation announcing that, from 1 January, 
the peoples of the six states, New South Wales, Victoria, 
Queensland, South Australia, West Australia and Tas- 
mania, were to be united in a single community under 
the name of the Commonwealth of Australia. 
ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER 
During the last days of his life, 
which ended on 21 September 
1860, this Berlin philosopher was 
still describing the miseries of 
man’s condition. With the Hindu 
sages, he had said that the 
desire for life was the great evil. 
The wise man must free himself 
by a continual effort of the intel- 
ject to escape from the coils of 
life and to attain “nirvana”, a 
state of spiritual repose, in which 
the philosopher will feel no more 
than a mild pity for his fellows. 
 
LAFCADIO HEARN 
Lafcadic Hearn was the son of an Irishman and a 
Greek woman, and later became a Japanese citizen. 
As a correspondent of a New Orleans newspaper, he 
spent two years in the West Indies, then proceeded 
to Japan, where he found his natural home. He 
became professor of English at Tokyo University, 
married a Japanese wife, became a Buddhist and was 
naturalized under the name of Yakumo Koizumi.. His 
Irish name was still, however, to be seen on the 
covers of the books he published between 1894 and the 
date of his death on September 26, 1304. He had 
become the best interpreter of Japanese culture to the 
Western world. There was no one who had a more 
sympathetic understanding of that culture, no one who 
could express its essence with greater skill.   
sat down in his wattle-and- 
daub hut, under the palm- 
trees, and laboriously wrote 
down, “ This wireless set 
doing more than cost, there- 
fore I seen we African we 
have a good chance of new 
life”. 
* 
SIX HUNDRED MILLION 
OF WORLD'S CHILDREN 
LACK BASIC NEEDS 
NE of the features of the “Help for Distressed 
Children Week” held in Cannes recently was an 
exhibition organized by Unesco. In a message for the 
opening of this exhibition, M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
Director-General of Unesco, said, in part : 
“Charity derives from two ideas : love of that which, 
should be dear to us, and love of that which 
in the supreme scale of values, is of greatest price. 
And I would ask you : is there anything more precious, 
anything that we should hold more dear than children ? 
“Ladies and gentlemen, the suffering of a child, with 
his obscure sense of being ill-fitted for life, is an indict- 
ment of us which we adults should find unbearably 
painful. It is for the conscience of humanity to cry out 
against the forfeiture of the child’s indefeasible right 
to happiness... 
“Though, in our time, invaluable discoveries have 
been made about the personality of children... though 
new sciences have been developed under the names of 
educational therapy and social pediatrics, children have, 
in the same period, been the victims of crimes far worse 
against humanity than almost any committed. The 
number of children in the world who, as the aftermath 
of the last war and the resulting upheavals lack the 
basic necessaries of life, has been estimated at 
600,000,000. Two hundred and thirty million of these 
children are going hungry. In Europe alone there are 
13,000,000 orphans, deprived of all the care they should 
naturally enjoy... 
“Concurrently with its own particular work of educa- 
tion, our Organization, in close agreement with UNICEF 
and the other Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, 
has endeavoured to meet the other needs of children. 
The resources of goodwill in every quarter must be 
mobilized. Each one of us, in his own conscience, 
must answer the child’s despairing cry : Why have you 
neglected me ? 
The first two 
thousand sets were 
sold in a few weeks 
and ten or more per- 
sons listen in to each 
set. There are al- 
ready something 
like twenty thousand

## [Page 12](081543engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 74423: The Sign on the front door

UNESCO COURIER — Page 12 
  
  
HE most coveted possession in 
the Brazilian town of Cachoei- 
ro do Itapemirim is a simple 
cardboard sign tacked on a front 
door. It reads “ Nesta casa nao ha 
analfabetos” (“In this house there 
are no illiterates ”). What it means 
is that every man, woman and child 
in that house has learned to read and 
write. 
That cardboard sign is just one of 
the weapons which Dona Zilma 
Coelho Pinto uses in an energetic 
campaign to educate the people of 
Cachoeiro. Her ambition is to pin it 
on to every front door in the town 
and ultimately to stimulate similar 
action in every town in Brazil. 
Her’s is not the biggest town in the 
State of Espirito Santo, but already 
Dona Zilma’s efforts have made it 
one of the best known. While a 
literacy campaign is being conducted 
all over the country, Cachoeiro 
presents perhaps the most spec- 
tacular example of achievement — 
and of individual accomplishment. 
For it has been due chiefly to this 
one woman’s enterprise that 32 lite- 
racy classes are mow running for 
grown-ups and for children. It is 
she who finances them by collecting 
contributions and she who finds and 
pays the teachers. 
Dona Zilma has been called many 
things : “ A Louca de Itapemirim” 
(* The Mad Woman of Itapemirim ), 
and the town’s No. 1 Beggar. The 
harsh. names come from some of 
those whom she approaches for 
financial help, but she finds adequate 
compensation in the happiness and 
gratitude of the hundreds of students 
of all ages whom she has helped to 
find the chance for a new life. 
¢¢ Beggar >’ On Horseback 
N horseback and on foot, she 
makes the round of homes and 
offices, collecting 5 cruzeiros 
here, 10 there, to finance her classes. 
In 1949 she managed 32 full subs- 
  
Dona Zilma (shown above with two pupils in one of her 
literacy classes) not only finds and pays the teachers, but 
also tries to better the conditions of the townspeople, for 
learning is no maich for hunger and sickness. 
    
criptions. That meant 32 classes, 
each bearing the name of the donor 
whose contribution paid the teacher’s 
modest fees. As for premises, rooms 
are found in factories and schools for 
night classes, and even in private 
homes. 
A Little < Pep > Talk 
uT Dona Zilma is not content 
merely to teach the towns- 
people how to read and write. 
She strives also to better their con- 
ditions, for she knows only too well 
that learning is no match for hunger 
and sickness. That is why, when a 
student is repeatedly absent from 
class, a teacher is sent to visit his 
home. If she finds that the cause is 
simply laziness or lack of interest, 
she administers advice and a little 
“pep” talk. If it is sickness, she 
advises the Organization’s Health 
Centre. 
Hygiene is taught by the State 
Health Department. Local doctors 
and laboratories co-operate by pro- 
viding each student with a free 
yearly X-Ray examination, vaccina- 
tion and free medicine, while dentists 
attend to their teeth. 
Material aid to the poor depends 
on the amount Dona Zilma is able to 
collect — not only in cash, but in 
garments food, and a variety of 
immediately useful things. A tooth- 
brush, a tin of condensed milk, a 
broom to keep the floor clean, an 
odd scrap of cloth, all are welcome. 
And for those who learn to read and 
write, there are prizes : old maga- 
zines for the men and dressmaking 
lessons for the women. 
A new life is taking shape for the 
people of Cachoeiro. To the grown- 
ups who have known what it is to be 
ignorant and ill-cared for, it is more 
exciting than it is for their children, 
who sit on the same school benches 
and take their opportunities for 
learning much for granted. But all 
over the vast country of Brazil the 
excitement is spreading. The hunger 
for knowledge, aroused by the natio- 
nal literacy campaign, is being fed. 
This campaign, launched in 1947, 
has already done a great deal towards 
of $5,000,000. 
 
A new life is taking shape for the people of Cachoeiro. 
‘I'o the grown-ups it is more exciting than for their children, 
who sit on the same school benches and take their oppor- 
tumties for learning much more for granted.” 
 
On horseback Dona Zilma Coelho Pinto (above) makes the rounds of homes and offices in 
the Brazilian town of Cachoeiro do Itapemirim to raise money for the literacy classes she has 
organized. Already, 32 classes for adults and children are running thanks to her energetic 
campaign to educate the people of Cachoeiro. 
decreasing the illiteracy rate in 
Brazil which, according to the 1940 
census, reached over 55 per cent. 
But actually it is not so much 
concerned with the figures of those 
who read and write as with the state 
of fundamental education as a whole 
in Brazil, and with the insufficient 
school attendance. Eighteen months 
is the average school life of Brazilian 
children. 
Professor M.B. Lourenco Filho, 
Director-General of the National 
Education Department and Director 
of the literacy campaign, made it 
clear at the beginning that the 
government was embarking, mot 
merely on a literacy drive, but on a 
campaign for adult education. The 
object to be kept in view was to 
raise the living standards and cul- 
tural levels of a large section of the 
population by disseminating know- 
ledge ' and popularizing techniques 
which would help them make the 
most of their environment and their 
capacities. Reading and writing 
were just a means to that end. 
¢¢ Freedom >> For A Million 
HREE years of the literacy 
T campaign have cost the Bra- 
zilian Government about 100 
million cruzeiros, or the equivalent 
In that time, over a 
million people have been taught to 
read and write, 2,000,000 adolescents 
and adults have enrolled for night 
classes and there has been a marked 
improvement in normal school 
attendance. Education, once consider- 
ed in Brazil to be the prerogative 
‘of the privileged classes, has become 
accessible to all. And what is more, 
teaching is not confined to profes- 
sionals. Individual volunteers are 
constantly being sought to teach one 
or more illiterates in their own 
homes. They are supplied with the 
necessary material by the national 
and regional services (more than 
200,000 copies have already been 
sent out in this way) and during the 
three years of the campaign, more 
than half a million letters and 
circulars have been posted to induce 
people to volunteer. 
An important milestone in Brazil's 
campaign against illiteracy was the 
seminar organized at Quitandinha 
near Rio de Janeiro in August 1949 
by Unesco. Brazilian educators 
were brought into contact with 
colleagues from the other South 
American countries, from England, 
France and Egypt. They discussed 
old methods and learned new ones, 
and thanks to this experience, the 
campaign has made even greater 
strides in conquering ignorance and 
the misery which accompanies it 
like an evil twin. 
Courier 
ae |. + JE 
EDITORIAL OFFICES : 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. 14 
* 
Editor : PETER DU BERG 
English Language Editor : RS. FENTON 
* 
All reproductions authorized 
* 
Imprimerie GEORGES LANG 
11, rue Curial, Paris. 
UNESCO Publication 772     
 
For those who learn to read and write in the classes at 
Cachoeiro there are prizes. 
(being selected by teachers, above) and the women are 
The men receive magazines 
given dressmaking lessons.