# [074933](074933engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](074933engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 2](074933engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

    CL ) iA a se vy 
oC ln “T'! - [I~ v Ng wi L a PT 
wig a pot SVR, ~ RS jy, A ~ 
| § AN Wea Rak wi. Ny 
- J 2 _ - “A . » - hg v " “ - ’ LA] ’ . * - Ay "~ “, - > - 
-—r [LS bh TRE] Ns Dae WIRY | -~ 
— - y SPR Ti Sarr “sf uy 
» el Wa 1 Sl A Nl REL 
2) an em by WT. 3 FN BY) Sh OWE PY a ih Li TW a » . S-g.. - , r 5 ‘ oo > IL “» 
- J. . (NY LJ 
‘ . ey A ng - ‘ 
-— -< Lm — : : wt ; AS) ‘ 
— ak 2 “ou = 
~~ =. -_ D0 al X &. “3 % 
——— . — . .-— 
F— - ——— - - - -. ’ iE | " » ~ hp. x 
- _— — . +, -y Jt ’ 
“a \ - ald - 
-r WL > , \ ”. - . 
PQ Aner ama WAL AN Ww = 
a wv 2 Fe \ . - 
SY 4 > rg ® - - w 
“ . ~ . = LAN. RQ oy 
ur N CNL CR TARE wt WN orn A 
5 y - 8 LI AVL Ne NL ! 3 , - 
0 &*? ~ eat PARAS ww 
A time to live... 
  
48 Gambia Women living in rural areas are the invisible where the Government had launched a project to 
farmers of the Third World. In Africa alone they boost rice production, IFAD supported the 
produce, process and store almost 80 per cent of women who traditionally grow and harvest rice in 
Land for women food destined for family consumption. Along with the marshes along the Gambia River (above) dur- 
other organizations, the International Fund for ing successful negotiations to obtain rights relat- 
Agricultural Development (IFAD), which was ing to the land they cultivate when this land was 
created in 1977 to increase food production and redistributed. As a result of land redistribution 
income of rural populations in developing coun- and the draining of the marshes, rice production 
tries, is co-operating with Third World govern- was increased sixfold, benefiting 15,000 persons 
ments and other institutions in projects to im- in 40 villages. 
prove conditions for these women. In Gambia, 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
IF
AD
, 
R
o
m
e

## [Page 3](074933engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The Courier 
A window open on the world 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
 
Editorial November 1986 
39th year 
 
I HIB 
selves and the world they live in—the main theme of 'E Snell A 
this issue of the Unesco Courier—owes much to the th bor ri 
lessons they have learned from their history. Sometimes this 
“popular imagination” focuses on a great man or woman. [hl 
Two such outstanding figures are commemorated in the Ds 
following pages: the great Islamic scholar and man of faith E 
al-Ghazali; and Aleksandr Ostrovsky, the contemporary of E10 
Tolstoy and Turgenev who was one of the founders of the — Lo 
Russian theatre, which has made such a notable contribution 15! LE 
to our understanding of the human soul. hi 
The collective imagination is also a product of the interac- 
tion between different ways of perceiving and describing the I= q 1p 
world. In this process, a “transfer of images” takes place in 
which a community assimilates, sharpens or deforms its 
T= fresco of mental images peoples create of them- =): CB 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
  
 
  
conception of other peoples and civilizations. One illustra- : 
tion of this phenomenon, described in this issue by Miguel PY 
Rojas Mix, is the way in which depictions of the American é 
continent by European artists over the centuries have some- i PR i 
times—but not always—been distorted by projections of Ea Le 
European concepts and values. Likewise,ca comparison 4 Al-Ghazali: 
between the cult of filial piety in China and certain religious From philosophy to mystical experience 
practices in the West casts a revealing light on differences by Amadou-Mafiar MBow 
and similarities between two civilizations. 5 The spiritual quest of al-Ghazali 
Imagination is inevitably rooted in the world of practical by Abdurrahman Badawi 
knowledge. An instrument such as the Japanese abacus can 
be used with amazing technical virtuosity as a calculating 9 Aleksandr Ostrovsky 
instrument; it also opens up far wider horizons of mental Founding father of Russian theatre 
  
activity which stretch beyond the processes of arithmetic. by Nelly Kornienko 
Recent developments in brain research are showing a similar 11 Latin America in European painting 
form of interdependence, as they stress the importance of One continent seen through the ‘F of another 
“co-operation” between the rational and the intuitive func- by Miguel Rojas Mix 
tions of the brain’s two hemispheres. In the same strain, it 1s 16 Saintly sons and daughters 
now being realized that science and tradition are not mutual- Ancient China's enduring cult of filia! piety 
ly exclusive, and that the most advanced discoveries of by Donald Holzman 
science can be enriched by the deepest roots of tradition. 
Finally, the imagination of peoples also shapes their 
future, tracing a design for development which they alone 
are equipped to define. Peoples can only advance towards 22 Breakthroughs in brain research 
self-fulfilment when they draw on the vitality of their im- by David Ottoson 
agination and the dynamism of their culture. 
20 How Japan reckons with the abacus 
by Toshio Sawada 
25 Science and tradition 
‘Two spokes of a single wheel’ 
Cover: Illustrated envelope and stamps have been specially created by Basarab Nicolescu 
for the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and 
 
   issued at Vienna (Austria) by the United Nations Postal Adminis- 29 The human factor in African development 
tration. The envelope was designed by Anka Klausing of the by Jean-Paul Ngoupandé 
Alsterdamm School of Art, Hamburg (Fed. Rep. of Germany); the 
stamps by Thomas Lee (China). 34 1986: Year of peace/11 
i 2 A time to live ... 
Editor-in-chief: Edouard Glissant GAMBIA: Land for women 
Published monthly in 32 tanguages English Italian Macedonian Turkish Finnish A selection in Braille is published 
by Unesco French Hindi Serbo-Croat Urdu Swedish quarterly in English, French, 
The United Nations Educational, Spanish Tamil Stovene Catalan Basque Spanish and Korean 
Scientific and Cultural Organization Russian Hebrew Chinese Malaysian Thai - 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. German Persian Bulgarian Korean ISSN 0041-5278 
Arabic Dutch Greek Swahili ° N°11-1986-CPD-86-1-439A 
Japanese Portuguese Sinhala Croato-Serb 

## [Page 4](074933engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 70769: Al-Ghazali: from philosophy to mystical experience

Al-Ghazali: 
From philosophy to mystical experience 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
    
Portrait of al-Ghazali by the Lebanese 
writer, mystic thinker and poet Gibran 
Khalil Gibran (1883-1931), who emigrated 
to the United States at the turn of the 
century. Gibran’s most noted work, The 
Prophet (1923), was widely successful and 
has been translated into 34 languages. 
  
IR 
» n 
MIE 31 
24 T% 
Ye : 
x 2 4 é 
Fi , Fda 73 «J 5 
¥ Ear ER Wa 1k 
» ’ x Ps 4 $ 
-» or A ” | 
Ss FS AS Re 
3 ad ’ 
Po ’ be ee ex 4 
% 8 4 7 Sip oa | 
3 yo Sl PE 3 
oh $d 6% 
Be Pde Sh Zea 20 GH ok 
Sy 4 ed ae ae PY 
y vot & - oreo i” SY 
§ PRL Rpts CoM, 
i TNs ae Rg KN 
wr & 
mot B08 FT 
* ww pA 4.25 oN ad 
VL Food = og FE FN 
ERIS A 
‘ha 3 Hd + or Fs 
» ad Ey » 7 
3 ‘ be Sih oo ) 
$a : 
L-GHAZALTI’s whole life seems to 
A have been guided by his determina- 
tion to restore the faith of the Mus- 
lims to its original purity and vigour. This he 
attempted to do by taking up one by one the 
challenges with which Islam was then faced, 
deriving strength for his great work, which 
he entitled “The Revival of the Religious 
Sciences”, from those challenges themsel- 
ves. In writing this work, he drew most 
admirably on all the intellectual resources 
provided by the accumulated intellectual 
knowledge of his time. 
He began by making an exhaustive 
study—which was to take him ten years—of 
all the intellectual traditions established 
over the previous period, systematically 
subjecting them to critical analysis but ack- 
nowledging that each one contained some 
measure of wisdom and validity. 
The development of his thinking at this 
stage seems to have brought him to that 
critical point in his life where, having 
attained the summit of contemporary learn- 
ing, he began to reflect on the possibility of 
acceding to a realm beyond all rational 
knowledge leading, through the teachings 
of Sufism, to a state of receptivity to the 
ultimate divine truth. 
He felt that he was invested with one last 
mission in life—to show his contemporaries 
the light which he had so long and so 
arduously sought and which had at last been 
so fully bestowed upon him. In his eyes, the 
mystical experience gave an overall mean- 
ing to the truest intuitions contained in the 
various schools of thought of his time, while 
breaking through the boundaries within 
which each of them was confined. 
He thus left us a work of rare breadth and 
generosity, testimony to an exacting faith 
served by an exceptional intelligence and 
dedicated to the teaching of men of his own 
generation as well as to the teaching of 
generations to follow. In the development 
of his thought, knowledge was always 
directed towards serving the faith, and con- 
viction was constantly reinvigorated by a 
critical spirit. 
His influence was and still is very great in 
the Muslim world, where he is seen by the 
most erudite as one of those exceptional 
Muslims whose thinking retains its vitality 
and who have fully harmonized their 
teaching with their own personal ex- 
perience. 
In the West, his influence was consider- 
able although it was some time before the 
entire significance of his work was fully 
perceived. He was one of the first Arab 
authors to be translated into Latin in 
medieval Europe, and was first known 
there through his book Magasid al-Falasi- 
fah (“The Aims of the Philosophers”). This 
treatise was translated in Toledo by one 
Master Johannes in the second half of the 
twelfth century. 
His account of Aristotelian logic, 
metaphysics and physics, which he based on 
an abridged version of Ibn Sina’s “Great

## [Page 5](074933engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 70769: Al-Ghazali: from philosophy to mystical experience

Encyclopaedia”, circulated widely in 
Europe during the thirteenth century. By 
contrast, his refutation, contained in the 
masterly Tahafut al-Falasifah (translated by 
some as “destruction” and hy others as the 
“incoherence” of the philosophers), was 
not known until much later, and even then 
only indirectly through the criticism made 
of it by Ibn Rushd in Tahafut al-Tahafut 
(translated in the Middle Ages under the 
title “Destructio Destructionis™). 
In the second half of the thirteenth cen- 
tury, a Catalan preaching friar, Ramén 
Marti, who devoted himself to the study of 
oriental languages, became acquainted with 
several Arabic works by al-Ghazali and 
quoted in particular the Taehdfut and the 
Mungidh min al-dalal (“The Deliverer from 
Error”). Here, at last, al-Ghazali’s thinking 
appears to have been faithfully reproduced; 
but Ramén Marti’s works seem to have 
been reserved mainly for the use of his 
fellow friars. 
In 1328, Robert of Anjou, King of Na- 
ples, requested a scholar from Arles, Carlo 
Calonymos, to translate the Tahdfut al- 
Tahafutin which Ibn Rushd began by giving 
an objective account of al-Ghazali’s main 
ideas and then proceeded to criticize them. 
This gave Europe a fresh opportunity to 
become acquainted with the real thinking of 
al-Ghazali—but for a long time Calonymos’ 
translation remained practically unknown. 
Not until the end of the fifteenth century 
and the Renaissance was a new version of 
Ibn Rushd’s book printed and widely circu- 
lated in Italy. Only then did al-Ghazali’s 
work, and the full significance of his think- 
ing, begin to be known in Europe. 
What, today, in general terms, are the 
lessons to be learned from his thinking, 
even outside the Islamic world? First of all 
that al-Ghazili can be seen as a unique 
witness of an age distinguished by great 
intellectual turmoil and by much question- 
ing about ultimate aims in relation to the 
realities of social life. 
This is certainly where the evolution of 
al-Ghazali’s thinking, which played so im- 
portant a role in the development of West- 
ern thought, can still be a source of inspira- 
tion today. 
Al-Ghazali reacted to the challenges of 
unprecedented intellectual, scientific and 
technological development and to its 
psychological and social consequences, 
both per se and in regard to the faith, by 
adopting an approach that was exemplary 
in its scrupulousness. Enlightened by the 
most progressive knowledge of his time, he 
embarked on the path of luminous spiritual- 
ity and intellectual revival which gave to 
culture its most creative stimulus. || 
  
This article is a slightly shortened version of an address 
given by the Director-General of Unesco on 9 Decem- 
ber 1985 at Unesco Headquarters in Paris, during a 
symposium on al-Ghazali.   
Dr
aw
in
g 
Ha
ss
an
 
M
a
s
s
o
u
d
y
 
©
 
Ca
ll
ig
ra
ph
ie
 
ar
ab
e 
vi
va
nt
e 
Fl
am
ma
ri
on
, 
Pa
ns
 


### 70770: The Spiritual quest of Al-Ghazali

The spiritual quest 
of al-Ghazal 
by Abdurrahman Badawi 
BU Hamid al-Ghazali, a great 
A theologian, a penetrating and sub- 
tle. critic of rationalist philosophy 
and a mystic with great gifts of psychologic- 
al and moral analysis, was born in 1058 in 
Tis, today called Meshhed, in eastern Iran, 
and died in 1111. One of the greatest think- 
ers humanity has ever known, he was hon- 
oured with the title hujjat-al-islam (Proof of 
Islam) for his role as a defender of religion 
against the rationalist atheism of the philo- 
sophers and of orthodox Islam against sects 
preaching heresy and subversion. The 
lucidity of his writings and the beauty of his 
prose were such that his works were widely 
circulated and won a very extensive reader- 
ship. His masterpiece, entitled fhya’ ‘uliim 
al-din (“The Revival of the Religious Sci- 
ences”), was, and is still, a reference work 
on the principles and practice of the Muslim 
religion. 
There were three stages in al-Ghazali's 
spiritual development: a stage of practical 
involvement and political commitment, a 
stage of doubt and criticism, and a mystical 
stage. 
Having received a sound training in case 
law and theology from the great masters of 
his time, and primarily from the Imam al- 
Haramayn (al-Djuwaini), al-Ghazali went 
to seek favour with the great vizir Nizdm 
al-Mulk in Naysabar. The latter was im- 
pressed by al-Ghazali’s I€arning and cogen- 
The decorative qualities of the angular and 
geometric Kdfic style of Arabic calligraphy 
has led to its widespread use for religious 
inscriptions carved in stone. Above, re- 
production of a Kiific inscription inside a 
mausoleum at Isfahan (Islamic Republic of 
Iran). Highly stylized into square and rec- 
tangular forms, the calligraphy of this in- 
scription dating from the early 14th cen- 
tury seems to evoke certain trends in mod- 
ern graphic design. 
cyindebate, and, as an earnest of his admir- 
ation, he apppointed him in 1091 to teach at 
the Nizamiyyah school in Baghdad. One 
year later, Nizam al-Mulk was murdered by 
a young Batinite. The Batiniyya was a Shi- 
"ite sect, the militant branch of the Isma'ili 
sect. During and after the crusades, its 
members were known by the name of 
hashishi. The activities of the Batinites 
posed a serious threat to the Abbasid 
caliphate in Baghdad. 
The Caliph al-Mustazhir accordingly in- 
structed al-Ghazali to wage war with his pen 
against the Batinite sect. Al-Ghazali wrote 
a book entitled the Mustazhiri, or The De- 
pravity of the Batiniyya, in which he re- 
vealed its impostures and unmasked its evil 
designs against Islam and its great conspira- 
cy against the State. This work analyses in p 
5

## [Page 6](074933engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 70770: The Spiritual quest of Al-Ghazali

Pp detail the sect’s stratagems to attract well- 
wishers and rally them to its cause, for the 
Bitinites were skilled at making converts. 
At the age of thirty-four, al-Ghazali be- 
gan to study philosophy. He then entered a 
period of profound spiritual crisis in which 
he came to doubt his faith. That doubt was 
transient and lasted for only two or three 
months. It was more a “dark night of the 
soul” than the methodical type of doubt 
practised by Descartes, as some scholars 
have mistakenly suggested. But that doubt 
was a goad which spurred him to subject his 
beliefs to unrestricted scrutiny. In Mizan 
al-amal, he asserts the usefulness of such 
doubt, for “he who does not doubt, does 
not think; he who does not think, does not 
see; he who does not see remains in a state 
of blindness, perplexity and error”. 
Being blessed with a positive attitude of 
mind, he could not remain in a state of 
doubt for very long. Thus we see him enter- 
ing a new phase: that of certainty based on 
reason. He had found a new vocation, 
which drove him to defend the great articles 
of faith against the rationalism of the Isla- 
mic philosophers, including al-Farabi and in 
particular Ibn Sina (Avicenna). 
By way of a prologue to his diatribe 
against the philosophers, he wrote for the 
6 
layman a clear and easily grasped summary 
of the three principles of philosophy: logic, 
physics and metaphysics. That summary is 
entitled Magasid al-Falasifah (“The Aims 
of the Philosophers”). It is a brief and lim- 
pid exposé, unclouded by polemic or per- 
sonal opinions. 
This was the prelude to his philosophical 
masterpiece, Tahdfut al-Falasifah (“The In- 
coherence of the Philosophers”), in which 
he launches a sustained attack on the 
rationalist philosophers. As he states in the 
prologue, this book is a refutation of the 
ancient philosophers, designed to prove the 
falsity of their doctrines, to expose their 
contradictions in the sphere of philosophic- 
al theology (metaphysics) and to reveal the 
dangers inherent in their opinions. 
In this work, he claims that between the 
different philosophers there are huge di- 
vergences, and bitter conflicts between the 
different systems. He therefore confines 
himself—as he says—to a refutation of the 
philosophy professed by the greatest of 
them, namely, Aristotle. 
According to al-Ghazali, Aristotle and 
philosophers in general “judge by conjec- 
ture and presumption, and not by verifica- 
tion and certainty” in the field of meta- 
physical theology. He therefore sets out to Pp 
In 1095, after being embroiled in a religious 
controversy with the Islamic philo- 
sophers, al-Ghazalr experienced a period 
ofdoubt. He went on a pilgrimage to Mecca 
and visited Jerusalem, where he began to 
write his masterwork lhyad ‘ulum al-din 
(“The Revival of the Religious Sciences”), 
which he completed during a two-year 
stay at Damascus. Above, elaborate 
mosaics on a golden background adorn 
the cupola of the Dome of the Rock, the 
shrine built in Jerusalem in AD 691 by the 
Umayyad caliph ‘Abd al-Malik. The shrine 
is built over a flat sacred rock which many 
traditions connect with Abraham and 
Muhammad. Right, the Great Mosque of 
Damascus (Syria) was builtin AD 705, also 
under the Umayyads, on the site of the 
Byzantine church of St. John the Baptist 
and of a Roman temple once dedicated fo 
Jupiter.

## [Page 7](074933engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 70770: The Spiritual quest of Al-Ghazali

sued 
'oydey 
@) 
1a1s195) 
Bioag 
oloyd 
 
 
    
A APRS   h\ 
- Tea] 
bo 2
ESN 
meray 
 
 
os 
KA   
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
J IRN 3 ree i | - NES ro) fu“ 
 
 
  
 
 
sued 
‘
w
n
u
b
e
p
 
©
 
pasiy 
pPIEUCAT 
0
J
0
U
d

## [Page 8](074933engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 70770: The Spiritual quest of Al-Ghazali

   
     
  
 @ 
a 
: 
_— 
WI gg ny 
= 
 
Ph
ot
o 
Ge
or
g 
Ge
rs
te
r 
©
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
The modern town of Meshhed, near the 
eastern border of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran, is an offshoot of the ancient city of 
Tas, the birthplace of al-Ghazali, which 
was destroyed by the Timurids in 1389. As 
the site of the mausoleum of the Imam Ali 
Reza, eighth Imam of the Shi'ites (died AD 
818), and of the adjoining mosque of Ga- 
whar Shad (15th century), Meshhed is the 
Holy City of the Shi'ites and a major pil- 
grimage centre. Above, enamelled tiles 
cover minaret and porch of the Shah 
Mosque (14th century). 
Below, the four minarets of the Kazimayn 
Mosque, one of the most beautiful in Bagh- 
dad, which became the seat of the ‘Abba- 
sid caliphate in AD 750, and was the 
greatest religious and economic centre of 
the Near East until it was sacked by the 
Mongols in 1258. Al-Ghazalr taught law in 
this prestigious city before applying him- 
self to the study of philosophy, then 
embarking on the path of Saff mysticism.      
 
hi 
Sa TRARY 
\ Re Li] 
; at son 
Ph
ot
o 
Ge
or
g 
Ge
rs
te
r 
€)
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
(00
) 
» prove the falsity of their ideas in the follow- 
ing fields: 
The eternity of the world. 
The creation of the world. 
The proof of the existence of God. 
The attributes of God. 
Divine knowledge. 
The movement and the prime mover of the 
Heavens. 
The possibility of miracles. 
The immortality of the human soul. 
Resurrection and life after death. 
After a disputation with the philosophers 
on these topics, he concludes with a con- 
demnation of the following three theses: 
their assertion that the world is eternal; 
their assertion that God does not know 
particulars, i.e. the acts of human beings; 
their denial of resurrection and eternal life. 
“These three theses are wholly incom- 
patible with Islam. Anyone who professes 
belief in them is thereby claiming that the 
prophets are liars and that they made their 
pronouncements only for utilitarian pur- 
poses, using parables for the sake of clarity. 
But this is a manifest heterodoxy (kufr).” 
(Tahafut) 
As regards the remaining theses, al-Gha- 
zali finds similar tenets in the various Mus- 
lim sects; they are therefore not incompati- 
ble with Islam. 
Some scholars have claimed that al-Gha- 
zall’s attacks on the philosophers who had 
upheld these three theses struck a mortal 
blow to philosophy in the Islamic world. 
This allegation is quite false since, during 
the century which followed al-Ghazali’s 
death, Muslim philosophy reached its 
apogee in Muslim Spain with Ibn Bajja, Ibn 
Tufayl and Ibn Rushd (Averroés), and con- 
tinued to advance in the East with Suhra- 
* Wardi, Bawwani and Mulla Sadra. 
Al-Ghazali argued with the philosophers 
“using their own method, that is, a logical, 
rational and rigorous method”. But in the 
depths of his soul he felt that reason was not 
enough to attain the supreme truths of re- 
ligion. He realized that he needed to use 
quite another faculty in order to penetrate 
directly to the heart of the mystery of being. 
In 1095 he experienced another crisis, much 
more acute than the first, whereupon he 
abandoned his teaching at the Nizamiyyah 
school in Baghdad and set out on the pil- 
grimage to Mecca. After (or before) that 
pilgrimage, he visited Damascus and Jeru- 
salem. In Jerusalem he began to write his 
masterpiece, the Ihya’ (“The Revival of the 
Religious Sciences”), which he completed 
in Damascus during the two years that he 
spent in that city. 
After Damascus he returned, in 1097, to 
his native town of Tis, where he had re- 
solved to end his days in mystical retreat. 
But the vizir of Korasian, Fakhr al-Mulk, 
son of Nizam al-Mulk mentioned earlier, 
invited al-Ghazali to take up teaching once 
more. Al-Ghazali demurred, but the vizir 
was insistent. Al-Ghazali therefore began 
to teach again, not at the Nizamiyyah of 
Baghdad, but at that of Naysabir, after an 
eight-year retreat. However, one year later, 
in approximately 1106, he returned to Tus 
in order to devote his time to writing several 
mystical treatises, including the Mishkat al- 
anwar (“The Niche for Lights”). He also 
wrote his autobiography there, Al-Mun- 
gidh min al-dalal (“The Deliverer from 
Error”). 
In the Mishkat, al-Ghazali draws inspira- 
tion from a verse of the Qur’an which pro- 
claims that “God is the light of the heavens 
and the earth”, and reveals a vision of a 
world structured around the concept of 
light. He shows how that divine light suf- 
fuses and sustains the world with its count- 
less rays. The world is accordingly repre- 
sented as a pure crystalline sphere, scat- 
tered with opaque points of matter. 
The Mungidh, his autobiography, is a 
masterpiece of remarkable psychological 
insight. It retraces his spiritual development 
and uncompromisingly dismisses jurists, 
theologians, Batinites and philosophers 
alike, reachirig the conclusion that the only 
true Way is that of the mystics. Compared 
with the Confessions of St. Augustine, the 
Munqidh is more concentrated, but more 
precise and structured. It is free of the 
grandiloquence and prolixity that we find in 
the Bishop of Hippo. 
The influence of al-Ghazali was 
tremendous, both in the Muslim world and 
in- medieval Europe. 
Six of his works were translated into Heb- 
rew in the thirteenth century. Some, includ- 
ing the Maqasid, were even translated 
several times. Jewish philosophers influ- 
enced by al-Ghazali include Isaac Albalag, 
who translated the Maqdsid, Moses of Nar- 
bonne, who wrote a major comnmentary on 
the same work, and Jehudah Halevi, who 
makes abundant references to the treatise 
entitled “The Grounds of Belief” (later in- 
corporated into the Ihya’). David Yehuda 
Léon even goes so far as to claim that 
Maimonides drew on the works of al-Gha- 
zal1 as his main source of inspiration. 
The Magasid was translated into Latin in 
the twelfth century by Domingo Gundisal- 
vo, a well-known translator of the Toledo 
school. The Tahafut (Destructio philo- 
sophorum) was likewise translated into 
Latin, together with its refutation (Destruc- 
tio destructionis) by Averroés in about 
1325. 
What influence did the works of al-Gha- 
zall exert over the thinkers of the late Mid- 
dle Ages and the Renaissance? This has still 
to be determined. However, we reject the 
parallels that have been drawn—wrongly, 
in our opinion—between the method of 
approach of al-Ghazili and that of certain 
modern European philosophers: between 
the doubt of al-Ghazali and that of Des- 
cartes, for example, and between the con- 
ceptions of causality found in al-Ghazali 
and in David Hume. These are empty 
hypotheses, totally without foundation. W 
 
ABDURRAHMAN BADAWI, of Egypt, is a philo- 
sopher and an historian of philosophy. Former 
head of the departments of philosophy at a num- 
ber of universities in Egypt, the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya and Kuwait, and a visiting professor 
at the Sorbonne, Paris, he is author of over a 
hundred publications in French and Arabic, 
mainly concerned with existentialism, Greek and 
Arab philosophy and contemporary German phi- 
losophy.

## [Page 9](074933engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 70772: Aleksandr Ostrovksy, founding father of Russian theatre

Aleksandr Ostrovsky 
Founding father of Russian theatre 
the famous Moscow literary salon of 
Countess Rostopchin, an elegant, 
fair-haired man of twenty-six read his play 
Bankrot (“The Bankrupt”) to an audience 
of distinguished literary figures including 
the great Nikolai Gogol. More readings of 
this work, which had opened the doors of 
Moscow’s salons to its author, were soon 
delighting the evening patrons of the city’s 
cafés and taverns, but the imperial theatres 
remained immune to the enthusiasm felt by 
the new playwrights first admirers. Tsar 
Nicolas I banned the play and had its au- 
thor, Aleksandr Nicolaevich Ostrovsky 
(1823-1886) watched by the police. His sixth 
play was the first to be staged and all its 
successors had problems with the censor. 
The author of some fifty plays, Ostrovsky 
is the creator of the Russian “comedy of 
manners” and the founder of the repertory 
of the Russian theatre. He was born and 
grew up in the Zamoskvorechye commer- 
cial district of Moscow, away from the city’s 
major thoroughfares. Destined by his 
father for a career in commerce, the young 
Ostrovsky’s first employment was with the 
Moscow civil court. His youthful observa- 
tions of different types of merchants and the 
setting in which they lived were to provide 
him with material for most of his plays. 
In face of obstinate, ignorant, despotic 
money-grubbers respectful of the estab- 
lished order, conformists such as Podkha- 
liuzin, Bolshov and Kabanikha, he sets 
figures on a par with such great characters 
of the European drama as Hamlet, Karl 
Moor or Laurencia, the creations of 
Shakespeare, Schiller and Lope de Vega. 
In Dokhodnoe Mesto (1857, “A Profit- 
able Post”), Zhadov champions those who 
go “against social customs and conditions... 
The struggle is arduous and often fatal, but 
the glory for those who win through and the 
gratitude of later generations is all the 
greater. ... Without them lies and evil would 
have proliferated to hide the sun’s light 
frommen”. In Les (1871; The Forest, 1926), 
the tragedian Neschaslivtsev proclaims that 
“honour is boundless”, and Parasha, in 
Gorzhacheiya serdce (1869, “A Yearning 
Heart”), asserts for all to hear, “You can 
take away all l have but I shall never give up 
my freedom. .... For my freedom I would go 
to the scaffold.” 
The tragic end of Ostrovsky’s finest char- 
acters always springs from their rectitude, 
their purity, their nobility of spirit, their 
moral integrity and their conviction that 
love is the ultimate meaning of life. In this 
S OMETIME in the autumn of 1849, in 
 
respect Ostrovsky echoes the preoccupa- 
tions of Dostoyevsky, for whom beauty will 
save the world, or the law of love and the 
vocation of goodness dear to Tolstoy. 
Ostrovsky wished “to put the people on 
the right path without harming them”. Be- 
cause of the logic of the plot, people who 
make their mark in life through hypocrisy 
and duplicity often triumph in his plays. But 
the real victors are losers like Katerina, who 
is incapable of living dishonestly and throws 
herself into the Volga, or Larissa, the girl 
without a dowry whose fine talent has been 
brought to nothing by the vulgarity of life 
and who murmurs “Thank you” to Karan- 
dychev, her murderer and saviour, before 
she dies. Ostrovsky wants a person who 
rebels against oppression and arbitrariness, 
a {ree spirit, to become the “law of life”. 
It should thus come as no surprise that 
circles close to the court of the Tsar, suspi- 
cious of culture and the theatre and 
apprehensive of new ideas, stopped at noth- 
ing to prevent Ostrovsky’s heroes from 
being portrayed in the theatre, even though 
they might admit that Ostrovsky himself 
was not without talent. It was said contemp- » 
by Nelly Kornienko 
“You alone have completed the edifice 
whose foundations were laid by Fonvizin, 
Griboyedov and Gogol. It is because of 
you alone that we Russians can proudly 
say that we have our national theatre. In all 
justice, it should be called the Ostrovsky 
theatre.” This tribute to Aleksandr N. 
Ostrovsky was made by the writer Ivan A. 
Goncharov, seated at extreme left of this 
photo taken in the editorial offices of the 
magazine Sovremennik. Seated with him 
(left to right) are Ivan S. Turgenev, Alek- 
sandr V. Druzhinin, and Ostrovsky. Stand- 
ing behind them are Leo N. Tolstoy and 
Dimitri V. Grigorovich. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w

## [Page 10](074933engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 70772: Aleksandr Ostrovksy, founding father of Russian theatre

Ph
ot
o 
|. 
Ef
im
ov
 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
 
Scene from a production of The Forest at 
Moscow's Maly Theatre where this and 
other plays by Ostrovsky still have an hon- 
oured place in the repertoire. The Forest, 
written in 1871, describes the decline of 
the Russian aristocracy and the rise of a 
new class of merchants, who buy up the 
large estates at rock bottom prices and 
> 
ruthlessly clear their forests. 
tuously of his plays that they “stank of 
sheepskin”. 
Nevertheless, under the pressure of pub- 
licopinion, Ostrovsky was elected a Corres- 
ponding Member of the Academy of Scien- 
ces in 1863. Shortly before, on the new 
ceiling of St. Petersburg’s Maryinsky the- 
atre, his portrait had been added to those of 
the classics of Russian satire, Fonvizin, Gri- 
boyedov and Gogol. 
“The existence of a national theatre is the 
sign that a nation has reached its majority,” 
wrote Ostrovsky, “just like that of 
academies, universities and museums.” In 
addition to his creative work as a dramatist, 
he gave many years of his life to other 
activities connected with the theatre. Mos- 
cow’s “Little Theatre” (or “Maly”) where 
he staged many of his plays, was dubbed 
“the Ostrovsky house”. And only six 
months before his death he was appointed 
director of the repertory of Moscow’s impe- 
rial theatres where in face of considerable 
obstruction he nevertheless succeeded in 
introducing reforms. His influence on the 
history of the theatre was in every respect 
enormous. 
Ostrovsky’s horizons broadened as the 
years went by and came to include other 
social classes as well as the merchants. In 
the 1870s he created a new type of charac- 
ter, the cold, ambitious bourgeois, the Rus- 
sian equivalent of Balzac’s Rastignac. 
Ostrovsky analyses certain forms of Rus- 
sian behaviour and patterns of thought with 
such originality and authenticity that this 
“Russianness” slowed down the introduc- 
tion of his work to other countries. In 
10 
France, for example, the first performance 
of Groza (1859; The Storm, 1898) possibly 
his masterpiece, did not take place until 
1889. 
Around the middle of the nineteenth cen- 
tury the Russian novel of Tolstoy, Dos- 
toyevsky and Turgenev conquered Western 
Europe, but Ostrovsky’s plays remained 
unknown there because of the exceptional 
translation difficulties involved. In the East 
too, interest in his plays only began to 
appear much later. In adapted form, his 
work enjoyed a certain success in China in 
the 1920s, but did not achieve world fame 
until the 1960s and 1970s, when plays by 
Ostrovsky were performed in over forty 
theatres in Delhi, London, New York, 
Paris, Milan, Hamburg, Basle and else- 
where. Since then their author’s literary 
reputation and stature have continued to 
grow. 
In Ostrovsky’s own country, the greatest 
directors of the twentieth century have been 
attracted to his work. Konstantin Stanis- 
lavsky staged Snegurochka (“The Snow 
Maiden”, 1872) a poetic masterpiece made 
famous by Rimski-Korsakov’s operatic 
adaptation of it, and “A Yearning Heart”. 
Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko, author 
and drama teacher who founded the Mos- 
cow Art Theatre with Stanislavsky, staged 
Na vsyakogo mudretsa dovolno prostoty 
(1868; Even a Wise Man Stumbles, 1944), 
and the great Vsevolod Meyerhold pre- 
sented The Forest and “A Profitable Post”. 
Two other avant-garde directors, Alek- 
sandr Tairov and Yuri Zavadsky, staged 
respectively Bese viny vinovatye (“The In- 
With his general’s uniform, narrow- 
minded outlook and generally decrepit 
appearance, Krutinsky, a character in 
Ostrovsky’s comedy Even a Wise Man 
Stumbles, symbolizes the decadent in- 
stitutions of the old Russia. Above, Kru- 
tinsky played in a 1910 production by the 
great actor and director Konstantin Stanis- 
lavsky. 
nocent Guilty”) and Bespridannitsa (1879; 
“The Girl without a Dowry”). Musical 
adaptations and experimental versions have 
also been performed in the present decade. 
Some of Ostrovsky’s plays have also been 
adapted for the cinema and television. 
Among them are Yakov Protazanov’s ver- 
sion of The Poor Bride, Vladimir Petrov’s 
The Storm, and, more recently, Eldar 
Riazanov’s Gestoki romanse (“The Cruel 
Romance”), which was a great success with 
the public. 
All these productions have made known 
a new Ostrovsky who sings a hymn to love 
and fidelity. 
A man of wide culture, Ostrovsky did 
much to bring to the Russian stage dramat- 
ists from other literatures. Among the 
works he translated into Russian are the 
Asinaria of Plautus, Terence’s Hecyra, 
Shakespeare’s The Taming of the Shrew and 
Antony and Cleopatra, Machiavelli’s The 
Mandrake, and works by Seneca and Cer- 
vantes. 
With Nikolai Rubinstein, director of the 
Moscow Conservatory, and the actor Piotr 
Sadovsky, Ostrovsky created in 1865 the 
“Artistic Circle” —the first society of artists 
in Russia—whose members included 
actors, writers, musicians and painters. Im- 
pressed by the teachings of the Russian 
physiologist and naturalist Ivan Sechenov, 
he worked out a theory of acting based on 
the idea of reciprocal conditioning between 
the actor and his environment. 
In the last years of his life, Ostrovsky 
spent much of his time on his estate at 
Chtchelykovo, in the region of Kostroma, 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w

## [Page 11](074933engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 70772: Aleksandr Ostrovksy, founding father of Russian theatre

Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
  
The actress Alice Koonen as Katerina in a 
1924 production of Ostrovsky’s The Storm 
(1859). In this interpretation of the play as a 
“peasant tragedy” Katerina is the per- 
sonification of pride and purity, ready to 
lay down her life for the right to be free. 
which became for him what Boldino was for 
Pushkin, Yasnaya Polyana for Tolstoy, and 
Bougival for Turgenev.In this country re- 
treat he wrote more than a dozen of his 
finest plays. And it was there, in June 1886, 
in his house built high on a hill in the midst 
of the countryside he loved, where even the 
storms seemed more beautiful than else- 
where, that Ostrovsky passed away. Borne 
by peasants on long pieces of drapery 
embroidered with traditional motifs, 
escorted by faithful friends, Ostrovsky’s 
coffin was carried through the places from 
which he had drawn inspiration to the 
cemetery of Nikolo Berezhki. 
Today the house at Chtchelykovo is an 
Ostrovsky Museum, a place of pilgrimage. 
Nothing—neither the setting nor the wel- 
come—has changed. The visitor almost ex- 
pects to see the master of the house appear 
in the clothes he loved to wear in the coun- 
try—Russian shirt, wide trousers and high 
boots, short grey doublet and wide-brim- 
med hat—ready to sit down at his work 
table. | 
  
NELLY NICOLAEVNA KORNIENKO, of the 
Soviet Union, is a specialist in dramatic art and in 
the sociology of culture, subjects on which she 
has written some 40 works published in her own 
country and elsewhere. A former member of the 
sociology of culture sector at the Soviet Institute 
of Scientific Research into Art, she is currently a 
staff member of the Russian language edition of 
the Unesco Courier.   


### 70780: Latin America in European painting; one continent seen through the 'I' of another

Latin America 
in European painting 
One continent seen 
through the ‘I’ of another 
by Miguel Rojas Mix 
have square heads.” The Euro- 
peans were still disembarking in 
the New World when John of Hollywood, a 
cosmographer with the name of a film-star, 
penned this azure-tinted, geometrical por- 
trait of its inhabitants. At the time when he 
wrote—or even earlier, with the publication 
of the letters of Christopher Columbus—an 
“imaginary America” began to take shape 
through images in which people and the 
natural world were continually transmogri- 
fied into the most unusual and fanciful 
forms. 
Over the centuries, works of art depicting 
America were coloured by the spirit of the 
age in which they were created. The earliest 
of them encompass the entire continent, 
but from the eighteenth century onwards 
the United States has a separate image. 
After that date, we shall refer exclusively to 
Latin America. 
The first image of America, coinciding 
with the classical aesthetic of the Renais- 
sance, was a “fantastic” one. The “Dis- 
covery” (although to avoid Eurocentrism it 
would be preferable to talk of “the arrival of 
the Spaniards”) does not seem to have 
made a great impression on Europe. Apart 
from travellers’ tales and the engravings 
illustrating them, there are few contempor- 
ary accounts of the impact made by this 
event on the European continent. We are 
left with three major literary works: “Des 
cannibales”, a chapter of Montaigne’s 
Essays; Thomas More’s Utopia; and 
Shakespeare’s The Tempest. 
There are also a handful of allusions and 
exotic details in paintings by the great 
artists: a name on a map by Leonardo da 
Vinci, a plump agave cactus in The Garden 
of Earthly Delights by Hiéronymus Bosch 
and a sunflower lurking somewhere among 
his sketches; a Saimiri squirrel monkey in 
St. John on Patmos by Hans Burgkmair the 
Elder; and a strange figure of Apollonian 
physique, clothed in feathers, used by 
Diirer to decorate the prayer-book of Maxi- 
milian I. 
And yet newly-discovered America 
seemed to be tailored to fit European 
dreams. In the New World, all myths found 
concrete expression. The “newest of the 
new” walked hand in hand with the old. 
There, merging and overlapping, were to 
be found Eden, the country of Ophir and El 
Dorado. Columbus believed that he had 
discovered Paradise, and Diirer and 
¢ T: people are blue-skinned and Rubens followed current taste by placing 
between Adam and Eve a parrot—a bird 
which, though undeniably beautiful, seems 
to symbolize a sin of frivolity which has 
been imputed to America ever since. 
Through the landscapes of the New 
World wandered creatures from the classic- 
al and medieval bestiaries: giants cohabited 
with basilisks, and Amazons, with one 
breast slashed off, encountered ster- 
nocephaloids, creatures with heads beneath 
their shoulders. In addition to these figures 
were plants and animals the evocation of 
which inspired artists to create a world 
where miracles could happen, unhampered 
by the mundane restrictions of daily life. 
America was to exert an influence, even 
if indirect, on the emergence of a series of 
themes in European painting. Did the en- 
counter with its pristine natural world con- 
tribute to the discovery of landscape paint- 
ing as a genre? (Diirer was the first Euro- 
pean artist to paint pure landscapes.) We 
cannot be sure. What is certain, however, is 
that in reawakening the classical opposition 
between “techne” (art and technique) and 
“physis” (nature), America raised once 
again the question of the origins of human- 
ity and fostered in painters a certain taste 
for the primitive. And not only for biblical 
primitivism—many painters have worked 
on the theme of Paradise: Cranach, Jan 
Brueghel, Titian, etc.—but also for classical 
primitivism, Orphism and nostalgia for the 
Golden Age, which influenced the style of 
Piero di Cosimo’s works. 
Nevertheless, there is little reference in 
European painting to the primitive lives of 
the inhabitants of America, for the simple 
reason that Europe never managed to de- 
cide whether they were barbarians or “no- 
ble savages”. Were the indigenous people 
of America human beings or animals? 
Europeans wondered. Did they have souls? 
Should they be enslaved? Should they be 
exterminated? And although Bartolomé de 
las Casas maintained as long ago as the 
mid-sixteenth century that all the nations of 
the world consist of human beings, the Puri- 
tan colonizers had very different ideas. 
Even in the nineteenth century the poet 
James Russell Lowell had a Yankee soldier 
in the Mexican War confess that before he 
left home he was convinced that Mexicans 
were not human beings but a nation of 
orang-outangs that could be slaughtered 
without a second thought. 
In 1637, John Maurice of Nassau, Gov- p 
1

## [Page 12](074933engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 70780: Latin America in European painting; one continent seen through the 'I' of another

THEODORE GERICAULT (Rouen, 1791 - 
Paris, 1824). The Battle of Maipu, gouache, » 
around 1818. Paris, Bibliothéque 
Nationale. This little-known work by Gérl- 
cault depicts the meeting between José de 
San Martin and Bernardo O'Higgins after 
their army had defeated the Spanish 
forces at Maipu (8 April 1818) and brought 
independence to Chile. Géricault, who 
painted his famous Raft of the “Medusa” In 
the following year, epitomizes the spirit of 
the Romantic painters who championed 
“modernity” and the new freedoms, and 
closely followed contemporary events in 
Spanish America and elsewhere. 
  
ALBRECHT DURER (Nuremberg, 1471 - id. a ~ 
1528). This figure (below) drawn in the 
margin of the prayer-book of the Emperor 
Maximilian | (1515) is an example of the     
 
         
  
    
way in which the non-European was en-. Ra fo gion Fos Gh emt : 
visioned by early 16th-century Europe as We bmg pe os os Of fo 7 
radically different from the European, in- 5 R" 
corporating features from India, Africaand / J > 2 
America. AY SC ATRL ET 
A AN 2.55 5 8 : 
a 
    
° x = X 
= ! 
d ¢ EEE 311 as | -  5 EN 
£'%e v 31 Y on Sha 2 A 
on TL pp" — : 
© - Sn pn wd — — 
Fa Dg
T I 
= . 
© - 
0 
Q 
i] 
£ ; > 
o MEM — win tomeath « CORTES LETTERS by PIETRO SAVORUGNANL 1324 
THE MAP OF TEMIXTIAN (Mexico City), 
known as the “Cortés Map”, incorporates 
a schematic map of the Gulf of Mexico (at 
left of document), and is the oldest known 
map of the island of Tenochtitlan, the site 
of present-day Mexico City. It Is attributed 
to Hernan Cortés since it appears in the 
first Latin edition of the conquistador’s 
second letter to Charles V, published in 
Nuremberg In 1524. This highly imagina- 
tive piece of work with its European-style 
city buildings may have been a source of 
inspiration for Utopian thought. (its influ- 
ence may be seen in a plan for a Utopian 
city dating from around the same time and 
attributed to Direr.) The link between 
America and Utopia seems to have been 
close; in his book Utopia (1516), Thomas 
More learns of the existence of Utopia 
from a certain Hitlodeo, who is presented 
as a former companion of the Italian navi- 
gator Amerigo Vespucci, from whom the 
American continent takes its name. 
     

## [Page 13](074933engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 70780: Latin America in European painting; one continent seen through the 'I' of another

p crnor and Representative of the Dutch 
West India Company, took up residence in 
Pernambuco. In his entourage were Frans 
Post and Albert van der Eeckhout, two 
artists who had been instructed to paint 
everything that lived and moved and had its 
being there. While they were in Brazil, they 
produced works that were true to life. 
When they returned to Europe, however, 
buyers considered their paintings to be in- 
sufficiently exotic and decorative, and to 
comply with the taste of the age they were 
obliged to invent a Brazil of gaudy jungle 
scenes and improbable animals. Such was 
the “Baroque image” of America. 
This new style loved exuberance and an 
exoticism that gave short shrift to geo- 
graphical precision. America now became a 
set of decorative motifs and competed in the 
salons with “Chinoiseries”. Some of the 
finest depictions of exotic America date 
from this period: the “tapestries of the In- 
dies”, large canvases into which are woven 
images of Indians, llamas, tapirs, etc.—in 
short, all the animals and plants with which 
America astonished the Old World—all 
jumbled together with animals and plants 
from Asia and Africa. For Baroque, the 
exotic has no geographical location, but is 
simply “outside Europe”. 
But America became fashionable for 
allegory as well as for decorative exoticism: 
she is one of the matrons representing the 
“Four Quarters of the Globe”. These 
female figures were a favourite motif of the 
time, because on ceilings and at the heads of 
staircases they could give solid expression 
to the limitless power-hungry aspirations of 
Absolutism and the no less ambitious mis- 
sionary pretensions of the Counter-Refor- 
mation. Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, the un- 
disputed master of this art, produced the 
finest representation of America as an 
Amazon, with the horn of, plenty in one 
hand and a skull at her feet. Rich and 
barbaric. Rich. and thus promising bound- 
-_ Y 
— cantina... 
bh Em man aos a 
-  PANOM A eaTIC KON, 
Fs ~ - - 2 
\ - i r 
< ¥ 3 
- TE 
x 
or A 
  
less wealth to kings; barbaric, and thus open 
to legitimate conquest. The country must 
be converted to Christianity and civilized: 
profit and its justification fused in a single 
image. 
This image of America changed in the 
nineteenth century with the advent of 
Romanticism. The Romantics brought a 
spirit of liberalism, and their art expresses 
the values of a nascent middle class. Their 
themes included the new freedoms, revolu- 
tion, the abolition of slavery, the people, 
progress, nature and travel. In America the 
Romantics found plenty of grist to their 
mill. A series of engravings by William 
Blake denounces slavery in Suriname; a 
watercolour by Géricault celebrates a deci- 
sive battle for the independence of Chile. 
But, above all, such concerns find express- 
ion in the taste for the picturesque to be 
found through travel and in the feeling of 
wonderment before the rich profusion of 
the natural world. 
Romantic exoticism is nevertheless dis- 
tinct from that of the Baroque period. It 
prides itself on being scientific and attempts 
to reproduce the landscapes, animals and 
people of the New World with total veri- 
similitude. It is the exoticism of exploration 
in the travels of Alexander von Humboldt, 
and the literary exoticism of Chateau- 
briand, who describes the Niagara Falls 
with a geographer’s scrupulous attention to 
detail. Humboldt attempts to marry art and 
science in “treu und lebendig” (faithful and 
lively) representation of reality. This com- 
bination was to be of benefit to both: to art, 
since contact with such magnificence in na- 
ture would revitalize landscape painting, 
and to science, which was thus able to en- 
rich its stock of images (photography was 
still unknown). The spirit of Humboldt im- 
bues most of the German artists who 
travelled to America in the nineteenth cen- 
tury: Johann Moritz Rugendas, who jour- 
neyed throughout the continent; Ferdinand 
Bellermann, who visited Venezuela; 
Eduard Hildebrandt, to whom we owe one 
of the most vivid depictions of Brazil in the 
mid-nineteenth century; and many others, 
including Pissarro. 
This great French painter, born in the 
West Indies, arrived in Venezuela under 
the name of Pizarro. He was twenty-two 
years old. His style was in keeping with the 
naturalism favoured by Humboldt, but 
even at this early date he was determined to 
capture the intensity of the light. Was this 
naturalism, bathed in the sunlight of the 
Caribbean, the first stage of the quest that 
would make him one of the founders of 
Impressionism? Whistler, another artist 
obsessed with light, would leave in one of 
his paintings a fleeting record of his brief 
contact with South America. At anchor one 
night in the world’s remotest harbour, he 
painted Valparaiso: Nocturne in Blue and 
Gold. 
Three outstanding painters of the end of 
the century had intermittent connections 
with America: Manet, who produced a 
number of versions of The Execution of 
Maximilian; Henri (Le Douanier) Rous- 
seau, of whom it is claimed, on scanty 
evidence, that he was in Mexico with the 
French army and there discovered the 
“tropical” landscape that is unmistakably 
his own; and Gauguin, the great master of 
modern exoticism, which he portrays as a 
refuge from civilization. Gauguin was influ- 
enced by his childhood in Peru. Both in his 
pottery and in some of his paintings we find 
the shapes of Mochica vases: head-shaped 
jars which are self-portraits, and terra-cotta 
vases with the uplifted faces of Breton 
women, just as in Inca society, where there 
were no tables, the clay faces must have 
gazed upwards to meet the eyes of their 
owners and masters. 
At the beginning of the twentieth cen- 
tury, the image of America becomes Janus- 
faced. One face is that of the mass media; p 
THEODORE DE BRY (Liége, 1528 - Frank- 
furt-am-Main, 1598). Engraver famed for 
his 13-part Travels in America published 
between 1590 and 1634. The Amazon and 
the sternocephalic figure were two of 
many fantastic creatures which European 
travellers and chroniclers claimed to have 
found in Brazil and Guyana, and show how 
European myths were projected onto 
America. The Amazon is a figure from clas- 
sical mythology and the headless man 
appears in a legend associated with im- 
aginary journeys. Headlessness is also a 
feature associated with such figures as 
Gog and Magog and AntiChrist. The 
monstrous creature here epitomizes the 
Indian’s diabolical nature. 
13

## [Page 14](074933engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 70780: Latin America in European painting; one continent seen through the 'I' of another

  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
DE BRY, El Dorado. The engraving below 
depicts the original myth of Eldorado (“the 
glided one”), a name first applied to the 
chief of a rich country who according to 
legend plastered his naked body with gold 
dust before plunging into a sacred lake. 
Eldorado later came to mean a whole fabu- 
lous country of gold which was described 
In the 18th century by Voltaire : “Near to a 
certain Parima, whose sand was of gold. ... 
There was a city with gilded roofs. ...” 
_— 
 
WILLIAM BLAKE (London, 1757- id. 
1827). Poet, painter and illustrator of Dan- 
te. Blake also expressed his humanist 
vision in his illustrations for John Gabriel 
Stedman’s Narrative of a Five Years’ Ex- 
pedition against the Revolted Negroes of 
Surinam (London, 1796). Blake shows in 
atrocious detail (right) how slaves were 
tortured to death. His work and that of 
painters who followed him anticipated the 
struggle for the abolition of slavery. 
  
  
HENRY MOORE (Castleford, 1898 - Much 
Hadham, 1986). Like many European 
artists, the great English sculptor drew 
inspiration from pre-Columbian art. The 
Reclining Figure, below, outside the main 
building of Unesco Headquarters in Paris, 
and other works bearing the same title, 
have a strong affinity with effigies of the 
Aztec divinity Chac Mool. Opposite page 
below, statue of Chac Mool in the Temple 
of the Warriors, Chichén Itza, Yucatén, 
Mexico. 
—
—
 
] 
a
 
be? 
« =i | Ls SIE | A 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
M.
 
Ro
ja
s 
Mi
x,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ro
ge
r-
Vi
ol
le
t,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 15](074933engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 70780: Latin America in European painting; one continent seen through the 'I' of another

  
PAUL GAUGUIN (Paris, 1848 - Atuona, 
Marquesas Islands, 1903). Above left, Self- 
Portrait, stoneware, 1889, Copenhagen 
Museum of Decorative Arts. The same ves- 
sel features in a picture Gauguin painted in 
the same year, Still-life with Japanese 
Woodcut (ittleson Collection, New York). 
Like Gauguin’s other ceramics, this self- 
  
  
Eo. 
4 3 # 
Ly J Ei 
Lo Ae 
Ae 
A ——— Fal ~a, LL 
dd 4 
SS hh 
€ % : 
J 4 Tay PY 2g ~ 
. . Te 5 NM 
tars 5 1 N 
- ww E : Ng 
g k wy 
Mid 
3 : a ta i 
Ga Se wh 
portrait is strongly inspired by Dbre- 
Columbian Peruvian pottery such as the 
anthropomorphic Mochica vase (above 
right). Gauguin may have sought self- 
realization in exoticism through memories 
of his childhood in Peru or because of the 
Peruvian blood he inherited from his 
maternal grandmother. 
  
p-the other, that of art. The media have 
accumulated all the stereotypes that have 
represented America throughout history, 
together with new clichés born of specific 
historical events. The image of parrot-like 
frivolity, human degradation in hot cli- 
mates, sloth and childishness has been com- 
pounded by that of machismo, corruption, 
the siesta and lust for revolution. Suchis the 
image put across by the cinema, advertising 
and light novels, and often, too, by more 
serious literature. The comic strip is largely 
responsible for projecting this image, 
although it is true that comics are now be- 
ginning to change. The Indian is regarded 
with less contempt, and the Western hero 
has doubts about his moral superiority. This 
may be to some extent due to the influence 
of the French social anthropologist Claude 
Lévi-Strauss, who altered the concept of 
“the savage mind”. 
The image found in art is quite different. 
In the early twentieth century it sought 
renewal through the discovery of new rules 
of formal expression. When Picasso, 
Braque and Matisse drew on African aes- 
thetics to creat modern art, all non-Euro- 
pean art was seen with new respect as a 
source of inspiration for the avant-garde. 
Many artists became interested in pre-Col- 
umbian art. One was Henry Moore, whose 
Reclining Figures irresistibly evoke the sta- 
tue of the Aztec divinity Chac Mool. The 
image of twentieth-century art thus came 
into being, not merely as a prolongation of 
Greek classicism—of the aesthetics of Phi- 
dias and Praxiteles—but also as the syn- 
thesis of the creative abilities of all huma- 
nity. Cubism, abstract art, expressionism 
and other schools of art owe much to the 
sensibility of these “foreign cultures”. 
Thus over the centuries America has 
been depicted in images which do not al- 
ways correspond to reality but tend instead 
to reflect European interests and changes in 
Europe’s idea of itself from one period to 
the next. In this context, the non-European 
is little more than a mirror. Europe has 
projected its own vision of itself—whether 
classical, Baroque or Romantic—onto “the 
other”. As this vision changed, “the other” 
changed too. And so we see an America 
that is imaginary in two senses—both be- 
cause its story is told in images and because 
it is more imaginary than real. As an Indian 
says to a European in an illustrated story by 
the Italian author Milo Manara: “Everyone 
knows that Indians cannot really exist in 
your world.” [| 
  
MIGUEL ROJAS MIX, of Chile, is the founder 
and former director of the Chilean Institute of 
Latin American Art. A former professor at the 
Sorbonne, he is currently teaching at the Uni- 
versity of Vincennes, Paris. He is the author of 
several published works, including Vera historia 
natural de Indias (The True Natural History of the 
Indies) and a short history of Latin America for 
children. 
15

## [Page 16](074933engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 70781: Saintly sons and daughters: ancient China's enduring cult of filial piety

Saintly sons and daughters 
e
d
 
Ancient China’s 
f=. 
enduring cult of filial piety 
Drawings show the evolution of 3 Chinese 
characters from pictorial representation. 
Left to right, ideograms signifying “old”, 
“child” and “filial piety”. The latter is a 
combination of the first two. 
Calligraphy © Hsuing Ping Ming, Paris. Drawings from L'origine 
des caractéres © Yong Bao Zai, Beijing, 1979 
16 
by Donald Holzman 
HE desire to reach out beyond our 
] everyday lives to find some kind of 
permanence or absolute meaning 
for them seems to be universal, but each 
civilization reaches out in a different way. 
To study one of the methods the Chinese 
have employed to attain to this heightened 
meaning of life may teach us something 
about the bases of Chinese civilization and 
also something about our own. 
The Chinese have espoused various 
forms of religiosity throughout their long 
history. Filial piety is possibly the most 
enduring of all these forms. Archaeologists 
believe that the burial sites in Banshan, 
eastern Gansu, which date from the begin- 
ning of the third millennium BC, show that 
the Chinese already celebrated an ancestor 
cult at that time. Whether or not we accept 
their hypothesis, it is clear that filial piety 
was the cornerstone of the most ancient 
Chinese royal religion. The worship of the 
supreme deity, God on High (Shangdi) 
could only be carried out through the 
worship of the king’s own ancestors who 
served as “go-betweens” (pei) to the deity. 
Evidence of filial piety is also found 
throughout the earliest period of Chinese 
history, even though the character for filial 
piety, xiao, strangely enough, does not 
appear in the earliest writings, the oracle 
bone inscriptions. On bronze vessels dating 
from as early as 1000 BC, a Chinese scholar 
writing in 1974 counted sixty-four inscrip- 
tions containing the word for filial piety, in 
contexts showing that the sentiment con- 
cerned living members of the family (pa- 
rents and brothers) as well as ancestors.

## [Page 17](074933engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 70781: Saintly sons and daughters: ancient China's enduring cult of filial piety

It is hard to appreciate today what it 
meant to be “filial” in ancient China; too 
few texts dealing with everyday life have 
survived to enable us to reconstruct in detail 
what it was like to live in a Chinese family 
in, say, 1000 BC. However, some ancient 
texts do give us glimpses of what Chinese in 
that distant past thought of their parents, 
providing a picture not entirely different 
from that presented by Chinese family life 
today. Poem no. 202 in the “Minor Odes” of 
the “Book of Poetry” (Shijing), for exam- 
ple, contains a very moving description of 
an orphan lamenting the death of his 
parents, and the “Book of Documents” 
(Shangshu) contains a number of references 
to filial piety, the most important (and 
probably one of the oldest) being in the 
“Announcement to Kang” (Kanggao). The 
passage in question not only equates unfilial 
children with “the worst criminals”, it also 
describes unfilial behaviour in emotive 
terms, saying that an unfilial son “wounds 
his father’s heart grievously”. 
Yet in the earliest stories told about filial 
sons and daughters there is something that 
non-Chinese find hard to believe or under- 
stand. A story in a very late section of the 
“Book of Documents” about the early cul- 
ture hero, Shun, and his barely credible 
filial conduct towards his blind father and 
his wicked stepmother, is typical of the 
stories of filial sons. In one of the very few 
works of Antiquity that tell us much about 
everyday life, the Zuozhuan (“Zuo’s Com- 
mentary” on the Chungiu), a work that is 
generally thought to have been recorded in 
written form in the mid fourth century BC 
but may contain genuine material from as 
early as the end of the eighth century, are 
other stories which it is equally difficult to 
believe. 
It is surely not a coincidence that the very 
first story in the Zuozhuan concerns filial 
piety. It describes the actions taken by 
Duke Zhuang of the state of Zheng who has 
done everything in his power to remain filial 
to his mother whose treacherous behaviour 
towards him would seem rather to merit the 
strictest punishment. Yet the commenta- 
tors, beginning with the author of the 
Zuozhuan himself, find that his behaviour 
           
   J 
  <. on 
ie > 
-~ 
EIR EN ~ 
" CoA AE 
was not filial enough! The stories of Jizi 
(695 BC) and of Shensheng (659 and 655 
BC) both of whom prefer to die rather than 
to deny their fathers’ exorbitant demands, 
are similarly hard to take. In all these stories 
filial piety seems to require absolute obedi- 
ence to one’s parents. 
These earliest examples of the import- 
ance of filial piety are more than confirmed 
in the Golden Age of the philosophers. 
Every single school of philosophy without 
exception, even the iconoclastic Daoists 
and the anti-traditional Legalists, accepted 
filial piety as a natural, inevitable human 
sentiment. The Legalists, indeed, coupled 
the virtue with “loyalty” (zhong) and gave it 
an importance in the government of the 
State that it had never had previously but 
that it was to keep until our own day. 
J o Fl Wa ob 
W775 (57 
Es ALTER Mata 3 
[ gs 
» 
I~) / rd J he > 
1 rs Fi 
Hd 0 
    
   
   
  
f if) jg A A = 
- . N
E
 
w LL
 
-~ =\
 
ax
 
E
N
 
A
 
N
a
 
4 
~ 
—
 
“
U
e
 
  
  
lllustration depicts an episode in the life of 
a model son, Xue Bao. “His father remar- 
ried and his new wife, taking an intense 
aversion to Xue Bao, had him sent away 
from the house. But he cried night and day, 
unable to leave, until they took a stick to 
him and he was obliged to lodge in a hut 
outside the house. In the mornings he 
would go in to sprinkle and sweep, which 
angered his father, who chased him out 
again.” 
Photo from an 18th century Korean work on virtuous people from 
Chinese history © Musée Guimet, Paris 
17

## [Page 18](074933engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 70781: Saintly sons and daughters: ancient China's enduring cult of filial piety

  
Drawing of Cao E., a Chinese heroine cele- 
brated for her filial devotion. Her father 
was a shaman who drowned while celeb- 
rating the cult of the God of the Waves. 
“His body was not recovered, and his 13- 
year-old daughter, Cao E., went along the 
river wailing and crying night and day 
without stopping. Seven days later she 
threw herself into the river and drowned.” 
Photo from an 18th century Korean work on virtuous people from 
Chinese history © Musée Guimet, Paris 
 
18 
> 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ca
rm
el
it
e 
co
nv
en
t 
of
 
St
. 
Ma
ry
 
Ma
gd
al
en
 
de
 
Pa
zz
i,
 
Fl
or
en
ce
 
Confucius makes filial piety a corner- 
stone of his philosophy, but his remarks on 
the subject show that for him this quality 
transcends ordinary rationality and should 
be treated as something inviolable. It is 
generally agreed that Confucius, in his 
“Analects” or “Conversations”, provided 
China, and the world, with some of the 
loftiest, most deeply human and appealing 
moral insights ever pronounced. But his 
dicta on filial piety seem so stiff and doctri- 
naire that they might almost have been 
made by someone else, a follower so intent 
on keeping the letter of Confucius’ teaching 
that he lost its spirit. 
But I am by no means sure that this is the 
case; is it not rather that the very special 
role played by filial piety in Chinese 
thought in general, and in Confucian 
thought in particular, gives to his pro- 
nouncements on the subject a stiff, absolut- 
ist tone quite absent from the rest of his 
work? Precisely because the Chinese have 
considered filial piety as something “abso- 
lute”, something universally recognized as 
beyond question, a distinctive form of mor- 
al hero or saint has come into being. De- 
tailed study of this “saint” may reveal some- 
thing important about the Chinese way of 
thinking. 
The three examples already cited from 
the Zuozhuan show men doing very strange 
things, leading to suicide for two of them, in 
order to respect blindly the sometimes irra- 
tional wills of their parents. Many similar 
sacrifices must have been made in the 
ancient period, but it is only under the 
Empire [after the unification of China in 
221 BC] that stories of filial sons and daugh- 
Scene from the life of St. Mary Magdalen 
de Pazzi (1566-1606), patron Saint of Flor- 
ence who was canonized in 16689. In spite 
of a fragile constitution, she lived in great 
austerity and attained a high degree of 
mysticism. She is shown below at the age 
ofeleven when, wearing a crown of thorns, 
she spent entire nights flagellating 
herself.

## [Page 19](074933engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 70781: Saintly sons and daughters: ancient China's enduring cult of filial piety

ters become commonplace and are re- 
corded in detail. A chapter is reserved for 
them in twenty of the twenty-four dynastic 
histories and countless separate collections 
are devoted to them, much like the “Lives 
of the Saints” that were so popular in 
Europe almost until modern times. It may 
be that filial piety only became noteworthy 
under the Empire when it was institutional- 
ized as an “imperial” virtue, rewarded by 
the State with stipends and titles that could 
lead to high official posts in the civil service. 
The earliest examples of filial extrava- 
gances I have been able to find in the dynas- 
tic histories are taken from the Hou Han- 
shu, principally from Chapter 39, which is 
entirely devoted to filial sons and daughters 
and probably dates from the middle of the 
fourth century AD. 
The Preface to Chapter 39 tells two stor- 
ies about sons who showed filial piety. The 
first describes a man who serves as an offi- 
cial only to be able to take care of his 
mother, who has no personal interest in the 
glory such service might procure for him. 
The second tells a story that is so typical that 
I shall quote the beginning of it in full: 
“At the time of Emperor An [who 
reigned from AD 107 to 126] there lived a 
man from Runan [southern Henan] named 
Xue Bao. ... Studious and sincere, when his 
mother died he was renowned for his per- 
fect filial piety during the mourning period. 
His father remarried and his new wife, tak- 
ing an intense aversion to Xue Bao, had him 
sent away from the house. But he cried 
night and day, unable to leave, until they 
took a stick to him and he was obliged to 
lodge in a hut outside the house. Mornings 
Two edifying cases of filial piety are de- 
scribed in a 14th-century collection of 
Chinese poems by Gui Ju Jing entitled 
Twenty-four Examples of Chinese Piety. 
Drawing this page, left shows the Emperor 
Wu of the Han dynasty (standing) and his 
mother (seated at left). After becoming 
Emperor, Wu continued to treat his mother 
with the same filial devotion as before. 
Whenever she took a medicinal potion the 
Emperor tasted it himself before giving it 
to her. Drawing right evokes the story of 
another model son. The family of 8-year- 
old Wu Weng lived in aregion infested with 
mosquitoes. Because his parents were so 
poor that they could not afford to buy a 
mosquito net, Wu Weng slept in their bed- 
room and let himself be bitten by the mos- 
quitoes so that his parents could sleep 
undisturbed. 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
he would go in to sprinkle and sweep. which 
angered his father, who chased him out 
again. Then he set himself up in a hut next 
to the gate of their ward, but never failed to 
greet his parents in the evening and in the 
morning. After a year or so his parents felt 
ashamed and had him come back.” 
Later, when his father and stepmother 
died, he doubled or tripled the mourning 
period. Xue Bao is typical of the filial sons 
we read about in texts of this time. In fact 
his actions seem almost normal when you 
compare them with some of the other filial 
sons and daughters that fill the pages of the 
Hou Hanshu. 
We learn of four-year-old children who 
refused to eat and drink when their parcnts 
fell ill, and of a man who “ate no meat and 
drank no wine for over ten years after the 
death of his father, and commemorated the 
anniversary of his death by fasting for three 
days”. Some of the stories, such as that of 
Yang Zhen (died AD 124), are even more 
amazing. A scion of one of the founding 
families of the Han dynasty, Yang Zhen 
taught school early in life to keep aloof from 
politics: 
“Fatherless when young and poor, he 
lived alone with his mother. He rented 
some land to cultivate and thus provide for 
their sustenance. Once one of his pupils 
tried to help him plant cabbages, but Yang 
Zhen pulled them up each time, and re- 
planted them a little further on. The neigh- 
bours called him ‘filial’.” 
Yang Zhen, believe it or not, is here 
proving his filial piety by insisting that his 
mother’s cabbages were planted by her 
son’s own fingers! 
Moving cabbage plants around is a harm- 
less enough demonstration of filial feelings, 
but there are many examples of deaths 
caused by a desire to give irrefutable proof 
of filial piety. The most famous example is 
the story of Cao E, who lived near what is 
now Shaoxing in Zhejiang. Her father was a 
shaman (wu) who drowned on the fifth day 
of the fifth lunar month (6 June) in AD 143, 
while he was celebrating the cult of the God 
of the Waves (perhaps a deification of the 
  
  
    
S
R
 
. 
N
E
 
 
E
 
. 
. 
5 
Vi
d 
L
i
 
; 
$ 
i
p
 
o
F
 
», - PW 
| 
a
 
» 
+ 4 H 
35
 
. 
0 
~
 
N
L
 
a
 
| 
  
  
    
     
    
       
  
  
3 
N
n
 
> 
a 
» 
A
o
r
t
a
 
cu
r 
~ 
ty | 
| 3 [p+ 
™ 2 v: oo L 
Ros Og Bop | 
- ia 2 i 
| 3 1’ : 
= HEL

## [Page 20](074933engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 70781: Saintly sons and daughters: ancient China's enduring cult of filial piety

p tidal bore). “His body was not recovered, 
and his thirteen-year-old daughter, Cao E, 
went along the river wailing and crying 
night and day without stopping. Seven days 
later she threw herself into the river and 
drowned.” 
Another filial daughter, Shuxian Xiong 
(or Shu Xianluo), drowned herself in 
Sichuan, on the other side of China, on the 
spot where her father had drowned, and 
was found floating in the water with her 
father in her arms six days later. Jiang Shi 
drowned because he ventured too far out 
into the river to fetch drinking water for his 
mother who preferred river water to well 
water. 
The stories showing self-sacrifice, mira- 
cles, cruel persecutions (usually by 
mothers-in-law or stepmothers) greeted 
with forbearance, useless suicides, extraor- 
dinary examples of brothers who refuse to 
leave one another even to sleep with their 
wives, except to produce offspring, fill the 
pages of the Hou Hanshu and are in fact 
found throughout Chinese history. 
How can these astonishing actions be 
accounted for? They are strongly reminis- 
cent of the behaviour of the Christian saints 
of late Antiquity and the Middle Ages. 
Mortifications, leper-licking, holy anorexia 
and other excessive actions were never 
deemed excessive enough to prove the 
saints’ love for and adoration of their 
Creator. Is this not a similar phenomenon 
to that of Chinese filial piety? 
The Chinese woild-view, as has often 
been remarked, is much more earthbound 
than the world-view of the West; imman- 
ence has always been preferred to trans- 
cendence in China, and when the Chinese 
reach out towards their “creator” they re- 
fuse to take the metaphysical leap the Wes- 
terner finds normal and look toward those 
they know are their true creators, their 
parents. “The Book of Filial Piety” (Xiao- 
jing), a mediocre document that probably 
dates from the very end of Antiquity or 
from the beginning of the Imperial era and 
has been extraordinarily popular through- 
out Chinese history, says this in almost so 
many words. In Chapter 9 we read: “there 
can be no greater veneration of the father 
than to inake him the go-between with 
Heaven.” The word used for “go-between”, 
pei, and the context, show that the authors 
of the Xiaojing here are referring to the very 
earliest Chinese religious practices known 
to us, according to which sacrifices were 
presented to royal ancestors who, as go- 
betweens, interceded and presented to 
Heaven their descendants’ requests. This is 
to give the father a mystical role and to 
identify him, if not as God, at least as a 
stepping-stone toward God. Thus in this 
respect the Chinese are not far from making 
gods of their parents, and their actions show 
them, like their Western counterparts, 
attempting to reach out beyond themselves 
to glorify their creators, who are literally 
their fathers and mothers. [| 
~ 
DONALD HOLZMAN, born in Chicago, USA, is 
head of the Institute of Advanced Chinese Stu- 
dies in Paris, and director of studies at the School 
of Advanced Studies in Social Sciences, also in 
Paris, where he is professor of Institutions of 
Imperial China. 


### 70784: How Japan reckons with the abacus

20 
  
How Japan reckons with 
URPRISING though it may seemin a 
country where many business enter- 
prises are computerized and where 
microcomputers are widely used in schools 
and families, the soroban or Japanese aba- 
cus is still playing a unique role in Japanese 
life as a calculating device and as an educa- 
tional tool. 
The soroban was introduced into Japan 
from China about 450 years ago. The 
Japanese then developed and began to 
manufacture an improved version which was 
soon being used throughout the country. Chil- 
dren were taught to handle the soroban in 
small schools known as tera-ko-ya and itis no 
exaggeration to say that the three R's in 
Japan became “Reading, Writing and soro- 
ban". 
 
 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Mi
ni
st
ry
 
of
 
Ed
uc
at
io
n,
 
To
ky
o 
Why, at a time when the price of computers 
is falling and their performance is improving, 
should the soroban not only survive but form 
part of training programmes organized by 
some Japanese firms, with one world-famous 
computer manufacturer even holding an 
annual soroban contest for its employees? 
There are several answers to this question. 
Firstly, a skilful handler of the soroban is likely 
to be a dab hand at immediately spotting 
errors in facts and figures, and able to use 
mental arithmetic to make the kind of instant 
estimates that are invaluable in business 
analysis and decision-making. Another plus 
for the sorobanis that using it helps to develop 
the kind of psychomotor skills required for 
handling keyboard machines. 
Today the use of the soroban is taught in 
a rae 8 
A ey RE . YES 
- g . Ty Pi il i 
ee 
Using the soroban or Japanese abacus, 
this 11-year-old schoolboy can solve with- 
in ten minutes twenty addition and sub- 
traction problems involving 5- to 10-figure 
numbers, and perform mental arithmetic 
calculations on 12- to 13-figure numbers. 
At the blackboard, a primary schoolboy 
solving multiplication problems by mental 
arithmetic.

## [Page 21](074933engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 70784: How Japan reckons with the abacus

by Toshio Sawada the abacus 
Japanese primary schools, from the third year Lower beads worth 1 Frame Dots indicating units Column rods Upper beads worth 5 
on, and occupies a major part of the curricu- 
lum in higher commercial secondary schools. 
A number of features make the soroban a 
useful educational tool. By manipulating 
beads pupils can actually see the process of 
calculation, become familiar with numbers 
and enjoy learning to be numerate. It also 
helps them to understand decimal notation. 
Another advantage, since higher figures are 
handled first (see drawings) is that itis easy to 
see approximate figures and also, incidental- 
ly, to calculate not only written but dictated 
numbers. 
Research has shown that handling the 
soroban develops certain kinds of mathema- 
tical skills. Japan won first prize at a World 
Congress cf Mathematics held a few years 
ago. Might further investigation show that this 
victory was in some measure due to the con- 
tinuing role of the soroban? [ 
TOSHIO SAWADA, Japanese educalor, is a 
senior specialist for curriculum in the Vocational 
Education Division of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Bureau at the Ministry of 
Education, Japan. 
  
      
     
 
The soroban is a calculating instrument 
consisting of a rectangular frame contain- 
ing a number of counting beads which 
slide back and forth along rods. A cross- 
wise bar divides the soroban info two 
parts: the upper part consists of a row of 
beads each with a value of 5 and the lower 
part has four rows of beads each with a 
value of 1. On the crosswise bar, a dot is 
marked at every third rod to indicate the 
unit or the decimal point. The rows of 
beads to the left have a higher value than 
those to the right, and calculations with 
numbers of more than two figures are 
always done from left to right. The value of 
the beads is determined by their position: 
they only “count” when they are pushed 
towards the crosswise bar. 
Two examples of simple arithmetic on the soroban: 
A. Addition: 87+52 = 139 
(1) Put down 87. 
(2) Add 50 (from the 52} to 80 (of 87} by 
moving the bead worth 5 away from the bar 
and positioning a bead worth 1 on the rod 
to the left. The number shown on the soro- 
ban is 137. 
(3) Add 2 to the 7 of the last rod. The 
answer is 139. 
  
  
  
<> Bead left in its place or with no value 
3 Bead moved in the course of the calculation 
Bead already “counted” or “positioned” 
B. Subtraction: 92-35 = 57 
(1) Put down 92. 
(2) Take away 30 (from the 35) from 90 (of 
92), leaving 6:. 
(3) 5 cannot be subtracted from 2. There- 
fore borrow 10 from the rod to the left, 
which is worth 60. 10-5 5. Take away 10 
from 60 and add 5 to the rod on the right, 
which is already worth 2. The answer is 57. 
  
  
Dr
aw
in
gs
 
(©
 
T
o
m
o
e
 
So
ro
ba
n 
Co
.,
 
Ja
pa
n 
  Bar 
21

## [Page 22](074933engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
An international symposium on the theme “Science and the 
Boundaries of Knowledge: the Prologue of our Cultural Past” 
was held in Venice, Italy, from 3 to 7 March 1986. Leading 
scientists from 16 countries attended the meeting, which was 
organized by Unesco in collaboration with the Giorgio Cini 
Foundation. They agreed on a final communiqué, the “Venice 
Declaration”, which sets forth their joint observations in five 
points, summarized below: 
1. A significant gap exists between the new world-view which 
is emerging from the study of natural systems and the values 
that continue to prevail in philosophy, in the human and social 
sciences and in the life of modern society. We believe that this 
discrepancy holds a threat to the very survival of our species. 
2. The new and mutually enriching exchange between science 
and the different world traditions opens the door to a new 
vision of humanity, even to a new rationalism, which could 
lead to a new metaphysical perspective. 
3. There is a pressing need for truly transdisciplinary re- 
search, through a dynamic exchange between the natural 
sciences, the social sciences, art and tradition. In a sense, this 
transdisciplinary approach is inherent in our brain through 
the dynamic interaction of its two hemispheres. 
4. The conventional way of teaching science masks the di- 
vorce between today’s science and outdated world-views. 
There is an urgent need for new educational methods that 
take into account current scientific progress, coming into 
harmony with the great cultural traditions, the preservation 
and study of which appear essential. 
5. Although scientists may have no control over the applica- 
tions of their own discoveries, they must not remain passive 
when confronted with the haphazard use of these discoveries. 
The magnitude of today’s challenges requires a reliable and 
steady flow of information to the public and the establishment 
of multi- and transdisciplinary mechanisms for the guidance 
and even the implementation of decision-making. 
The following two articles have been extracted from papers 
prepared for the symposium and illustrate some of the points 
made in the Venice Declaration. 
- 


### 70785: Breakthroughs in brain research

Breakthroughs in brain research 
by David Ottoson 
dramatic development in brain research, 
only rivalled by the advances in molecular 
biology in the early 1950s and the progress in 
physics at the beginning of this century. The 
introduction of new biophysical and bioche- 
mical techniques has made it possible to 
I: the last two decades there has been a 
tackle problems that until recently were 
beyond experimental investigation. All evi- 
dence indicates that these techniques will 
open up a world hitherto unknown to us and 
give us new insight into the complexity of the 
higher functions of the brain. This develop- 
ment is at present progressing at a rapid rate, 
but the results already obtained have pro- 
vided us with unprecedented data on many 
aspects of the brain involving information pro- 
cessing, perception, brain control of pain, 
neuro-transmitter actions, brain plasticity, re- 
generation, learning, memory, behaviour and 
emotion. 
The major breakthrough in our understand- 
ing of the higher functions of the brain was the 
discovery of Roger Sperry, Professor of 
Psychology at the California Institute of Tech- 
nology, of the functional specialization of the 
two hemispheres of the brain. Since the two 
22 
hemispheres are anatomically almost identi- 
cal, it had long been generally assumed thatin 
principle the two brain halves had similar func- 
tions. However, it is interesting to note that as 
early as 1861 it was demonstrated by a 
French neurologist, Pierre-Paul Broca, that 
the centre for speech is localized in the left 
hemisphere. When presenting his cbserva- 
tions to the Société d'Anthropologie in Paris, 
he made the now famous dictum: “Nous par- 
lons avec I'hemisphere gauche”. 
Later observations, particularly on soldiers 
wounded in the two world wars, indicated that 
the two hemispheres have different functions 
also in other aspects, but the functional differ- 
ences between them remained largely un- 
known until the early 1950s when Roger Sper- 
ry made his pioneering -discoveries which 
soon received world-wide attention and for 
which in 1981 he was awarded the Nobel 
Prize in Physiology or Medicine. 
Sperry's research thus established that 
each of the two hemispheres are specialized, 
each having its own specific functional char- 
acteristics. The left hemisphere is analytical, 
sequential and rational while the right is syn- 
thetic, holistic and intuitive. The left hemi- 
sphere is, to quote Sperry, “the more aggres- 
sive, executive, leading hemisphere with con- 
trol of the motor system”. This is the hemi- 
sphere that we mainly see in action and the 
one with which we communicate. The right 
hemisphere is “the silent passenger who 
leaves the driving of behaviour to the left 
hemisphere”. The right hemisphere cannot 
express itself in language, is therefore unable 
to communicate any experience of perception 
or consciousness. 
More recently a number of new methods 
have been employed for the study of brain 
functions which have given us new and excit- 
ing insights into the performance of the brain 
in health and disease. One of these tech- 
niques provides for measurements of the re- 
gional blood flow in the brain. With this tech- 
nique it has been demonstrated that at rest in 
a quiet room, the cerebral flow is the same in 
the two hemispheres. It is interesting to note 
that the highest flow is found in the frontal 
lobe. Simple visual perception consisting of 
opening the eyes results in an increase in the 
primary visual area of the cortex, while visual 
stimuli which require discrimination tasks are 
followed by an increase in other areas.

## [Page 23](074933engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 70785: Breakthroughs in brain research

  
Téte nucléaire d’un ange (1952), by Salvador Dali. 
23 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
S
P
A
D
E
M
,
 
19
86
, 
pr
iv
at
e 
co
ll
ec
ti
on

## [Page 24](074933engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 70785: Breakthroughs in brain research

Di
ag
ra
m 
©
 
Th
e 
Sc
ie
nt
if
ic
 
Am
er
ic
an
, 
Ja
nu
ar
y 
19
64
 
p Cerebral blood flow measurements have 
also provided interesting information on re- 
gional activation of the brain during voluntary 
movements in man. When programming a 
sequence of movements without actually ex- 
ecuting them, there is a selective increaseina 
special area called the supplementary motor 
area. During the execution of a movement 
there is in addition an increase in another 
area, the so-called primary motor area. This 
suggests that the command for the movement 
is executed by the supplementary motor area, 
while the execution ofthe movement is carried 
out by the primary motor area. 
Equally interesting are the results of studies 
of cerebral blood flow during the focusing of 
attention. it is of particular interest from a 
clinical point of view that cerebral blood flow 
measurements have demonstrated abnormal 
patterns of blood flow in mental diseases such 
as organic dementia and schizophrenia. 
These findings encourage the belief that this 
method and other modern approaches to the 
analysis of higher brain functions may also 
provide a deeper understanding of the brain 
mechanisms in mental disorders. 
Visual field Visual field 
right left 
WH SN 
I : 
<. 
7 
Corpus 
callosum 
  
0
 
Diagram above shows how visual fieids 
and visual centres of the brain are related. 
Cutting optic chiasm and corpus caliosum 
leaves each eye feeding information to 
one side of the brain only and eliminates 
the normal overlap of visual fields. 1. left 
eye-ball; 2. right eyebali; 3. optic chiasm; 
4. left hemisphere; 5. right hemisphere; 6. 
lateral geniculate body; 7. optic tract; 8. 
right-half visual field; 9. left-half visual 
field. 
24 
Still another method, positron emission 
tomography (PET), provides a new and 
powerful tool for the study of higher brain 
functions. In positron emission tomography a 
chemical compound is labelled with radioac- 
tive isotope that decays by emitting positrons 
with the emission of gamma rays as a result. 
The gamma rays are recorded by a circular 
array of detectors placed around the head and 
a computer reconstructs the distribution of 
radioactivity and displays it as a colour-coded 
image ona TV screen. With this technique itis 
possible to see how different regions of the 
brain are activated during various kinds of 
mental activities. Thus it has been demon- 
strated that certain regions of the left hemi- 
sphere are activated when a person listens to 
someone speaking to him. When listening to 
music, regions in the right hemisphere be- 
come active. However, if the patient is asked 
to tell what particular piece of music is played 
or to say the name of the composer, the 
activity shifts over to the left (analytical) 
hemisphere. 
The famous Russian physiologist Pavlov is 
supposed to have said that mankind can be 
divided into artists and thinkers. It would be 
tempting, in view of the new knowledge that 
recent advances in brain research have 
brought us, to believe that in artists the right 
holistic hemisphere is the dominating one 
while in thinkers the left analytical hemisphere 
is dominant. However, it is important to 
emphasize that the hemispheric differences 
are quantitative rather than qualitative in 
many aspects and that care should be taken 
in classifying individuals or groups as being 
dominated by the left or the right hemisphere. 
itis equally clear that the brain only reaches 
its full potential capacity by the functional 
co-operation of the two hemispheres. This 
new insight has important implications for the 
understanding of higher cognitive functions 
and has practical applications in many fields 
of social life and most particularly in educa- 
tion. Recent developments in various areas of 
brain research provide strong evidence that in 
teaching attention should be given to the spe- 
cific functions of the two hemispheres and 
both of them should be given the opportunities 
to fully develop their inherent faculties. 
Most educational systems in the Western 
world have until now been directed mainly 
towards the training of the left hemispheric 
capacities. In view of our expanding know- 
ledge of hemispheric processing it is impor- 
tant that the information provided by brain 
research should be integrated into the educa- 
tional system. As our knowledge of the func- 
tions of the brain develops, teaching methods 
should be modified to meet the specific needs 
not only of the norma! individual but also of 
those with hemispheric dysfunctions in order 
that they may be given the opportunities to 
develop the full functional capacities of their 
brains. [| 
 
DAVID GUSTAY OTTOSON, Swedish medical 
doctor, has been since 1984 Special Adviser on 
scientific questions to the Director-General of 
Unesco. Former head of the department of phy- 
siology at the Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
president of the Nobel Committee for Physiology 
or Medicine, and honorary professor at the Beij- 
ing Medical University, China, he is a member of 
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and of 
several international medical associations, in- 
cluding the International Brain Research 
Organization (IBRO) of which he is Secretary- 
General. 
Corpus callosum region 
     
   
     
   
Language 
  
yen 
   
Information 
from the left 
visual field 
Tactile information 
The study of the functions of the left and 
right cerebral hemispheres has made 
great progress due to the “split brain” 
technique, which consists in cutting the 
nerve fibres (primarily the corpus callo- 
sum) which interconnect the two hemi- 
spheres. In the early 1960s, this surgicai 
technique was applied to several patients 
suffering from severe epilepsy by a team 
of specialists ied by the U.S. neurophy- 
sioiogist Dr. Roger W. Sperry (Nobei Prize 
for Physiology or Medicine, 1981) and led 
to a series of remarkable observations of 
the functioning of each hemisphere separ- 
ately. It proved possibie, in particular, to 
locate linguistic capacities essentially in 
the left brain hemisphere and to establish 
that the right hemisphere has superior abi- 
lities in the field of vision and the recogni- 
tion of shapes. Thus, in the drawing above, 
the “right hemisphere” person (someone 
whose left hemisphere is inoperative) 
sees the flower, makes the gesture of 
smelling it, but cannot say its name. 
Dr
aw
in
g 
fr
om
 
Le
 
ce
rv
ea
u 
et
 
l'
es
pr
it
 
by
 
Gu
y 
La
zo
rt
he
s 
©
 
Fl
am
ma
ri
on
, 
1
9
8
2

## [Page 25](074933engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 70788: Science and tradition: 'two spokes of a single wheel'

Science and tradition by Basarab Nicolescu 
“I'wo spokes of a single wheel’ 
NY practising scientist knows from ex- 
A perience that our representation of the 
world is not wholly arbitrary. A scien- 
tific theoretical construction worthy of the 
name may be rejected because it does not fit 
the observed facts. There is something that 
resists. What other name than “reality” can 
we give to that something? 
To date, two conceptions of “reality” have 
dominated our representations of the world. 
“Reality” has been seen either as “objective” 
(with humanity cast in the role of “master” of 
. an external reality) or as “subjective”, created 
J : by humanity (humanity thus being the only 
source of “reality”). These two conceptions of 
  
{ 
reality stem, in my opinion, from a single 
/ vainglorious attitude—that of viewing human- 
\ 4 or ity as the static and absolute centre of 
J 43 “reality”. There is, however, a third possibility 
—_ which seems to me to be consistent with 
) modern scientific knowledge: “reality” is the 
J product of the interaction between the world 
1 and humanity, which are two aspects of one 
and the same reality. Modern scientists could 
testify about this interaction. 
The time may be ripe for us to incorporate 
the most general ideas of modern science into 
our culture. Is it going too far to suppose that 
‘ \ the discrepancy between an outmoded vision 
“ of the world and an infinitely more subtle and 
more complex reality (as revealed on the 
4 quantum scale or on the cosmological scale) 
is the source of many of the tensions and 
¢ conflicts that we witness every day, but on 
{ which we are virtually powerless to act? Is it 
not our attitude to reality that will determine, in 
4 the final analysis, the fate of our world? Is 
| ignorance of fundamental science not one of 
the causes of that anarchic technological pro- 
liferation which, although it has many ben- 
eficial effects, may also lead our species t 
self-destruction? 
w. Fundamental science is rooted in the 
1 nourishing earth of questions that are com- 
mon to every field of human knowledge: What 
is the meaning of life? What is man’s role in 
the cosmic process? What is nature's place in 
knowledge? Fundamental! science thus has 
| the same roots as religion, art or mythology. 
i Itis true that such questions have gradually p> 
® 
C 
[7] 
£ 
< 
E 
3 
o 
@ 
3 
= 
w 
c 
2 
© 
z 
a 
& 
a 
J 
I 
= 
2 
o 
3 
a 
8 
c 
© 
d 
= 
© 
he] 
I<) 
c 
) 
3 
= 
& 
[1] EL) 
2 
[+] 
£ 
o 
Finely sculpted figure on the marble tomb- 
stone of a Greek (4th century BC) evokes 
eternal questions of the meaning of life 
and man’s role in cosmic processes. 
25 
 

## [Page 26](074933engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 70788: Science and tradition: 'two spokes of a single wheel'

> 
Ph
ot
o 
Ni
el
s 
Bo
hr
 
In
st
it
ut
e 
©
 
MP
G-
Pr
es
se
bi
ld
, 
Mu
ni
ch
 
and increasingly come to be regarded as non- 
scientific and have been cast into the outer 
darkness of the irrational, the preserve of the 
poet, the mystic, the artist or the philosopher. 
The cause is probably the indisputable 
triumph—at the material level—of analytical, 
reductionist and mechanistic thought. Every- 
thing was, apparently, determined, even pre- 
determined. In this universe of false freedom it 
was amazing that anything could actually 
happen. As witnesses to an absolute, static 
and immutable order, scientists could no lon- 
ger be, as in the past, “natural philosophers”; 
they were obliged to become “technicians of 
the quantitative”. 
Modern science, starting with the advent of 
quantum physics at the turn of the twentieth 
century, reveals the fragility of such a para- 
digm. Quantum physics has demonstrated 
the groundlessness of blind faith in continuity, 
local causality and mechanistic determinism. 
Discontinuity came in through the front door— 
that of scientific experiment. Local causality 
gave way to a subtler concept of “global” 
causality~ “Objects” were replaced by re- 
lationships, interactions and interconnections 
among natural phenomena. Lastly, the clas- 
sical concept of matter was replaced by the 
infinitely more subtle concept of matter-ener- 
gy. The omnipotence of substance, the touch- 
Physicists Max Planck (right, 1858-1947) 
and Niels Bohr (1885-1962) were respec- 
tively pioneers in the development of the 
quantum theory and quantum mechanics 
in the early 20th century. The quantum 
theory grew up around Planck’s introduc- 
tion into physics of the concept of the 
discontinuity of energy. According to this 
concept light, which appears to be a 
steady stream or a continuous flow, is 
actually given off and absorbed in tiny 
units called quanta. The theory was de- 
veloped by Bohr and other great physi- 
cists into a system of “quantum mecha- 
nics” which has come to be used to de- 
scribe physical phenomena occurring on 
such a small scale that the system of 
mechanics deriving from the work of the 
17th-century English physicist Isaac New- 
ton breaks down. 
26  
stone of reductionists from time immemorial, 
was challenged: substance is simply one of 
the possible facets of energy. 
An unprecedented conceptual revolution 
which logically should have led to a new sys- 
“tem of values governing our everyday life in 
the community began with Planck and Ein- 
stein. However, three-quarters of a century 
after the emergence of the quantum image of 
the world, nothing has really changed. We 
continue to act, consciously or otherwise, 
according to the concepts of earlier centuries. 
The palpable, experimental discovery of a 
scale invisible to the sense organs, the quan- 
tum scale on which the laws are completely 
different from those of the visible scale of 
everyday life, has probably been modern sci- 
ence's most important contribution tc human 
knowledge. The new concept which has thus 
emerged—that of levels of materiality—is one 
of those that could underpin a new vision of 
the world. 
The world of quantum events is completely 
different from the world to which we are 
accustomed. 
The unity of opposites seems to reign in this 
new world: quantum entities are particles and 
waves atthe same time. The quantum events 
not separable as an object: the new world is 
that of universal interconnection, relationship 
> 
 
  
i 
Jn hl} 
| 
cA HL A 
ry 
A : 
: “i AY 
and interaction. Discontinuity and continuity 
coexist harmoniously (that is to say, “contra- 
dictorily”): energy varies by jumps, but our 
visible world nonetheless remains a world of 
continuity. The void is “full”—it contains, 
potentially, all events. The new world is one of 
perpetual effervescence, annihilation and 
creation, and movement at lightning speeds 
beyond comparison with those of rockets. 
Energy concentrated on the scale of the in- 
finitely small reaches fantastic values that are 
hardly imaginable on our own scale. 
But over and above the inadequacy of im- 
ages there is also the inadequacy of logic and 
language based on classical realism. Contra- 
diction, a concept that must be taken here in 
its philosophical sense of reciprocal construc- 
tion through antagonistic struggle, does not 
mean incoherence. It simply means that what 
is unified at one level of reality appears con- 
tradictory at another level of reality. 
Let us consider in this context the well- 
known example of the concept of com- 
plementarity introduced by Niels Bohr in 
1927: a quantum particle may be described 
approximately in terms of either a classic 
particle or a classic wave, but the quantum 
particle is neither a particle nor a wave. Parti- 
cle and wave appear to be two com- 
plementary aspects of the quantum particle, 
  
  
- 
re
 
 
—
—
 
al
 
Fr
 
Ba
 
" 
= 
-
 
-
 
. 
~
~
 
c
y
 
r
e
 
: 
—
—
 
=
 
—
 
~~
 
w
y
 
- 
l
a
 
S
m
 
= 
—
 
: 
Y
N
 
Ra
, 
e
r
 
By
 
—
—
 
E 
w
e
 
y 
_
—
—
 
ul 1 
A 
AU 
—] 1 
7) 
  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
M
u
s
é
e
 
de
 
'
H
o
m
m
e
,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 27](074933engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 70788: Science and tradition: 'two spokes of a single wheel'

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Do
mi
ni
qu
e 
Da
rb
oi
s,
 
Pa
ri
s  
The Buddhist tradition, like that of other 
great world religions, enshrines doctrines 
handed down over the centuries “by word 
of mouth, ... through the science of sym- 
bols, through writings or works of ar, 
myths orrites.” Above, graceful hands of a 
moulded clay Bodhisattva or future Bud- 
dha, in the rock-cut caves of Mai-chi-shan, 
a major Buddhist site in Kansu Province, 
northern China. 
Shamanism is the traditional religion of 
the Tungus people of Soviet eastern Siber- 
ia. The central figure is the clan shaman, 
left, who is a mystical priest, singer, 
prophet and healer. Found in many parts 
of the world but especially in the Arctic and 
central Asia, shamanism is based on the 
belief that the world is pervaded by good 
and evil spirits whom the shaman seeks to 
influence or control by communicating 
directly with them. 
which is, in this sense, both a particle and a 
wave. 
Complementarity in this sense, then, in 
contrast to the meaning of the word in every- 
day language, denotes the mutually exclusive 
aspects of quantum phenomena. 
The quantum particle defies representation 
by forms in space and in time, for itis obvious- 
ly impossible to make a mental representation 
(other than by mathematical equations) of 
something which is at the same time both 
particle and wave. 
This was an unprecedented challenge 
hurled by scientific experiment at the very 
foundations of our everyday thinking. For ex- 
ample, light behaves experimentally either as 
waves or as particles. But the results of scien- 
tific experiments are obtained, by definition, 
on our own scale in an unavoidably classical 
world that is incapable of conceiving of the 
unity of opposites. This separation between 
opposites is due to our logic, our language, 
and our way of interpreting results on an 
infinitely more complex scale than the quan- 
tum scale. On the quantum scale lightis one: it 
is both wave and particle. 
Is there really a connection between sci- 
ence and Tradition? Tradition means all the 
doctrines and religious or moral practices 
handed down over the centuries, originally by 
word of mouth or example, and the handing 
down of more or less legendary information 
about the past, also initially by word of mouth, 
from one generation to another. According to 
this definition, Tradition encompasses various 
“traditions”—Christian, Jewish, Islamic, Bud- 
dhist, Sufi and so on. 
Tradition is thus primarily concerned with 
the transmission of a body of knowledge 
about the spiritual evolution of man, his posi- 
tion in different “worlds”, and his relationship 
with different “universes”. This body of know- 
ledge is necessarily constant, stable and per- 
manent, despite the many forms through 
which it is transmitted and despite the distor- 
tions wrought by time and history. Transmis- 
sion is usually by word of mouth, but it may 
also be effected through the science of sym- 
bols, through writings or works of art, myths or 
rites. 
For an impartial researcher, there seems to 
be every reason to separate science from 
Tradition. 
Traditional knowledge is based on revela- 
tion, contemplation and direct perception of 
reality. In contrast, scientific knowledge (at 
least in its contemporary form) is based on the 
understanding of reality through mental pro- 
cesses, through logical and mathematical 
constructions. Traditional knowledge presup- 
poses the non-involvement of mental proces- 
ses, through the suppression of ordinary 
logical associations, whereas scientific know- 
ledge is possible precisely because the 
mental faculty is activated as intensely as 
possible. 
Traditional research assigns great import- 
ance to the body, sensations, feelings and 
faith, while scientific research excludes the 
researcher's own body, sensations, feelings 
and faith from the field of observation and the 
formulation of laws. The only instrument be- 
longing to the human body that is tolerated by 
science is the researcher's brain and its inhe- 
rent logical structures that are common to all 
researchers. Experimental measuring de- 
vices are assumed to possess an intrinsic 
objectivity and a quasi-absolute independ- 
ence of the researcher's own will. 
Traditional thought has always claimed that 
reality is not linked to time and space: it simply 
is. The traditional researcher, through long 
and unremitting effort, deliberately annihilates 
his own spatio-temporal identity in order to 
discover his true being, through dissolution in 
that one, all-embracing reality which, to be 
known, admits of no separation, no impurity 
due to projection in space or time. At the other 
extreme, the scientific researcher is obliged to 
postulate the existence of a separate objec- 
tive reality which is necessarily defined in 
terms of time and space. 
Another important difference between sci- 
ence and Tradition resides in the communic- 
able or non-communicable nature of an ex- 
periment. Traditional research claims the right 
to engage in experiments that cannot be com- 
municated through natural language. The tra- 
ditional experiment is unique and total, and 
transcends ordinary logical categories. A sci- 
entific experiment, on the other hand, is com- 
municable and repeatable. The conditions of 
scientific experimentation are defined in as 
objective a manner as possible. A scientific 
experiment can thus be repeated by any re- 
search team equipped with the appropriate 
scientific instruments. Experiment is even 
considered to be the supreme arbiter of sci- 
ence. The “argument from authority” does not 
exist in science (save as a marginal and tran- 
sient sociological phenomenon). A theory, p 
27

## [Page 28](074933engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 70788: Science and tradition: 'two spokes of a single wheel'

Ph
ot
o 
fr
om
 
Im
ag
es
 
de
s 
Sc
ie
nc
es
 
©
 
Al
be
rt
 
de
 
Vi
ss
ch
er
 
> 
    
even if it is of the greatest aesthetic beauty or 
formulated by the greatest physicist of the 
age, is unhesitatingly rejected if itis clearly in 
conflict with experimental data. 
Traditional knowledge therefore claims a 
“right to ineffectiveness” on the level of spa- 
tio-temporal materiality and on the level of the 
directly observable material world. Con- 
versely, science is interested essentially in 
maximum effectiveness on the level of direct 
materiality. It is precisely because of this 
effectiveness that the material life of humanity 
has been profoundly transformed by the tech- 
nological applications of the discoveries of 
fundamental science. 
Is there, then, any relationship between 
science and Tradition? 
Einstein's famous dictum: “The most in- 
comprehensible thing in the world is that the 
world is comprehensible” is often quoted. Pa- 
raphrasing these words, it could be said that 
the only “irrational” aspect of the world is its 
rationality. 
It is a constant source of wonder to scien- 
tists in their daily practice to see the harmony 
between their abstract, logical and mathema- 
tical constructions and experimental data. 
28 
The conformity between human thought and 
the intelligence concealed in natural laws acts 
as a third factor in the man-nature relation- 
ship, making a ternary entity that exists as a 
dynamic and inseparable unit. That confor- 
mity, an independent factor in the man-nature 
relationship, explains Einstein's insistence on 
the role of intuition as a form of immediate 
knowledge in the genesis of great scientific 
discoveries. Forgetfulness or ignorance of 
this third factor seems to be the source of 
contemporary reductionist schools of thought 
that proclaim a vulgar, false and static duality. 
Traditional experience is, indeed, incom- 
municable, but it is important to realize that 
some traditional thinkers feel a need to analy- 
se and explain to others in an intelligible man- 
ner what they experienced at the time of the 
experiment. Describing, analysing, ex- 
plaining: these constitute a procedure on 
which science is also built. 
. Is not faith in the structural rationality of the 
world the subtle link which binds traditional 
thought to scientific thought? 
The idea of the unity of opposites and the 
role of discontinuity in the genesis of move- 
ment permeates traditional thought. For many 
Science and Tradition “differ in their 
nature, methods and final purposes. But 
they ... converge toward the same centre: 
humanity and human progress.” Above, 
diagram from 16th-century French treatise 
on navigation shows location of the points 
of the compass in relation to the parts of 
the human body. 
“The only instrument belonging to the hu- 
man body that is tolerated by science is 
the researcher's brain and its inherent 
logical structures that are common to all 
researchers. Experimental measuring de- 
vices are assumed to possess an intrinsic 
objectivity and a quasi-absolute inde- 
pendence of the researcher's own will.” In 
this drawing by the artist Yésai (1788- 
1873), the Japanese astronomer Kasuga 
Ason Manumaro is depicted from the 
back, with a map of the heavens to evoke 
his scientific calling. 
traditional approaches (in both East and 
West), the outward manifestation is bound up 
with a dynamic process of combat and co- 
operation, annihilation and creation, eternal 
movement and eternal transformation, one 
might even say “eternal genesis”. Is this vi- 
sion of the world not surprisingly close to our 
own? 
Science and Tradition differ in their nature, 
methods and final purposes. But they can be 
viewed as two poles of a single contradiction, or 
as two spokes of a single wheel, which although 
different yet converge toward the same centre: 
humanity and human progress. [| 
 
BASARAB NICOLESCU is a French theoretical 
physicist at the National Centre for Scientific 
Research (CNRS), Paris. A specialist in the 
theory of elementary particles, he is also in- 
terested in the relationship between art, science 
and tradition and has published many articles on 
this subject in French and American journals. He 
is also the author of several published works, 
including Nous, la particule et le monde (1985). 
Ph
ot
o 
fr
om
 
Im
ag
es
 
de
s 
Sc
ie
nc
es
 
©
 
Al
be
rt
 
de
 
Vi
ss
ch
er

## [Page 29](074933engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
Ab
ba
s 
© 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
The human factor 
by Jean-Paul Ngoupandé 
HEN the peoples of the develop- 
W ing countries aspire to develop- 
ment, what they really want is to 
attain the normal condition of any form of 
human existence, whether collective or in- 
dividual, namely to be able to choose their 
course, to be responsible for their destiny, 
and hence to control all action concerning 
their lives. In Sartrian terms, they want to 
be able to act instead of being acted upon. 
The firm if inarticulate resistance of the 
peoples of developing countries to develop- 
ment controlled from abroad is now well 
known. It is a commonplace to say that the 
only certain result of twenty-five years’ de- 
velopment in the developing countries is 
that the development graft has not taken. In 
the great majority of cases the graft is re- 
jected because the populations concerned 
have a basically conflictual relationship 


### 70789: The Human factor in African development

  
in African development 
with “projects”. Mr Helmut Eggers, of the 
Directorate-General for Development at 
the Commission of the European Com- 
munities, noted recently that a review of 
experiments carried out over the years in 
the field of financial and technical co-opera- 
tion for development, notably for rural de- 
velopment, revealed the “self-evident 
truth” that the operations funded were not 
viable. As a large number of such opera- 
In May 1986 the United Nations General 
Assembly met in special session at min- 
isterial level “to consider in depth the cri- 
tical economic situation in Africa”. On this 
occasion Unesco published a document 
entitled Getting to the Roots of the Prob- 
lem, which describes what Unesco is 
doing, within its fields of competence, to 
help to build African economies cn sclid 
and lasting foundations. The introduction 
to the document draws attention to the 
growing acceptance of “a conception of 
development which goes beyond the mere 
listing of parameters relating solely to 
growth and material goods”, and which 
takes human fulfilment as its ultimate 
geal. The document emphasizes that a de- 
velopment process of this kind is not feasi- 
ble “unless account is taken of the cultural 
dimension, which in turn implies taking 
account of, and even if need be transcend- 
ing and integrating into the movement of 
innovation, the sociological characteris- 
tics and deep traditional roots of the peo- 
ples concerned.” Left, oil-rig worker at 
Port Harcourt, the port of south-east Niger- 
ia in the Niger Basin. 
29

## [Page 30](074933engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 70789: The Human factor in African development

p> tions do not survive when external funding 
comes to an end, their impact on the capac- 
ity for self-development of the rural groups 
concerned is insignificant, non-existent or 
negative. 
This can be verified in the field. 
“Development aid” leads to scenes of rack 
and ruin: miracles of engineering which are 
now abandoned factories; rusting machines 
which in some cases need only a fuse or a 
washer to work; land recently occupied by a 
“project” overgrown with vegetation; the 
spectacle of desolation which follows the 
departure of the “experts”, sometimes giv- 
ing the landscape of a developing country 
the strange appearance of an old industrial- 
ized country whereas in fact industrializa- 
tion has only just begun. 
The explanation is that since man is fun- 
damentally free, he aspires to be himself, 
“Despite the development policies which 
she has followed, Africa remains the conti- 
nent where per capita income ... is the 
lowest ... Everywhere the basic needs of 
mankind ... are very poorly met ... In our 
opinion, it is much less the theory and the 
policies of development which are in ques- 
tion than the institutional frameworks in 
which they are implemented (instability of 
exports, high degree of economic balkan- 
ization and nationalism, excessive facili- 
ties accorded to transnational corpor- 
ations, etc.). In Africa these conditions act 
as a brake on growth and lead to increas- 
ing dependence on developed countries 
...” (Science économique et développe- 
ment endogéne, “Economic Science and 
Endogenous Development”, Unesco, 
1986). Right, drought in Mali, 1983. On the 
banks of the Niger River, men hack at the 
dried out soil in order to build dams to 
capture hoped-for rainwater. 
30 
and it is useless for anyone else to try to 
make him happy against his will. 
Human fulfilment, the achievement of 
freedom in the field of economics, means 
being able to choose what one produces, to 
know why one produces it, and to know 
how it is produced. The cultivation of mil- 
let, corn or sorghum presents no problems 
to peasants in the least developed countries 
because these are the crops they want, and 
because they know the practical reasons for 
growing these crops. If on the other hand 
they must be continually persuaded to grow 
cotton, tobacco or even coffee, it is because 
these crops are imposed on them and they 
see no clear advantage for themselves in 
. growing them. It is significant that the most 
Ph
ot
o 
Se
ba
st
ia
n 
Sa
lg
ad
o 
jr.
 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
stubborn resistance to development con- 
trolled from elsewhere comes from rural 
people: they are the ones who have been the 
 
least affected by the great cultural changes 
effected by contact with industrial societies, 
and they are therefore the ones who aspire 
most to be themselves. As they account for 
between 75 and 90 per cent of the popula- 
tion in the developing countries, it is clear 
that they represent a tremendous force of 
inertia. 
In the least developed countries, which 
are primarily agricultural countries, the im- 
pact of this inertia on production is obvious: 
most of the labour force is unenthusiastic 
and feels unconcerned by its own work. 
And if famine is again invading these coun- 
tries today, in these times of overproduc- 
tion, it is not only because of worsening 
climatic conditions. The vagaries of the 
weather are nothing new to Black Africa. 
Far be it from us to insinuate that there was 
no famine in precolonial Africa.

## [Page 31](074933engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 70789: The Human factor in African development

Ph
ot
o 
Ge
or
ge
 
Ro
dg
er
 
©
 
M
a
g
n
u
m
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
However, as the twentieth century draws 
to a close, with the world having achieved 
an unprecedented level of technological 
progress, no one would suggest that climatic 
difficulties alone can explain famine. There 
are admittedly civil wars which disrupt pro- 
duction because of insecurity, mass popula- 
tion movements and the depletion of 
peasants’ reserves in order to feed armies. 
But the most important thing in our opinion 
is the lack of motivation of peasants to grow 
crops and observe production standards 
which they have not chosen. Endemic 
famine or chronic malnutrition in countries 
where there is neither civil war nor extreme 
variations in climate, abundantly prove that 
the human factor is still crucial. 
In a country such as the Central African 
Republic the drift from the land occurs 
chiefly in regions where the old cash crops 
inherited from colonial times are dominant. 
These crops are identified in the peasants’ 
minds with forced labour and the overseer’s 
whip, even though these came to an end 
twenty-five years ago. Cotton-growing 
areas have been so drained of labour that 
output has been affected, since virtually 
none but elderly workers remain. A recent 
survey carried out by a Bangui young peo- 
ple’s newspaper revealed that the vast 
majority of the young would prefer to starve 
to death in the capital rather than return to 
the countryside. 
Food aid also tends to make both con- 
sumption and production dependent on ex- 
ternal factors, and thus removes responsi- 
bility from indigenous producers. Food aid 
is closely related to the key problem of 
self-sufficiency in food production. Theo- 
retically this is a goal sought by everyone, 
but the conditions for achieving it are close- 
ly linked to the mobilization of the rural 
world. 
Food aid alienates the peasant and places 
him in a situation of enforced inferiority, 
powerless in the face of his destiny, his 
environment, and nature. It will be argued 
that such aid makes it possible to save hu- 
man lives which would be inevitably lost 
without it. This is true; just as it is also true 
that the by no means well-off men and 
women in Europe who make the effort to 
show their human solidarity are not all in- 
spired by Machiavellian motives. No one 
doubts the good faith of donors who have 
nothing to do with political or economic 
“decision-making” circles. However, food 
aid has a serious long-term effect on the 
viability of African agricultural production, 
which has become accustomed to relying on 
the outside world to bridge gaps in output. 
Still worse is the harmful effect of this 
“In the least developed countries of Africa 
those responsible for promoting develop- 
ment have been reduced to such a state of 
enforced inferiority that they are caught up 
in a vicious circle. If development is to be 
achieved, it must be achieved by the Afri- 
cans themselves; but since the Africans 
are still suffering from the after-effects of 
submission, and have no confidence in 
their own human resources, it follows that 
the aim of development must be to free 
them from this psychological block.” 
Above, workers in a Tanganyikan diamond 
mine, 1948. The country gained independ- 
ence in 1961, and together with the former 
Sultanate of Zanzibar formed the United 
Republic of Tanzania in 1964. 
31

## [Page 32](074933engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 70789: The Human factor in African development

To
ta
l 
A
g
r
i
c
u
l
t
u
r
e
 
African agriculture: 
the road to recovery 
The Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations (FAO) issued, on the 
occasion of its 14th Regional Conference 
for Africa in September 1986, the results of 
a far-reaching study on the food and agri- 
cultural crisis in Africa which the FAO initi- 
ated in 1984. The study, African Agricul- 
ture: The Next Twenty-Five Years, pro- 
vides a close analysis of the causes of this 
situation and recommends practical mea- 
sures that would make arecovery feasible. 
Contrary to widespread belief, drought 
is not the only cause of the suffering and 
famine which affect so many African coun- 
tries. The problem is rooted in a crisis 
which has been undermining agriculture 
for over twenty years. Per capita food pro- 
duction has decreased by almost 20 per 
cent since 1961 and, although they were 
practically self-sufficient ten or twenty 
years ago, most African countries are to- 
day incapable of feeding themselves. If 
current trends persist, the food situationin 
Africa by the year 2010 will be even worse 
than it was at the most critical juncture of 
the 1983-1985 famine (see Figure 1). 
Six factors, according to the authors of 
the FAO study, are mainly responsible for 
the crisis: a bias in government policy 
against agriculture (to which most coun- 
tries devote less than 10 per cent of their 
budgets); high population growth rates 
(with an urban population growing much 
more rapidly than the rural population); a 
decline in the rate at which arable land and 
harvested area are being developed (see 
Figure 2); a lack of technological change, 
which is leading to a widespread stagna- 
tion or even decline in crop yields; acceler- 
ated degradation of the environment; an 
external economic environment that is 
making it more and more difficult for most 
African countries to balance their budgets. 
Many remedies have been suggested, 
including various forms of aid to farmers 
Figure 1 
Self-sufficiency if trends continue* 
(notably incentive policies), institutional 
reforms and the improvement of infras- 
tructures (roads, railways, ports). Special 
attention is being given to the protection 
and development of natural resources. 
To halt the degradation of agricultural 
land, for which man is the main culprit, 
action has already been taken in a number 
of African countries (including Somalia, 
Kenya, Malawi, Senegal, Sierra Leone, 
Morocco and Lesotho) in many cases with 
highly positive results, suggesting that 
under certain conditions African agricul- 
ture could be more productive than it is at 
present. 
To take one example, on the Mossi 
Plateau of Burkina Faso, simple techni- 
ques of water harvesting have enabled 
village co-operatives and farmers to bring 
abandoned land back into production; in 
several villages rice yields have doubled. 
This successful experiment, if it was ex- 
tended, would allow the exploitation of 
millions of hectares of potential plough- 
land in the semi-arid regions of the con- 
tinent. 
Figure 2 
  
When they became independent, most 
African countries inherited poorly de- 
veloped transport networks designed pri- 
marily to export commodities to the home 
ports of the former colonial powers. Today 
African agriculture urgently requires an 
efficient infrastructure for supply and dis- 
tribution. Above, working on a railway line 
at Ouagadougou, capital of Burkina Faso. 
Trends for arable land development (percentages) 
*assuming projected deficits are met by net imports 
North Africa 
  
 
West Africa 
 
North Africa 
  
  
 
 
Central Africa 
 
J Rat Hep Sudano-Sahel 
 
ov
 
c [«
N 
He
 
o 
Lee
 
3 
Fe.
 
o an
 
; 
I) =
 © 
  
BLY 
 
East Africa 
 
L 
  
South Africa 
PE En CE ER CO TT Ter eT i a [afatinnd iran ed Se rr eR a Te AY A rE ent SS AY A i ey 
South Africa 
   
L_
f-
+ 
  
05 
Tn 1979-1981 [12010 
  
  
Total Africa 
i] 
| _ 
1.0 0 1 
J 1961-1963 to 1971-1973 [11971-1973 to 1981-1983 
Source: African Agriculture: The Next 25 Years, Main Report, © FAO, Rome, 1986 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Jo
hn
 
Vi
nk
 
N

## [Page 33](074933engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 70789: The Human factor in African development

Pp dependency on the creativity of the African 
peoples and their determination to cope 
with the vagaries of nature. 
Increasing numbers of Africans now 
think that nothing is more degrading than to 
be in permanent receipt of food aid and 
believe that Africans themselves should be 
able to meet their basic food requirements. 
It is understandable to call for international 
solidarity when an exceptionally serious dis- 
aster occurs, but the continued showering 
of African countries with foreign foodstuffs 
can give no cause for satisfaction. It is only 
by fully pledging their labour and their re- 
sponsibility, and by being constantly faced 
with their responsibilities as human beings, 
that Africans will overcome their terrible 
century-old handicap of defeatism, of lack 
. of confidence in themselves and their des- 
tiny. 
In the least developed countries of Africa 
those responsible for promoting develop- 
ment have been reduced to such a state of 
enforced inferiority that they are caught up 
in a vicious circle. If development is to be 
achieved, it must be achieved by the Afri- 
cans themselves; but since the Africans are 
still suffering from the after-effects of sub- 
mission, and have no confidence in their 
own human resources, it follows that the 
aim of development must be to free them 
from this psychological block. 
One of the least frequently mentioned 
factors of dehumanization is the slave- 
trade. Its extent, duration and especially its 
cruelty were such that it has left immeasur- 
able psychological after-effects in Black 
Africa. In terms of extent and numbers of 
victims, its impact affected the entire con- 
tinent; it lasted for more than three centur- 
ies and was characterized by great brutality. 
Folk imagery still vehicles the phantasms 
born of the shock of this experience. The 
slave trade also explains the limited territo- 
rial settlement of populations which fer 
more than three centuries were continually 
forced to flee. This led to the incessant 
The analysis of development processes in 
different social and cultural contexts is 
one of Unesco’s major preoccupations. In 
November this year an international meet- 
ing of experts is being held at Unesco’s 
Paris HQ on the theme of “Poverty and 
Progress”. The meeting, organized by Un- 
esco in co-operation with the United Na- 
tions University, will examine from a wide 
range of viewpoints the problems of 
poverty, marginalization and exclusion 
caused by certain development proces- 
ses. Right, coal-mining village in Bihar, 
one of India’s leading mineral-producing 
States. 
migratory movements in the seventeenth, 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries which, 
in certain regions of Central Africa, histo- 
rians find it impossible to disentangle. 
Fear has become a kind of second nature 
to people who live in a climate of perma- 
nent insecurity. The continuing oppression 
of post-colonial Black African dictatorships 
maintained and sometimes increased this 
fear. 
This then is the post-colonial Black man, 
who is now responsible for promoting de- 
velopment: he is traumatized; he has lost 
confidence in himself, in his destiny, in his 
human capabilities. 
Any talk of development which today 
fails to take account of this terrible burden 
borne by post-colonial Black Africa is simp- 
ly preaching in the wilderness. The impossi- 
bility of achieving economic take-off brings 
us back to the most important question: the 
human question. Psychological blocks, the 
after-effects of traumatism caused by 
aggression, oppression and humiliation, are 
the first obstacle to mobilization for de- 
velopment. Statistics, projects, plans, bi- 
lateral or multilateral aid have for twenty- 
five years come up against this insurmount- 
able wall of human despair. 
It is possible to break this vicious circle by 
stating the problem of development in a 
different way from that defined by econo- 
mists. In economic theory, development 
means increasing material production in 
order to lead to the liberation of man. To 
posit this relationship of cause and effect 
between the production of material wealth 
and emancipation is to enter a vicious circle. 
But by positing development as both mate- 
rial increase and human emancipation, in 
our view it becomes possible to avoid this 
vicious circle. 
By transforming their environment in 
order to increase material production and 
improve their living conditions, people 
transform themselves, and take one step 
towards their liberation. Emancipation is 
  
not simply the outcome of the material 
results achieved, nor simply a result of the 
material wealth provided by development; 
it is a part of the very process by which 
Black Africans change their material con- 
dition, and therefore goes hand in hand 
with the process of material production. 
But this is only possible on one vital 
condition: that the process of material pro- 
duction should be initiated and conducted 
by the Black African himself. This means 
that by his own efforts, by trial and error, 
the experience he acquires and the progress 
he makes, Black African man will gradually 
learn to know his own capabilities, and thus 
regain confidence in himself when he re- 
alizes that he is capable of creating. It is 
from the ordeal of success or failure, 
whether immediate or in the long term, that 
he will learn, and through that ordeal he will 
transform himself. [| 
 
JEAN-PAUL NGOUPANDE is the Minister of 
Education of the Central African Republic and 
former head of the faculty of letters and human 
sciences of the University of Bangui. The present 
article has been extracted from a study “The 
Aims of Development in the Context of the Least 
Developed Countries”, which was presented to a 
specialist meeting on “The Aims of Develop- 
ment”, held in Budapest, Hungary, in October 
1986. The meeting was one of a series of semi- 
nars on philosophical aspects of development 
which Unesco has organized since 1978. 
Ww
 
Ww
 
Ph
ot
o 
(©)
 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
La
bo
ur
 
Of
fi
ce

## [Page 34](074933engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 70790: 1986: Year of Peace, 11: scientists and peace

1986: Year of Peace / 11 
Scientists and peace 
Conference on the theme “Scientists 
A on the Problems of Peace and Pre- 
vention of Nuclear War” was held in 
Moscow from 27 to 29 May in the context of 
the International Year of Peace. Those 
attending the Conference included not only 
Soviet delegates but also over a hundred 
scientists from 44 countries representing all 
the continents. 
Representatives of Mr. Javier Perez de 
Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, and of Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, 
Director-General of Unesco, emphasized the 
importance of a conference whose theme, as 
the representative of the Director-General of 
Unesco pointed out, “epitomizes the struggle 
in which mankind is engaged to save our 
planet and humanity from a nuclear holo- 
caust.” 
The ultimate aim of the Conference was to 
work towards the total elimination of the nu- 
clear arsenal and other means of mass des- 
truction before the year 2000, an aim which, 
like all the initiatives stimulated by the Interna- 
tional Year of Peace, has been warmly wel- 
comed by world opinion. The proposals put 
forward by the Soviet Union in order to attain 
this objective were spelled out in detail in a 
report entitled “For a world free from nuclear 
arms in the 21st century”, presented by Mr. 
Anatoly Dobrynin, Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union. 
After a report on the activity of the Commit- 
tee of Soviet Scientists for Peace and against 
the Nuclear Threat, presented by the Commit- 
tee’s chairman, Mr. Evgeniy Velikhov, a num- 
ber of study groups examined certain topics in 
greater depth, notably “Prevention of the mili- 
tarization of space and international co-oper- 
ation”, “Current problems of nuclear disarma- 
ment and the limitation of conventional 
armaments” and “Probable consequences of 
a nuclear conflict”. 
New information presented by Mr. Georgy 
Golitsyn, a Corresponding Member of the 
USSR Academy of Sciences, speaking on 
behalf of a large group of Soviet scientists, 
broughtthe “nuclear winter” scenario (see the 
Unesco Courier, May 1985) into clearer focus. 
In the event of an atomic war, the discharge of 
soot after nuclear explosions into the upper 
layers of the troposphere and into the strato- 
"sphere would in themselves be enough to 
cause serious climatic disturbances. 
Sir Frederick Warner (United Kingdom) 
presented the results of research into the 
environmental consequences of nuclear war, 
~ carried out as part of the ENUWAR project of 
the Scientific Committee on Problems of the 
Environment (SCOPE) of the International 
Council of Scientific Unions. Some 300 re- 
searchers from 30 countries are taking part in 
this work. 
One speaker, Mr. B. Raushenbakh (USSR) 
pointed out the dangers for humanity inherent 
in the increasing computerization of the tech- 
nologies of destruction. Mr. S. Gustavsson 
(Sweden) stressed the need to develop furth- 
erinternational legal safeguards with a view to 
avoiding nuclear war. Messrs R. Khan (India), 
0. Obassanjo (Nigeria), T. Berendt (Hungary) 
and |. Ivanov (USSR) emphasized the dis- 
astrous consequences of the arms race, 
especially for developing countries, while Mr. 
A. Fokin (USSR) drew attention to the fact that 
chemical weapons, which are less complex 
and costly than the nuclear arsenal, are within 
reach of a larger number of countries and that 
their banning is all the more urgent. Finally, 
Mr. B. Sendov (Bulgaria) recalled that peace 
education for the young generation was one of 
the keys to future peace. 
At the close of the Conference, an “Appeal 
to the Scientists of the World” was adopted. 
The only way to save humanity, it states, is 
that of genuine disarmament and international 
co-operation in every field of constructive 
action: from space exploration to the exploita- 
tion of the ocean depths, from environmental 
protection to the non-military use of atomic 
energy, from the solution of the world hunger 
problem to the elimination of epidemics and 
disease. n 
MEXNPABHTENLC TBE HMAY 
OKE AMOI PASVNECKAY 
KOMMULCEW       
MOYTA CCCP 15 
MOYTA (HHH 10 
YENOBEK H SHOCOEPA    
noua cece «10 
To commemorate the 40th anniversary of 
the founding of Unesco, the Soviet Union 
has issued a series of stamps entitled 
“Unesco Programmes in the USSR”. The 
three stamps at left are dedicated (in 
ascending order) to the intergovernmental 
programme on Man and the. Biosphere 
(MAB), to the International Geological Cor- 
relation Programme (IGCP) carried out 
jointly by Unesco and the International 
Union of Geological Sciences, and to the 
International Hydrological Programme 
(IHP). The other two stamps feature (be- 
low) computer science and (above) The 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Com- 
mission (10C). 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 78 French francs. Binder for a year's issues: 
56 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER”, plus date of issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles reprinted must bear 
author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied cn request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed adi- 
cles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and headlines are written 
by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published 
in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance 
by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Courier is pro- 
duced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (1) Unesco, 
7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris: (2) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.; (3} N.C.R. Micro- 
card Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, New York, 
U.S.A; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, 
Ohio 44691, U.S.A, 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Assistant Editor-in-chief: Olga Rodel 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
Editors: 
English: Roy Malkin 
Caroline Lawrence 
French: Alain Lévéque 
Neda el Khazen 
Spanish: Francisco Fernandez-Santos 
Russian: Nikolai Kuznetsov 
Arabic: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Braille: Frederick Potter 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
llustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Georges Servat, George Ducret 
Promotion: Fernando Ainsa 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Speclal projects: Peggy Julien 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in- 
Chief in Paris 
Non-Headquarters editions 
German: Werner Merkli (Beme) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ram Babu Sharma (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido {Tel Aviv) 
Persian: 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (!stanbuf) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said {Karachi} 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur} 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Git (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah {Dar-es-Salaam} 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Lina Svenzén (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larraftaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
34 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) - Dépét légal : Ct - Novembre 1986 
PHOTOCOMPOSITION : Ateliers de 'UNESCO - PHOTOGRAVURE. IMPRESSION : MAURY-IMPRIMEUR S.A., Zl. route d'Etampes, 45330 MALESHERBES.

## [Page 35](074933engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

International Voluntary 
Service campaigns 
for Unesco and the Courier 
Ever since it was founded on Unesco's initiative 
in 1948, the Co-ordinating Committee for Inter- 
national Voluntary Service (CCIVS), based at 1 
rue Miollis, 75015 Paris, has been committed to 
strengthening international solidarity between 
the world's young people and to providing a 
forum for those wishing to create a climate 
favourable to peace. 
The CCIVS is composed of 110 organizations 
which, with their local branches, are present in 
more than 100 countries of North, South, East 
and West. Through its wide range of activities 
and its publications, the Committee plays a lead- 
ing role in promoting many kinds of voluntary 
service throughout the- world, including work- 
camps, intercultural exchanges, literacy cam- 
paigns, training programmes, activities for the 
protection of the environment and the cultural 
heritage, and for rural development. 
As a contribution to the International Year of 
Peace, and a follow-up to International Youth 
Year, the CCIVS has organized in co-operation 
with Unesco, a conference which will be held in 
November 1986 in Accra (Ghana) on the theme 
of “The Mobilization of Rural Youth for the Prom- 
otion of Peace, Disarmament and Develop- 
ment”, as well as the 23rd Conference of volun- 
tary service organizers, the theme of which will 
be “Working Together for Mutual Respect, Co- 
operation and Peace”. 
In order to create direct contact between Un- 
esco and the public, the CCIVS has launched a 
campaign, on the occasion of Unesco's 40th 
anniversary, for a thousand young people to 
subscribe to the Unesco Courier. 
The CCIVS has appealed to other non-gov- 
ernmental organizations to commemorate Un- 
esco’s 40th anniversary by launching similar 
campaigns, in order to collect as many subscrip- 
tions as possible to Unesco publications. [|   
A Unesco best-seller 
 
Study Abroad 1987-1988 
The latest (25th) edition of Unesco’s popular reference book 
detailing opportunities for further study and training 
IL . N 
 
A 
- 
A hl son 
x wn y§ 
r 
f
a
d
 
B
I
G
 
by 
"o
y 
P
a
n
e
.
 
: 
i
 
available in more than 124 countries: 
® Lists some 3,700 university and 
postgraduate courses in all fields; 
® Financial assistance offered by 
international organizations, 
governments, foundations and 
universities; 
® Entrance requirements, study 
fees, cost of living and facilities 
available to handicapped students. 
And for the first time 
provides information on: 
® Opportunities available to those who 
are over university admission age 
and/or who do not fulfil the required 
academic conditions; 
® Study opportunities offered to adults 
who already have practical 
experience in their field. 
1,348 pages 
Trilingual: English/French/Spanish 
68 French francs 
ISBN 92-3-002337-X 
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco periodicals 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
AUSTRALIA. Hunter Publications, 58a Gipps St., Collingwood, Victoria 3066; 
Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW: Penodicals: Domine Pty. Subscriptions Dept., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of Australia, P.O. Box 
175, 5th floor, Ana House, 28 Elizabeth St, Melbourne, Victoria 3000. 
AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. 
BAHRAIN. United Schools International, Arab Regional Office, P O. Box 726, 
Bahrain. BARBADOS. University of the West Indies Bookshop, Cave Hill 
Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown. BELGIUM. "Unesco Courier” Dutch 
edition only: N.V. Handelmaatschappy Keesing Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 
Deurne-Antwerpen. French edition and general Unesco publications agent. 
Jean de Lannoy, 202 Ave. du Roi, 1060 Brussels, CCP 000-0070823-13. 
BRAZIL Publicagoes Tecnicas Internacionais Ltda, Processing Dept, R 
Peixoto Gomide 209, 01409, Sao Paulo SP. CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. 
Ltd., Central Distnbution Centre, 61, Sparks Street, Ottawa ONT K1P SR1. 
CHINA. China National Publications Import and Export Corporation, P.O. Box 
88, Beijing CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T L., Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1; Ve 
Smeckach 30, P.O.B. 790-111-27 Prague 1 (Permanent display); Zahranicm 
hteratura, 11 Soukenicka, Prague 1. For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag.-Pub- 
ishers, Hurbanovo nam. 6,893 31 Bralislava-CSSR. DENMARK. Munk- 
sgaard Export-OG, Tidsskrittservice, 35 Norre Sogade, DK-1970 Kobenhavn 
K. EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for Unesco Publications, 
No. 1 Talaat Harb St., Cairo, FINLAND. Akateeminen Kinakauppa, P. O. Box 
128, SF-00100 Helsinki. Suomalainen Kinakauppa Oy, P.O. Box 2, 01641 
Vantas 64. Rautikina Oy, Subscription Department, P.O. Box 1,01641 Vantas 
64. FRANCE. Librairie de |'Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. CCP 
12598-48. GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchhaus Leipzig, Post 
fach 140, 710 Leipzig, or Irom Internationalen Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. 
FED, REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco Couner: Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher 
Unesco-Kurier Vertrieb, Basaltstrasse 57, D5300 Bonn 3. GHANA. Fides 
Entreprises, P.O. Box 14129, Accra. GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. 
GREECE John Mihalepoulos & Son SA, International Booksellers, P.O. Box 
10073, 541 10 Thessaloniki G C Eleftheroudakis SA, International Bookstore, 
4 Nikis Street, Athens T 126. Kostarakis Brothers, International Booksellers, 2 
Hippocratous Street, Athens. HONG KONG. Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock 
Rd., Kowloon. Hong Kong Gow. Information Services, Publication Centre, 
Baskerville House, 22 ce St. HUNGARY. Kultura-Bushimport-ABT, P.O B. 
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
149-H-1389, Budapest 62. ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson and Co., H.F. 
Halnarstraeli 9, Reykjavik. INDIA. Onent Longman Lid.. Kamani Marg, Ballard 
Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chitaranjan Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salar, 
Mount Read, Madras 2, 5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh, Hyderabad 500001 (AP): 80/1 
Mahatma Gandhi Rd., Bangalore 560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad- 
500001. Sub-depots: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., 17 Park St., Calcutta 
70016; Scindia House, New Dethi. INDONESIA. Indira P.T., JI Dr. Sam 
Ratulangie 37, Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. Iranian National Comrmission for Unesco, 
1188 Englab Ave., Rostam Give Building, Zip Code 13158, P.O. Box 11365- 
4498, Teheran. IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd., Bally- 
mount Ad., Wallanstown, Dublin 12. ISRAEL. A.B.C. Bookstore Ltd, P.O. Box 
1283, 71 Allenby Rd., Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa {Libreria Commissionaria 
Sanson, S.p.A}, Via Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence. 
JAPAN. Eastern Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 
113. KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, 
Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd, POB 2942, Kuwall; {or the 
Unesco Courier: Farafalla Press Agency, P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwall. 
LUXEMBDURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 
22-11. MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic St., Valletta. MAURITIUS. Nalanda 
Company Ltd., 30 Bourbon St, Port-Louis. MEXICO. DILITSA, Distnbwdora 
Literaria SA, Apartado Postal 24 448, Mexico DF 06700. N & E Omicron SA, 
Bookseller & Subscriptions Agency, Col Condesa Deleg Cuahtemoc, Aparta- 
do Postal 40 075, 06140 Mexico DF. MONACO. British Library, 30 Bd. des 
Mouiins, Monte Carlo. NEPAL. Saha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. 
NETHERLANDS. Faxon Europe, P.O. Box 197, 1000 AD Amsterdam. NEW 
ZEALAND. Government Publishing, P Q. Box 14277-Kilbirnie, Wellington, 
130 Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma St., P O. Box 857, 
Hamilton; Princes St., P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin. NIGERIA. The University 
Bookshop of Ife; The University Bookshop of Ibadan, P.O. 286. NORWAY. 
Johan Grundt Tanum, P.0O.B. 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1; Narvesen A/S, Litteraturt 
Jenesten, P.O.B. 6125 Etterstad, N 0602 Oslo 6; Universitets Bokhandelen, 
Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Blindern, Oslo 3. PAKISTAN. Mirza Book 
Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid--azam, P.O. Box No. 729, Lahore 3; Unesco 
Publications Centre, Regional Office for Book Development in Asia and the 
Pacific, 39 Delhi Housing Scciety, P.O Box 8950, Karachi 29. POLAND. 
QOrpan-impon, Palac Kultury | Nauki, Warsaw; Ars Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie 
Przedmiescie No.7, 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lida. 
Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. SAUDI ARABIA. Dar al Watan, 
Olaya Main Street, Ibrahim Bin Sulaym Building, Riyadh. SINGAPORE. 
Federal Publications {S} Pte Ltd Times Jurong, 2 Jurong Port Rd., Singapore 
2261. SDUTH AFRICA. American & Overseas Publications (Pty} Ltd., Sub- 
scription Service, P.O. Box 42476, Johannesburg. Universitas Books (Pty) 
Ltd, P.O. Box 775, Pretoria 0001. Van Schaik’s Bookstore {Pty} Ltd., Libn 
Building, 268 Church Street, Pretoria 0001. Central News Agency Ltd., Group 
Overseas Penodical Div. P.O. Box 613, Cape Town 8000. SRI LANKA. Lake 
House Bookshop, 100 Sw Chitampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, 
Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. 
SURINAME. Suriname National Commission for Unesco, P.Q. Box 2943, 
Paramaribo. SWEDEN. For the Unesco Courier: Svenska FN Forbundet, 
Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 §-104, 65 Stockholm; Wennergren-Willams AB, 
Nordenflychtsvagen 70, 8-104, 25 Stockholm; Esselte Tidsknftscentraien, 
Gamia Brogatan 26, Box 62 -101, 20 Stockholm. SWITZERLAND. Eurcpa 
Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich; Librairie Payot, Rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 
11, C.C.P. 12-236; Librairies Payot also in Lausanne, Basle, Berne, Vevey, 
Montreux, Neuchatel and Zurich. SYRIA, Aleppo University Books Estabhsh- 
ment, University of Aleppo, Aleppo. TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, 
P.0.8. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Lid., 40-42 
Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok; Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Ave., Bangkok. TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO. 
National Comnussion for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St., St. Clair, Trinidad W 1. 
TURKEY, Haset Kitapevi A S., Istikldl Caddesi, No 469, Posta Kutusu 219, 
Beyoglu, Istanbul. UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, Agency Sec- 
tion Publications CTR, Periodicals Seclion-Room 008. Nine Elms Lane, 
London SW8 50R, and H.M.S.0. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast, 
Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol; for scientific maps only: McCarta Ltd., 122 
King's Cross Rd., London WC1X 9DS. UNITED STATES. Bernan Associates- 
UNIPUB, Perodicals Department, 10033-F King Highway, Lanham MD 
20706. USSR. V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, Ul Dimutrova 39, Moskva 
113095. YUGOSLAVIA. Miadost, llica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankaneva Zalozba, 
Zopraneva 2, Lubljana; Nolit. Terazie 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA. Nahonal 
Educational Distnbution Co. of Zambia Lid, P.O. Box 2664, Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Lid., 1 Norwich Union Centre, Harare. 

## [Page 36](074933engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
E 
ta 
 
 
 
AR ce at Aa? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
14 
fr 
x ar, 4) jv 
Ox 
; - 
 
 
Np 
Zoe) it 
  
 
 
a 
—
—
 
— 
of 
B
A
T
 A 
Bd 
wok 
bog A
E
H
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 