# [074875](074875engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](074875engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
   
  
+ ..Auniversal genius 
oe in Central Asia 
i thousand years ago 
AL-BIRUN 
astronomer 
historian 
botanist 
pharmacologist 
geologist 
o poet 
philosopher 
mathematician 
geographer 
humanist 

## [Page 2](074875engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

TREASURES 
WORLD A 
  
: 
: 
» 
[ 
w
n
 
  y Bronze defiance in Venice 
Dominating the great portal of St. Mark's Cathedral in Venice, these colossal gilded 
bronze horses have snorted defiance through nearly 24 centuries. Attributed to the 
famous 4th century B.C. Greek sculptor Lysippus, they graced the Trajan Forum in 
~ Rome until the Emperor Constantine moved them to Constantinople RUCK URCLIT a" 
A.D. In 1204, the Doge Enrico Dandolo had them shipped to Venice, where they stood 
over the portal of St. Mark's till 1797 when Napoleon Bonaparte took them to ETE OG) 
adorn the triumphal arch of the Petit Carrousel. Finally, in 1815, they were returned 
    
to St. Mark's. Today the preservation of Venice, threatened not only by the ravages 
of time but also by flooding, pollution and industrialization, is the object of an inter- 
national campaign launched by Unesco in 1966. In 1973 the Italian Parliament endorsed 
Unesco’s initiative by voting 450 millions dollars for the protection of the city. ‘ 
" — 
a a i 
 
= 
a
 
+ 
=e
 
=
 
4 
= 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Fu
lv
io
 
Ro
it
er
, 
Ve
ni
ce
 

## [Page 3](074875engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"mCourier 
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
 
Page | 
JUNE 1974 4 | AL-BIRUNI 
27TH YEAR A universal genius who lived in Central Asia { 
a thousand years ago i 
English Arabic Hebrew 10 | THE LONG ODYSSEY ; 
French Japanese Persian In the footsteps of a Muslim scholar i 
Spanish Italian Dutch By Jacques Boilot 
Russian Hindi Portuguese 
German Tamil Turkish 14 | THE NINE-DOMED MOSQUE OF BALKH 
Photo report iJ 
Published monthly by UNESCO = 
The United Nations 16 | A PIONEER OF SCIENTIFIC OBSERVATION 
Educational, Scientific By Mohammed Salim-Atchekzai 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 19 MINIATURE ANTHOLOGY OF AL-BIRUNI : 
Annual subscription rate 24 French francs Special eight-page supplement : 
* 27 | AL-BIRUNI versus AVICENNA 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in IN THE BOUT OF THE CENTU RY 
pean: For lst of disouors sos inside bat cover. U8 ® Two youthful geniuses debate the nature of the universe : 
be reprinted providing the oreqrt ine reads. - Ropanted from By Seyyed Hossein Nasr ; 
fi, Snesco, COURIER." pls dhe of sit nd | 
printed. must bear author's name. ®Non-copyright photos 28 AL-BIRUNI ON THE SCREEN 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot if 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply Photo report 
coupon covering postage, Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent v 
EEE CotRith, CO oF those of the editors of the 30| LOST HORIZONS IN THE LAND OF POETRY 4 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- Vanished works of a scientist turned man of letters | 
film and/or microfiche) by : (1) University Microfilms K x 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A. ; (2) N.C.R. By Zabihollah Safa a 
Microcard Edition, Indian Head, Inc., Ill West 40th 
old Mansfiotd Had Wasa) Soil oye ce. | 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the 32 ‘FATHER OF ARABIC PHARMACY i= 
Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by IN M EDIEVAL IS LAM 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- k 
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. By Hakim Mohammed Said 
* 
Editorial Office 37 | MANDRAKE THE MAGICIAN . 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris = France Photo report 1 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 38 | FREE-WHEELING PHILOSOPHER 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief By Seyyed Hossein Nasr 
René Caloz 
| 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 2| TREASURES OF WORLD ART ; 
Olga Rodel Bronze defiance in Venice (Italy) oe 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) J 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) 
German Edition : Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 1 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo)   
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : Ramesh Bakshi (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition : N.D. Sundaravadivelu (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition : Mefra Telci (Istanbul) 
Assistant Editors 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Illustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard 
Research : Christiane Boucher 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
Cover 
  
Al-Biruni as he may have looked in his 
prime. An imaginary portrait to mark 
the thousandth anniversary of the birth 
of the great Islamic scholar in 973. 
Photo © APN 
All correspondence should be addressed to 
the Editor-in-Chief in Paris No
 
6 
= 
19
74
 
M
C
 
74
-3
-3
00
 

## [Page 4](074875engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

4 
Few periods in man’s history can boast the existence of one of those 
rare intellectual giants whose genius not only embraces the knowledge 
of his time but reaches out to uncharted, unknown frontiers. Such a 
man was al-Biruni, born a thousand years ago, who ranks among the 
greatest scholars of the Islamic world. Astronomer, mathematician, 
physicist, geographer, historian, linguist, ethnologist, pharmacologist 
as well as poet, novelist and philosopher—al-Biruni’s contribution to 
human learning was unique. Despite the political upheavals which 
interrupted his work, his sheer output was prodigious. He had a 
scientific spirit in the full sense of the term and displayed a spirit of 
understanding and respect for other cultures remarkable for his time. 
His contribution was such that many scholars put him on a par with 
or even higher than the great Avicenna. Yet unlike Avicenna, al-Biruni 
is virtually unknown except to the rare specialist. The Unesco Courier 
hopes that this special number will provide a small insight into the 
extraordinary genius of this universal scholar and man of science. 


### 50318: Al-Biruni: a universal genius who lived in Central Asia a thousand years ago

Abu al-Rayhan Mohammed i Ahmad 
AL-BIRUNI 
A universal genius 
who lived 
In Central Asia 
a thousand years ago 
  
by Bobojan Gafurov 
 
BOBOJAN GAFURQV, of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, is director of the 
Academy's Institute of Oriental Studies and chairman of the Unesco-sponsored 
International Association for the Study of the Cultures of Central Asia (comprising 
Afghanistan, India, Iran, Mongolia, Pakistan and U.S.S.R.). Of Tajik nationality, he 
is the author of many works on Asian history and culture. 
1000 AT CO 
— - 
  
CUMHURIYET! ,.,, 
250 
KURUS 
       
  
A. al-Rayhan Mohammed 
ibn Ahmad al-Biruni, the great Central 
Asian scholar, is one of those 
intellectual giants whose stature 
continues to grow as we become more 
fully acquainted with their legacy. 
One hundred years ago, when al- 
Biruni's Chronology of Ancient Nations 
was published in Russian, only one 
facet of his many talents was apparent, 
that of an outstanding medieval his- 
torian. But as more of his works were 
discovered—treatises on mathematics, 
geography and astronomy—and the 
more deeply they were studied, the 
higher al-Biruni stood out above the 
mass of his contemporaries. 
Al-Biruni was so far ahead of his 
time that his most brilliant discoveries 
seemed incomprehensible to most of 
the scholars of his day. He was the 
first to arrive at an amazingly simple 
formula for measuring the earth's

## [Page 5](074875engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 50318: Al-Biruni: a universal genius who lived in Central Asia a thousand years ago

10=. 1973 var Je 
IRAN 
SIAL 
MILLENARY OF AL - BIRUNI 
    
rene | X0 | 
AAVESIAA 
Syrian Arab Rep. 
circumference. He thought it possible 
that the earth revolved around the sun. 
He developed the idea that geological 
eras succeed one another in cycles. 
“With the passing of time, the sea 
becomes dry land, and dry land the 
sea,” he wrote, and on this brilliant 
hypothesis he based his theory of the 
earth’s geological history. 
What enabled al-Biruni to move so 
far ahead of his contemporaries and to 
create works that made his name 
known in the East as a symbol of 
learning of the 11th century? 
Khwarizm, in Central Asia, where 
al-Biruni was born and grew up, had 
long been famed for its advanced 
culture. Its cities had magnificent 
palaces, mosques and madrasahs 
(religious colleges), and in this pros- 
perous, ancient state the sciences were 
esteemed and highly developed. 
The 10th and 11th centuries saw 
tries, 
973-1048 AD ™ “FA-4QVYP 
cdo pill. ls oJ) 
IN ABU RAIHAN ALBERONI 
  
1973 FO) Jo 
Hae ale 3 aut io 
=< ONE THOUSANDTH ANNIVERSARY 
alla sRllasy gasyl- 
FN wir - 
' INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ~ (Its 
ON MILLENARY OF AL-BIRUNI 
NOV. 26 —DEC. 12, 1973 
BEER ITER RELL CIETY | 
~ scientist he belongs to all 
~ nations and every age. 
Here we show commemo- 
~ rative stamps issued in 
1973, on the occasion of 
~ the 1,000th anniversary of 
~ al-Biruni’s birth, in Afgha- 
nistan, Iran, Libya, Pakistan, 
. Syrian Arab Republic, Tur- 
key and USSR. Four coun- 
I LEIS CL 
LEISEI ERIEL TVET SCTE ET TE 
~ zed symposia or congresses 
on_al-Biruni at the time. 
the decline of the Arab caliphate in 
Baghdad. New states arose on its 
ruins, and a pleiad of illustrious Central 
Asian scholars appeared, including 
Abu-Nasr al-Farabi and ibn-Sina (Avi- 
cenna). 
It was during this period that al- 
Biruni was born near Kath, the capital 
of Khwarizm, on 4 September, in the 
year 973. “In truth, | am not certain 
of my genealogy, for | do not really 
know who my grandfather was. And 
how could | know who my grandfather 
was, when | do not even know who 
was my father?” he wrote in a poem 
which appears in one of his treatises. 
In his early youth, fortune brought 
him in contact with an educated Greek 
who was to become his first teacher. 
At the Greek's request, the young 
al-Biruni collected plants, seeds and 
fruit and this kindled his interest in the 
natural sciences. 
CSL 
PAKISTAN 
Al-Biruni’'s foster father was Abu- 
Nasr Mansur ibn-Ali ibn Iraq, or simply 
Mansur, a member of the Khwarizmian 
royal family and a distinguished math- 
ematician and astronomer. He intro- 
duced al-Biruni to Euclidean geometry 
and Ptolemaean astronomy, which 
equipped the young scholar to study 
astronomy. 
“Most of my days were blessed by 
gifts and privileges which were in- 
creasingly bestowed on me,” wrote 
al-Biruni, describing this period of his 
life. “The Iraq family nourished me 
with their milk and their Mansur took 
it upon himself to rear me.” 
Al-Biruni studied the stars and 
minerals, probed the secrets of the 
heavens and the earth and read 
thousands of books in order to fathom 
the meaning of history. He constructed 
a globe of the earth—the first in 
Central Asia—and was equally gifted 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](074875engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 50318: Al-Biruni: a universal genius who lived in Central Asia a thousand years ago

AL-BIRUNI (Continued) 
as a poet. He lived through the 
feverish final years of the powerful 
Samanid dynasty and witnessed the 
rise and fall of two early feudal 
empires—the Karakhanid and the 
Ghaznavid. 
Social conflicts, feudal wars and 
barbarian invasions left their imprint 
on his manuscripts, since science does 
not exist in a vacuum, least of all the 
science of history. It might well have 
been the violent social upheavals in 
Khwarizm that suggested the theme of 
his first major work, in which he 
turned to the past for an understanding 
of how society was evolving. 
Al-Biruni completed his Chronology 
of Ancient Nations at the age of 27, 
just before the 11th century was born. 
“My aim in this book,” he explained, 
“was to establish as accurately as poss- 
ible the time span of various eras.” 
His study begins at the dawn of the 
human race, moves on to the period 
of the great flood, and covers every- 
thing then known about the times of 
Nebuchadnezzar and Alexander the 
Great. 
The book explains various calendar 
systems such as the Arabian, Greek 
and Persian. The history of rulers, 
heroes and political events is inter- 
woven with the history of culture, 
customs and morals. The Chronology 
of Ancient Nations should not be 
considered as a purely historical work, 
but as a partly historical and partly 
ethnographic study that retains its full 
significance to this day. 
Soviet scholars of the 1930s referred 
to the Chronology again and again in 
their research on ancient Central Asia. 
Only in al-Biruni's work could they find 
an account of the Soghdian calendar, 
essential to their study of early 
8th century Soghdian documents; only 
here could they find information about 
~ pre-Muslim Khwarizm, which archae- 
ologists were just beginning to study. 
Al-Biruni was no ivory tower scholar. 
He met and came to know people in 
many different walks of life and 
maintained close contacts with his 
fellow scholars. We know from letters 
written by al-Biruni in Khwarizm, in the 
year 997, to the 17 year-old Avicenna 
in Bokhara, that these young scholars 
discussed Aristotle's Physics and On 
the Heavens, as well as the structure 
of the universe, the physical laws 
covering a free-falling object and in- 
divisible particles (atoms). Al-Biruni 
devoted his work, Questions and Ans- 
wers to these exchanges (see article 
page 27). 
Al-Biruni's letters reveal a deep 
respect for the ancient Greek philos- 
ophers and show him to be already a 
mature man of science, despite his 
youth. In the year 1010, he was ad- 
mitted to the Academy of al-Mamun, 
which embraced a group of famous 
scholars, including the philosopher and 
natural scientist Avicenna, the historian 
and philosopher ibn-Maskawayh and 
the mathematician abu-Nasr Arrah.

## [Page 7](074875engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 50318: Al-Biruni: a universal genius who lived in Central Asia a thousand years ago

¢ IPAM 
Photos B. Fabritsky and |. Shmelhiov @ Aurora Art Publishers, APN, Leningrad 
  
Al-Biruni was born near the town of Kath, north-east of the ancient city of Khiva. Kath has vanished from the 
map, but Khiva (today in Uzbekistan) still boasts palaces, religious colleges, mosques and burial monuments 
that testify to the talent of its medieval architects and craftsmen. Shown here are two buildings in Khiva 
today: the Baths of Anusha-khan (opposite) and the mausoleum of Pahlawan Mahmud (above) whose great 
dome covered with blue tiles dominates the city. 
Whereas European natural science 
was in a state of stagnation at that 
time, scholars in ‘Khwarizm were 
vigorously advancing along the path 
traced by scientists of antiquity. 
Khwarizm’s economic growth during 
the early feudal period had set the 
stage for a golden age of science in 
the early 11th century. 
Commerce with northern peoples— 
the Khazars and Bulgars, the ancient 
Russians and the tribes of the Urals 
and Western Siberia—also influenced 
scientific advancement. Learning 
flourished in this fertile soil, with its 
traditions of a thousand year-old 
independent culture, combining the 
“wisdom of neighbouring India with the 
perfect lucidity of far-off Hellas.” 
Al-Biruni's frequent references to 
Greek philosophy and scientific thought 
demonstrate the encyclopedic scope of 
his interests. He was familiar with 
Homer's lliad and Odyssey, and had 
studied Plato's treatises, Laws and 
Phaedo. He was well acquainted with 
the works of Aristotle, Archimedes and 
Democritus, and extolled what he con- 
sidered the best of Greek philosophy. 
The 11th century was a time of great 
turmoil. The armed hosts of Mahmud 
of Ghazna overran Khwarizm, in 1017, 
taking thousands of prisoners, in- 
cluding al-Biruni. The decade which 
followed was to be the most difficult 
period in the scholar's life, but at the 
same time his most productive. He 
studied astronomy, collected materials 
for a mathematics treatise, sought to 
comprehend the influence of the moon 
on the tides, and conceived his major 
work on India, which represents the 
zenith of his scientific thinking. 
Arabic and Persian literature prior 
to al-Biruni's time had depicted India 
as a land of wonders. The Indians 
were knowledgeable in astronomy and 
arithmetic; they were said to have 
invented chess, which in al-Biruni’'s 
time was already considered an 
intellectual game; they were ac- 
complished sculptors and poets; their 
doctors were highly reputed, and it 
was even affirmed that the science of 
philosophy had originated in India. 
In Ghazna, al-Biruni became ac- 
quainted with Indian scholars who, like 
him, were exiled from their homeland. 
His meetings and conversations with 
them sparked his interest in their 
remarkable country. For a period of 
12 years, up to the year 1030, al-Biruni 
was totally absorbed in India. 
Many people before al-Biruni had 
travelled to India, especially to Sind 
and its southern coast, and some 
books that could serve historians as 
a guide to studying the country had 
been written. Al-Biruni’'s monumental 
work on India, however, clearly 
demonstrated a scientific, that is, ob- 
jective, approach to the subject. At 
the age of 45, he began learning Sans- 
krit. He visited India several times, 
walked on its soil, breathed its air, 
compared and marvelled. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
 

## [Page 8](074875engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 50318: Al-Biruni: a universal genius who lived in Central Asia a thousand years ago

AL-BIRUNI (Continued) 
A true scientist, al-Biruni strove to 
share knowledge as well as to obtain 
it. He translated Euclid's Elements 
and his own treatise on astronomy into 
Sanskrit. He also began a translation 
of the Panchatantra into Arabic, as he 
considered the existing translation of 
this immortal literary classic to be in- 
adequate. 
Al-Biruni’s India became the major 
source for studying 11th century India. 
It covered the caste system, philos- 
ophy, the exact sciences, religion, laws, 
customs, superstitions, legends, the 
system of weights and measures, the 
written language and geography. In 
writing it, al-Biruni quoted 24 works by 
14 Greek writers and used 40 Sanskrit 
sources. He was an objective re- 
searcher, free of racial bias, with a 
deep respect for the advanced culture 
of another people. 
During the reign of Mas’ud, who 
succeeded his father, Mahmud, as 
Ghaznavid ruler, al-Biruni's situation 
improved. The new king was an 
enlightened man who encouraged the 
sciences. Al-Biruni dedicated his 
major work on astronomy, The Mas'udic 
Canon, to him. In the opinion of al- 
Biruni's contemporaries and suc- 
cessors, he surpassed his ancient 
mentor, Ptolemy, in this work. 
When the grateful Mas’ud sent the 
  
Below, map showing im- 
portant cities and areas of 
central Asia during the 
lifetime of al-Biruni. Right, 
  the same region today, 
embracing Uzbekistan, 
Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and india. 
  
    
  
      
The boundaries on this map do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. 
 
  
2 
“gTleheran) ! 
¢ 
B55 we Wd EL. 
A) 
N
L
R
 
\ 
wi
) 
) 
HH
) 
R
I
 
2)
   
KHWARIZM 
    ‘U
ne
sc
o 
Co
ur
ie
r 
ma
p 
- 
Fr
an
go
ls
 
Gu
il
lo
t 
Pa
ri
g 
scholar an elephant loaded with pure 
silver, al-Biruni replied: “This gift 
would seduce me from science. Wise 
men know that silver is soon spent but 
science lives on. | would never 
exchange the perennial wealth of 
scientific knowledge for the short-lived 
tawdry glitter of silver.” 
Al-Biruni's main interests were math- 
ematics, astronomy, geography, physics 
and geodesy but in his last work, the 
Pharmacology, he classified the physi- 
cal features of plants, animals and 
minerals, and compiled an alphabetical 
list of medicinal herbs and their uses. 
Besides Arabic names, al-Biruni 
listed about 900 Persian, 700 Greek, 
400 Syrian and 350 Indian names in 
the Pharmacology. He referred to 
Aristotle’s works on biology, and also 
to the writings of Dioscorides and 
Galen, physicians and pharmacologists 
of the 1st and 2nd centuries. Un- 
fortunately, the Pharmacology was not 
completed, but even in the form it has 
come down to us its values is self- 
evident. 
Al-Biruni's contemporaries spoke of 
him thus: “Except for two festive 
days each year, his hand never stopped 
writing, his eyes observing, his mind 
contemplating.” When he died in 1048, 
at the age of 75, more than 150 works 
had flowed from his pen. They 
include 70 on astronomy, 20 on math- 
ematics and 18 on literature, including 
translations, and bibliographies. He 
was famed as a cartographer, meteor- 
ologist, physicist, philosopher, historian 
and ethnographer. 
Only 27 of his works have come 
down to us. Whether the rest were 
destroyed or simply have not been 
found is not known. Abu’l Faraj, the 
Syrian historian and physician, wrote 
of al-Biruni, the man he regarded as 
his mentor: “His works gre numerous, 
exhaustive and completely reliable. 
There was no one, neither among his 
colleagues, nor to this day, so well 
versed in astronomy, from its main 
principles down to the smallest 
details.” 
Al-Biruni had a vast impact on 
science in the East. Many countries 
claim him as their own, but this son 
of Khwarizm, one of Central Asia's 
most brilliant civilizations, belongs t 
all nations and to all time. LJ 
Bobojan Gafuraov

## [Page 9](074875engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 50318: Al-Biruni: a universal genius who lived in Central Asia a thousand years ago

  
Ph
ot
os
 
O.
 
Ka
me
ne
ts
ky
 
© 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
  
Chess was first played in 
Asia and many authorities 
agree that it originated in 
India. In al-Biruni's day it 
was already a popular game 
in Central Asia, and he may 
himself have handled pieces 
like the ones shown here of 
carved ivory (4 cm. high), 
dating from the time when he 
lived. They were unearthed 
near the village of Kurban- 
Sheid, in Tajikstan, in a region 
once part of the Ghaznavid 
Empire, in which al-Biruni 
lived for many years. Above, 
pawns with a knight in fore- 
ground (rider's body and 
horse’s head are missing). 
Left, knight and rook (7) 
flanked by pawns.

## [Page 10](074875engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

”, 
KA 6 aig Asem ces 
         
  
    
  
  
— (Ee PRM ie Tn a 1 
: kd TT : i ey a § , ~ oR 
Photo Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris 


### 50319: The Long Odyssey; in the footsteps of a Muslim scholar through a world in ferment

THE LONG 
ODYSSEY — 
In the footsteps of a Muslim scholar 
through a world in ferment : | FATHER JACQUES BOILOT, distinguished 
French orientalist, has devoted many years 
to the study of al-Biruni. His “L'(Euvre 
d'al-Biruni : Essai Bibliographique® is regarded 
10 as the standard bibliographical work on the 
subject. He is a member of the Dominican 
Institute of Oriental Studies (formerly the 
French Institute of Oriental Archaeology) in 
Cairo. His article is abridged from a study 
on al-Biruni published in the Dominican 
Institute's review, “Mélanges™ (No 11,1972).

## [Page 11](074875engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 50319: The Long Odyssey; in the footsteps of a Muslim scholar through a world in ferment

  
[EN 
  
    
  
 
  
  
  
  
                           
Miniatures on these pages are from two different manuscripts of 
Opposite, copied and 
illustrated in Cairo in the 17th century, a miniature portraying the 
Sassanian king Feroz addressing his court (1). The four miniatures 
above are from a manuscript probably made at Tabriz, Iran, dated 
al-Biruni's Chronology of Ancient Nations. 
A. is one of the 
greatest scholars of medieval Islam 
and probably the most original and 
profound of all. His Eastern contem- 
poraries called him al-Ostadh (The 
Master). 
How did his fame spread to the West 
in the Middle Ages? 'His major works 
were apparently not translated into 
Latin, with the possible exception of a 
few peripheral chapters dealing with 
natural magic, judicial astrology, talis- 
manic art... The extraordinary features 
of his life as recounted by his Eastern 
biographers perhaps added to ‘his 
reputation. Early French texts that 
speak of a “Maitre Aliboron™ are 
almost certainly alluding to “Master 
al-Biruni”, scientist, doctor and man of 
deep wisdom. 
While al-Biruni's work is of great 
value in itself and deserves serious 
study by historians of science, religion 
and philosophy, it is the Master's 
mental outlook and the nature of his 
intellectual interests that scholars 
today find stimulating. 
Fifteen years ago we wrote: “Appar- 
ently not much given to making 
  
    
   
  
a 
CRF 
pA 8 
  
  
 
bears his name. 
generalized syntheses by systemized 
deduction, or metaphysical speculation 
in the strict sense of the term, but 
constantly on the look-out for positive 
facts carefully and critically observed, 
trained to think mathematically, in- 
terested in everything concretely 
related to human life, he appears at 
the beginning of the eleventh century 
like a champion of the scientific spirit 
as it is understood today. 
“He showed great religious tolerance 
and doctrinal objectivity. Above all, 
he wanted to learn and understand. 
He was relatively unprejudiced but 
prepared to take a courageous stand 
in defence of truth. He was one of 
the first Muslims to study the phil- 
osophy and science of India sympath- 
etically, and in exchange he taught 
those of Greece.” 
So it is al-Biruni the man we wish to 
discover, by piecing together such 
facts as will help us to place him in 
his setting and his time, 
This puts us in the latter part of the 
tenth century in Khwarizm, a central 
Asian country situated south of the 
Photos Edinburgh University library, U.K. 
1307. They show the celebration of the autumnal equinox by the 
Hindus (5); a barbecue with roast fowl and game (4); a discussion 
between a sage and a peasant (2); and the birth of Caesar (3), 
an early pictorial representations of the surgical operation which 
Al-Biruni himself used the term “Caesarian”. 
  
Aral Sea, along the Amu-Dar’ya river, 
the Oxus of the ancients (1). 
The sultanate of Khwarizm had en- 
joyed relative independence throughout 
its history but successive wars and 
changes in the course of the Amu- 
Dar'ya river brought about the de- 
struction of one medieval city after 
another. As a result, it is difficult to 
determine the exact site of Kath, the 
city where al-Biruni was born in 
973 A.D. beyond the fact that it was 
probably situated on the right bank 
of the Amu-Dar’ya river north-east of 
the modern town of Khiva. 
The second largest city in Khwarizm 
was Jurjaniyya on the opposite bank 
and to the north of Khiva. Today it 
is known as Urgench. On the right 
bank across from Urgench, a new town 
has risen not very far perhaps from 
ancient Kath, and its name, “Biruni”, 
commemorates the scientist's birth- 
place. 
(1) Now part of the Soviet Socialist 
Republic of Uzbekistan, this region is in- 
habited by Turkmenian and Mongolian 
peoples, the Karakalpaks, whose lands form 
the Kara-Kalpak Autonomous Republic. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
I 
 

## [Page 12](074875engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 50319: The Long Odyssey; in the footsteps of a Muslim scholar through a world in ferment

THE LONG ODYSSEY (Continued) 
Al-Biruni very early began scientific 
studies and at the age of 17 he used 
a ring graduated in halves of a degree 
to observe the height of the sun at 
the Kath meridian and thus calculate 
the latitude of the city. Four years 
later he made plans for a series of 
observations and measurements, and 
had prepared an astronomical ring 
"15 cubits (8 metres) in diameter along 
12 
with other equipment. 
At this time, civil war broke out in 
Khwarizm and al-Biruni, who was 
now 22, went into hiding and soon had 
to flee the country. 
In order to understand al-Biruni's 
long career from then on, we must take 
into account the political situation in 
the countries where he was to live. In 
addition to what is now Uzbekistan, 
they comprised the northern part of 
present-day Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and northern India. Al-Biruni in the 
course of his life was directly involved 
with six princely dynasties. 
Who was the prince that al-Biruni 
fled to for protection in 9957 We do 
not know with certainty. It may have 
been then that he went to the town of 
Ray, near present-day Teheran. In his 
Chronology of Ancient Nations he 
quotes a poem on the tribulations of 
poverty, and recounts that when he 
was living in Ray without royal 
patronage and destitute, a local 
astrologer scoffed at his views on 
some technical matter simply because 
he was poor. Later, when his situation 
improved, the same man became 
friendly. 
At that time, the flourishing Bowayhid 
dynasty, which had originated in the 
mountains south of the Caspian Sea, 
extended its domain south towards the 
Persian Gulf and west to Mesopotamia. 
At the request of the Bowayhid 
prince, Fakhr al-Dawla, the astronomer 
al-Khojandi had built a large mural 
sextant on a mountain above the town 
of Ray. He used this “Fakhri Sextant” 
—so named after the prince—to 
observe the sun's transits throughout 
the year 994, 
Al-Biruni wrote a treatise describing 
this sextant and giving a detailed 
account of the observations made, 
based on information given to him by 
al-Khojandi in person. As the astron- 
omer died about the year 1000, his 
scientific discussions with the young 
al-Biruni in Ray, must have dated from 
shortly after the observations carried 
out in 994. 
There is reason to believe that al- 
Biruni was also in the province of 
Gilan, along the south-west corner of 
the Caspian Sea about this time. One of 
his books is dedicated to the Ispahbad 
(*ruler” or “commander™) of Jilan. In 
the Chronology of Ancient Nations 
which was finished by the year 1000, 
he speaks of having been in the 
presence of the Ispahbad of lilan— 
perhaps the same official who pro- 
tected Firdausi, the epic poet of Persia, 
from the wrath of Sultan Mahmud. 
In any event, al-Biruni was certainly 
back in Kath by 997. On 24 May in 
that year, he observed an eclipse of 
the moon in Kath, after arranging to 
have the great Muslim mathematician, 
Abu’ 1-Wafa, observe the same 
phenomenon in Baghdad. The time 
difference between the respective 
observations enabled the two scientists 
to calculate the difference in longitude 
between the two points. 
T. short reign of the Sa- 
manid Mansur {| began the same year, 
997, and it was also about that time 
that al-Biruni visited his court at the 
capital city of Bokhara. The Samanid 
dynasty, a royal house of Zoroastrian 
origin, but early converted to Islam, 
ruled an area comprising all of modern 
Afghanistan, Transoxiana and Iran. 
Meanwhile, Qabus, the Ziyarid ruler 
of Gurgan, a city at the south-east 
corner of the Caspian Sea, had been 
- driven from his lands, and was trying 
to obtain support from Bokhara in an 
effort to return to power. He suc- 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ch
ri
st
op
he
-V
io
ll
et
, 
Pa
ri
s 
 
ceeded in reinstating himself in Gurgan 
and al-Biruni followed him there. 
The Chronology, al-Biruni's first 
major work, seems to have been 
written at the Guragan court, This 
book, which treats of calendars and 
eras, and fundamental problems in 
mathematics, astronomy, meteorology, 
was dedicated to Qabus about the year 
390 of the Islamic calendar (1000 A.D.). 
In it al-Biruni refers to seven other 
books that he had already completed, 
dealing with decimal numbers, the 
astrolabe, astronomical observations, 
astrology and history. 
During this period al-Biruni was 
carrying on an acrimonious correspon- 
dence with a young prodigy, the 
brilliant philosopher and physician of 
Bokhara, Ibn Sina, known in the Latin 
countries as Avicenna, who was seven 
years his junior (see article page 27). 
Among the subjects on which they 
exchanged views were the nature and 
transmission of heat and light. Al- 
Biruni was not yet 30 years old at the 
time and Avicenna was in his early 
twenties. 
in his book on geodesy, after de- 
scribing the measurement of a degree 
along a terrestrial meridian, made at 
the direction of the Caliph Ma'mun, al- 
Biruni describes his own failure to 
repeat the operation. A suitable tract 
of land had been chosen between Gur- 
gan and the land of the Oghuz Turks 
(on the deserts east of the Caspian) 
but the patron, presumably Qabus, lost 
interest.

## [Page 13](074875engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 50319: The Long Odyssey; in the footsteps of a Muslim scholar through a world in ferment

i TL Tee B= Ml, A 
"THE TOWER .OF QABUS 
~ Al-Biruni lived at a time of great ferment in learning and 
~ the arts. About 1000 A.D., he was living at Gurgan, in 
north-east Iran, at the court of (OF. ITERE CRW LT BL TR EF [TET I 
his first known major work, the Chronology of Ancient 
‘Nations. Left, the famous tower of Qabus. It was long 
~ believed to be the ruler's tomb, but recent investigation 
has revealed no trace of a burial chamber. Al-Biruni may 
have watched the tower being built, since elegantly carved 
Arabic inscriptions at its summit and base record that 
Qabus ordered its construction in 1006 A.D. when al-Biruni 
was 33 years old. The region had been reputed since the 
9th century for its pottery. Below, platter and bowl shaped 
; Kh Samanid potters who worked in Transoxiana and in 
. orassan, countries in which al-Biruni gojourned for several 
years. Kufic Arabic inscriptions adorn platter fet; glazed 
ah rss sce bd mot 
Photo © The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
New York, U.S.A. 
The end of al-Biruni's stay at the 
Ziyarid court can be precisely estab- 
lished, for in 1003 he observed two 
lunar eclipses from Gurgan, one on 
19 February and the other on 14 Au- 
gust. The following year he observed 
a third lunar eclipse, but this time 
from Jurjaniyya, on 4 June. Thus in 
the interim, he had returned to his 
homeland, high in favour with the 
reigning Khwarizmshabh. 
Thanks to the Khwarizmshah's liber- 
ality, al-Biruni was able to construct 
in Jurjaniyya an astronomical instru- 
ment which in gratitude he called the 
“Shah’s Circle”. In all probability it 
was a large ring fixed on the plane of 
the meridian. 
Al-Biruni speaks in several places 
in the Tahdid, his book on geodesy, 
and in his Canon on astronomy, of 
15 observations of the sun's transit 
over the meridian in lurjaniyya, the 
first one at the summer solstice on 
7 June 1016, and the last one on 
7 December of the same year. It was 
probably during this period of pros- 
perity and royal favour that he had a 
hemisphere ten cubits (5.4 metres) in 
diameter built to help solve geodesic 
problems graphically. . 
Meantime the political atmosphere 
in the sultanate of Khwarizm was 
becoming more and more tense. In the 
Tahdid al-Biruni writes: “I had enjoyed 
only a few years of peace when the 
Lord of Time (God) allowed me to 
return to my own country; but there 
| was forced to take part in public 
Photo © Freer Gallery of Art, 
Washington, U.S.A. 
affairs, which caused fools to envy me 
and wise men to pity me.” 
Ma’'mun, the Khwarizmshah, confided 
several difficult political missions to 
al-Biruni, who carried them out skil- 
fully “with tongue of silver and of 
gold”. But Ma’'mun was assassinated 
by some of his troops in revolt and 
this gave the Ghaznavid sultan Mahmud 
an opportunity to march against 
Khwarizm with a large army. From 
its base in east-central Afghanistan the 
kingdom of the Ghaznavids was swiftly 
expanding. By 1020, Sultan Mahmud 
had carved out a realm extending a 
thousand miles north and south and 
twice as far east and west. 
A. was among those 
deported by the conqueror to Ghazna 
in Sijistan (Afghanistan), partly no 
doubt to enhance the sultan’s court 
with his presence, but also in order to 
get rid of an active supporter of the 
Khwarizmian pretenders. He was then 
44 years old. 
The following year we find him in 
a village south of Kabul, downcast and 
living in misery, but working hard on 
the Tahdid. On 14 October 1018 he 
wanted to measure the height of the 
sun but had no instrument to hand. 
So he was obliged to draw a calibrated 
arc on the back of a reckoning board 
and use it,with the aid of a plumb line, 
as a makeshift quadrant. 
On the basis of the measurements 
made with this crude device he calcu- 
lated the latitude of the locality. On 
8 April, 1019, he cbserved an eclipse 
of the sun at Lamghan, a town to the 
north-east of Kabul. 
Al-Biruni's relations with Sultan 
Mahmud were never cordial. It is 
evident, none the less, that he was 
given official support for his work. In 
his Canon he relates that he determin- 
ed the latitude of Ghazna by a series 
of observations made between 1018 
and 1020 with an instrument which he 
calls the “Yamini Ring”. Yamin al- 
Dawla (Right Hand of the State) was 
one of the titles conferred on Mahmud 
by the Abbasid Caliph in Baghdad, and 
the monumental instrument was named, 
according to custom, after the royal 
patron. 
It is also evident that al-Biruni’s 
interests in Sanscrit and the civilization 
of India were due to his forced resi- 
dence in an empire that now extended 
well into the Indian subcontinent. In 
1021 the conquering sultan subjugated 
the Ganges Valley almost as far as 
Benares, and in 1026, by a daring raid 
south starting from Ghazna, he reached 
the Indian Ocean. 
Al-Biruni took advantage of these 
events to visit various parts of India 
and stayed there more or less volun- 
tarily. We know that he journeyed to 
the Punjab and Kashmir regions, 
though no dates can be given for his 
visits. He determined the latitudes of 
a number of towns, and reports that 
CONTINUED PAGE 16 
13

## [Page 14](074875engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 50319: The Long Odyssey; in the footsteps of a Muslim scholar through a world in ferment

R
d
 
T
T
T
 
Fo 
PR
RR
R 
& 
w
r
 
h
e
 
n 
A 
- 
g 
0
,
 
-
 
* 
3 
U 
» 
2
S
 
" 
Rr
 
oT
 
.
 
i 
. 
a 
Te
 
x 
. 
» 
O
e
 
25
 
» 
T
o
 
. 
> 
ru
 
: 
= 
k 
i 
A
S
L
 E
 
S
E
 
n 
WL
 
' 
i
l
 
\ 
Aa 
eg 
. 
v 
" 
: 
. 
pn 
p 
1 
> 
k
d
.
 
s 
1 
' 
ig 
5 
- 
» 
-
w
 
» 
- 
- 
Fy 
~ 
: 
. 
i 
. 
or 
Pye 
- 7 
ES 
Ph 5 
be
 
eX 
vr VP Ce 
wh » 
\ a “i / o> 
<P P05 
sa pie (ad 
- — 
le 
 
 
* 
-' 
So
Fn 
a Ear ih i 
      
ya 
~~ 
oe 
- — 
= 
+ 
he 
~~ a 
» a 5 F# . " F . y 
  
ASL 
a. 
J 
pu 
. - 
an - 
a 
So 
dy Er 
¥ 
  
 
 
’ 
a Sar ar all 
  
J _ - 
- _—_ne .“ eo ” 
-. F re 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
A rink 
- ed uy rl 
: Codi 
n 
= 
- 
a!
 
“a
lt
 
Th 
oA
 
F
o
 
x
 
1}
 
. 
~~
 
e
n
,
 
’ 
“
 
o
e
 3
 
e
R
 
pv
r 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
™
)
 
. 
AY
 
’ 
In
db
in
 
o
N
 
U
N
E
 
Ph
ot
os
 
Jo
se
ph
in
e 
Po
we
ll
 
© 
Ca
me
ra
 
Pr
es
s,
 
Lo
nd
on
 
MOSQUE 
THE NINE-DOMED 
OF BALKH 
 

## [Page 15](074875engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 50319: The Long Odyssey; in the footsteps of a Muslim scholar through a world in ferment

     
  
. - 
J 
AT ie ny 
VCS CL THR 
TON Tah Lah 
hs a . f 
  
     
eT 
} §( 
- 
ry ~ 
Seven years ago the existence of the mosque of Nouh-Goumbed 
with its nine domes, one of the early examples of Islamic archi- 
tecture in Central Asia, was unknown to modern scholars. Its 
imposing ruins, hidden away in the remoteness of north-west 
Afghanistan on the site of the ancient city of Balkh, were studied 
and described by archeologists only in 1967. In this region 
al-Biruni set the scene of one of his romances, The Two 
Idols of Bamian (see page 30). Up to the 7th century, Balkh 
was an important seat of Buddhist learning. After its conquest 
by the Arabs in 663, its fame as an intellectual and artistic centre 
spread even wider and its splendours were recounted by Arab 
and Chinese travellers and historians. The nine domes of this 
almost square mosque were once supported on pointed arches 
 
 
  
     > 
RIYA 
Vit JH
AA 
¢ 
of 
gl: 
  
      
  
- 
. to 
resting on six central columns. The domes have fallen in, but even 
in its present state the mosque gives an impression of beauty 
and strength. This is in part due to the size of the six columns 
1.56 metres in diameter (above) and to the manner in which the 
baked bricks are separated by small decorated interstices 4 to 
5 cm. wide. The exterior (above left) is ravaged by time, but 
the interior decoration is well preserved (see ornamental detail 
below left). The floral and geometrical motifs are found on the 
stucco carvings which cover the entire surface above the columns 
in an infinite profusion of designs, none of which is repeated, 
except on the capitals. The decorative features and form of 
construction enabled archaeologists to place the mosque in the 
9th century and as “an architectural achievement without precedent”. 
 
  
13 
 

## [Page 16](074875engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 50319: The Long Odyssey; in the footsteps of a Muslim scholar through a world in ferment

16 
THE LONG ODYSSEY (Continued from page 13) i 
while he was living at Fort Nandana, 
he used a nearby mountain to calculate 
the diameter of the earth. Nandana 
had been taken by Mahmud in 1014. 
It controlled the route by which he, the 
Moghuls after him, and Alexander the 
Great long before penetrated the Indus 
Valley. 
Al-Biruni spent a long time in Ghazna 
itself and made many astronomical 
observations there, including transits 
of the sun across the meridian at the 
time of the summer solstice in 1019, 
an eclipse of the moon on 16 Septem- 
ber 1019, and equinoxes and solstices 
up to the winter solstice in 1021. |t 
was then that he completed his treatise 
Shadows. 
In 1024, the ruler of the Turks along 
the Volga sent an embassy to Ghazna. 
The Turks had trade relations with the 
inhabitants of the polar regions, and 
al-Biruni was able to add to his know- 
ledge of those countries by question- 
ing the envoys. One of them stated 
in the sultan’s presence that some- 
times in the far north the sun did not 
set for days. Mahmud at first con- 
sidered this as heresy and was enrag- 
ed, but al-Biruni convinced him that 
it was perfectly plausible. 
In 1027, the year that the treatise 
Chords was finished, a Chinese and 
Uighur Turkish legation came to 
Ghazna. From this mission, al-Biruni 
obtained geographical information 
about the Far East which he 
included in his Canon. 
Sultan Mahmud died in 1030, and 
soon afterwards al-Biruni completed 
his encyclopaedic book, India, but he 
did not dedicate it to any particular 
patron. Within the year (1030) the 
sultan's eldest son, Mas'ud succeeded 
to the crown and then the situation of 
his most famous scientist changed 
completely. 
Al-Biruni put the final touches to his 
third major work, the Canon of Astro- 
nomy, and dedicated it to the new 
sovereign in florid terms. 
In this book he takes issue with 
Ptolemy's system on several points. 
He holds, for example, that the sun's 
apogee is not fixed, and while he 
accepts the geocentric theory, he 
shows that the astronomical facts can 
also be explained by assuming that the 
earth revolves round the sun. 
According to one chronicler, Mas'ud 
offered the Master an elephant-load of 
silver coins for this work, but al-Biruni 
declined the gift. Nevertheless he 
was provided with the means to con- 
tinue his scientific and literary studies 
as long as he lived. 
It may have been because of this 
change of regime that he was able to 
re-visit his native country. He made 
at least one trip back, for in his 
Bibliography he writes that for over 
forty years he had sought a certain 
Manichaean work, a copy of which he 
finally procured in Khwarizm, 
Al-Biruni recounts that after the age 
of 50 he suffered from a number of 
later 
serious ailments. In his distress, he: 
questioned several astrologers about, 
how much time he had left to live.: 
Their replies were at ‘total variance 
with one another and some were 
obviously absurd. In point of fact, 
towards the end of his 61st year 
(possibly his 61st lunar year) his 
health began to improve. ' 
One night he dreamt that he was 
observing the new moon and when its 
crescent disappeared he heard a voice 
predicting that he would be able to 
gaze upon it 170 times more. As it 
turned out, he lived longer than 
170 more lunations (14 lunar years). 
it was during the reign of Mawdud, 
son of Sultan Mas'ud, (1040-1048) that 
al-Biruni wrote Gems, his book on 
precious and semi-precious stones 
and on metals. Following this period, 
even though his sight and hearing were 
failing, as he himself tells us in his 
last book, he carried on his research 
assiduously with the aid of a Greek 
assistant. 
His final work was the Pharmacology 
which is a tribute to his prodigious 
erudition. Al-Biruni tells us that he 
was over eighty years old (lunar 
years?) when he was still working on 
this compilation, which brings us down 
to the year 1050 or later. The date 
of his death, as given by Ghadanfar. 
—13 December 1048—is therefore 
inexact. Ultimately, he survived his 
third Ghaznavid patron and lived 
longer than the time predicted in his 
dream. 
Al-Biruni was Persian by birth. He 
was brought up in the Khwarizm dialect 
and later used Neo-Persian as his 
spoken tongue, but out of choice he 
preferred the Arabic language as an 
instrument of thought and a means of 
expression in his intellectual life, both 
for his scientific treatises and his 
purely literary works. 
Thus his writings constitute a monu- 
ment in the history of ideas and doc- 
trines within the Arab world before 
forming part of the general history of 
human thought, as a contribution from 
the Arabic-speaking world where they 
came into being and first acquired their 
fame. 
In point of fact, al-Biruni, personally 
and well ahead of his time, was a 
promoter of mutual! understanding and 
fruitful cultural exchange between the 
East and the West—though he may 
not have thought of himself as such— 
through the active mediation of the 
Arabic language and the profoundly 
humanistic values inherent in it. 
By virtue of his scientific method, 
which makes him a model for the 
Eastern world even today and ensures 
him the gratitude of Western science, 
he was a forerunner; and in his apti- 
tude for inter-culturat understanding. 
he formed a connecting link between 
East and West, just as his work is a 
manifestation of their underlying unity 
and fraternity. | 
Jacques Boilot 


### 50320: A Pioneer of scientific observation

pioneer 
| 
scientific 
observation 
 
by Mohammed 
Salim-Atchekzai 
   MOHAMMED SALIM-ATCHEKZAL, of Afgha- 
mistan, is professor of Afghan language and 
literature at the New Sorbonne University, 
Paris. Mr. Salim-Atchekzai has made a 
special study of Afghan civilization and 
culture.

## [Page 17](074875engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 50320: A Pioneer of scientific observation

[ol 
3 The earth and 
the heavens 
“measured : 
“with amazing 
“precision 
2 NE Biruni's ‘book 
¥ 
on India: 
an unprecedented 
effort = 
"10 understand 
a people 
uly their culture. 
  
A the dismemberment 
of the Empire of Charlemagne, the 
Christian West was at a low ebb. The 
tenth century was a sombre period 
when conditions favoured neither the 
growth of great political empire-building 
movements nor the dissemination of 
philosophical ideas. 
In the Muslim East, however, the 
tenth century was a time of brilliant 
intellectual progress. The empires of 
the East, linked by a vigorous faith, 
attracted to themselves a great number 
of scholars who made a unique contri- 
bution to the cultural heritage of 
mankind. 
In the empire of the Samanids (819- 
1005), with its capital in Bokhara, the 
talents of poets such as Rudaki and 
Dagqiqi and of scholars such as Rhazes 
and Avicenna, flourished, while Ghazna, 
the capital of the empire of the Ghaz- 
navids (977-1186), which stretched 
from western India as far as Khwarizm, 
was the home of many poets and 
scholars such as "Unsuri and Firdausi, 
a 
the author of the Book of Kings, epic 
masterpiece of Persian literature. 
Al-Biruni was one of the many 
scholars and philosophers who were 
drawn to the court of Sultan Mahmud 
(998-1030) in Ghazna, where he was 
employed as the court astronomer. 
This mixture of astrology and astron- 
omy was not, however, enough to 
satisfy the thirst for knowledge of a 
man with such an enquiring mind. 
Al-Biruni's works, both before and 
after his arrival in Ghazna, show him 
to have been a man of many and varied 
interests. He carried out research in 
almost all the subjects known at that 
time. Among the pure sciences, 
astronomy was naturally the pivotal 
point around which all his other 
interests revolved. 
The extent of his knowledge, particu- 
larly in astronomy, may be judged from 
two main works: the Mas’udic Canon 
and the Kitab al-Tafhim (a book of in- 
structions on the elements of the 
science of astrology). 
  
  
    
    
 
  
   
 
  
          
   
    
The Mas'udic Canon is an almost 
complete encyclopedia of astronomy 
and of the related sciences. It consists 
of 11 volumes dealing simultaneously 
with cosmology, chronology, geography 
and mathematics as well as astronomy. 
Avicenna's Canon of Medicine is justly 
famous, but the sheer scale and the 
intrinsic value of the Mas'udic Canon 
place it in the same category. 
In compiling the works of his pre- 
decessors, al-Biruni corrected many of 
their mistakes, both theoretical and 
experimental. He never made a formal 
break with the geocentric system which 
was universally accepted in the Middle 
Ages. He was, however, aware of the 
existence of the heliocentric system 
from the works of Greek astronomers 
like Asistarchus of Samos, and also 
from the teachings of certain sages 
whom he had met in India. 
Al-Biruni hesitated for many years 
between the two systems and in fact 
remained undecided until his death; it 
is important to stress, however, that 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
11 
  
ae? “vot - i Sil yj iE AN 
Nye] anh PY ee BY Asien 
Ht: UL: Vel ; > HI PUTA ALN : 
: eT y 
AY ~~ oe | 
ode ) 
” & ’ . ? . 
3 NN A 
=> ; \ a Ans 
=) 
— 3 
a 
{ A yorsds Emon 
Photo British Museum, London 
This diagram, reproduced from one of al-Biruni's treatises on astronomy, 
illustrates the different phases of the moon. The sun is represented by the 
black disc at the top. 
~ . ay ye) ve a LAN =,

## [Page 18](074875engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 50320: A Pioneer of scientific observation

SCIENTIFIC OBSERVATION (Continued) 
he always maintained that there was 
absolutely no contradiction between the 
heliocentric hypothesis and the laws 
of astronomy. As he himself said: 
“ | have seen the astrolabe called 
Zuragi invented by Abu Sa'id Sijzi. 
| liked it very much and praised him 
a great deal, as it is based on the idea 
entertained by some to the effect that 
the motion we see is due to the Earth's 
movement and not to that of the sky. 
By my life, it is a problem difficult of 
solution and refutation... For it is the 
same whether you take it that the Earth 
is in motion or the sky. For, in both 
cases, it does not affect the Astronomi- 
cal Science. It is just for the physicist 
to see if it is possible to refute it.” 
Al-Biruni was throughly familiar with 
the astronomical works of Ptolemy and 
other Greek astronomers. In geometry, 
his work is based on that of Euclid and 
of Archimedes and Theon (4th cen- 
tury A.D.), but he was also acquainted 
with the work of the great Indian 
astronomer Brahmagupta (6th to 
7th centuries A.D.) and the astronomi- 
cal works of the Indian, Tabahafara 
(7th century A.D.). 
In his book on India, al-Biruni quotes 
a passage from Brahmagupta's book 
concerning the rotation of the earth: 
“The followers of Aryabhata maintain 
that the earth is moving and heaven 
resting. People have tried to refute 
them by saying that, if such were the 
case, stones and trees would fall from 
the earth. ” 
But, says al-Biruni: 
“Brahmagupta does not agree with 
them, and says that that would not 
necessarily follow from their theory, 
apparently because he thought that all 
heavy things are attracted towards the 
centre of the earth... 
“Besides, the rotation of the earth 
does in no way impair the value of 
astronomy, as all appearances of an 
astronomic character can quite as well 
be explained according to this theory 
as to the other. There are, however, 
other reasons which make it imposs- 
ible. This question is most difficult 
to solve. The most prominent of both 
modern and ancient astronomers have 
deeply studied the question of the 
moving of the earth, and tried to refute 
it. We, too, have composed a book 
on the subject called Miftah-ilm-alhai’a 
(Key to Astronomy), in which we think 
we have surpassed our predecessors, 
if not in the words, at all events in the 
matter.” 
In his measurements of the circum- 
ference of the earth, he was only 
110 km. out by comparison with modern 
measurements. He studied the sun 
during the eclipse and ways of measur- 
ing the illuminated parts of the moon. 
He described the various phases of the 
dawn and the dusk and carried out 
observations of the new moon. He 
studied the astronomy of the stars. 
He classified the celestial bodies 
(planets and fixed stars) by order of 
magnitude (in fact by their luminosity.) 
He noted stars’ positions and observed 
their apparent motion around the poles. 
His list included 1,029 stars. 
He learned about trigonometry from 
India, and was the first to establish it 
as a science distinct from that of 
astronomy. 
He was the first geometrician to use 
the radius of the circle as unity, an 
idea which immenseley simplified 
calculations. He wrote the best 
medieval account of the arithmetical 
systems used in India and on methods 
of extracting the cube root. 
  
Al-Biruni compiled a table of the 
latitudes and longitudes of the 600 most 
important towns and localities in the 
Islamic world; this enabled him to 
determine with scientific accuracy the 
direction of Mecca, to which Muslims 
turn to pray. When constructing 
mosques, builders could thus place the 
mihrabs (semicircular niches in the 
wall indicating the direction of Mecca) 
correctly. 
For the purposes of cartography, he 
invented a special system of stereo- 
graphic projection, remarkably simple 
to use, whereby the part of the globe 
to be represented is projected on the 
great circle of which the point of vision 
is the pole. 
Al-Biruni was severely critical of 
astrologers and their unscientific 
approach to their work. Thus it was 
that he came to write a treatise which 
he called A Warning Against the Art of 
False Predictions by the Stars. In the 
Mas'udic Canon, he denounced the 
alleged “secrets” of astrologers’ pre- 
dictions, pointing out that, although 
they were supposed to be dictated by 
the influence of the celestial bodies on 
human lives, one prediction often 
contradicted another. 
He was also a geologist and ob- 
served the stratified structure of the 
rocks, noting that: 
“We have to rely upon the records 
of the rocks and vestiges of the past 
to infer that all these changes should 
have taken place very long ago and 
under unknown conditions of cold and 
heat: for even now it takes a long time 
for water and wind to do their work. 
And changes have been going on and 
observed and noticed within historical 
times.” 
CONTINUED PAGE 42 
RAMPARTS 
OF GHAZNI 
Part of the remains of the 
fortifications of ancient Ghaz- 
na (today Ghazni), in Afgha- 
nistan. It was here that al-Bi- 
runi spent many years at the 
court of the Ghaznavid em- 
perors. (See also back cover). Ph
ot
o 
G
e
o
r
g
e
s
 
Ma
rr
y 
©
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
P
a
r
i
s

## [Page 19](074875engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

     
     
 
     
      
    
   
   
   
   
  
    
 
4 Ae oT aT riled 141 0 
‘ » LAA TN 2. i {eweo
o
 
}    
a
t
s
 
3 
e
T
}
 
1
 
    
. 
=
 
'&
 
A
 
EN
E 
RS
 o
s 
A
E
 
Fb
 
NS
 
  
Mn 
» 
. 
-
 
A
 
I
O
 
a
t
 
i 
a
r
e
)
 
v 
o
l
 
LD
 
oy
 
<b
 
-—
 .y
 
oJ
) w "Courier 
AL-BIRUNI 
  
      
Portrait of al-Biruni by the Iranian artist 
Azarguin based on recent historical research.         ¢ 
LAL 
MINIATURE ANTHOLOGY 2 
. fl 
ol sy . . . 


### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

& Selections from works by al-Biruni 
DEN including many translated 
\ RE - a . . 
Ev. into English for the first time 
Po TA 
pa Al-Biruni is believed to have written at least 150 works (180 according to some 
“yrs authorities) by the time of his death about 1050 A.D. The actual number is uncer- 
wy tain since roughly four-fifths of his writings have vanished. Al-Biruni himself 
Tl recorded 113 titles in a bibliography he prepared in 1036 when he was 63 years 
of age. In this special supplement, the “Unesco Courier” presents passages from 
. 1 the writings of al-Biruni, including many translated into English for the first 
agit time. Those we present here have been chosen not only to show the originality 
CX) and encyclopaedic scope of his thinking, but in particular his narrative talents and 
Se the scientific approach he made to every subject. Highly technical and scientific 
Gr material has naturally been excluded. The passages published are taken from: 
Alberuni’s India (translated by Edward C. Sachau, 2 volumes, London, 1888): 
The Chronology of Ancient Nations (translated by Edward C. Sachau, London, 
1879): Al-Biruni's Book on Pharmacy and Materia Medica (translated by Hakim 
Mohammed Said, Karachi, 1973): The Determination of the Co-ordinates of 
Cities (Geodesy); The Mas'udic Canon on Astronomy; Gems, and Bibliography 
of the Works of al-Razi. 
  
ha ur- 3 
AL, oN 
OL Pn wl 
a a BAAS, . v 
AES ow * =r 
RT ME NE Oe iy]

## [Page 20](074875engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

     
  
    
  
Tri d ¥ ’ 
“a 
. 
Satin Eages y Vota ’ Vaan San 
SE Na Te $& Se Lis = - 
Ne wl aE » at i “wr 
—, Fa J : . ~ 
INTELLIGENCE 
AND REASONING 
Some believe that science Is of recent 
origin, others that it is as old as the 
world. The former affirm that its tech- 
niques were taught by “initiation™ and 
go so far as to maintain that every 
technique was revealed and implanted 
by a particular prophet. But there are 
others who think that man discovers 
techniques with the help of intelligence 
and that it is reasoning which enables 
the mind to acquire understanding... 
When one discovers, by reasoning, a 
law or principle, one must proceed from 
the general to the particular. At the 
same time, experiment and reflection 
allow us to compare one thing with 
another and so obtain knowledge in 
detail... 
Time is limitless and successive 
generations traverse only stages. Each 
passes on its heritage to the next, 
which develops and enriches it. That 
is the true metempsychosis, not the 
soul, which simply passes from one 
body to another. 
— Bibliography of the Works 
of al-Razi 
ANTIQUITY’S 
SUEZ CANAL 
When the Persian kings conquered 
Egypt they tried to cut a canal through 
the isthmus to link the two seas [the 
Red Sea and the Mediterranean]. Sea- 
going vessels would thus have been 
able to sail direct from west to east. 
The first king to dream of such a canal 
was Sesostris, whose idea was taken 
up by Darius. A waterway of consider- 
able width was dug, of which traces 
 
    
    
   
   
  
    
   
   
    
   
    
      
   
   
    
   
   
     
    
    
  
oe 
Re an 
Jon mh 
i,  
a 
- -— CT > r 
“Ri (Vato Yaerank 3 J [9S a 4) es : 
i aes DC 
. - 
Cd 
" Photo Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris 
can be seen to this day. The waters 
of the Red Sea flowed in at high tide 
and receded when the tide was low. 
However, when the level of the Red 
Sea was measured, the project was 
abandoned, for the Red Sea is higher 
than the Nile of Egypt and it was feared 
that its waters would engulf that river. 
During the reign of Ptolemy lll, Archi- 
medes completed the unfinished wok 
without causing the slightest mishap. 
A Roman king blocked the canal, how- 
ever, in order to bar the way to the 
Persians who threatened to invade 
Egypt. " 
— The Determination of the 
Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy). 
SCUBA DIVING 
IN 1000 A.D. 
Someone from Bagdad has told me 
that pearl divers have recently discover- 
ed a method for overcoming the problem 
of breathing under water. They are thus 
able to dive from morning till evening, 
for as long as they like... The device is 
a leather saci which the diver passes 
over his head and which extends to 
just below his chest. He attaches it 
very firmly just beneath the lower ribs 
then he dives and breathes the air 
contained in the bag. But a heavy 
weight is needed to draw the diver, 
with his air supply, towards the bottom 
and to keep him down. It would be 
more advantageous to fix to the upper 
part of the device a leather tube shaped 
like a sleeve, the seams of which are 
hermetically sealed by wax and tar. 
The length of the tube should corres- 
pond to the depth of water in which 
the diver has to work. The upper end 
of the tube should be fixed into a large 
vessel through an opening pierced in 
the bottom. One or more bladders 
attached to the vessel would keep it 
            
afloat. Breathing air in and out through 
the tube, the diver could then stay 
under water as long as he wished, even 
through the entire day. 
— Gems 
THE NATURE OF GOD 
...Some Hindu scholar calls God 
a point, meaning to say thereby that 
the qualities of bodies do not apply 
to him. Now some uneducated man 
reads this and imagines that God 
‘is as small as a point, and he does not 
find out what the word point in this 
sentence was really intended to express. 
He will not even stop with this offensive 
comparison, but will describe God as 
much larger, and will say “He is twelve 
fingers long and ten fingers broad.” 
Praise be to God, who is far above 
measure and number! Further, if an 
uneducated man hears what we have 
mentioned, that God comprehends the 
universe so that nothing is concealed 
from him, he will at once imagine that 
this comprehending is effected by means 
of eyesight; that eyesight is only 
possible by means of an eye, and that 
two eyes are better than only one; and 
in consequence he will describe God as 
having a thousand eyes, meaning to 
describe his omniscience. 
— Alberuni's India 
* THE ENCOMPASSING 
OCEANS 
The northern regions are uninhabited 
because of the cold and the snow, but 
we find that the shores of the sea, 
called the Sea of the Varangians (Bal- 
tic Sea), which leads off the Encircling 
Sea to the north of the lands of the 
Slavs (1), are inhabited. 
These folk live on the shores of the 
sea in localities parallel with regions 
which are beset by cold and snow, yet 
 
» Sat 
   a 
 
  
  
 
    
  
    
  
   
  
   
        
    
         
  
    
    
        
    
    
  
  
" SPN LED, OPT EW 2 ( ' " . E wr - > pd — - or A a. - _ tw ta 
Pd : "5. Sn Ory er Sos fl 5 2 ho 5% : ol ie ny oh oor “e 
SON sie Noeiety tele Joely Wels MIE CHOY PCN § 
. - 3 ~ - -~ -~. - ’ 
   
a - - ) 
8 od Qe 0 v ato a er an Tt JF a Bel ey 1% 13 Cg [3 IE he 00

## [Page 21](074875engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

  
   
     
   
So 
(VFeTa grat nd Voogiok Jarek YGeTnsk grata FAD : AL RI Ad, ” 
os A We a Slav ALT Shan Tei) Av WAT 
2 "5 <r NX Dr EY 5 oF 
   
 
  
the cold in those places, though severe, 
is not so extreme. 
Furthermore, there are among these 
folk fishermen and hunters who put far 
out to sea during the summer days and, 
following the Azimuth of the North Pole, 
reach places where the Sun at the 
summer solstice never descends below 
the horizon; observing this with their 
own eyes, they then boast among their 
kindred that they have been In places 
where there is no night at all. 
As concerns the impossibility of the 
inhabited regions continuing uninter- 
ruptedly to east and west, there Is no 
excess of heat or cold to prevent this, 
but habitability comes to an end because 
the dry land emerged from the oneness 
of the waters by the will of God as 
well as from natural causes. The dry 
land must therefore be a separate part 
without continuation and it must be 
bounded by the encompassing waters. 
Hence it must have boundaries both to 
the east and to the west. 
The sea which lies to the south of 
the dry land | assume to be a sea leading 
out of the encircling sea to the East of 
China, stretching along the Equator 
parallel to China, then to India and to 
Persia, and then to the land of the 
Arabs, and ending in a gulf of the Sea 
of Kulzum [Red Sea]. In every place 
it is called by the name of the country 
off whose shores it passes. 
Similarly, the sea which runs out 
of the Encircling Sea to the west of 
Zin] by the headland known as Rasun 
(2), stretches southward from the Equa- 
tor parallel to the land of the Negroes 
and the Sofala of the Zinj (3). 
  
 
Left, map of the world, from a treatise by al-Biruni on 
astronomy, drawn in Tashkent. The north is at the 
bottom. Below, the same map reversed with the north 
at the top to facilitate indentification of different regions : 
1. Caspian Sea, 2. China, 3. India, 4. Persian Gulf, 
5. Red Sea, 6. Black Sea, 7. Mediterranean, 8. Egypt, 
9. Morocco, 10. Andalusia, 11. Baltic Sea, 12. The 
 
: 
E
N
 
T
L
 
© 
  
   
   
Both these regions are located 
beneath the zenith of the Sun, Moon and 
Stars, for which reason their climate is 
mild and their waters are easily navi- 
gable. 
As concerns the Encircling Ocean to 
the West [Atlantic Ocean], it Is an 
enormous mass of water, but there are 
many shoals and shallows in it where 
the water becomes viscous, like a mud 
spring, so that navigation is difficult 
and its paths are unknown. It was for 
this reason that the great Hercules set 
his signs and pillars opposite Andalus, 
so that sailors might be deterred from 
the ambition of sailing beyond them. 
The place where they were set up was 
then probably dry land which has since 
been covered by the waters. 
A worthy traveller recounts in a mes- 
sage to Khamza ibn al-Hasan al-Isfa- 
hani (4) the wonders which he saw in 
the West. He recalls having sailed 
through a narrow strait, the strait [Straits 
of Gibraltar] connecting the Syrian Sea 
[Mediterranean] with the Encircling Sea 
The shores were visible both on the 
side of Andalus and on the side of 
Tangier and Further Sus (5). He looked 
into the waters of the Strait and saw 
In Its depths a mighty bridge of rock, 
and one of those present affirmed that 
it had been built by Alexander. But 
the Andalusians exclaimed: "The devil 
take your Alexander! Could he have 
taken the land of the Andalusians to 
build this? This was built of old by 
Hercules!” 
| believe that "Hercules’ crossing” 
mentioned in Ptolemy's “Geography” is 
nothing other than this bridge. It was 
undoubtedly once above water, but the 
4 i 
So 
a a 
a5 pe 
4 9 
Ree Re D eB De NINO 
“ Encircling Ocean”. 
Photo S.A. Davidov - © APN, Tashkent 
water then rose up and covered it 
As concerns the Encircling Sea to 
the East [Pacific Ocean] it is often 
shrouded in darkness and is a place 
of frequent calms, where navigation is 
most dangerous. 
* 
lt is believed that these two seas, the 
one to the West and the one to the 
East of the dry land [the Atlantic and 
Pacific Oceans] are not joined together. 
But those who have sailed these seas 
and have suffered shipwrecks because 
of the storms recount things which lead 
us to believe that they may be joined. 
Recent evidence has furthermore 
strengthened these suppositions and 
indeed given them the character of truth. 
Ship's timbers have been found bound 
together In the Encircling Sea near its 
confluence with the Syrian Sea. But 
it is only in the Indian Sea that timbers 
are lashed together In this way (because 
of the many magnetic stones which are 
there and are a danger to shipping) and 
not in the Western Sea, where the 
ships’ timbers are not lashed together 
but fastened with Iron nails. The pre- 
sence of these timbers in the Western 
Sea Is proof that they arrived there by 
(1) Slavs who settled on the shores of 
the Baltic — the Pomeranians and the 
Novgorodian Slovenes. 
{2) A name not found In other sources, 
it may refer to the Cape (Ras) Khafun, the 
extreme eastern tip of Africa. 
(3) “ Ethiopians " — East African Ne- 
groes, 
(4) Famous 10th century historlan and 
philologist. 
(5) As-Sus al-Agsa, medieval name of 
part of Morocco. 
 
PROTO ea Td 
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
    
    
   
     
    
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
    
   
   
   
 
   

## [Page 22](074875engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

  
   
     
   
   
   
   
    
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
    
    
    
    
   
     
       
   
   
   
    
    
   
     
   
      
 
   
       
n 
aks : 
rr . Ty 
BT Pe 
- ads 
~ ~a 
h ZB 
» 
> a 
some waterway connecting it to the 
Indian Sea. This could not have happen- 
ed by way of the Sea of Kulzum for 
between it and the Syrian Sea there 
lies an isthmus. 
Nor is it easy to envisage a junction 
between the two by way of the sea 
which lies to the north. In such a case, 
the timbers, after being broken up in 
the Indian Sea, would have had to drift 
out of it through an eastern strait linking 
the seas (6) and would then have had 
to drift around those parts lying to the 
north beneath the zenith of the Polar 
Star or through the other northern 
quarters of the Earth lying opposite the 
dry land. 
This cannot be what happened. Espe- 
cially when it is considered that those 
who speak of the joining of the seas 
point out that the level of the eastern 
waters is higher than that of the western 
waters, just as it was discovered when 
the land was being surveyed that the 
waters of the Sea of Kulzum are higher 
than those which run into the Syrian 
Sea. The conclusion must be that the 
seas are linked to the south of the dry 
land. 
— The Determination 
of the Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy) 
 
(6) Al-Blrunl may have known or conjec- 
tured about the exlstence of the Behring 
Straits. 
SMART SCHOLARS 
Once a sage was asked why scholars 
always flock to the doors of the rich, 
whilst the rich are not inclined to call 
at the doors of scholars. “The schol- 
ars”, he answered, “are well aware of 
the use of money, but the rich are 
ignorant of the nobility of science.” 
— Alberuni’s India 
‘SPEAK THE TRUTH’ 
That man only is praiseworthy who 
shrinks from a lie and always adheres 
to the truth, enjoying credit even among 
liars, not to mention others. 
It has been said in the Koran, “Speak 
the truth, even if it were against 
yourselves” (Sidra, 4, 134); and the 
Messiah expresses himself in the Gospel 
to this effect: “Do not mind the fury of 
kings in speaking the truth before them. 
They only possess your body, but they 
have no power over your soul.” 
In these words the Messiah orders us 
to exercise moral courage. 
— Alberuni's India 
POWER OF MOONLIGHT 
That the moon has certain effects on 
moist substances, that they are appar- 
ently subject to her influences, that, 
for instance, increase and decrease in 
ebb and flow develop periodically and 
parallel with the moon's phasgs, all this 
is well known to the inhabitants of 
seashores and seafaring people. 
-. oo —. 
- = . wv 
v. 
: Avan . \ 3 : : Ae "oA oJ ly ra 
p ah 
: 
  
Vata tr . RA Na ol 
A 
   
n 
» 
> { 
Ss 
Likewise physicians are well aware 
that she affects the humores of sick 
people, and that the fever-days revolve 
parallel with the moon's course. Phy- 
sical scholars know that the life of 
animals and plants depends upon the 
moon, and experimentalists know that 
she influences marrow and brain, eggs 
and the sediments of wine in casks 
and jugs, that she excites the minds 
of people who sleep in full moonlight, 
and that moonlight affects linen clothes 
which are exposed to it. 
Peasants know how the moon acts 
upon fields of cucumbers, melons, 
cotton, etc., and even make the times 
for the various kinds of sowing, planting, 
and grafting, and for the covering of the 
cattle depend upon the course of the 
moon. Lastly, astronomers know that 
meteorologic occurrences depend upon 
the various phases through which the 
moon passes in her revolutions. 
— Alberuni's India 
DIAMONDS AND THE EAGLE 
 
  
Al-Biruni related the story of 
the eagle which collected dia- 
monds. Many similar legends 
describing how precious gems 
were obtained in this way 
flourished in the East. A num- 
ber were recorded In the 
“Thousand and One Nights”, and 
s0 reached the West, where 
they inspired engravings such 
as this, which appeared in 
“Hortus Sanitatis”, published at 
Mainz, Germany, in 1491. 
Many strange and unlikely tales are 
told about diamond mines and the way 
these precious stones are obtained. It 
is said for example that the diamond is 
called the eagle's stone. . The origin 
of this name is that diamond prospec- 
tors are said to cover the nest in which 
eaglets are lying with a piece of glass. 
The eagle can see its young but, unable 
to reach them, it goes in search of 
diamonds, which it places on top of the 
glass. When a goodly number have 
CN - J 
"UT k . . Le | ~ 
EE ee LIS Renl FL PS 
     
 
   
- 
Go 
we 
by) 
  
 
been deposited, the prospectors purloin 
them, then remove the glass, so deceiv- 
ing the eagle into believing that it 
has regained its young thanks to fetch- 
ing the diamonds. The glass Is then 
replaced, and the eagle. flies off in 
search of more gems. 
— Gems 
THE GREAT ART 
OF THE HINDUS 
In every place to which some particu- 
lar holiness is ascribed, the Hindus 
construct ponds intended for the ab- 
lutions. In this they have attained to 
a very high degree of art, so that our 
people (the Muslims), when they see 
them, wonder at them, and are unable 
to describe them, much less to construct 
anything like them. The Hindus build 
them of great stones of an enormous 
bulk, joined to each other by sharp and 
strong cramp-irons, in the form of steps 
{or terraces) like so many ledges; and 
these terraces run all around the pond, 
reaching to a height of more than a 
man’s stature. On the surface of the 
stones between two terraces they con- 
struct staircases rising like pinnacles. 
Thus the first steps or terraces are like 
roads (leading round the pond) and the 
pinnacles are steps (leading up and 
down). If ever so many people descend 
to the pond whilst others ascend, they 
do not meet each other, and the road 
is never blocked up, because there are 
s0 many terraces, and the ascending 
person can always turn aside to another 
terrace than that on which the descend- 
ing people go. By this arrangement all 
troublesome thronging is avoided. 
— Alberuni's India 
THE PROPERTIES 
OF CHINESE TEA 
It is said that chah is a Chinese 
word and is meant for a herb which 
grows at high altitudes there. It aiso 
grows in Katha and Nepal. Several 
varieties of it are distinguished on the 
basis of its colour: some are white, 
while the others are green, violet, grey 
and black. 
White tea Is the most excellent variety 
of the herb; its leaf is slender and 
fragrant, and exerts its effect on the 
body comparatively more swiftly than 
all the other varieties. It is rare and 
not easily available, followed with regard 
to availability by the green, violet, grey 
and black varieties. 
The people (of China and Tibet) cook 
it, and preserve it In a cube-shaped 
vessel after desiccating it. Tea has the 
characteristics of water but is especially 
benefical in overcoming the influence 
of tippling. For this reason it is taken 
to Tibet where people habitually quaff 
considerable quantities of wine, and 
there Is no better medecine for negating 
the effect of liquor than this herb. 
Those who transport it to Tibet accept 
nothing in barter but musk. 
~ » 
w lr ae " 
Te or, 
LU a \ - ~ 
wr Fe 
   

## [Page 23](074875engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

    
    
    
   
 
   
x J 
a Ap f A 
~ “ ; 
yale oe! 
x» 
In the book, Akhbar al-Sin it has 
been stated that thirty bags of tea cost 
a dirham, and its taste is sweet coupled 
with sourness. On boiling, however, 
the sourness disappears. 
The people (of China and Tibet) drink 
it. It Is said that they drink it with 
hot water and believe it to be a chola- 
gogue [promoting the flow of bile] and 
blood purifier. A person who travelled 
to the place of its occurrence in China 
has stated that the king of that country 
resides in the city of Yanju. A big 
river like the Tigris traverses this city. 
Both sides of the river are studded 
with wine sellers’ tenements, kilns and 
shops. People flock there to drink tea, 
and do not take Indian cannabis clan- 
destinely. The king of the place receives 
the capitation tax, and the public cannot 
transact the sale of tea, since both 
tea and wine are in the possession of 
the king. He who transacts business 
in salt and tea without the king being 
aware of it is awarded the punishment 
due to a thief. 
Profits from such places go to the 
coffers of the king and such profits 
equal those accruing from gold and 
silver mines. Some physicians have 
mentioned In their pharmacopoeia that 
tea Is the plant produced in China. The 
people of that country make tablets 
from it and take them to foreign lands. 
These pharmacopoeia also describe 
the origin of tea. A Chinese king became 
displeased with one of his courtiers 
whom he exiled from the city in the 
direction of the mountains. The cour- 
tier was seized by a fever, and one 
day he trudged, in a desperate state, 
towards the mountain valleys. He was 
being gnawed by hunger, and he saw 
only tea plants, whose leaves he ate. 
After a few days, his fever began to 
abate. He continued eating tea leaves 
till he recovered completely. 
Another courtier happened to pass 
that way. He saw the courtier who 
had made this remarkable recovery, 
and Informed the king about it. The 
king was surprised and he recalled 
the exiled courtier and enquired from 
him the reason for his recovery. The 
courtier then narrated the remarkable 
medicinal properties of tea. 
The king thereupon ordered that tea 
should be tested, and his physicians 
enumerated its advantages to him. They 
also began to Incorporate tea in 
medicines. 
— Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica 
THE LODESTONE 
. Like amber, the lodestone has the 
property of attraction. But it renders 
gréater service, because it can draw 
a blade from a wound, the point of a 
lancet from a vein or a metal ring 
swallowed and lying in the stomach. 
According to Dioscorides, the best lode- 
stones are the colour of lapis lazuli. 
When burnt, the lodestone becomes red 
_— ee 
L / a ea AJ 
a. — ~ 
- » 
 
  
~ / 
= eT SEAS OF   RN » 
  
     
      
  
   
   
   
    
   
    
    
   
  
   
    
   
    
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
   
   
   
   
    
     
   
    
Ironstone. Yet, we have never seen 
this stone and no one has described It 
to us. In an anonymous work, it Is said 
that the best lodestone is a reddish 
black, followed by lodestone the colour 
of fire. Some say that the most sought 
after lodestone is more plentiful in the 
Zabtara region, on the eastern confines 
of the Roman Empire, than anywhere 
else on earth. 
It is said also that the hulls of ships 
built for crossing the Arabian Gulf are 
bound with palm fibres threaded through 
holes drilled in the planks, while the 
boards of ships sailing on the Medi- 
terranean are secured with iron nails. 
The avoidance of nails in the former 
case is explained by the presence of 
hidden lodestone reefs in the Gulf, 
which could constitute a grave danger 
for ships built with iron fixings. This 
is a far-fetched argument, however, 
because the ships that cross the Ara- 
bian Gulf cannot dispense with anchors 
and are always laden with iron imple- 
ments, notably weapon blades from 
ndia. 
-— Gems 
Ny
 
     
      
  
   
He — ee TTT rd 
15th Century engraving showing 
the foundering of a ship on a 
magnetic rock. From “Hortus 
Sanitatis”, Mainz 1491, 
WHY THE EARTH IS ROUND 
As concerns the curvature of the 
Earth in the directions between longi- 
tude and latitude, it may be ascertain- 
ed by means of the longest days In 
the towns we have mentioned. Let us 
consider, for instance, the town of Bul- 
gar, in the far north, and the town 
of Aden, lying far to the south of it. 
In and around Aden, the length of the 
longest day is little more than twelve 
hours, whilst in Bulgar it is little less 
than seventeen hours. There is a dif- 
ference of two hours between the hours 
of sunrise and sunset in those two 
towns. Consequently, at the time of 
sunrise over Aden, the Sun has already 
risen to a height of two hours' travel 
in the sky over Bulgar, 
Bon Ae 
PAPI he 
RC STE 
     
B 
Thus, in summer, an observer in Bul- 
gar looking In the direction of the sun- 
rise or sunset sees a part of the sky 
corresponding to that magnitude, whilst 
the same part of the sky Is not visible 
in Aden, being situated In a circle be- 
neath the very Pole. Similarly, a part 
of the sky of similar magnitude is visi- 
ble at sunrise and sunset in winter, when 
it is not visible in Bulgar. 
This being the case, we may assert 
that a line traced on the Earth in the 
direction of latitude, that is to say a 
meridian, must of necessity be either 
straight, or a concave or convex curve. 
As regards the probability of its being 
a straight line... the facts themselves 
refute such a hypothesis, so that the 
surface of the Earth cannot be flat in 
this direction. As to the meridian being 
concave, if it were, the height of the 
Pole, that is to say the number of 
stars permanently visible in the far 
south, would diminish as the obser- 
ver moved northwards, becoming fewer 
and fewer the further north he went. 
In fact, the opposite occurs, the number 
of such stars becoming greater, which 
implies the convexity of the meridian 
and hence the curvature of the Earth. 
Thus the Earth is round in this direc- 
tion too, and if the same is true both 
in the directions of latitude and longi- 
tude, then the Earth's surface must be 
spherical. 
Moreover, mountains, however high 
they may be, do not alter this shape, 
since they are small in comparison with 
the whole and are mere wrinkles which 
detract from the smoothness of its sur- 
face but not from the roundness of 
the whole. 
If the observer still harbours certain 
doubts and thinks that this curvature 
is characteristic only of the inhabited 
parts of the Earth but not its other 
parts... let us turn for confirmation to 
another argument, the Earth's shadow... 
If an object is round, its shadow Is 
round, if it is triangular its shadow 
Is triangular, if square then square, if 
oblong oblong, and so forth with other 
shapes. 
When we observe an object casting 
a shadow upon the Moon, we see that 
its edges are rounded, especially near 
the fullest point of the eclipse when 
we may see most of the circumference 
of the object casting the shadow and 
the roundness of the object, thus con- 
cluding that the intersection of the part 
of the Earth illuminated by the Sun and 
the part casting the shadow is a cir- 
cle... Since such intersections are nu- 
merous, corresponding in number to the 
number of observations and since they 
concern different parts of the Earth, 
yet ail have this in common, that they 
all throw a rounded shadow upon the 
Moon, there can be no doubt as to 
the shape of the Earth, which is indeed 
confirmed to be rounded on all sides. 
— The Mas'udic Canon on Astronomy 
 
   
 
: So 9) 
Te, A UN. : 
Cran EO)

## [Page 24](074875engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

    | 
“ 
-G 
St 
oy 
or    
M
r
 
"
y
i
A
T
.
 
THE CAPRICIOUS 
TURQUOISE 
We have ceased to prize the turquoise 
since it changes rapidly with changes 
in the skies, as they clear or are cover- 
ed with cloud, and also with the caprice 
of the wind. Further, perfumes diminish 
the brillance of the turquoise, toilet water 
attacks its lustre and unguents dull it 
completely. For these reasons the tur- 
quoise does not rank as a precious 
stone. It is thought to come from a 
“mud which has petrified”. It may be 
polished with grease or the fatty tail of 
the sheep. That is why it flashes with 
a brillant fire in the hands of a butcher, 
particularly one who has flayed an ani- 
mal's skin. while grasping it with his 
hand. 
— Gems 
INDIA WAS ONCE A SEA 
... If you have seen the soll of India 
with your own eyes and meditate on 
its nature—if you consider the rounded 
stones found in the earth however 
deeply you dig, stones that are huge 
near the mountains and where the 
rivers have a violent current; stones 
that are of smaller size at greater 
distance from the mountains, and where 
the streams flow more slowly; stones 
that appear pulverized in the form of 
sand where the streams begin to stag- 
nate near their mouths and near the 
sea—if you consider all this, you can 
scarcely help thinking that India has 
once been a sea which by degrees has 
been filled up by the alluvium of the 
streams. 
— Alberuni’s India 
WITCHCRAFT AND SCIENCE 
‘We understand by witchcraft, making 
by some kind of delusion a thing appear 
to the senses as something different 
from what it is in reality. Taken in 
this sense, it is far spread among peo- 
ple. Understood, however, as common 
people understand it, as the producing 
of something which Is impossible, it Is 
a thing which does not lie within the 
limits of reality. For as that which is 
impossible cannot be produced, the 
whole affair is nothing but a gross 
deception. Therefore witchcraft in this 
sense has nothing whatever to do with 
science. 
One of the species of witchcraft is 
alchemy, though it is generally not called 
by this name. But if a man takes a 
bit of cotton and makes it appear as 
a bit of gold, what would you call this 
but a piece of witchcraft? It is quite 
the same as if he were to take a bit 
of silver and make it appear as gold, 
only with this difference, that the latter 
is a generally-known process, I. e. the 
gilding of silver, the former is not. 
The Hindus do not pay particular 
attention to alchemy, but no nation is 
entirely free from it, and one nation has 
  
more bias for it than another, which 
must not be construed as proving 
intelligence or ignorance; for we find 
that many intelligent people are entirely 
given to alchemy, whilst ignorant people 
ridicule the art and its adepts. Those 
intelligent people, though boisterously 
exulting over their make-believe science, 
are not to be blamed for occupying 
themselves with alchemy, for their 
motive is simply excessive eagerness 
for acquiring fortune and for avoiding 
misfortune. 
— Alberuni's India 
  
  
Al-Blrunl used a vase similar 
to this to calculate the specific 
gravity of various substances 
such as metals and stones. 
Ingeniously constructed, the 
vessel enabled him to ascertain 
the volume of water displaced 
by an immersed object and so 
determine its specific gravity 
with a high degree of accuracy. 
He put the specific gravity of 
gold at 19.0 (it is actually 19.3), 
iron at 7.92 (actually 7.9) and 
lapis-lazuli at 3.91 (3.90). 
ON-THE-SPOT OBSERVATION 
Reliance on personal observation and 
on-the-spot examination enhance the 
capacity to remember and distinguish 
facts and also to identify objects, not 
only in pharmacy but in other pro- 
fessions and crafts. Gathering data 
through direct handling and observation 
is a greater advantage to be encourag- 
ed over mere reading of books. 
— Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica 
A HEMISPHERE 
10 CUBITS IN DIAMETER 
| began by correcting the distances 
and the names of places and towns, 
basing my work on what | had heard 
about those who had visited those 
places and what | could learn from 
the mouths of those who had seen 
them. | took the precaution of verify- 
ing the reliability of the material and 
of comparing the evidence of different 
witnesses. 
> 
   A 
AA 
LH [ir 
Ls ana 
& 3 ; ox 
  
    
a UUR 
Sa ah 
&y ks 14 
  
  
 
  
   
    
  
   
     
    
      
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
    
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
       
   
    
   
   
   
   
    
    
   
    
    
    
  
  
| spared neither energy nor money 
In order to achieve my purpose and | 
constructed a hemisphere 10 cubits [5.4 
metres] in diameter, on which to base 
the longitudes and latitudes of the 
places and towns as calculated from 
their distances, since time did not allow 
me to use mathematical calculations, 
the distances being so many and the 
calculations so long. 
— The Determination 
of the Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy) 
THE MISER & THE BOOK 
“He who just collects books and 
prides himself on their possession is 
like a miser who fills his chests and 
locks them.” 
— Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica 
25 WAYS TO FREEDOM 
According to the Hindu philosophers, 
liberation is common to all castes and 
to the whole human race, if their inten- 
tion of obtaining it Is perfect. This view 
is based on the saying of Vyésa: “Learn 
to know the twenty-five things (i. e. the 
twenty-five elements of existence) 
thoroughly. Then you may follow 
whatever religion you like; you will no 
doubt be liberated.” 
— Alberuni's India 
THE GEOMETRY OF FLOWERS 
Among the peculiarities of the flowers 
there is one really astonishing fact, viz. 
the number of their petals, the tops of 
which form a circle when they begin 
to open, is in most cases conformable 
to the laws of geometry. In most cases 
they agree with the chords that have 
béen found by the laws of geometry, 
not with conic sections. 
You scarcely ever find a flower of 
7 or 9 petals, for you cannot construct 
them according to the laws of geometry 
in a circle as isosceles (triangles). The 
number of their petals, is always 3 or 4 
or 5 or 6 or 18. This is a matter of 
frequent occurrence. Possibly one may 
find one day some species of flowers 
with 7 or 9 petals, or one may find 
among the species hitherto known such 
a number of petals; but, on the whole, 
one must say hature preserves Its 
genera and species such as they are. 
For if you would, for example, count 
the number of seeds of one of the 
(many) pomegranates of a tree, you 
would find that all the other pomegra- 
nates contain the same number of 
seeds as that one the seeds of which 
you have counted first. So, too, nature 
proceeds in all other matters. 
Frequently, however, you find in the 
functions (actions) of nature which it is 
her office to fulfil, some fault (some 
irregularity) ...l, however, do not call 
them “faults of nature”, but rather a 
superfluity of material beyond the due 
   
   
    
     
     
« , be    
   
   
  
 
     
    
  
   
c fa 0 » 3 /
RL RS, PRI | Ah TN [TAS . sf TY A Ve oT L BW ad L WSs TY ) 
So SCT § NCIS NEE 
re a 
a CS GNC 
ed 
rhe 
Tod 
y 
lr Se      \ 
  
     
  
          

## [Page 25](074875engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

proportions of the measure of everything. 
To this category belong, for example, 
animals with supernumerary limbs, 
which occur sometimes, when nature, 
whose task it is to preserve the species 
as they are, finds some superfluous 
substance, which she forms into some 
shape instead of throwing it away. 
— Chronology of Ancient Nations 
AN AGE OF IMITATORS 
The most important requirement of 
medicine is that the man of medicine 
should examine the terms of reference 
as regards natural science and should 
be fully acquainted with the natural 
laws. When he comes to the resolution 
of the ingredients of a drug every medi- 
cinal ingredient is arrayed in a different 
aspect before him and each one has 
properties that argue differently. This 
is what the art of pharmacy should 
achieve, but alas! ours is an age of 
blind Imitation, and people mostly go 
by hearsay. Only he who sedulously 
learns from the masters the fundamen- 
tals of the art and follows their di- 
rections can ever hope to achieve 
mastery. 
— Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica 
  
Photo © Gérard Dufresne, Parls 
In his treatise on precious 
stones, al-Biruni wrote, “| used 
to have a disc of onyx, on 
which wavy lines formed the 
perfect figure of a duck, the 
legs being invisible as if it was 
swimming or sitting on its eggs; 
the representation was faultless, 
as if done by a skilful artist.” 
This figured onyx shows not a 
duck but a fish. It is part of 
the private collection of the 
writer Roger Caillois, of the 
Académie Francaise. 
LAWS OF NATURE 
... The bees kill those of their kind 
who only eat, but do not work in their 
beehive. 
Nature proceeds in a similar way; 
‘however, it does not distinguish, for its 
action is under all circumstances one 
and the same. It allows the leaves and 
fruit of the trees to perish, thus pre- 
venting them from realizing that result 
which they are intended to produce in 
  
the economy of nature. It removes 
them so as make room for others. 
If thug the earth is ruined, or is near 
to be ruined, by having too many 
inhabitants, its rule—for it has a ruler, 
and his all-embracing care is apparent 
in every single particle of it—sends it 
. a messenger for the purpose of reducing 
the too great number and of cutting 
away all that is evil. 
— Alberuni’s India 
THE NATURE OF TIME 
Some people maintain that time 
consists of cycles, at the end of which 
all created beings perish, whilst they 
grow at their beginning; that each such 
cycle has a special Adam and Eve of 
its own, and that the chronology of this 
cycle depends upon them. Other people, 
again, maintain that in each cycle a 
special Adam and Eve exist for each 
country in particular, and that hence the 
difference of human structure, nature, 
and language is to be derived. 
Other people, besides, hold this 
foolish persuasion, viz that time has no 
terminus a quo at all. 
Now, personal observation alone, and 
conclusions inferred therefrom, do not 
prove a long duration of the human life, 
and the huge size of human bodies, and 
what else has been related to be beyond 
the limits of possibility. For similar 
matters appear in the course of time 
in manifold shapes. There are certain 
things which are bound to certain times, 
within which they turn round in a certain 
order, and which undergo transfor- 
mations as long as there is a possibility 
of their existing. If they, now, are not 
observed as long as they are in 
existence, people think them to be im- 
probable, and hasten to reject them as 
altogether impossible. 
This applies to all cyclical occurrences, 
such as the mutual impregnation of 
animals and trees, and the forthcoming 
of the seeds and their fruits. For, if it 
were possible that men did not know 
these occurrences, and then were led 
to a tree, stripped of its leaves, and 
were told what occurs to the tree of 
getting green, of producing blossoms 
and fruits, etc., they would certainly 
think it improbable, till they saw it with 
, their own eyes. It is for the same 
reason that people, who come from 
northern countries, are filled with ad- 
miration when they see palm-trees, 
olive-trees, and myrtle-trees, and others 
standing in full-bloom at wintertime, 
since they never saw anything like it in 
their own country. 
Further, there are other things 
occurring at times in which no cyclical 
order is apparent, and which seem to 
happen at random. If, then, the time 
in which the thing occurred has gone 
by, nothing remains of it except the 
report about it. And if you find in such 
a report all the conditions of authenticity, 
and if the thing might have already 
occurred before that time, you must 
accept it, though you have no Idea of the 
sw A FY es 
E 
re ry 
ay a 3 PO wl 
  
v a i A , Ly) 4 
; Toe 0s FFA x rn n an - HT i. -~ - 8 - UY : ad 
Wes Br Ca Tada Ay RL $ Ed 
: A rd 9 ro of ke ey ao 2 A ody ual LE "™ FE ore = Fi ay vi +N ve Y 
«a oo wr RY a 
- A ae nN - On $x Lm Ww <> <i tr 
~~ av a ogni Coin ~~ 0 fpr” "Cag yy Ww on AlN ‘ { 
NIA AS LBS 8 LAS I LES ac. > JN SY LTV oY | BS IN DA, ANSON 
re a ot lot oa lnty wT My wT we JU Laan ') wl FE Oy . hy PE Fe ee 
po VAN OYA TAN De MN A AC AF 4 AN WE SAN, WIS I Re Tm yr AUS 
w >, ” SRA ERs hl EN ea Ean N Ly : 
8 
OT w AN Lend 
TR ATT aN el 
   a) 
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
nature nor of the cause of the matter 
in question. 
— Chronology of Ancient Nations 
PARABLE OF THE 
FOUR PUPILS 
A ‘man Is travelling together with his 
pupils for some business or other 
towards the end of the night. There 
appears something standing erect before 
them on the road, the nature of which 
it is impossible to recognize on account 
of the darkness of night. The man 
turns towards his pupils, and asks them, 
one efter the other, what it is. The 
first says: “I do not know what it is.” The 
second says: “| do not know, and | have 
no means of learning what it is." The 
third says “It is useless to examine 
what it is, for the rising of the day will 
reveal it. If it is something terrible, 
it will disappear at daybreak; if it is 
something else, the nature of the thing 
will anyhow be clear to us.” Now, none 
of them had attained to knowledge, the 
first, because he was ignorant; the 
second, because he was incapable, and 
had no means of knowing; the third, 
becalse he was indolent and acquiesced 
in his ignorance. 
The fourth pupil, however, did not 
give an answer. He stood still, and 
then he went on in the direction of the 
object. On coming near, he found that 
it was pumpkins on which there lay a 
tangled mass of something. Now he 
knew that a living man, endowed with 
free will, does not stand still in his 
place until such a tangled mass Is 
formed on his head, and he recognized 
at once that it was a lifeless object 
standing erect. Further, he could not 
be sure if it was not a hidden place 
for some dunghill. So he went quite 
close to it, struck against it with his 
foot till it fell to the ground. Thus all 
doubt having been removed, he returned 
to his master and gave him the exact 
account. 
— Alberuni’'s India 
SOLAR AND LUNAR YEARS 
.. People distinguish two kinds of 
years—the Solar year and the Lunar 
year. They have not used other stars 
for the purpose of deriving years from 
them, because thelr motions are compar- 
atively hidden, and can hardly ever be 
found out by eyesight; but only by astro- 
nomical observations and experiments... 
The Solar Year. According to the 
statement of Theon (1), in his Canon, 
the people of Constantinople, and of 
Alexandria, and the other Greeks, the 
Syrians and Chaldaeans, the Egyptians 
of our time... all use the solar year, 
which consists of nearly 365% days. 
They reckon their year as 365 days, and 
add the quarters of a day in every fourth 
year as one complete day... This year 
(1) Fourth century Greek astronomer. 
  
   
Dea nit 
5 
: wy T= tL 
ot LN : WAT h by a Wn ER Se in ST

## [Page 26](074875engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 50321: Al-Biruni: miniature anthology, selections from works by al-Biruni including many translated into English for the first time

a Jy 
sraddand) 
ALE PL 
they call an intercalary year, because 
the quarters are intercalated therein. 
The ancient Egyptians followed the same 
practice, but with this difference, that 
they neglected the quarters of a day 
till they had summed up to the number 
of days of one complete year, which 
took place In 1,460 years; then they 
intercalated one year. 
The Persians followed the same rule 
as long as their empire lasted; but they .. 
treated it differently. For they reckoned 
their year as 365 days, and neglected 
the following fractions until the day- 
quarters had summed up in the course 
of 120 years to the number of days of 
one complete month and until the fifth 
parts of an hour, which, according to 
their opinion, follow the fourth parts of 
a day (i.e. they give the solar year the 
length of 365 { days and 1/5 hour), had 
summed up to one day; then they added 
the complete month to the year in each 
116th year. 
The Luni-Solar Year. The Hebrews, 
Jews, and all the Israelites, the Séabians, 
and Harranians, used an intermediate 
system. They derived their year from 
the revolution of the sun, and its months 
from the revolution of the moon—with 
this view, that their feast and fast days 
might be regulated by lunar computation, 
and at the same time keep their places 
within the year. Therefore they inter- 
calated 7 months in 19 lunar years. 
— Chronology of Ancient Nations 
ON HINDU RELIGIONS 
Everything which exists on this subject 
[the religions of the Hindus] in our 
literature is second-hand information 
which one has copied from the other, 
a farrago of materials never sifted by 
the sieve of critical examination. 
..l have written this book on the 
doctrines of the Hindus, never making 
any unfounded imputations against 
those, our religious antagonists, and 
at the same time not considering it 
Inconsistent with my duties as a Muslim 
to quote their own words at full length 
when | thought they would contribute to 
elucidate a subject. If the contents of 
these quotations happen to be utterly 
heathenish, and the followers of the 
truth, I. e. the Muslims, find them 
objectionable, we can only say that such 
is the belief of the Hindus, and that they 
themselves are best qualified to 
defend it. 
— Alberuni's India 
THE WEAK FOUNDATIONS 
OF ASTROLOGY 
The art of astrology in general is 
built upon weak foundations and its 
deductions are insubstantial. Its calcul- 
ations are confused and it is mostly 
supposition rather than reliable know- 
ledge. The subject matter of astrology 
i y “ah k 1 v oh we - 
consists of the various configurations 
of heavenly bodies which are themselves 
contingent on the chosen points on 
the heavenly sphere itself or on a certain 
relationship between that and the hori- 
zon. Astrology therefore can never 
produce positive results since its very 
basis is unreliable. 
How indeed could it be reliable, when 
the exact location of the object for 
which the calculations are made and for 
which the future is foretold by means 
of horoscopes of “conjunctions” and 
“oppositions” is unknown and when the 
actual positions of these configurations 
conflict with those which are used! 
— The Determination 
of the Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy) 
ON LEARNING 
Learning is the fruit of repetition. 
— Alberuni’s India 
THE PERFUMER’'S ART 
Dari was a port in the old days where 
scents and perfumes were unloaded 
and therefrom perfumers went from 
one city to another selling them, or 
bought by the people of the Quraysh 
tribe. The Quraysh possessed a 
masterly expertise in this art. It is 
because of this that the Arabs call 
apothecaries Dari. In the hadith the 
Holy Prophet (peace be on Him) said: 
“The example of a noble and sincere 
person is like that of a Dari whose 
perfumes, even if he does not give any 
of them to you, will all the same have 
their pleasant smell; and a bad com- 
panion is like an ironsmith who, even 
though he may not singe you with the 
sparks of his furnace will at least 
harass you with its smoke.” 
— Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica 
THE DESALTING 
OF WATER 
People say that on the 6th [of January] 
there is an hour during which all salt 
water of the earth becomes sweet. All 
the qualities occurring in the water 
depend exclusively upon the nature of 
that soil by which the water is enclosed, 
if it be standing, or over which the water 
flows, if it be running. Those qualities 
are of a stable nature, not to be altered 
except by a process of transformation 
from degree to degree by means of 
certain media. Therefore this statement 
of the waters becoming sweet in this 
one hour is entirely unfounded. 
Continual and leisurely experimen- 
tation will show to any one the futility 
of this assertion. For if the water were 
sweet it would remain sweet for some 
space of time. Nay, if you would 
place—in this hour or any other—in a 
well of salt water some pounds of pure 
dry wax, possibly the saltiness of the 
water would diminish. This has been 
mentioned by the experimenters, who go 
so far as to maintain that if you make 
a thin vase of wax and place it in sea 
water, so that the mouth of the vase 
emerges above the water, those drops 
of water which splash over into the 
vase become sweet. 
If all salt water were mixed with so 
much sweet water as would overpower 
its nature, in that case their theory 
would be realized (i.e. all salt waters 
would become sweet). An example of 
this process is afforded by the lake of 
Tinnis, the water of which is sweet in 
autumn and winter in consequence of 
the great admixture of the water of the 
Nile, whilst at the other seasons it is 
salt, because there is very little ad- 
mixture of Nile water. 
— Chronology of Ancient Nations 
QUALITIES OF ARABIC 
All the arts of the world have been 
transferred to the Arabic language; it 
has penetrated deep into our hearts, 
and its charms have crossed into 
the innermost reaches of our being, 
although to every people their own 
language appears to be sweet, since 
they use it day in, day out. 
When | observe my language, 1 find 
that if any art is rendered into it, it 
would look de trop and odd. On the 
other hand, if the same art is rendered 
into Arabic, it would look natural and 
good, even though Arabic does not 
happen to be my mother tongue. 
— Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica 
THE RUSE OF 
ALEXANDER THE GREAT 
Some say that the diamond was 
brought by the Bicornutus (Alexander 
the Great) from the valley of the dia- 
monds, a valley teeming with snakes. 
Whoever set eyes on these reptiles 
would instantly perish. The Bicornutus 
advanced on the snakes with a mirror 
carried by men who were hidden behind 
it. When the snakes saw their reflec- 
tions, they died on the spot. Yet these 
snakes had looked upon each other 
without dying and the sight of the real 
thing should have been more deadly 
than the mere reflection. 
— Gems 
MUSLIM ADAGE 
“Your knowledge should not be like 
the clothes that you wear, and not likely 
to be washed away while you are taking 
your bath.” 
Adage quoted by al-Biruni. 
— Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica 
   
bh 
Md 
PPAR 
oo» 
io 
NOS 
| ) oh 1g 
. RST <M LES 
. A oy LM 
\ 2 Te hy » A 
a oa 
— ¥ i 
I “nl Ne Pet 
RIE Te Ye 
—t A NOR 
a Cl) 
Vt ThA 
3 ~~ 
- I's a 
CanaW AV 
LEN : 3 
SF oN 
kl 2) kh 
Ey gt 
; A a Py re SN 
- Ll 
r . Eh : 
A ad Cay 
abe oh, 
*’ 0, 
. » 
LA £ Le hl, LS A 
Td 3 
oh m— { 9 
g , - 
3 ] @ 
i _— " A os . 
. ml 
Te a 
Sp : Ly AE 
ply wi NEY 
a TLE 
> ~~ 
8 a 4 4 
Fre Soi Ar 
YA AMYOLS dCs 4 : A 
a ~ A A a7 23 x 
1 _K ral 
¥ 
i ~~ » 
§ LA - 
al fe G 
, tS by . 
-" - 4 A 
. Ly vil ors VF 
2 iA = 
5 a 
i a 
3 “v 2 
Yiadk SINLLS, 
wa L ed > 
ren Yo 
Rare re A
ny : 
y . roy YRS . 
a eg | aA 
. 2 4 p+ 
0 ! w) ha | ie 
NE Ty 
I AN 3 -> } 
£0 
ed, 3 Se IVE 
- a AY 
Foy SIN : A 
IAS Pe sal 
A ad 9 LT oA 
a ~~ 
2 - a ry BY i Se Of 
Fre a. LB 
Ndr, =F a wll, 
Pg" CLS 
hy Ah, 
| . 
d - ~~ 
TRS = Ww 
Se TAY 
LAA Vy 
itp! a wl 
Wo Mi vw 
  
    

## [Page 27](074875engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

AL-BIRUNI vs. 
by 
Seyyed Hossein Nasr 
  
SEYYED HOSSEIN NASR, rector of Arya- 
mehr University, in Teheran, is the author 
of a remarkable study on al-Biruni, published 
in his “An Introduction to Islamic Cosmo- 
logical Doctrines" (Harvard University Press, 
1964), in which he dealt with al-Biruni, Avi- 
cenna and lkwan al-Safa, Professor of the 
History of Science and Philosophy at Arya- 
mehr University, he has devoted another 
book to great Islamic scholars, “Three Mus- 
lim Sages” (Avicenna, Suhrawardi and Ibn 
'Arabi) published by Harvard University Press. 
Last year his “Al-Biruni and Ibn Sina - Ques- 
tions and Answers" was published by the 
High Council of Culture and Art in Teheran. 
Qur text 1s abridged from the English 
introduction to this work. 
AL-BIRUNI 
AND AVICENNA 
| ON THE SCREEN 
eh 
\ film based on the lite © 
a al-Biruni is currently peing 
“made in Soviet Uzbekistan. Ay 
Right, scene portraying Ayu 
~ meeting between al-Biruni 
Re right) and his famous : ~ 
contemporary the CLUTGELE 
pher and physician Avi- 
ot LLLGER CET ER GUN TEE Si 
CELE CNT UVTI TET) wo 
oe CIELIEY descri- 
in this article. Trg or 
.) 
© CONTINUED NEXT page 
= 


### 50322: Al-Biruni vs. Avicenna in the bout of the century: two geniuses aged 24 and 17 debate the nature of the universe

AVICENNA 
IN THE BOUT 
OF THE CENTURY 
Two geniuses aged 24 and 17 
debate the nature of the universe 
I. the rich tradition of 
Islamic intellectual history there are 
several instances in which leading 
thinkers have left in writing the 
exchanges of ideas and debates which 
they have carried out with each other 
on the highest intellectual level. 
One of the most important is the 
series of Questions and Answers 
exchanged between al-Biruni and 
Avicenna (Ibn Sina) in which Avicenna's 
student Ma’'sumi, also took part. This 
series of exchanges stands as a peak 
of Islamic intellectual history and a key 
to the understanding of an aspect of 
al-Biruni's thought not discussed 
extensively in his other writings. 
The Questions and Answers, include 
Ts A 
Photo N. Kasyanov «© APN, Tashkent 
ten questions pertaining to Aristotle's 
De Caelo (On the Heavens) and eight 
other questions posed by al-Biruni 
himself. These are answered by 
Avicenna one by one. Then al-Biruni 
once again responds to Avicenna’s 
answers, discussing eight of the first 
ten and seven of the last eight 
questions. Finally Ma'sumi answers 
al-Biruni once again on behalf of 
Avicenna. 
There are then altogether two sets 
of exchanges on some of the most 
fundamental points of “natural phil- 
osophy” between al-Biruni, the “in- 
dependent” scientist and thinker, and 
Avicenna the most eminent represen- 
tative of the Islamic Peripatetic (ma- 
CONTINUED PAGE 29 

## [Page 28](074875engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 50322: Al-Biruni vs. Avicenna in the bout of the century: two geniuses aged 24 and 17 debate the nature of the universe

VE jp mp fact "Em ¢ of BN Ete NEE RE Te Sele» Ee — “wll I INE a Ee 
i 
i 
i 
i 
| 
B 
  
Sie gl es Of = ~~ Two further scenes from the forth- 
iol LL coming film on al-Biruni. Above, the 
; AL-BIRUNI QO)! gl= SCREEN (Continued) great scientist and an assistant discuss 
; Vid J A : a reading from the quadrant he cons- 
i tructed for determining latitude by 
~ measuring the sun's elevation. Below 
~ left, al-Biruni (right of photo) talks with 
© #n Indian sage during the travels he 
of ed 
i 
~h 
  
Ea
to
n 
A 
- 
| 
-~ 
ak ah & B
r
n
 
an
g 
» 
’ 
A 
» 
~ » * 
| 
\ 
[4 \ 
Photos N. LEVEL TIER Tachkent i=" - 
k=l SHU | e 

## [Page 29](074875engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 50322: Al-Biruni vs. Avicenna in the bout of the century: two geniuses aged 24 and 17 debate the nature of the universe

~ undertook vefore] writing We monu- 
Serial “India”. Below right, the Pa 
crew on location. The film is being 
directed LACH TENN EEL (VEE TL TE 
cap) from a scenario written by the 
“historian and orientalist Pavlov Bulge: 
a LH
  
AL-BIRUNI vs. AVICENNA (Continued) 
shsha'i) school, and one of his fore- 
most pupils, Abu Sa'id ibn Ali al- 
Ma'sumi. 
In one question al-Biruni criticizes 
the reasons given in Aristotelian 
natural philosophy for denying that the 
celestial spheres have gravity or levity. 
Al-Biruni does not reject the view of 
Aristotle but criticizes the reasons 
given to sustain such a view. 
Moreover, he attacks the Aristotelian 
thesis that circular motion is innate 
to heavenly bodies, asserting that 
although the heavenly bodies do move 
in circular motion, such a motion could 
be “forced” and accidental while the 
motion natural to these bodies could 
be straight. 
Avicenna replies to these objections 
along the lines of argument presented 
in standard works of Aristotelian 
natural philosophy. 
In another question al-Biruni criticizes 
Aristotle's over-reliance on the views 
of the ancients and his predecessors 
concerning the conditions of the 
heavens without relying upon his 
own observation. Al-Biruni gives an 
example of the Hindu description of 
mountains which he says cannot be 
relied upon because if one observes 
them today one sees that they have 
altered. 
Avicenna reminds al-Biruni of the 
difference between mountains which 
undergo generation and corruption and 
the celestial bodies which do not do so. 
Furthermore, he accuses al-Biruni of 
having learned this argument from 
either John Philoponus, who was 
opposed to Aristotle because he 
himself was a Christian, or Mohammed 
ibn Zakariyya' al-Razi, who according 
to Avicenna should have remained 
content with medicine and not meddled 
in metaphysics, in which he had no 
competence. 
A. criticizes the 
Aristotelian denial of the possibility 
of the existence of another world 
completely different from the one we 
know, and unknown to us because 
it is completely veiled to our senses. 
He cites as illustration the fact that 
it is impossible for the person who 
is born blind to conceive of vision. 
In the same way there might be other 
worlds for the perception of which 
man does not have the necessary 
faculties. Avicenna accepts the exist- 
ence of other worlds which differ from 
this world but defends the Aristotelian 
view that there cannot be another 
world such as this with the same ele- 
ments and nature. 
After these questions which are 
related to Aristotle's De Caelo, al- 
Biruni poses eight other questions 
himself related to natural philosophy. 
Al-Biruni, for example, asks how 
vision is possible. Why can we see 
beneath water whereas water is an 
opaque body which should reflect the 
rays of light at its surface? Avicenna 
states that according to Aristotle 
vision results from the eye becoming 
affected by the “qualities” of visible 
colours contained in the air that is in 
contact with it. According to this 
theory the problem mentioned by al- 
Biruni does not arise since both water 
and air are transparent bodies that 
can transmit the colours to the sense 
of sight, thus making vision possible. 
if there is no vacuum either inside 
or outside this world, al-Biruni asks, 
why is it that if the air within a flask 
is sucked out water rises up in it? 
Avicenna answers that this is not due 
to a vacuum. Rather, a certain amount 
of the air remaining in the flask 
contracts as a result of the coldness 
of the water causing the water to rise 
within the flask. 
If things expand through heating and 
contract through cooling then why, al- 
Biruni asks, does a flask full of water 
break when the water within it freezes? 
Avicenna believes that it is the air 
which upon being cooled contracts, 
almost causing a vacuum to be created 
in the flask, and since that is not 
possible, causing the flask to break. 
Finally, al-Biruni queries, why does 
ice float on water while its earthy parts 
are more than water and it is therefore 
heavier than water? Avicenna replies 
that upon freezing ice preserves in its 
internal spaces and lattices airy parts 
which prevent it from sinking in water. 
An examination of the questions 
posed by al-Biruni reveals their vital 
significance for the history of science. 
In Islamic civilization the main school 
of natural philosophy which served as 
the immediate philosophical back- 
ground for most Muslim scientists was 
the Peripatetic, itself a synthesis of 
the views of Aristotle, his Alexandrian 
commentators and certain elements of 
later Neoplatonism. Avicenna in his 
Peripatetic writings represents this 
main current in its most mature form. 
But there was also an anti-Aristo- 
telian current which is of much 
importance for an understanding of 
Islamic science, to which the questions 
of al-Biruni belong. Some of the anti- 
Aristotelian elements derived from 
schools related to the Pythagorean- 
Hermetic heritage of Antiquity such as 
the writings of Jabir ibn Hayyan and 
the Ikhwan al-Safa’ while others issued 
from the logical criticism of individual 
philosophers and scientists such as 
Mohammed ibn Zakariyya' al-Razi and 
al-Biruni, 
Al-Biruni's criticism of Peripatetic 
natural philosophy is one of the 
sharpest attacks on this dominant 
school. It touches upon the most 
difficult and thorny problems of Aristo- 
telian physics and for that reason 
resembles some of the arguments 
against this form of physics by 
Renaissance and 17th century scientists 
in the West, although the point of view 
of al-Biruni is verv different from that 
of the Western critics of Aristotle. WH 
Seyyed Hossein Nasr 
2

## [Page 30](074875engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 50323: Lost horizons in the land of poetry; the vanished works of a scientist turned man of letters

J0 
LOST HORIZONS 
IN THE 
LAND OF POETRY 
The vanished works 
of a scientist 
turned man of letters 
I. is sometimes difficult 
to make a distinction between the 
“scholar” and the “man of letters” of 
Islamic civilization. In both the Arab 
and the Persian worlds, the two 
cornerstones of Islamic literature, it 
frequently happens that great scholars 
in the fields of philosophy, medicine, 
natura! history or mathematics are also 
poets and men of letters. 
In some cases they even put aside 
their scientific preoccupations and set 
about recounting or writing tales or 
anecdotes. Philosophers and thinkers 
such as Avicenna and al-Biruni, in the 
11th century, and Suhrawardi in the 
12th, have thus left behind them novels 
and stories written in Arabic or in 
Arabic and Persian, 
Avicenna wrote two well-known 
philosophical novels in Arabic, which 
foreshadowed certain later Persian 
works, 
Islamic scholars found a welcome 
source of diversion in writing poetry, 
and there are very few Iranian scholars 
who did not at some time or another 
apply themselves to verse in Arabic 
or Persian. One of the earliest among 
them is al-Farabi, some of whose 
quatrains in Persian are still extant. 
At a later date when scholars 
versified to their heart's content, Avi- 
cenna became a prolific writer of verse 
 
ZABIHOLLAH SAFA is the author of a book 
on the Ife and works of al-Biruni. He is 
president of the Iranian National Commission 
for Unesco and professor of literature at the 
University of Teheran. He has written several 
- works on Avicenna, and is now compiling 
for Unesco an annotated bibliography min 
Arabic and Persian on the writings of al- 
Biruni. He also prepared, for Unesco's 
Collection of Representative Works, the 
"Anthologie de la Poésie Persane”, published 
by Editions Gallimard, Paris, in 1964. 
in Arabic as well as Persian. Al- 
Biruni, an author of serious scientific 
works, also wrote poetry in Arabic, 
and others, such as the great 12th cen- 
tury mathematician, philosopher and 
doctor, Omar Khayyam, became so 
well known for their literary work that 
their names have been handed down 
to posterity as poets rather than as 
scholars, 
These are but a few of the many 
examples we could quote, for Arabic 
and Persian literary history is rich in 
such many-sided talents, At that 
time the language of science was 
Arabic, and the approach to any 
scientific discipline necessarily invol- 
ved learning Arabic. In lrano-Arabic 
schools the teaching of Arabic lan- 
guage and literature preceded all 
other subjects; Arabic prose and 
poetry were used as a means to enable 
pupils to benefit from text books 
written in Arabic, and students learned 
by heart works of prose and verse 
by leading writers and poets. 
This meant that the student began 
Islamic schooling with an introduction 
to Arabic, which he continued to study 
throughout his life, and which often 
led him to an interest in literature, even 
when his main preoccupation was the 
rational study of a specific field of 
science. So it is hardly surprising that 
the great scientist-scholar al-Biruni 
became interested in literature and 
composed verses for his own pleasure. 
Yaqut of Hama examined some of 
al-Biruni's literary works in the library 
at Marw (or Merv) shortly before the 
Mongol invasion of Khorassan in the 
13th century. The vestiges of Merv, 
former capital of Khorassan, can still 
be seen near the modern city of Mary 
in the Soviet Turkmenistan Republic. 
by 
Zabihollah Safa 
Yaqut's bibiography of al-Biruni 
shows that the latter wrote a consi- 
derable number of literary and critical 
works: among many others, an Arabic 
etymology, commentaries on the poems 
of the great Arabic poet Abi Tamman, 
and even an anthology entitled “ Selec- 
tion of Verse and Literary Works". 
One of his most important works, 
of a literary rather than a scientific 
stamp, deals with his native region of 
Khwarizm. Although this book was 
widely known during the 11th and 
12th centuries, it has since disap- 
peared. Fortunately, part of it is quoted 
by the 11th century Persian writer- 
historian Balaghi, and the fragment 
which has reached us demonstrates 
al-Biruni's scrupulous and impartial 
research into historical events, their 
causes and their consequences. 
The value of al-Biruni's work lies 
in the vast scope of his knowledge, 
which, particularly in respect to pre- 
Islamic nations, was not shared by 
his contemporaries. This is largely 
due to his command of languages— 
Iranian, Arabic, Syriac and Sanskrit 
were as familiar to him as Soghdian, 
the language of his native Khwarizm. 
He was also able to use Arabic 
translations of works written in Greek 
and Syriac. 
Al-Biruni was of both a serious and 
lighthearted turn of mind; perhaps his 
penchant for humour and jokes was 
a counterweight to the scientific rigour 
of his studies. In his personal rela- 
tionships and in his conversation, as 
his biographers have noted, he reveals 
a pleasant open nature and a spirited 
wit. Occasionally, he surprises his 
readers by the use of earthy terms in 
his poems. 
It may have been this trait that led 
him to translate or write a number of

## [Page 31](074875engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 50323: Lost horizons in the land of poetry; the vanished works of a scientist turned man of letters

  
: - “iw 1 ad
 
S 
Al-Biruni wrote several novels which unfortunately have not come down to us. 
One of these, entitled The Two Idols of Bamian, is about two Buddhist statues, 
of a man and a woman, carved from the face of a huge cliff of Bamian in 
northwest Afghanistan. The now famous cliff is honeycombed with caves, 
which provide a dramatic setting for numerous carvings and paintings. The 
two colossal stone Buddhas, stand majestically in the shelter of the rock, 
dominating the entire valley. Above, the smaller of the two (35 metres high). 
The larger statue stands 53 metres high. The sculptures date from the 4th-5th 
century A.D. 
popular or folk romances while en- 
gaged in exacting scientific work. In 
the inventory of his writings, which he 
made when he was 65 years old, he 
lists six novels, which have all unfor- 
tunately been lost. Works by other 
authors and poets, however, record 
passages from these novels, but it is 
not known whether they were written 
in Arabic or in Persian. 
The adventure of “Vamegh and 
Azra”, an ancient legend of Greek 
origin which found its way into Pahlavi 
literature, is a love story. Onsori, a 
poet of the time, seems to have used 
this as a source of inspiration for his 
own poetic work, “Vamegh and Azra”; 
it was at a much later date that several 
other poets put this tale into verse. 
It is worth noting here that the story 
also entered Persian literature through 
pseudo-Callisthenes' novel on Alexan- 
der the Great 
ho
to
 
©
 
D
o
m
i
n
i
q
u
e
 
La
ca
rr
ié
re
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Pp 
Qassim al-sorur wa'ayn al-hayat is 
another tale put into verse by Onsori. 
It has never been clearly established 
whether the original was written by 
Onsori or by al-Biruni, but neither 
version exists today. 
“Urmasdyar and Mehryar” is an old 
story adapted by al-Biruni; the names 
indicate that it is certainly of Iranian 
origin. 
“The Two Idols of Bamian”, a folk 
tale adapted by al-Biruni, is about two 
Buddhist statues, a man and a woman, 
carved in the rock of a mountainside 
at Bamian, near Balkh in northern 
Afghanistan. The statues still exist 
and the local people, believing that 
they were two lovers who were turned 
to stone, still recount their adventures 
and the reason for their metamor- 
phosis. The story was also put into 
verse by Onsori, under the title “The 
Red Idol and the White Idol”. This 
story, like that of “Dadmeh and Gera- 
midokht”, has also disappeared. “Ni- 
nufar” (water lily), the last of these 
works appears to have been a tale of 
Hindu origin. 
The six titles clearly demonstrate al- 
Biruni's interest in legend; it is unfor- 
tunate that they should have been 
lost, for they would have provided 
excellent material for analysis. From 
the narrative skill and descriptive 
power al-Biruni displays in his various 
works, especially when dealing with 
historical or contemporary subjects, 
one can easily imagine the excellence 
of the stories that have disappeared. 
In short, in addition to some twelve 
thousand pages of erudite and scien- 
tific writing, this prodigiously indus- 
trious scholar produced a great number 
of literary works: Arabic poetry, 
romances, etymology, literary criticism, 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
J

## [Page 32](074875engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 50323: Lost horizons in the land of poetry; the vanished works of a scientist turned man of letters

32 
LOST HORIZONS (Continued) 
history—which in Islamic civilization is 
a part of literature. 
It is interesting to note that both 
Arabic, the scientific language of Islam, 
and Persian, were greatly enriched by 
the contributions of the major scholars 
of Iranian origin and of the Islamic 
civilization within the Iranian cultural 
sphere living at the beginning of this 
civilization (between the late 8th cen- 
tury and the end of the 12th century). 
This was brought about firstly by the 
addition of many words, phrases, 
explanations and expressions from 
Greek, Syriac, Pahlavi and Hindu, with 
a few minor changes in pronunciation; 
secondly, by the translation of scien- 
tific expressions and terminology; and 
finally, by the invention of turns of 
phrase or expressions using the rules 
and the flexibility of Arabic and Persian 
grammar. 
The debating skill of such scholars 
as al-Biruni, Avicenna, Suhrawadi, 
among others, contributed greatly to 
the elucidation of many concepts in the 
field of philosophy and disputation in 
the Arabic and Persian languages. 
Al-Biruni was one of the master- 
artisans of this enrichment. 
What differentiates him especially is 
his knowledge of Sanskrit and Syriac, 
Greek texts and ancient Iranian sour- 
ces, by virtue of which he introduced 
a considerable number of words, 
expressions and turns of phrase into 
the Arabic and Persian languages. 
His Pharmacology gives ample evi- 
dence of this. In this work each 
drug is named in Persian (Pahlavi), 
Arabic, Greek, Syriac and Sanskrit, 
and sometimes even in local dialects 
of the Iranian plateau, together with 
directions for its use, its composition 
and cases where its use would be 
harmful, written in Arabic. This book 
alone would suffice to establish al- 
Biruni's contribution to the enrichment 
of Arabic (see following article). 
The same considerations apply to 
the only book of his which is written 
in Persian and which is still extant, 
namely the Astrology, where his 
terminology shows extensive use of 
Sanskrit and Pahlavi sources. 
Al-Biruni's literary work adds a 
particularly engaging aspect to his 
complex genius. lt presents an in- 
exhaustible field of linguistic research, 
which Iranologists have now begun to 
investigate. 
At the start of the present century 
Carra de Vaux, the French orientalist, 
wrote in his basic study “Thinkers of 
Islam™: “Like other great thinkers of 
the more recent past, a Leonardo da 
Vinci or a Leibniz, al-Biruni combines 
the most varied talents. Philosopher, 
historian, traveller, linguist, scholar and 
poet, mathematician, astronomer and 
geographer, he has left his mark in all 
these spheres... spanning the gap of 
time, he is a figure whose youthfulness 
strikes us today; it is as though he 
stands out and breaks away from his 
own era and comes to meet us.” | 
Zabihollah Safa   


### 50324: Father' of Arabic pharmacy in medieval Islam: a binomial method of classifying plants seven centuries before Linnaeus

‘FATHER’ OF 
ARABIC PHARMACY 
IN MEDIEVAL 
ISLAM 
by Hakim Mohammed Said 
M.- than nine hundred 
years have passed since al-Biruni 
wrote his Book on Pharmacy (the Kitab 
al-Saydanah, or Saydalah), a work that 
has rightly earned him the title of 
Father of Arabic Pharmacy in medieval 
Islam. 
Today the science of medicine is 
characterized by disciplines unknown 
in al-Biruni's age. A proper appraisal 
of al-Biruni's work can, therefore, only 
be made by referring to his age and 
its standards. 
Lest it be understood that al-Biruni’s 
book is concerned with the aetiology 
of diseases and their treatment, it must 
be made clear that this is by no 
means the case. In fact, it is a 
treatise on materia medica, patterned 
somewhat on the Ist century A.D. 
treatise of the Greek physician Dios- 
corides, which lists 600 medicinal 
plants. 
But al-Biruni sets forth five times 
as many medicinal plants as Diosco- 
rides, although he makes the latter the 
main source on which to base his 
discussion of the drugs. It has, 
however, been said that the description 
of the drugs, given by Dioscorides, is 
so vague as to make most of them, 
with the exception of about a hundred 
drugs, unidentifiable today. It is rather 
  
HAKIM MOHAMMED SAID, a medical doctor 
of Pakistan, Is president of the Hamdard 
National Foundation, Karachi. This founda- 
tion, devoted to scientific and medical 
research, has just published "Al-Biruni's Book 
on Pharmacy and Materia Medica” (two 
volumes, Karachi, 1973), the first translation 
. into English of the complete text of al-Birunf's- 
“Pharmacology”. Dr. Said was the organizer 
of the Al-Biruni International Congress, held 
in Karachi, last November. 
interesting to see how al-Biruni over- 
came the problem. 
One of the advantages that al-Biruni 
enjoyed was his command over both 
Persian and Arabic and his own 
Khwarizmian dialect. He lived on the 
fringe of the Iranian mainland, and had 
an intimate knowledge of Persian 
customs and traditions, and, since most 
of his extant works are in Arabic, felt 
even more at home with the Arab 
background, although he never visited 
the Arab part of the world. 
The procedure that he commonly 
adopts with regard to the description 
of a drug is that he first discusses it 
under its Arabic name, and then 
examines its equivalents in other 
languages, finally establishing its iden- 
tity. For example, if a drug is known 
as hum al-majus in Arabic and arzad 
maghushi in Syriac, the probability is 
that it is the same drug, that is, the 
Magian plant, which is today known 
by the botanical name of Ephedra 
pachyclada from which the alkaloid, 
ephedrin, is extracted. 
Primarily a geodesist, geographer, 
mathematician and historian, during the 
course of his sojourn in Afghanistan 
and north India, he studied the customs 
of different people at close quarters. 
In short, he was a polymath who aimed 
at what is known in Arabic as takhrij 
(extraction of the essence). One 
cannot say that he was as much of 
a rationalist in science as the Egyptian 
scientist Ibn al-Haytham (he was not); 
nevertheless, he knows how to sift the 
grain and separate it from the chaff. 
One may smile today on reading 
that, after the hatching of the eggs 
of the timsah (skink lizard), the off- 
spring either make their way to the 
river and become crocodiles, or remain 
on land and become skink lizards. 
CONTINUED PAGE 34

## [Page 33](074875engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 50324: Father' of Arabic pharmacy in medieval Islam: a binomial method of classifying plants seven centuries before Linnaeus

A binomial method 
of classifying plants 
seven centuries before Linnaeus 
Al-Biruni has rightly 
been called the Father 
of Arab Pharmacy in 
medieval Islam. In his 
“Book on Pharmacy 
and Materia Medica”, 
he laid down the credo 
that pharmacy was an 
independent entity from 
medicine and “the first 
step in the hierarchy 
of the health profes- 
sions”, a calling requir- 
ing much study, obser- 
vation and experimen- 
tation. Right, a present- 
day apothecary of Fai- 
zabad (Afghanistan) in 
his shop. 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
D
o
m
i
n
i
q
u
e
 
Da
rb
ol
s,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 34](074875engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 50324: Father' of Arabic pharmacy in medieval Islam: a binomial method of classifying plants seven centuries before Linnaeus

ARABIC PHARMACY (Continued) 
But al-Biruni who had never been to 
Egypt, to which the skink lizard is 
indigenous, describes what he has 
been told by the earlier masters, and, 
after describing this, he comes to the 
ecology of the skink lizard, how it is 
obtained, its medicinal usages, and 
substitutes, 
" There are also priceless gems of 
"information scattered throughout the 
4 
text of the Kitab al-Saydanah. Al- 
Biruni's is among the first detailed 
descriptions of tea, telling us that tea 
was taxed in China (see Anthology 
page 22). His is the first description 
of the plant, faghirah (Zanthoxyllum 
species) which he describes as coming 
from Sufalah, the present-day Sangla 
Hill in Pakistan. This shows how the 
horizon of the Arabic materia medica 
was widening to embrace new drugs 
from the Indo-Pakistan Subcontinent, 
Iran, Afghanistan, and other regions. 
It amply shows, too, that what he was 
writing was not merely a piece of 
compilation but bears the stamp of an 
original mind. 
Let us give a concrete example of 
his approach. The winter truffle is 
known in Arabic as urjun gabal, and 
faswat al-dab. While describing this 
variety of the mushroom, al-Biruni says: 
“When tender, fresh, and lush, it is 
cooked for food as any other edible 
mushroom. But when it dries, the top 
scatters away leaving what looks like 
the Ceylon cornet tree—which gives 
the mushroom its name... It shoots 
out of the ground in a rectangular 
shape, like a white stick with a top...” 
Maimonides, the famous Jewish 
philosopher and rabbi, wrote his 
Exegesis of Drugs much later than 
al-Biruni. He holds lisan al-kalb (the 
hound’s tongue) to be lisan al-hamal 
(Plantago major), belonging to the 
Plantaginaceae family. Al-Biruni, on 
the other hand, holds it to be a 
Cynoglossum species, and he is 
correct, for the name given by him is 
  
  
      

## [Page 35](074875engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 50324: Father' of Arabic pharmacy in medieval Islam: a binomial method of classifying plants seven centuries before Linnaeus

  
  
~ $ 7 * 
0 Cag SFI le Fob, {go 
pa vlp or 7] 
so laly)s fo 
E60, 5 
an RZONEH 
  3 Pra 
3 nN 7 : 
. ry ov 3 J" 
3 ly lg 
_— . 
1 Ls | ae 
   77 
. The illustrations on these pages are taken from a 15th century Persian manuscript 
of a work by the Greek physician Dioscorides (1st century A.D.) on the healing 
qualities of plants. The Persian text of this bilingual (Arabic-Persian) manuscript 
is richly illustrated with drawings of animals and plants, rendered with a grace and 
in colours typical of Persian art, though sometimes scientific accuracy gives way 
to poetic fancy. Above stylized drawings of two medicinal plants: the bitter-sweet 
nightshade (top) a climbing plant with red berries: the highly poisonous henbane 
(below). Its analgesic qualities were well known to al-Biruni, who wrote: “It is an 
emollient for earaches and, with vinegar and rose oil, relieves toothache. Similarly, 
its seeds and root, cooked in vinegar or oil, act-as analgesics for the pains descri- 
bed above...Excessive eating of its leaves results in the loss of senses...” According 
to Avicenna, “those who eat henbane begin to bray like a donkey and whinny like 
a horse.” Left, from the same 15th century Persian manuscript, a treatment for 
cow-buffaloes suffering from a skin disease: to purify the air, incense is burned in 
a perforated vessel. 
Photos © Roland and Sabrina Michaud, Topkapi Museum library, Istanbul, Turkey 
a direct translation of the Greek word. 
Although he did not know Latin—for 
he always equates Rome with the 
Byzantine Empire—and Greek, al- 
Biruni's transcription of Greek names 
is generally scrupulously correct. 
Al-Biruni's book of pharmacy offers 
a view of several new tendencies which 
were crystallizing during the 10th- 
11th century Muslim world: 
B The vague notion of the binomial 
notation which is at the very heart of 
the Linnaean system. For example, in 
the Linnaean notation a species is 
described by means of its genus and 
its specific characteristic, after the 
name of the discoverer, or its location, 
e.g., Rosa damascena (that is, the 
damask rose—of Damascus). In a 
similar manner, al-Biruni describes the 
maiden-hair fern as sh'ar al-juyad (the 
hair of the giant). The description of 
sh'ar al-juyad is followed by that of 
sha'ar al-ghul, also a fern and known 
as Onychium japonicum in botanical 
parlance. This tendency is rather 
vague in al-Biruni, but he resorts to it 
wherever possible. 
The ethnography of plants. Al 
Biruni describes different plants and 
their occurrence in relation, wherever 
possible, to the folklore associated 
with them. When he calls a certain 
drug Roman or Persian, he does not 
mean that the drug is only in use in 
those countries but that it has 
originated there. 
MM Drug substitution. In this field 
al-Biruni has been very liberal in 
providing the names of substitute 
drugs in case the drug described is 
not available. He had little leeway, 
however, for originality here since the 
workings and active principles of drugs 
as we understand them today were 
not known in his day, and even the 
application of some rule of thumb 
would not have been possible. 
A critical appraisal of al-Biruni's 
materia medica would also demand an 
examination of the shortcomings of the 
treatise. Al-Biruni rarely describes 
the Galenic properties of drugs and 
"even when he discusses poly-pharma- 
ceuticals he hardly ever describes how 
they are prepared. 
Most of such descriptions are copied 
from earlier texts. Sometimes he 
simply indulges in etymological exer- 
cises as in his descriptions of the 
excreta of different animals. For 
example, an interesting account of the 
dolphin is given but not its medicinal 
relevance. At times he is so irrelevant 
that he makes one laugh. To quote 
one such example, he says that the 
excrement of the dog is ironically 
called dawa-i-kabir (i.e. panacea) in 
Persian! 
All the same, al-Biruni's materia 
medica provides us with a picture of 
the expanding materia medica of the 
time; of the Muslim approach in general 
to science; how the Muslim Weltan- 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
Jd

## [Page 36](074875engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 50324: Father' of Arabic pharmacy in medieval Islam: a binomial method of classifying plants seven centuries before Linnaeus

36 
ARABIC PHARMACY (Continued) 
schauung was embracing an enlarging 
world-picture supported by a Greek 
base which was being gradually dug 
out and replaced by a new one; and 
as a bridgehead to modern science. 
Perhaps the finest materia medica 
of all times, Jami Mufradat al-Adwiyah 
wa'l Aghdhiyah (A Definitive Treatise 
on Medicinal and Nutritional Simples) 
was written two hundred years after 
al-Biruni’'s death by Diya al-Din Ibn 
Baytar Mulaghi, one of the Hispano- 
Arabs, who quotes al-Biruni as one of 
his sources while elucidating the occur- 
rence and properties of the drugs. 
Since al-Biruni wrote—or rather 
dictated—the book during the ebb-time 
of his life, identical drugs are described 
in different parts of the work. Also, 
while citing authorities, he does not 
generally specify the works from which 
the passages are taken. He seems to 
have been a man of strong dislikes: 
Avicenna (Ibn Sina) is not mentioned 
at alll He also holds Abu Bakr Zaka- 
riya al-Razi—generally conceded to be 
one of the greatest clinicians of all 
times—in scant respect, although he 
draws upon him with recurring fre- 
quency. Succeeding generations have 
noted this fact, and one famous 
historian, Ibn abi ‘Usaybi’ah, the Syrian 
chronicler, has particularly written on 
this aspect of al-Biruni. 
On the other hand, al-Biruni held the 
Greeks in the highest respect, although 
his acquaintance was greater with the 
latter-day masters. He mentions the 
philosopher Theophrastus only oc- 
casionally and Aristotle mostly when 
referring to the pseudo-Aristotelian 
treatise on the magical and talismanic 
properties of certain stones. Galen is 
mentioned comparatively less frequent- 
ly. as he was more a physician than 
an exponent of the materia medica. 
Occasionally al-Biruni 
howlers: thus ambrosia (ambrosiya) is 
held to be a plant! 
But, as 1 have stated earlier, al- 
Biruni was not a physician; at best he 
could be called a dilettante in so far 
as medicine was concerned. And yet, 
when he describes the mandrake plant, 
the marking nut, balsam, the poppy, 
the iris, the aloes, he writes with the 
ease of a master. Very rarely in a 
book of materia medica have minerals 
been described in such delightful 
detail, and here he is at both his worst 
and best. For he does his best to 
extricate himself from the prison of 
traditionalism and one can well see 
that he goes more to the Greek sources 
here than to the oriental ones, tradition- 
fraught as the latter were. 
Among the animal drugs, his des- 
criptions of the civet cat and the 
beaver are among the best. One also 
gets the ‘impression that, even while 
traversing the beaten path, al-Biruni 
would like to ferret out something new, 
something not known to the ordinary 
man in the street. ) 
Thus the impression that this book 
leaves, along with his other pieces like 
the Qanun al-Mas'udi (his great work 
commits real 
on astronomy), the Kitab al-Hind (his 
book on India), and Athar al-Bagiyah 
(The Chronology of Ancient Nations) is 
that of a man writing at breakneck 
speed to communicate his own learning 
to his contemporaries and posterity, 
a fantastically industrious being, rather 
vain, egotistical, but self-effacing, ever 
keen to gain more and more know- 
ledge, ready to scrutinize the different 
hypotheses without bias and arrive at 
his own opinion; of a man eager to 
forswear narrow interests (he discards 
Persian and accepts Arabic), not prone 
to glossing over the foibles of his own 
people he makes a devastating attack 
on Dayh Nam (Ten Names), the Persian 
source book for medicinal synonyms 
and holds it to be far inferior to the 
  
Syriac Christian, Yashaq Samahi or 
Chahar Nam (Four Names); of a man 
determined to leave not a_ single 
moment of his life go to waste. 
it should also be noted. that his age 
was one .of disquisitions, argumen- 
tation, and internecine quarrels not 
only between orthodoxy and hetero- 
doxy but between the four orthodox 
Muslim schools of jurisprudence. Al- 
Biruni seems to have been a liberal 
orthodox Muslim who did not find it 
necessary to condemn the other 
schools of thought. A greater exponent 
of live-and-let-live is rare to find. This 
alone should be sufficient to place him 
among the ranks of the really great. ® 
Hakim Mohammed Said 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
Sa
br
in
a 
Mi
ch
au
d,
 
To
pk
ap
l 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
li
br
ar
y,
 
Is
ta
nb
ul
, 
Tu
rk
ey

## [Page 37](074875engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 50324: Father' of Arabic pharmacy in medieval Islam: a binomial method of classifying plants seven centuries before Linnaeus

  Photo & Gerard Dufresne, from the collection of Roger Caillors, Paris 
  
Photo © Roland and Sabrina Michaud, 
Topkapi Museum lbrary, Istanbul, Turkey 
a pi (eran. 
| 7 ¥ Ce % ~~ 
LA . 3 . : - » ~ 
MANDRAKE THE MAGICIAN. “Two forms appear, 
if it is cloven in the middle, and these are the male and 
female human shapes.” This is part of a long descrip- 
tion which al-Biruni gives of the mandrake root in his 
treatise on pharmacy. Photo left, a striking example of 
this strange root which might be taken for the statue 
of a man, his hands clasped. The soporofic properties 
of the mandrake have been known since ancient times. 
It “brings about sleep after three to four hours”, 
observes al-Biruni. Above, Muslim doctors examining a 
mandrake. Dioscorides, surgeon to Nero, used the man- 
drake as an anaesthetic in the Ist century A.D. The 
Persian translation of his treatise contains an illustration 
of the leaves and flowers of the plant (opposite page) 
which corresponds exactly with the description that “the 
flower resembles an actor's mask with a tongue protrud- 
ing from the open mouth”. In the Middle Ages, the 
mandrake was the subject of countless legends: it 
was supposed to grow under the gallows, to shriek 
when uprooted, and to be effective for ail manner of 
beneficent—or evil—purposes. A lively and profitable 
trade in imitation mandrake roots flourished for cen- 
turies, with any sort of root carved in a human shape 
being passed off as a mandrake. In fact the mandrake 
is a close relative to the inoffensive and humble potato. 
J]

## [Page 38](074875engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 50325: Free-wheeling philosopher: Al-Biruni was a model of the thinker who could harmonize various forms of knowledge without becoming the slave to a particular method or school

38 
FREE-WHEELING 
PHILOSOPHER 
Al-Biruni was a model of the thinker 
who could harmonize various forms 
of knowledge without becoming 
the slave to a particular method or school 
It was a custom of Islamic 
culture that thinkers and phi- 
losophers delivered their dis- 
courses leaning against a 
pillar or a column of a mos- 
que, surrounded by disciples 
and students, as shown In this   illustration from an ancient 
manuscript. 
Photo Bibliotheque Nationale, 
Paris, from “La Civilisation de 
I'lslam Classique”, by D. and 
J. Sourdel (Ed. Arthaud, Paris) 
by Seyyed 
Hossein Nasr 
1. classical Islamic civiliza- 
tion the name “philosophy” (al-falsafah 
or al-hikmah) is reserved for a particu- 
lar set of disciplines associated with 
various schools of “lslamic philoso- 
phy”. 
 
SEYYED HOSSEIN NASR. See biographical 
note, page 27. 
  
 
  
Therefore the title of “philosopher” 
(al-faylasuf) is usually reserved for 
those who are masters of the doctrines 
of one of these “philosophical” 
schools. Considered in this light al- 
Biruni has never been classified by 
classical authors as a “philosopher”, 
nor associated with one of the well- 
known schools of traditional Islamic 
philosophy. 
But if we understand philosophy in 
its more general sense as logical and 
rational discourse upon the nature of 
things, then al-Biruni must certainly be 
. considered as a philosopher of note to 
be studied for his significance in the 
general context of Islamic intellectual 
  
  
history and also for the innate value 
of his intellectual vision. 
Al-Biruni was a scientist, scholar, 
compiler and philosopher for whom 
the quest for knowledge was held as 
the supreme goal of human life. He 
respected knowledge in all its forms 
and hence sought it wherever and in 
whatever form possible. He saw in 
knowledge an almost divine quality 
very much in conformity with the fun- 
damental tenets of Islam. 
Hence, al-Biruni, with the universal 
vision and the remarkable intellectual 
qualities which he possessed, turned to 
Greek as well as to Persian and Indian 
sciences, to both the religious Islamic

## [Page 39](074875engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 50325: Free-wheeling philosopher: Al-Biruni was a model of the thinker who could harmonize various forms of knowledge without becoming the slave to a particular method or school

sciences and the intellectual ones. He 
holds the rather unusual distinction of 
being at once one of the greatest ma- 
thematicians and historians of hu- 
manity. And he wrote in nearly every 
field, from astronomy to pharmacology. 
But strangely enough, unlike his con- 
temporary scientist Ibn al-Haytham, al- 
Biruni has not left behind independent 
philosophical works of a systematic 
nature. The only exception among his 
extant works is the Questions and 
Answers exchanged with Avicenna (Ibn 
Sina), which deal with cosmological, 
physical and philosophical problems 
(see article page 27). 
As for his lost works, he apparently 
wrote several philosophical narratives, 
including Qasim al-surur wa ayn al 
haya and Ur-muzdvar wa Mihryar 
which if found would be very signifi- 
cant, considering the importance of 
this kind of philosophical narrative 
romance in the writings of Avicenna, 
Suhrawardi and many other Islamic 
philosophers. 
l. order to understand al- 
Biruni's philosophical thought, it is 
therefore necessary to turn to his other 
writings dealing with history, geography 
or even astronomy, for in nearly all of 
these works, one will find elements 
dealing with philosophy, cosmology 
and metaphysics interspersed within 
the main scientific or historical discus- 
sion at hand. 
In his encyclopaedic work, India, not 
only does al-Biruni describe Indian 
doctrines, but often comments upon 
them and offers his own metaphysical 
and philosophical ideas and interpre- 
tations. In his Chronology of Ancient 
Nations profound observations are 
made about the nature of time and 
the cycles of human history as well 
as the origin of the order observed 
in nature. In The Determination of the 
Co-ordinates of Cities, the origin of 
science and its classification are dis- 
cussed as are themes related to the 
question of the origin and creation 
of the universe. 
One could go on in the same vein 
with his other writings. Moreover, the 
very fact that he chose to translate 
into Arabic a work on Indian yoga such 
as the Patanjali Yoga shows his intense 
interest in metaphysical and spiritual 
matters. 
When all of these sources are ex- 
tracted and studied it becomes clear 
that al-Biruni was neither a follower, 
nor a member of any of the established 
philosophical schools of his time. 
The well known schools of “Islamic 
philosophy” included the Peripatetic 
(mashsha'i) (1), the llluminationist (ish- 
raqi) (2), and also that of theology 
(kalam). 
The most noteworthy aspect of al- 
Biruni's philosophical views is his 
strong and often original criticism of 
Aristotelian philosophy, which is re- 
flected in the questions and answers ° 
he exchanged with Avicenna and his 
student Abdallah al-Ma'sumi. 
Al-Biruni thus belongs to a series 
of independent anti-Peripatetic thinkers 
of the early period of Islamic history 
who were also scientists, such men as 
Mohammed Ibn Zakariyya'al - Razi, 
whom al-Biruni both admired and cri- 
ticized. 
Al-Biruni did not oppose all of the 
teachings of Peripatetic philosophy en 
bloc. Rather, basing himself on firm 
religious faith in Islam on the one hand 
and the tool of logic, rational analysis 
and observation on the other, he refut- 
ed many of the theses of Peripatetic 
philosophy, such as the eternity of the 
world and the possibility of indefinite 
division of matter. 
What is important for an understand- 
ing of Islamic intellectual history is 
that such a strong and rigorous criti- 
cism of Peripatetic thought did not 
come from a rationalist, as was to 
happen from the end of the Middle 
Ages to the 17th century in the West, 
but that it came from a man like al-Bi- 
runi who was deeply immersed in both 
the life of faith and metaphysical and 
cosmological doctrines of Islam and 
other traditions. 
It is of great significance for an 
understanding of the reason for the 
different paths that Islamic and Chris- 
tian civilization were to take at the end 
of the Middle Ages that one of the 
foremost critics of the Aristotelian 
world view in Islam should also be the 
person who introduced the Patanjali 
Yoga to the Islamic world and one of 
the Muslim figures really well-versed 
in the Hindu Vedanta philosophy. 
In questions of cosmogony and 
creation, al-Biruni rejected violently the 
idea of the “eternity” of the world. 
Like the Islamic theologians, he held 
that to believe in the eternity of the 
world is to negate the need for a 
cause for the world and therefore to 
negate indirectly Divine Unity, which 
was the principle most dear to him. 
In fact the whole of al-Biruni's works 
can be interpreted as a quest for the 
realization of unity in various forms of 
knowledge and planes of existence. It 
was most of all with the aim of preserv- 
 
(1) Muslim schoo! of philosophy influenced 
by the philosophy of Aristotle. 
(2) A philosophy with origins in Ancient 
Persia, postulating inward spiritual enlighten- 
ment and mystical experience, and contrast- 
ing with the philosophy of Aristotle based 
on reasoning and logical argument, 
ing the inviolability of the doctrine of 
unity that he criticized the Peripatetic 
view of the eternity of the world in the 
second of the questions he posed to 
Avicenna. 
The debate between al-Biruni and 
Avicenna as well as al-Ma’sumi on this 
subject concerns one of the most 
important questions of Islamic philoso- 
phy, namely the condition under which 
something needs a cause. Al-Biruni 
identified the idea of the eternity of the 
world with its not being created. For 
him, in contrast to Avicenna, the "new- 
ness” of the universe implied its being 
created and the denial of this “new- 
ness”, or an acceptance that the world 
does not have an origin .in time, des- 
troyed the conception of creation and 
ultimately the unity of the Creator and 
his power. Hence in other works such 
as The Determination of the Co-ordi- 
nates of Cities he affirmed his belief 
in the created nature of the world and 
tried to provide both scientific and 
theological reasons for it. 
As a result of his vast and varied 
study of nature, history and various 
traditional doctrines of time and of the 
world, al-Biruni became clearly aware 
of the qualitative nature of time, of the 
fact that it is not uniformly stretched 
out like a mathematical co-ordinate. He 
also strongly denied the idea of uni- 
formitarianism so dear to modern geo- 
logy and paleontology and provided 
both scientific and philosophical argu- 
ments to disprove it. 
F.. al-Biruni time has a 
cyclic nature, but not in the sense of 
returning to the same point again, 
which is a metaphysical absurdity and 
a modern caricature of the real tradi- 
tional teachings. Rather, by “cyclic” 
al-Biruni understands qualitative chan- 
ges and correspondences between 
various elements of time within each 
cycle. 
Without doubt his profound study 
and intimate knowledge not only of the 
Koranic conception of time, which is 
based on cycles of prophecy, but also 
of the teachings of the Puranas, the 
18 Hindu epics, and of many other 
traditions on the meaning of time and 
history, helped al-Biruni develop per- 
haps more profoundly than any other 
Islamic philosopher and scientist the 
meaning of qualified and cyclic time 
and its implications for the study of 
nature and of man. 
A basic aspect of al-Biruni’'s thought, 
which is closely related to his 
treatment of time, concerns the dev- 
elopment and becoming of things, 
which many have by mistake identified 
with the modern theory of evolution, 
the latter being no more than a parody 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
39

## [Page 40](074875engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 50325: Free-wheeling philosopher: Al-Biruni was a model of the thinker who could harmonize various forms of knowledge without becoming the slave to a particular method or school

40 
FREE-WHEELING PHILOSOPHER (Continued) 
of the traditional doctrine of grad- 
ation (3). 
Al-Biruni was fully aware of the long 
history of the earth, of the cataclysms 
which changed mountains into seas 
and oceans into continents, of the 
fact that certain species preceded 
others on earth and that each species 
has its own life cycle. 
Pondering over the vast panorama 
of nature in both time and space and 
the teachings of various sacred writ- 
ings on the creation and subsequent 
history of the Universe, al-Biruni 
became aware of the basic principle 
that the development and becoming of 
things in this world is the gradual 
unfolding and actualization of all the 
possibilities that are inherent within 
each being. 
Nothing evolves from one form into 
another as a result of external addi- 
tions or accretions; rather whatever 
transformation does take place is no 
more than the manifestations of pos- 
sibilities already present in that being. 
In the same way, what becomes mani- 
(3) The principle that the universe is com- 
posed of an infinite series of forms ranging 
in order from the barest type of existence 
to ultimate perfection. 
fested at a particular period of history 
is no more than the unfolding of possi- 
bilities inherent ‘in that particular cycle 
of time. 
This principle, which is one of the 
cornerstones of al-Biruni's thought and 
is a crystallization of well-known tradi- 
tional doctrines, is applied by al-Biruni 
to his study of various domains of 
nature, both animate and inanimate, as 
well as to history and man. 
Being an outstanding physicist, al- 
Biruni was deeply interested in the 
general principles of natural philoso- 
phy, in such questions as motion, time 
and madtter, as is again seen in his 
criticism of Aristotelian natural philoso- 
phy presented in the series of ques- 
tions and answers exchanged with Avi- 
cenna. 
As far as the nature of matter is 
concerned, he sided with the Islamic 
theologians, 
It is somewhat strange that a scien- 
tist such as al-Biruni should support 
the view of the theologians concerning 
the structure of matter, for usually the 
Muslim scientists believed in the conti- 
nuity of matter. 
Of paramount importance for an 
understanding of al-Biruni’s philosophi- 
Photo H.W. Silvester © Rapho, Paris 
cal ideas is his view of knowledge and 
the methods used for its attainment. 
Al-Biruni held a view of knowledge 
which was at once dynamic and static, 
that is, he believed clearly in the 
gradual development of particular 
forms of knowledge and at the same 
time in the immutability of principial 
knowledge derived from revelation. 
In addition to being the founder of 
the discipline of comparative religion 
or the history of religion he must also 
be considered as one of the founders 
of the history of science. Yet, he 
never lost sight of immutable know- 
ledge, which for him is always the 
revealed Scriptures and which provides 
the matrix for all the human sciences 
which change and develop. 
Moreover, al-Biruni was the great 
champion of pure knowledge and its 
value for the perfection of man. In 
Islam there has never been the idea 
of “science for science’'s sake” as is 
found in the West. But within the 
context of Islamic civilization al-Biruni 
emphasized the importance of pure 
knowledge and the pursuit of know- 
ledge for the sake of the perfection 
of man as against those who stressed 
the importance of its utility.

## [Page 41](074875engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 50325: Free-wheeling philosopher: Al-Biruni was a model of the thinker who could harmonize various forms of knowledge without becoming the slave to a particular method or school

THE FIRST 
MUSLIM 
TO MAKE 
A DEEP STUDY 
OF HINDU 
PHILOSOPHY 
    ”» 
4 ats as : 
1” g EPs oo wa = Xs. an 
C77 iv as nd $ A a 
Photo R.B. Bedi © Camera Press, London 
BE
N.
 
T
a
t
s
 
™
 » 
  Left, 14th century Persian manuscript illus- 
tration shows Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna 
crossing the Ganges, the sacred river to which 
Indians go on pilgrimage (above), to pray 
and meditate on its banks (opposite page). 
Al-Biruni studied India at first hand during 
his journeys in that country with Sultan 
Mahmud. This permitted him to write his 
monumental book on India. The breadth of 
vision and depth of understanding he revealed 
in this work were unprecedented in the 
Muslim world of his day. It remains a model 
of exact observation and objective analysis. 
As George Sarton writes in his “Introduction 
to the History of Science” : "He was the first 
Muslim to make a deep study of Hindu philo- 
sophy and became the most important link 
between two great provinces of mankind, 
India and Islam.” 4 Yow , A 
  
  
  
Photo Ee University hbrary, UK. 
Of course, inasmuch as al-Biruni 
spoke within the context of the tradi- 
tional world view, his defence of pure 
knowledge and the view of those who 
emphasized its utility met at the 
highest level. For what can be more 
“useful” to man than the knowledge 
which is an adornment for his soul 
and the means for its attainment of 
perfection? 
Al-Biruni himself was aware of these 
two poles and attitudes involved and 
in his own writings combined the 
pleasure aspect associated with the 
attainment of knowledge with its aspect 
of utility. For him the two were not 
completely divorced from each other 
but were complementary in the deep- 
est sense, 
Al-Biruni never became the slave of 
a particular method nor accepted that 
kind of tyranny of methodology charac- 
teristic of so much of modern science. 
He used different methods in different 
sciences in conformity with the nature 
of the science in question. Where it 
was necessary he used induction, or 
observation, or experimentation, or 
deduction or had recourse to intellec- 
tual intuition. 
He was the most exact of scientists 
without ever being fooled into believing 
that the methods of experimental 
science could he applied to the domain 
of religion or the sciences of man. That 
is why in al-Biruni, who in a sense 
summarizes the whole history of Isla- 
mic science, there is no single method, 
but methods for acquirlng various 
forms of knowledge in conformity with 
the innate nature of the sciences in 
question. 
The basic significance of al-Biruni 
for the modern world, and especially 
the contemporary Islamic world, in fact, 
is not only in that he was the father 
of geodesy or that he weighed several 
precious stones and metals carefully 
or even that he criticized Aristotelian 
natural philosophy profoundly. It is 
above all in his success in being an 
outstanding scientist, in being scienti- 
fic without being scientistic. It is in 
being logical without losing sight of the 
spiritual empyrean, the knowledge of 
which is not irrational nor illogical but 
unattainable through logic and reason 
alone. 
It is also in his remarkable sense of 
discernment which was able to give 
each form of knowledge its due, to 
assign to each element the place to 
which it belonged by nature, so that 
he could practise mathematics with 
the rigour of the greatest of mathema- 
ticians and at the same time write of 
human affairs with a vision that is 
much more profound than the view 
of those in the modern world who try 
to ape the methods of the exact scien- 
ces in the field of the humanities and 
who do not possess a fraction of 
al-Biruni's scientific knowledge. 
Al-Biruni stands as the model of the 
thinker who was able to harmonize 
within his own intellectual vision 
various forms of knowledge, from the 
sciences of nature to religion and phi- 
losophy. 
He also stands as proof that it is 
possible within a traditional world- 
view to develop and even found 
various branches of the sciences 
without becoming enslaved by them 
and without falling under the deadly 
influence of belief in the unilateral and 
tyrannizing power of science so preva- 
lent today, a belief whose end cannot 
but be the stifling of the human spirit 
and the destruction of the natural envi- 
ronment which itself serves as support 
for man’s terrestrial journey. | 
Seyyed Hosseln Nasr 
4]

## [Page 42](074875engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

12 
  
THE FORTRESS 
- OF NANDANA 
In the Fortress of Nandana, 
left, al-Biruni computed the 
radius and circumference of 
the earth in the year 1018. 
The fortress stands in hilly 
country about 100 kilometres 
from Islamabad, capital of 
modern Pakistan. Al-Biruni 
explained his method in the 
Mas'udic Canon. First he 
calculated the height of a 
neighbouring peak, possibly 
the one seen here behind 
the fortress, then he 
measured the angle from 
the summit to the earth's 
horizon. His results were 
amazingly accurate. He 
made the earth's radius 
6,338.80 kilometres, com- 
pared with today's mean 
figure of 6,370.98 kilometres 
or 6,353.41 kilometres at the 
latitude of Nandana, a dif- 
ference of barely 15 km. Ph
ot
o 
Wa
ll
ul
lz
h 
K
h
a
n
,
 
H
a
m
d
a
r
d
 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
, 
Pa
ki
st
an
 


### 50320: A Pioneer of scientific observation

Pioneer of scientific observation (continued from page 18) 
He wrote of the great geological 
changes which had occurred in the 
remote past, long before the creation 
of man, and also during human exis- 
tence, and some of his observations 
are of great interest. His discovery of 
fossils of marine animals led him to 
the conclusion that: 
“Sea has turned into land and land 
into sea; which changes, if they happen 
before the existence of man, are not 
known, and if they took place later they 
are not remembered because with the 
length of time the record of events 
breaks, especially if this happens 
gradually. This only a few can realize. 
“This steppe of Arabia was at one 
time sea, then was upturned so that 
the traces are still visible when wells 
or ponds are dug, for they begin with 
layers of dust, sand and pebbles, then 
there are found in the soil shells, glass 
and bones which cannot possibly be 
said to have been buried there on 
purpose. Nay, even stones are 
brought up in which are embedded 
shells, cowries and what is called 
'fish-ears’, sometimes well-preserved, 
or the hollows are there of their shape 
while the animal has decayed.” 
His interest next turned to the deter- 
mination of specific gravities, to vacuum 
theory, the propagation of heat, the 
dilatation of bodies and the reflection 
and refraction of light. He even 
attempted to establish a tentative 
comparison between the speeds of 
light and sound. 
In a totally different field, we find 
references in his works to the con- 
struction of a canal linking the Medi- 
terranean and the Red Sea, to the 
desalination of sea water and even to 
the atomistic theories of Democritus 
Furthermore, and it is in this respect 
that he really emerges as a precursor 
of the great geniuses of the Renais- 
sance and the Enlightenment, he also 
turned his attention to the human 
sciences, in which his achievement is 
quite extraordinary for someone living 
in an age which was certainly not 
noted for its tolerance. 
By virtue. of his official post at the 
court of Sultan Mahmud, al-Biruni was 
required to take part in the Sultan's 
campaigns. This did not prevent him 
realizing his greatest wish, which was 
to make contact with Indian thought. 
The long periods which he spent in 
India left an indelible impression upon 
him, resulting in some of his most 
remarkable works, in particular his 
great work on India. 
He went to India in the train of a 
military conqueror, but it was in the 
guise of a simple student that he 
introduced himself to his Indian 
masters. He learned Sanskrit in order 
to study Indian sacred writings and 
scientific texts. He was soon to be 
regarded as the equal of his masters, 
both for his learning and for his 
desire to spread the knowledge he 
possessed. His erstwhile teachers 
thus became his pupils and he taught 
them the elements of Islamic, Mani- 
chean, Christian, Mazdaist and Hebrew 
thought—with such success that they 
gave him the affectionate sobriquet 
“Boundless Ocean”. 
Al-Biruni's profound study of the 
Hindu religion enabled him to under- 
take a comparative study of the major 
religions of his day, examining for the 
first time the ties which bind the Greek, 
Christian, Manichean, Jewish and Hindu 
faiths. He particularly stressed the 
Hindu belief in the transmigration of 
souls. 
His work on India is not, however, 
concerned solely with religion, but also 
contains chapters of the greatest value 
on the Hindu social system and Indian 
geography, mathematics and medicine. 
It is greatly to his credit that, unlike 
so many of his contemporaries, he saw 
India as something more than merely 
a place where rich booty was to be 
had. His work is thus an objective 
and complete record of Hindu civi- 
lization and a source-book for his 
fellow-Muslims who had until then been 
ignorant of Hindu culture. 
Al-Biruni's work thus presents us 
with an outstanding example of an 
encyclopaedic mind ranging over both 
the exact sciences and the human 
sciences, and a model of respect for 
other people's manners, beliefs and 
customs—in short, for other people's 
cultures. He teaches us tolerance 
through understanding of other nations, 
and for this reason we respect al-Biruni 
as he respected others. As he him- 
self said: 
“If you are to learn to like other 
peoples, learn their language and show 
respect for their way of life for 
their customs, their thought and their 
religion.” | 
Mohammed Salim-Atchekzal Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
— 
Dé
pb
t 
lé
ga
l 
C 
1 
— 
Ma
i 
1
9
7
4
 
— 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in
 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 43](074875engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

INTERNATIONAL 
SOCIAL 
SCIENCE 
JOURNAL & 
OO 
cultures 
volume | no. 2 
Vo | 
g
e
 FIVE UNESCO 
QUARTERLIES 
Challenged paradigms 
in international relations 
UNESCO 
Unesco and la Baconniire 
Annual subscription: 45F Annual subscription: 28 F nual subscription: 75F hi fiptiong Rhy iption Single copy: PAE ngle copy: 8.50 F ngle copy: 22 F 
Pe | = 
- - 
# J big. n - = i i . Ea 
"CULTURES, a new international review, explores the world of art 
PT RR A CR LUC TH OTE IE CRITE R ERED TS ET THES 
the role of cultural institutions in modern society. f 
INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL SCIENCE JOURNAL is an authoritative 
international forum on topics of current significance in the social 
sciences. Each number examines a single major issue extensively. 
PROSPECTS studies timely and provocative questions facing education 
The role of museums 
in today’s 
Latin America 
Annual subscription: 55F x 
Single copy: 16 F j 
Annual subscription: 28F 
Single copy: 8.50 F 
today, particularly educational innovation and reform. Each issue 
publishes a “dossier” on a major theme, challenging articles and news 
from the world of education. 
MUSEUM is a richly illustrated guide to the latest developments, 
3 
- 
wt 4 21 
techniques and exhibits in the world of museums. A review of prime 
importance to all connected with museum work, it is also of interest 
ACRUCRENIGEDHR - 
3 Fall SG Ni 
IMPACT OF SCIENCE ON SOCIETY ———— on science as a major 
force for social change. Articles by leading specialists discuss 
problems that affect the man in the street and. society as a whole. 
Where to renew your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed, along with subscription rates in local 
currency, will be supplied on request.) 
— AUSTRALIA. Publications : Educational Supplies 
Pty. Led, P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; Perio- 
dicals; Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post Office, 
Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub-agent: United Nacions 
Association of Australia, Viccorian Division 5th flcor, 
134/136 Flinders St., Melbourne (Victoria), 3000. 
— AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg Fromme & C+, Arbeiter- 
gasse 1-7, 1051, Yienna.—BELGIUM. "Unesco Courier” 
Dutch edition only: N.V. Handelmaatschappy Keesing, 
Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. French 
edition and general Unesco publications agent: Jean de 
Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 3380.00. 
— BURMA. Trade Corporation N* (9), 550-552 Mer- 
chant Street, Rangoon. — CANADA. Information 
Canada, Ottawa, (Ont.}. —- CYPRUS, MAM", Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P. O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — 
CEZCHOSLOVAKIA, S.N.T.L, Spalena 51, Prague 1 
{permnent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1. For Slovakia only : Ala Verlag - Publishers, 
Hurbanove nam. 6, 893 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — DEN- 
MARK. Munksgaards Boghandel, 6, Nérregade, DK- 
1165, Copenhagen K. — EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC 
OF). National Centre for Unesco Publications, N* 1 
Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir Square, Cairo; Librairie 
Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Caire. — ETHIOPIA, 
National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Bex 2996, Addis 
Ababa. — FINLAND, Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Kes- 
kuskatu, Helsinki. — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 
7-9, place de Fontenoy, 75700-Paris, C.C.P. 12598-48, 
— GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REP. Deutscher Buch- 
Export und Import Gmbh, Leninstrasse 16, 701 Leipzig. — 
FED. REP. OF GERMANY For the Unesco Kurier 
{German ed. only): Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg- 
Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650. For scientific maps only: 
GEO CENTER D7 Stuctgare 80, Postfach 800830. 
Other publications: Verlag Dokumentation, Postfach 148, 
Jaiserscrasse 13, 8023 Munchen-Pullach. — GHANA. 
Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd, P.O. Box 195, 
Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Led, P.O. Box 7869, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; 
The University Bookshop of Cape Coast, The University 
Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — GREAT 
BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — GREECE. Anglo- 
Hellenic Agency, 5, Koumpari Street Athens 138; 
— HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock 
Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akadémiai Konyvesbolt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.Y. Konyvtarosck Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND, 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
— INDIA, Orient Longman Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard 
Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 
13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; B-3/7 Asaf 
Al Road, New Delhi 1; Sub-Depots: Oxford Book 
& Stationery Co. 17 Park Street, Calcutta 16; and 
Scindia House, New Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry 
of Education and Social Welfare, 72 Theatre Communication 
Building, Connaught Place, New Delhi 1. — INDONESIA. 
Indira P.T., JI. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, Jakarta. — IRAN. 
Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution C*., 229 Danesh- 
gahe Street, Shah Avenue, P.O. Box 14-1486, Teheran. 
Iranian National Commission for Unesco, Avenue Iran- 
chahr Chomali No 300, B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. 
McKenzie's Bookshop. Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad; 
University Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O. Box 
7S, Baghdad .— IRELAND, The Educational Company of 
Ireland Led., Ballymount Road, Walkinstown, Dublin 12. 
ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blumstein's Booksto- 
res, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat Benjamin Streex, 
Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Screet Jerusalem. 
— JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Stores Led, P.O. Box 
366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston. — JAPAN. Maruzen 
Co. Ltd., P.O, Box 5050, Tokyo International 100-31. 
— KENYA. The E.S.A. Led, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. 
~— KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT, The Kuwait 
Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA. 
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. 
— LIBYA. Agency for Development of Publication 
& Distribution, P,O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEM- 
BOURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, Luxem- 
bourg. — MALAYSIA, Federal Publications Sdn. Bhd., 
Balai Berita, 31, Jalan Riong, Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. 
Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kingsway, Vallecta, — MAURI- 
TIUS. Nalanda Company Led, 30, Bourbon Street, 
Port-Louis, — MONACO, British Library, 30, Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. For 
the ** Unesco Koerier *’ Dutch edition only : Systemen 
Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, Amsterdam-1007. Agent 
for all Unesco publications : N. Y. Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. — NETHERLANDS 
ANTILLES. G. C. T. Yan Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.}. N.V,, 
Willemstad, Curagao., N. A, — NEW ZEALAND. 
Government Printing Office, Government Bookshops 
at : Rutland Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, 
Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma 
Street, P.O. Box 857 Hamilcon; Princes Street, P.O. 
Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, 
Wellington. — NIGERIA The University Bookshop 
of Ife, The University Bookshop of lbadan, P.O. Box 
286; The University Bookshop of Nsukka; The University 
Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu Bello University Book- 
shop of Zaria. — NORWAY. All publications : Johan 
Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl Johans gate 41/43, 
Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Littera- 
turtjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6. — PAKISTAN. The 
West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd, Unesco Publications 
House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; Showrooms: 
Urdu Bazaar, Lahore, and 57.58 Murree Highway, 
G/6-1, Islamabad. Pakistan Publications Bookshop, 
Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi. Mirza Book Agency 65 Shahrah 
Quaid-e-azam, P.O. Box N* 729, Lahore-3 — PHILIP. 
PINES. The Modern Book Co. 926 Rizal Avenue, 
P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404, — POLAND, All publica- 
tions : ORWN PAN Palac Kuleury i Nauki, Warsaw, 
For the Unesco Courier only : RUCH, ul. Wronia, 23, 
Warsaw 10, — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lcda, 
Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — SINGA- 
PORE. Federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Times House, 
River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOUTHERN RHO- 
DESIA. Textbook Sales (PYT) Led, 67 Union Avenue, 
Salisbury. — SR] LANKA. lake House Bookshop, 
100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata P.O.B, 244 
Colombo 2. — SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. 
Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications: 
A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, 
Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Courier: Svenska FN-Férbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 
50 S- 104 65, Stockholm. — SWITZERLAND. All 
publications : Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich. 
Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.CP, 
12-236. — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, 
P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. — 
TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, 
Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — SOUTH AFRICA. All 
publications: Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty). Ltd. Libri 
Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. For 
the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Central News 
Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. UNITED KING- 
DOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, 
S.E.l., and Government Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, 
Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol. — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, P.O, 
Box 433, New York, N.Y. 10016. — U.S.S.R. Mezhdu- 
narodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA, 
Jugoslovensita Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna 
Zalozba Slovenije Mestni Trg. 26, Liubliana.

## [Page 44](074875engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

W Ancient splendours of Gl 
y ‘Ghazna (in present-day Afghanistan) was one of Asia’ s 
most splendid cities in the 10th century. It was the 
capital and cradle of the Ghaznavid d ruled 
from the frontiers of Mesopotamia to the Baki river. 
Al-Biruni, the great Muslim scientist and philosopher, 
lived at Ghazna most of the time from until his 
~ death about 1048 A.D. Here he wrote some of his most 
famous works, “including his encyclopaedic study on 
~The Mongol invasion of 1221 destroyed most of 
Ghana, sparing only two minarets and a palace, today 
in ruins. This star-shaped tower of burnt brick, 43 metres 
high and decorated with Arabic inscriptions, is the base 
of one of the minarets; it was once topped b yac ylindrical 
upper tower (see also page 0 EL 
piRShorss Lagersire Fats  