# [078200](078200engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](078200engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
   
   
ISTORY 
I] 
MANKINL 
A global view of 
cultural & scientific 
 
development 
 

## [Page 2](078200engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
    
"MAN vs. STRESSES 
‘OF ANTARCTICA 
Men who live hidden like hibernating animals in the 
scientific stations of Antarctica (above, an ice OLLI 
leading into aresearch base) undergo severe stresses and 
strains. A relentless climate, deprivations of all kinds, 
utter isolation and the enforced seclusion that comes 
~ with the long winter night all try mental and physical 
resistance to the full. As a leader of Australian Antarctic 
expeditions, Phillip Law has been able to study at 
first hand the psychological and physiological IER UEL 
affect these polar teams. (See article on page 26) 
© Jacques Masson-French Polar Expeditions 
TL  

## [Page 3](078200engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

4 WINDOW OPIN ON THE WORLD 
  
  
JUNE 1963 
16TH YEAR ‘mCourier 
Contents 
No. 6 
PUBLISHED IN Page 
NINE EDITIONS 
4 HISTORY OF MANKIND 
English A global view of scientific and cultural development 
French By Dr. Guy Métraux 
Spanish 
Russian 8 THE AWAKENING OF THE MIND 
German By Jacquetta Hawkes 
Arabic 11 THE DAWN OF ART 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 14 A SCHOOLBOY IN SUMER 
Italian By Sir Leonard Woolley 
16 FIRST ASTRONOMERS OF CHINA & BABYLON 
  
17 THE COMMONWEALTH OF MEDICINE 
18 THE BIRTH OF GLASS 
19 WORSHIPPERS OF SUMER 
20 THE RED CROSS 
Centenary of a universal! banner 
By Hubert d’Havrincourt 
COVER PHOTO 26 THE MENTAL STRAINS OF ANTARCTIC SOLITUDE 
 
This 4,000-year-old statue of 
a bearded man Is the only 
stone bust found In the 
ruins of Mohenjo-daro, a city 
By Phillip Law 
Torments of the long polar night 
of the mysterious civilization 31 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
of ancient India (now West 
Pakistan). The Indus Valley 
had no stone and all had to 32 DANTE’S DIVINE COMEDY IN ESPERANTO be imported, as was the case 
In Sumer. Cover also shows 
fog gras Irom the celebre 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
double-sided panels, Incrus- 
ted with shells and lapis- 
lazull, deplct a variety of 
scenes from Sumerian life. 
Photos Josephine Powell, 
and British Museum 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Editlon : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Yeniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
(M. C. 63.1, 181 A) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itis bi-monthly (Il issues a year) in English, French, Spaninh, Russian, German, 
Arabic, Japanese, and !talian, In the United Kingdom itis distributed by H.M, 
Stationery Office, P, O. Box 569, London, S. E, I. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are tent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or thote of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature publiahed by H. W. Wilion Co,, New York. 
Annual subscription rates: 10/-stg.; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies 1/-stg. 30 
cents; 0.70 F. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.

## [Page 4](078200engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

    
    
  
- _ . . J 
i (EC TAL JV: 
rf 
SL IRA (71 4, TAHIR pat Fi 
  
 
   
 
University Museum, Philadelphia 
One of the outstanding 
achievements of the Su- 
merians was the system 
of law they evolved. On 
the stele (left), Ur Nam- 
mu, a ruler of the Ur 
dynasty in about 2600 
B.C., is depicted in ado- 
ration before Shamash, 
the god of justice. Their 
figures at the top of the 
stele are incomplete, but 
the same scene is re- 
peated (intact this time) 
immediately below them. 
Some five centuries later, 
Hammurabi, the Babylo- 
nian king, gathered exist- 
ing laws and [egal pro- 
cedures into his cele- 
brated Code and in the 
design accompanying it 
he too represents him- 
self in an attitude of 
reverence before Sha- 
mash as the embodiment 
of the idea of justice. 
"All the illustrations 
‘accompanying our r 


### 62788: History of mankind: a global view of scientific and cultural development

“History of Mankind” 
‘report (pages 4-19 and 
front cover) are taken 
from the first volume 
“of this global History. 
= 
he 
 

## [Page 5](078200engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 62788: History of mankind: a global view of scientific and cultural development

A global view of scientific 
Uh : Vv 
hd be 3 
and cuigtural ae 
irk A nly tii ie iy se en eats Sd TR ETE a MI a gs Ly  
T= publication this month of the first volume 
of the monumental six-tome History of 
Mankind, subtitled Cultural and Scientific Development, 
sponsored by UnEsco, marks an important date for histor- 
ical sclence and for International understanding. 
Many of the differences that still divide mankind go 
back far into the distant past. Yet, as Professor Paulo 
E. de Berredo Carneiro, of Brazil, points out in the preface 
to the History, a study of the historical antecedents of 
its peoples reveals links which draw them nearer to one 
another. 
“Beyond differences of race, climate, economic structure 
and systems of ideas,” writes Professor Carneiro, who Is 
President of the International Commission responsible 
for the preparation of a history of the scientific and cul- 
tural development of mankind, “history shows the funda- 
mental identity of the various human groups, making it 
possible to discern, in many cases, profound analogies 
among the transformations they have undergone from 
the Palzxolithic era down to the present time. If we 
consider the human species as a whole, we perceive that 
the course of its evolution has been accomplished from 
one region and from one people to another by way of a 
series of oscillations, greater or lesser in extent, longer 
or shorter in duration. The different clvillzations which 
have arisen in the course of the ages correspond to dis- 
tinct phases and patterns of this general movement. 
Almost every one them ls to be found somewhere in the 
world of today. Contemporary society appears as a 
mosaic in which the most widely differing cultures adjoin 
and confront each other.” 
Volume One of the History of Mankind, which appears 
first in its English edition, deals wlth prehistory and the 
beginnings of civilization. But neither this volume nor 
the five others to follow trace the national history of any 
country or people in particular. Instead, what they 
present Is a detailed study of economic and social events, 
religious and emotional life, the forms of artistic expres- 
sion and the scientific thinking, and a comparison of these 
with the forms taken by the same experiences in other 
countries during the same period. 
S- Leonard Woolley, writing in Volume I on 
the urbanization of society, for example, exa- 
mines this economic and social process as it occurred in 
. Egypt, Sumeria, the Indus Valley and China. But he 
does not describe in the traditional way the thousand 
and one ups and downs In the fortunes of these countries. 
From the first volume to the last, and whether authors 
are dealing with prehistory or the 20th century, the 
chapter headings follow a similar pattern. First an 
introduction gives a chronological picture of the histor- 
ical events forming the background to the development 
of the great cultural and humanistic institutions. Then 
the life of the people, the social structures, economic 
velopment ps TN 
activities (crafts, production and trade), the development 
of spoken languages, of writing and teaching, rellglous 
life, the development and applications of sclence and the 
forms of artistic expression are all examined In turn. 
The study of the origins of language made by Jacqueita 
Hawkes in the first part of Volume I is followed by Sir 
Leonard Woolley’s survey on the formation of and dif- 
ferences between spoken languages In Sumerla, Egypt and 
China. The subject is taken up again in Volume II, this 
time by Professor Lulg! Paretl, who surveys the chief 
languages of the period between 1200 B.C. and 400 A.D. 
amongst them Greek, Latin and Sanserit, 
Similarly, it will be possible for the reader to follow the 
development of science and its applications down the 
road of history from its origins in far off antiquity up to 
the present 20th century. But once again this {s not a 
history of French science or Russian science or American 
science, but of the development of science as a whole In 
which contributions made throughout history by French- 
men, Russians and Americans as well as by scientists from 
other countries are given full acknowledgement. 
A ec for a global history of mankind was 
made clear at the conference of Ministers of 
Education heldin London while the world war was still rag- 
ing. The idea was again put forward In 1946, this time by 
Dr. Julian Huxley, then Executive Secretary of the Prepa- 
ratory Commission for UNEsco, In his report, “Unesco: Its 
Purpose and its Philosophy.” In 1949, UneEsco’s General 
Conference examined the project and after many prepa- 
ratory meetings and studles, decided on the form the 
work would take. 
In 1951, and under the auspices of UNEsco, the Interna- 
tional Commission for a History of the Scientific and Cul- 
tural Development of Mankind was formed with its own 
executive body and secretariat. The Commission's work 
went on for more than ten years during which time 
scholars the world over were asked to join the team 
working on the project. 
Those closely associated with the work realized the Im- 
mensity of the task. From the start it was clear that, 
like all works of great originality, it too could expect to 
come under rigorous scrutiny. And the final result must 
fully justify the expectations of a world public. Further- 
more, scholars who normally work in private and seclusion, 
would here be very much in public view: not only would 
the UNesco General Conference periodically discuss the 
execution of the project, but historians and scholars 
throughout the ‘world have also have to be kept informed 
of the progress of the work. 
Since 1953 the editorial plan of the History has been 
presented in the pages of the Journal of World History, a 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](078200engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 62788: History of mankind: a global view of scientific and cultural development

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd) 
An unparalleled 
international venture 
quarterly review initiated and published by the Interna- 
tional Commission. This review has also published some 
chapters from the History as well as major articles cover- 
ing a wide range of subjects relating to scientific and 
cultural development. Commissioned by the authors of 
the different volumes from their colleagues in all parts 
of the world to assist them in compiling this work, these 
articles represent the thinking of scholars, from many 
countries and with every kind of ideological background. 
In all cases scholars were given the widest possible 
bounds in which to develop their subjects: the bounds 
of human experience. By limiting itself to cultural and 
scientific development, the History seeks to attain the 
universality which brought Unesco into being and which 
guides it today. For, at every stage in the ascent of 
humanity and in varying degrees of complexity and 
intensity, culture and science have made their contribu- 
tions. 
The prehistoric man described by Jacquetta Hawkes in 
Voiume I was more or less consciously applying certain 
scientific principles each time he used a sling, shaped a 
flint or discovered the advantages of irrigation and crop 
rotation in agriculture. The complexity of the Sumerian 
civilization, as seen in its involved structures, scales of 
values and internal relationships, made it a very different 
one from that of Egypt. Yet the very existence of both 
Sumer and Egypt was conditioned by similar factors: the 
fate of both was linked to rivers. 
A HISTORY 
  
    
FANTASTIC 
BESTIARY 
The civilization of Sumer 
which flourished 4,500 years 
ago produced a rich art in 
which the animal -world is 
portrayed in striking poetic 
fantasy. The shell plaque 
(left) decorated an ornate 
lyre unearthed from the 
‘tomb of a ruler of Ur (about 
2500 B.C.). It bears a grace- 
fully executed series of little 
scenes engraved on a black 
enamel base, depicting ani-~ 
- mals with human attributes : 
gazelles with bearded human 
heads, a dancing bear, a lion 
bearing a vase, adog carrying 
a dagger in its belt and 
pushing a table, and a donkey 
musician. Not only does the 
bestiary show animals behav- 
ing like humans, as in the 
fables of Aesop and La Fon- 
taine, but it also depicts men 
metamorphized as animals, 
like the scorpion man (enlar- 
ged at right) who is attend- 
ed by a roguish young goat. 
IN SIX VOLUMES 
Volume |: Prehistory and the Beginnings of Civilization, 
by Jacquetta Hawkes and Sir Leonard Woolley, 920 pages. 
(London, George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1963) 75/-; (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1963) $12.50. 
Volume lI: The Empires of the Ancient World, by Luigi 
Pareti, assisted by Paolo Brezzi and Luciano Petech. To be 
published in 1964. 
Volume Ill: The Peoples and Cultures, 400 A.D. to 
1200 A.D.¥, by Gaston Wiet, Vadime Eliséeff and Philippe 
Wolff. To be published in 1965. 
Volume IV: The World, 1200 to 1775%, by Louis Gottschalk, 
assisted by L.C. MacKinney and E.H. Pritchard. To be 
published in 1964. 
Volume V: The Nineteenth Century*, by Charles Morazé 
et al. To be published in 1965. 
Volume VI: The Twentieth Century®*, by Caroline F. Ware, 
K.M. Panikkar and J. Romein, will appear at the end of 
the same year. 
The first volume of the History of Mankind in Spanish 
(Editorial Sudamericana, Buenos Aires) is scheduled for 
publication at the end of 1963 or early in 1964. Other 
editions are being prepared in French, Italian, German, 
Japanese, Arabic, etc. The History will also appear in paper- 
back form in the United States. 
. A collection of six paper-back volumes under the general 
title of Readings in the History of Mankind will appear under 
the imprint of the New American Library of World Lit- 
erature (Mentor Books). Based on articles published in the 
Journal of World History and grouped according to impor- 
tant historical themes, the collection can serve as a com- 
panion to the History of Mankind. The first two paperbacks, 
The Evolution of Science and The Nineteenth Century World 
are scheduled to appear this month at 95 cents. Ritchie 
Calder and Mario Praz have written original prefaces for 
these books. 
* Tentative titles. 
To attain the goal set by the International Commission, 
editors of the different volumes worked in clos? co-opera- 
tion. Every manuscript was drawn up according to a 
plan prepared by Professor Ralph Turner and approved 
by the Commission, and each 'was meticulously revised 
after having been widely circulated among UNEsco’s 
National Commissions in all the Member States. Com- 
ments, criticisms and additional facts supplied by spec- 
ialists were used to correct and complete the texts. 
Thanks to UnEesco’s support, this method was used on 
a world-wide scale. The long list of historians whose 
comments were used in the revision of Volume I includes 
Soviet specialists, American and British prehistorians, 
French, Italian and German archeologists and scholars 
from Japan, Spain, Mexico and India. In editing this 
first volume, Jacquetta Hawkes and Sir Leonard were able 
to make use of more than eighty comments from scholars 
of world-wide reputation. 
Where comments have not been embodied in the: texts, 
for reasons of historical or even ideological interpretation, 
they have nevertheless been included as notes prepared 
by the editorial advisers. 
In the chapter dealing with intellectual development 
for example, the theory advanced by Jacquetta Hawkes 
on the origins of languages is supplemented by comments 
from an American specialist, Dr. W.C. Sturtevant, who 
has different views on this subject. Similarly, from 
detailed notes and comments, Sir Leonard Woolley was 
able to record his discussion on the origins of Aryan 
civilization with Indian scholars. He was also able to 
exchange views with Marxist scholars regarding some 
social institutions which, in dialectical materialism, are 
given a prominence contested by other schools of thought. 
The International Commission has used these notes,

## [Page 7](078200engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 62788: History of mankind: a global view of scientific and cultural development

  
without in any way disturbing the continuity of the nar- 
rative, to show readers the great wealth of historical 
thought in the 20th century and the differences in inter- 
pretation ‘which it has produced. On controversial ques- 
tions, ‘whose interpretation is so often linked to a parti- 
cular philosophy of history, the Commission carefully 
avoided adopting a definite position. 
Contributors to the History were not asked to include 
in their texts viewpoints with which they disgreed, but 
in all cases where specialist opinions were avallable, these 
other views were included in the volumes in the form of 
notes or appendices. In Volume I, this type of contribu- 
tion was compiled and edited by a Swiss scholar, Professor 
A.G. Bandi. of the University of Berne, and a French 
scholar, Professor Jean Leclant, of the University of Stras- 
bourg. 
Under the auspices of UNEsco and the responsibility of 
the International Commission, the work of compiling the 
History was marked throughout by a spirit of interna- 
The Journal of World History (a quarterly historical journal 
with articles in French, English and Spanish) is published by 
the International Commission for a History of the Scienti- 
fic and Cultural Development of Mankind and is issued by 
the Editions de La Baconniére, Boudry-Neuchatel, Switz- 
erland, $10.00 a volume (four numbers, about 1,000 
pages). The last number is devoted to the development of 
the sciences in Italy. 
University Museum, Philadelphia 
tional co-operation. But it was no easy task. The dls- 
tribution of more than 200 coples of original manuscripts 
and the study of commentaries that were often lengthy 
Involved a great deal of patlent work. From the scholars 
co-operating in this work it required above all thelr readi- 
ness to revise thelr opinions In the light of information 
submitted by thelr colleagues, when thls was convincing, 
even if It did not correspond to thelr own ideas. 
This work has come Into belng in the middle of the 
20th century at a key moment in history when there is a 
growing consciousness of a civilization embracing all 
mankind. 
In the words of René Maheu, Director-General of 
UNEsco, in the forward to Volume I; “For the first time 
an attempt has been made to present, with respect to the 
history of consciousness, the sum total of the knowledge 
which the various contemporary socletles and cultures 
possess... It departs from the traditional approaches to 
the study of history, which, as we know, attach decisive 
importance to political, economic and even military 
factors... This historical study is itself a cultural achleve- 
ment, calculated to influence, by its spirit and methods, 
the present trend of culture. And that, no doubt, is Its 
ultimate end.” 
 
Guy METRAUX has been Secretary-General of the Inter- 
national Commission for a History of the Scientific and 
Cultural Development of Mankind since its inception. 
Doctor of Philosophy of Yale University, he is co-editor 
of the “Journal of World History”, published by the Com- 
mission, and author of “Ezchange of Persons: the Evolu- 
tion of Cross-Cultural Education”, published by the Soctal 
Sciences Research Council, New York, 1952.

## [Page 8](078200engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd) 
bol Fol 1 By hails ” 
“Volume | of the Unesco-sponsored “ History of Mankind ”, which appears this 
“month in its first English edition, is divided into two parts: * Prehistory " b 
ER ELL TEEN EUTLCENE UT Ry CR EG IG DIG TER SA TPE TT I ART RL ETS LTR 
ley, both archaologists of world-wide reputation. In 920 richly illustrated pages 
UCR ICRI ER EVCER GER EEG EIGER EEL END TITLE TI CR ED MERCEL TER 
: past through the Bronze Age to the development of civilizations in Sumer, 
~ Egypt and Elam, in Pheenecia, Crete, Anatolia, in India and China. * Prehistory 
~ and the Beginnings of Civilization ” describes what it was like to be a cave 
~ dweller and Stone Age hunter, a weaver, metal worker and farmer, how tech- 
niques, arts and crafts grew, and how languages and writing systems developed. 
BUS CLCERGEREE GEIR EUS CR GER TE EC [INVER SO CRCE AEN ER EO RLS EE UT 
BUENO RUTH CHER CRUEL CR CLI EL NGI RTE UL RCT ENEU LTE ER CRO ER UA CHAT 
CIR GEE LG ITER VE CR FEVER IETS CL ELT CN ETE  N  ET ET EW CR GER ET LITER 
LI CTE Qo ACL L ELT IVT TT RET SOR (TL GEV ERGY Sed TO ETI TEEN) Pa 
CLR UCR CHUCIRE EGE CER EL EEL of TTT ER TA EL TLR CR CIE EN CEG ELEN 
ER CU EC EI CU EEE GELB (CL BR UR EC AC LT BUIR EN CH GAA CIT TO CRE al 2 [ES CLA 
REN Ly 4 Ly Jodie - 
RCIA EVIL RTT CIO ETL ED publishing venture of unparalleled importance. 
Y i Atte , a 4 & . hy HS The ya By ba Tis fits : " Re i 
yh Fy Ll A aE SF } 
Nr IE ~ Courtesy of Govt. of India, 
Dept. of Archzlogy 
WAR ae 


### 62789: The Awakening of the mind

THE AWAKENING 
T= expansion of consciousness is a main 
theme of history. Nothing has greater signi- 
filcance than the development and exercise of the human 
greatness. This must be the estimate of the humanist; 
if it were added that it is through these gifts that God 
has made us aware of divinity, then there are few people 
in the world who would challenge it. 
In man’s animal past as one of the primates, the sharp- 
ening of sight at the expense of the more lowly sense 
of smell that went with Hving in trees, contributed to 
a heightening of mental faculties; only birds, carnivores 
and primates are equipped with a specially sensitive 
spot on the retina which provides for great acuteness of 
eyesight. When to this sharpness of sight the stereo- 
scopic vision was added, while that habit of grasping 
branches and seizing insects and fruit produced a flexible 
hand, the way was open for further advance. An ape 
or monkey fingering at the same time as it scrutinizes 
some unfamiliar object offers a good symbol for the dawn 
of both conscious apprehension and skill. 
Much has sometimes been made of the great impor- 
tance for human evolution of the hand with its opposable 
thumb; it was important, certainly, but only as the ser- 
vant of a waxing brain. The hands of the higher mon- 
keys would be perfectly capable of the finest skills had 
they a mind to set them to work; monkeys could be 
watchmakers had they ever conceived the notion of time. 
A further stimulus to mental growth was given our 
(1) Professor A.C. Blanc (Italy) points out that many authors 
have challenged the view that our ancestors left the trees and 
only then began to adapt themselves to living in relatively open 
country; instead, they consider that life in trees of apes is a 
form of specialization which the human species never went 
through. 
(2) Professor G. F. Debetz (U.SS.R.) suggests that the use of 
the hand in the process of labour activity and of the practical 
transformation of objects of nature for the purpose of salisfying 
the material requirements of man, conditioned the formation 
and development of his spiritual faculties: thinking, attention, 
memory, it complicated and improved such psychic funciion as 
sensation and perception. And our ancestors’ requirements for 
communication, ensuing from joint activities, conditioned inevi- 
tably the beginning and development of speech. 
ancestors when they left the trees and a mainly vege- 
tarian diet and began to adapt themselves to living in 
relatively open country and eating meat (1). If may be 
that the actual chemical constituents of meat were of 
benefit to their brains; undoubtedly its nutritive value, 
so much greater than that of herbs and fruit, relieved 
them of the necessity of perpetual eating. 
More important, the need for a creature with a rela- 
tively flat muzzle and lacking sharp claws of canine teeth 
to kill, skin and break up animal food must have led 
first to the use and then to the manufacture of tools. 
Once manufacture had begun, our forehears had stepped 
to an altogether higher plane of concentrated visual 
attention and manipulative skill. It may be that the 
controlled use of the hand helped to develop another 
essential human faculty, that of speech (2). 
It has been found that movements of the hand pro- 
  
{After Singer et Sh 
For many years it was thought that the earliest human species 
originated in Asia, but it is now generally agreed that Africa 
was the birthplace of mankind. It is in Africa that Australo- 
pithecus (reconstructed above with chimpanzee) the most 
man-like of the fossil apes has been found. Australopithecus 
walked upright and shaped stone tools a million years ago. 
  
 

## [Page 9](078200engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

Engraved seals bearing animal motifs. ‘and A West Pakistan. 'Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, 350 Riles 
BE-GER CTTLT ITE TS site of Mohenjo-daro on the River Indu way, were the chief cities of the Indus Valley civilizatic 
4 LT hs Em nC jeer : RE Ta io PER ora hg GA ERO wT hy fa a Te ; SUTTER ER [BES LY Toe 


### 62789: The Awakening of the mind

OF THE MIND Jacquetta Hawkes 
voke a sympathetic movement of the mouth, and it may 
be that a habit of communicating by gesture helped to 
induce the controlled emission of’ sounds. 
Here again, however, there is need to be chary In any 
recognition of cause and effect. Just as monkeys and 
some other primates have hands capable of executing 
skilful tasks were their brains equal to it, so, too, thelr 
lips, palate and vocal chords are probably capable of 
speech. It is brain power that is lacking. 
It is easy to say that the need for acute vision, the 
ability to manipulate, the necessity of cutting up meat, 
the purposeful concentration required to make tools all 
led to the multiplication of brain cells in hominid and 
human skulls, while each multiplication of cells led in 
turn to a further advance in functions. 
To this we can add the further idea favoured by many 
  
(After Le Gros Clark) 
Peking man, a reconstruction of the creature whose remains 
have been found in some numbers in the Choukoutien caves 
near Peking. Cave deposits proved the ancient human 
inhabitants were capable of chipping rough tools and of 
maintaining fires for warmth and protection. Their skulls 
had a brain capacity just within the modern human range. 
biologists that “man is a feetallzed ape,” that is to say 
that the direction of human evolution was towards 
resembling the young and not the mature primate, and 
that this postponing of physical maturity gave opportun- 
ity for a longer period of learning and experiment and 
further increase in brain size. 
All this interplay of cause and effect can be made to 
seem very convincing after the event. Yet we should 
remember that for thousands of years the Egyptians 
seemed to have very good reason for thinking that the 
rising of Sirius caused the Nile to flood. It may be that 
the ultimate cause of the waxing of the human brain, 
of the expanding of consclousness within it remalns as 
remote from our knowledge as the mountain sources of 
the Nile were to the Egyptians. 
i: causes are best treated with caution, there 
is no doubt that the strengthening of mental 
power came with the vast expansion of the cerebral cortex 
of New Brain in man. The two hollow hemispheres of the 
human cercbrum are so large that they have become 
deeply folded and convoluted to house them within the 
plates of the skull. 
The great size of the frontal and temporal lobes is 
particularly characteristic of man, and they Include 
among thelr millions of nerve cells many groups not 
enslaved to exact functions but with the storing of 
memories and thelr association. Memory, assoclation, 
leading to image-making powers, these are the capacities 
necessary for full self-consciousness, for the awareness 
of past and future, Intelligent anticipation and the build- 
ing of traditions to bind the long life of the race. . 
The self-consclousness that intensified with the ela- 
boration of the cerebral cortex, making man more and 
more aware of his actions and of his separation from 
nature, was to take two main and opposing directions. 
One ‘was towards controlling the environment. This led 
Immedlately to tool-making and then on to the whole 9 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](078200engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 62789: The Awakening of the mind

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd) 
A mental legacy from 
accelerating course of our technical and sclentiflc 
advance. Here analysis, the breaking down of the whole 
into manageable parts, has been the means, and the 
ends are wholly practical and material. 
The other direction Is towards reuniting the part with 
the whole, man with the universe from which his 
consciousness seemed to divide him. This way led to 
ritual, art, religious faith, mysticism and some aspects 
of philosophy. Metaphor, simile, symbolical enactments 
and other unifying forms have been the means, and the 
ends, essentially, are not practical or material. 
The very evident weakness of archaeology as a proper 
basis for history is its helpless dependance on material 
remains and the resulting tendency to over-emphasize 
the first of these two great 
ways of human endeavour. 
Thus, for example, it is not 
until the sudden appearance 
of art and ritual burial 
towards the end of the 
Palxolithic Age that we 
have anything beyond the 
faintest hint of man’s inner, 
unifying existence although 
undoubtedly thls must have 
been Increasing and re- 
fining even while In his 
extraverted and practical 
life man went from batter- 
ing pebbles to shaping a 
hand-axe. 
 
  
     
Women in long skirts figure in 
this ritual scene painted on a 
cave wall at Cogul, Spain, 
We can assume at the 
intellectual level a growing 
ability to categorize and to 
draw conclusions from the past to the benefit of the 
future. At the imaginative level there must have been 
mounting power to picture things (and particularly objects 
of desire such as game animals) when they were not before 
the eyes, comparable to the ability to visualize the com- 
pleted tool within the unshaped block of stone. 
«The beautiful shape of the hand-axe itself can, indeed, 
be used as a proof of the early emergence of an esthetic 
sense. It has even been suggested that the finest of 
these tools, those which seem so much more exquisitely 
worked than practical necessity demanded, may have 
become cult objects like the ceremonial axes of the Cale- 
donlan islanders or the very unwarlike silver maces often 
brought out on state occasions in western Europe. 
Whether or not these implements came to possess some 
special Imaginative significance or mana, their satisfying 
proportions show that already a quarter of a million 
years ago the imaginative mind had its own sense or 
rightness in pure form which, whatever its source, still 
holds good for us today. 
Consideration of the source of these esthetic judge- 
ments leads to the question of inherent mental patterns 
of all kinds. It may ‘well be that man’s feeling that 
certain proportions are right or beautiful has always been 
derived from his participation in’ the natural ‘world, 
animate and inanimate, organic and mathematical, from 
which he emerged. 
But beyond that there is a widely held and also 
strongly contested view that human beings are born with 
certain innate mental forms which have come into being 
through the experience of the evolving species. They are 
inherited just as the similarly evolved bodily parts are 
inherited, but as they are mental they tend to be 
expressed in cultural forms, most obviously in religious 
(After Burkitt) 
{0 myths, which although they differ in outward form ‘with 
the tone of the culture concerned, often appear to have 
an underlying unity that is world-wide and timeless. 
pre-humans 
These archetypes might correspond on a higher, more 
complex plane to the undoubtedly innate sense of asthe- 
tic rightness and such universal tendencles as the 
grotesque in art, animal forms, dragons and other recur- 
rent artistic manifestations. 
Although many people cannot accept thls idea of the 
inheritance of mental forms, it is surely far more likely 
than that we are born with a mental carte blanche. 
At the level of instinct we accept the idea readily enough, 
even though the instinctual bequest from the past may 
be highly complicated. 
Weaver birds, for example, after six generations of 
having been reared among other birds and deprived of 
thelr own proper nesting material, can still in the 
seventh generation weave their ingenious nests when 
given the opportunity. At some time in the remote past 
this species gradually perfected a most unusual form of 
dwelling construction, and the pattern for it has become 
fixed in the brain and central nervous system so that it 
can be repeated at any time by reference to this “ins- 
tinctive” pattern book. 
Surely, then, it cannot be impossible for man to Inherit 
patterns at a more imaginative level from the repetitive 
experience of twenty thousand generations? Or, having 
inherited them, that he should find expression for them 
in myths and other cultural forms? 
At least the possibility is strong enough for it to be 
unscientific to ignore it, particularly when considering 
the diffusion of cultural traits. When two peoples at some 
distance from one another possess some peculiar imple- 
ment, design, myth, in common it may ‘well have been 
transferred by trade, migration or a spreading influence. 
These contacts should always be looked for, but if they 
cannot be detected, then there remains the alternative 
that the trait represents two independent expressions 
of a common mental pattern. 
Whether or not human beings   
kind, there is no doubt that we 
A bring with us from the past very 
AN much more than our bodily parts. 
Forty thousand years after the 
death of the last Neanderthaler, 
Homo sapiens still carries with him 
a most powerful inheritance of 
passions and emotional tendencies 
acquired through the ages. Even 
inquisitiveness, the desire to explore, 
4S V4 is an emotion proved to exist already 
wh a in animals. 
i: inherit mental furniture of this 
  
     Some modern men have liked to 
The Sorcerer, part think of themselves as Wholly 
man, part beast, part rational and their fellows as poten- 
divinity, painted and tially so, yet others have concluded 
engraved on a cave that our species is never capable of 
wall in 5.W. France, carrying out a rationally formed 
(From a drawing in the . 
Musée de "Homme, Paris) intention. 
The ‘whole course of human 
. history in which so many great 
peoples have hurled themselves to self-destruction, 
seems ln many ways to support this second point of view. 
Some rationalists might be happier to have it otherwise, 
but if we lost our emotional inheritance with its ener- 
getic power to galvanize the Imagination, the whole 
creative life of our kind would soon be withered, parched 
as a mummy. 
— Part I, Chapter IV (Mind)

## [Page 11](078200engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
R. Perret, Courtesy of the Musée de I'Homme, Paris 
a 3 
= y 
E 
“a 4 
3 
» 
hy 
There was a rich artistic flowering among the Palxolithic, or Old Stone Age, peoples whe produced 
works of art that can rival anything that has been achieved in the last ten thousand years. Palxolithic 
paintings and engravings on the walls of caves and cave shelters have been found in great numbers 
in parts of Europe and Africa. Above, the Masked Hunter, an African rock painting from the Sahara 
  
I: has been said that Palaeolithic art can claim 
to be the most improbable event in history, 
and fundamentally it is as impossible to explain why it 
occurred as any of the other sudden upsurges of creative 
genius in the arts that, happily for us, have marked the 
course of our human existence. The tides of the human 
psyche ebbing and flowing in society remain largely 
mysterious. Yet at a rather more superficial level there 
are explanations and interpretations to be made. On the 
one hand there are the permissive factors. While material 
prosperity can never be the cause of artistic genius, a 
society cannot support its artists without an economic 
margin. 
Thus there is no doubt that the abundance of game to 
be hunted in south-west Europe in late Pleistocene times 
made a necessary foundation for the development of 
Paleolithic art. Although the artists were probably 
themselves hunters, it seems very likely, particularly as 
skill and professionalism grew, that in exchange for their 
artistic services to the community they only had to hunt 


### 62790: The Dawn of art

THE DAWN OF ART 
part-time and were supplied with food while at work in 
the caves. 
On the other hand there are the uses of art—meaning 
its uses to society and not the satisfaction it gives to its 
creators. A healthy artistle tradition is seldom without 
some more or less practical function, and in primitive 
socictles where there is no recognized division hetween 
intellectual, practical and religious activities, art always 
must be an integral part of everyday life. 
There'is long-standing dispute between those who have 
wished to see cave-painting and its related forms as an 
activity undertaken for its own sake, for self-expression 
and the creation of beauty and those who see it as a 
purely practical activity undertaken to secure good 
hunting. This conflict is entirely in the minds of the 
disputants. Even in the twentieth century, when life is 
lived so much in watertight compartments, no one even 
thinks of asking whether the painters of easel pictures 11 
CONT'D ON KEXT PAGE

## [Page 12](078200engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 62790: The Dawn of art

12 
  
HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd) 
A Stone Age art unsurpassed 
work for self-expression or because they intend to sell 
their canvasses. To try to separate art and magic and 
religion in the unified life of early man shows the folly 
of the over-analytical mind. 
HERE is no doubt at all that cave art had its 
maglco-religlous function. In particular it 
served that form of it known as sympathetic magic, which 
depends upon a belief that similarity or relationship is 
identity, and that anything down to an image or related 
part of a thing will affect the thing itself. It is an idea 
which has constantly recurred even in civilized life. Pota- 
toes, when first introduced into Europe, were thought to 
cause leprosy because the appearance of some of the tubers 
suggested the disease. 
It is well known that in modern Europe and America 
people still make images of their enemies and stick them 
with pins to secure their death, and this practice makes 
an exact analogy to one aspect of the Palaeolithic 
hunters’ magic. 
A considerable number of paintings have spears or darts 
drawn or scratched on the animals’ flanks. There are 
many instances at Lascaux. At Niaux there Is a famous 
example in which three little pits, naturally formed, have 
been enclosed by the outline of a bison, and each 
furnished with a dart to give the semblance of wounds... 
If one form of sympathetic magic was used to ensure 
successful kills, another was to cause an increase of life. 
Some of the painted beasts are undoubtedly intended to 
be gravid, while the careful representation of bull and 
cow bison at the Tuc d’Audoubert, and the signs of rites 
having been celebrated in the cave, is very suggestive of 
fertility magic. That this conception went far beyond 
sympathetic magic to form the basis of a fertility religion 
with a great history before it in Eurasia is shown 
unequivocally by the Venuses and other crystallizations of 
the mother goddess concept .. .. 
A third type of evidence for the close association of 
cave art with magico-religious activities is that provided 
by the various drawings of men with animal disguises and 
possibly of beings that are part man, part beast, part 
divinity like the great Sorcerer of Les Trois Fréres himself. 
Indeed this cave as a whole proclaims its ritual use as 
obviously as any chapel. Passages deep in the rock lead 
into a small chamber with walls thickly netted with 
engravings of many kinds. of animals, including the 
strange group of a man with bison head and other animal 
attributes dancing behind two weird hybrid' beasts, 
apparently in a state of sexual excitement. From this 
chamber a tunnel with further engravings curves upwards 
to give access to a window opening into a chamber some 
twelve feet above the floor, a place where an officiating 
medicine man could appear 'with dramatic effect and 
dominate participants gathered below him. It is 
extraordinarily stirring, then, to find that the antlered, 
phallic, hypnotically staring figure of the Sorcerer has 
been painted and engraved on the rock face just beside 
this opening. 
This magical element in cave art must have had less 
force in the home art. It is quite likely that when deer, 
mammoth and ibex were carved on spear-throwers, it 
was belleved that these images might help to make them 
effective against the animals represented. 
0 N the other hand no one can doubt that the 
carving was done partly for the pleasure of 
doing and regarding it, for it is pre-eminently decorative. 
Still more is this true of such little carved objects as the 
fish palette from the Grotte de Rey and the bone

## [Page 13](078200engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

SURRY ay Eg aD SURI, Te 


### 62790: The Dawn of art

 Palzolithic art was the work of specialists. 
~ Its technical inventiveness suggests that 
~ an artists’ clan may even have existed. 
~ Bison (left) each about two feet long, 
~ were modelled in clay at Tuc d’Audou- 
~ bert, France. In their deep cavern they 
kept their moisture throughout the 
~ millenia and when discovered by modern 
man, they showed only slight cracking. 
Ne hipney FRE 9 only: slight <ra Ee ng 4 
silhouettes of animals and even the superb horse head 
from Mas d’Azil and the horse from Espelugues, Lourdes. 
What conceivable purpose other than decoration can the 
artist at La Mouthe have had when he engraved an ibex 
on his lamp? 
There is no doubt that cave art, and to a lesser extent 
the home art as ‘well, served the animal cult, part magical 
and part truly religious, that underlay the lives of these 
hunting peoples. The status of the individual and the 
life of the tribe was wholly dependent on the multiplica- 
tion of the game herds and success in hunting them, and 
art responded to the urgency of these two great needs. 
Utilitarian in themselves, they cannot he s parated from 
a religious impulse towards a form of co: munion with 
animals and nature, a “participation myst.que.” 
And in this religious aspect we rediscover Palwseolithic 
art as genuine imaginative expression, its creators as true 
artists. Just as mediaeval painters could work entirely in 
the service of the Christian Church, just as modern 
painters work to sell their canvasses to furnish houses and 
galleries, so too (and Indeed much more consistently) 
could the painters of the last glaciation work in the 
service of hunting and fertility magic and still remain 
artists. 
~ From that time to this there have been great numbers 
of primitive peoples living throughout the world, yet none 
has had a representational art to approach theirs. Peoples 
who, like some of the Australians, make strikingly 
effective pictures in connexion with hunting magic lack 
thelr realism and technical skill. More often no attempt 
at realistic representation is made, and symbolic designs 
or enactments supply the identification needed for 
sympathetic magic. A visual identity between the image 
and the object has never been considered necessary. 
Yet in the whole range of Palaeolithic material only one 
example is known with anything of the Inartistic and 
grisly character often found among the properties of the 
primitive magic worker . . . that is the dummy bear with 
En. Trent ML ee A 
FE CR ls We 
~ implements with carving in 
high relief but also trans- 
formed broken-off pieces of 
bone, ivory,antlers and stone
into on) carvings. Horse's 
head (left) in reindeer antler 
~ and crouching reindeers in 
ivory thetow) vere found in 
the real head that had been set up in the sanctum at 
Montespan. 
All the rest may have been intended for magical usages, 
but was at the same time a true art, and an art in what 
we have come to call the humane tradition. In fact it 
comes closer to Chinese drawing and painting than to 
any other, and the Chinese were inspired by a mystical 
conception of the relationship between man and nature. 
The art itself makes It abundantly clear that the Stone 
Age artists knew an intense sclf-identification with the 
animals they portrayed. Perhaps with a strengthening 
self-consclousness due in part to the development of fully 
expressive language, a factor which would also have 
heightened thelr image-making powers, these people felt 
a need to re-affirm their participation in nature. 
A ee poet has sald that “the poetic image 
shows the artist secking to express unity with 
all that is and has been,” and this was true of the first 
artist as of the latest. Various attempts have been made 
to suggest that the cave-painters used dead beasts as 
their models, or that the sight of shadows suggested the 
idea of painting shapes on the cave wall. Such ideas are 
entirely misleading. Anyone with any understanding of 
the creative process must know that the artists working 
in these fastnesses so remote from the outer world carried 
with them Intense and emotionally charged Images of the 
animals on which their lives were centred. 
The creative act, as tn all true art, had already taken 
place in the Imagination; the pigments, the gravers, served 
only to glve it material expression. With all utilitarian 
magical functions apart, this element of communion 
with thelr animal subjects made the activity of these 
artists at one with the religious life of their societies. 
— JACQUETTA HAWKES 
Part I Chapter VII (Art & Religion) 
13

## [Page 14](078200engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

14 
HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd) 


### 62791: A Schoolboy in Sumer

  
A SCHOOLBOY IN SUMER 
by Sir Leonard Woolley 
Te literate element of the Sumerian and Old 
Babylonian population was proportionately 
larger than in Egypt. There were “junior” and “high” 
scribes, scribes of the temple and “royal” scribes of the 
palace, scribes who served as leading officials in the gov- 
ernment and scribes specialized In particular cate- 
gorles of administrative work, schoolmasters and notaries 
public, the latter being the more in demand because of 
the immense Importance of forelgn and domestic trade 
and because the law required documentary evidence in 
any civil action that came before the courts. 
It may well be that apart from all these professional 
writers, who numbered many thousands, the business- 
man also might acquire at least a smattering of literary 
education for hls own purposes; in any case it is clear 
that there must have been numerous scribal schools... the 
best example of a school is one in a private house of the 
Larsa period (c. 1780 B.C.) at Ur .. .. 
It was a small school—it could scarcely have accom- 
modated more than two dozen boys—but presumably it 
was typical of the schools of the time, and certainly it 
was not just an elementary school but one catering for 
pupils of all ages. 
The bun-shaped tablets [found here], bearing on one 
face the teacher’s fair copy and on the other the pupil's 
attempt to reproduce it, start with single syllabic signs, 
PRESTIGE OF 
THE SCRIBE 
The scribe, even if he 
were not in government 
employ, had the intellec- 
  
doubled up until sunrise. 
His knees and his spine are broken.... 
“The barber shaves from morning till 
he sleeps all 
then have lists of words beginning with the same syllable, 
and go on to proper sentences and extracts from the 
classics. Of the other tablets found here many were 
religious texts which were probably used for dictation 
or for learning by heart; there were numerous mathe- 
matical tablets—multiplication tables, rules for extracting 
square and cube roots, etc. problems in practical geome- 
try, e.g. land surveying or the calculation of the amount 
of earth to be moved, given the measurements of an 
excavation, and there were also what one must call belles 
lettres, amongst them a favourite classic describing school 
life.... 
Only boys attended the schools. Women scribes exlst- 
ed, and examples of their work have come down to us, 
but how they received their education we do not know; 
girl students are never mentioned in the literature of 
the schools . ... 
Cases are known in which a charitable person 
who had adopted an outcast baby—*“rescued him from 
the jaws of a dog”—crowned his benefaction by sending 
the child to school to “learn the scribal art... .” 
The full school course was a long one, lasting for 
many years, “from the time of childbood to maturity”. 
but after about two years a lad might qualify as a 
dubsar tur, a junior scribe, and would be entrusted with 
the task of helping in the education of one of the smaller 
tual arrogance of the 
better-educated man and 
his contempt for the man- 
ual labourer. There is 
an amusing illustration of 
this in the Teaching of 
Khety, Son of Duauf, an 
Egyptian work perhaps 
dating as early as the Eleventh Dynasty 
but current in much later times, in which 
a father taking his son to school exhorts 
him to industry by passing in review all 
the other occupations and trades and 
showing how ill they compare with the 
blessings of the scribe's calling: 
    
  
“| have never seen the smith as an 
ambassador, but | have seen the smith at 
his work at the mouth of his furnace, his 
fingers’ like the crocodile’'s, and he stank 
more than fishes’ eggs.... 
“The stonemason finds his work in every 
kind of hard stone. When he has finished 
his labours his arms are worn out, and 
night; he never sits down except to meals. 
He hurries from house to house looking 
for business. He wears out his arms 
to fill his stomach, like bees eating their 
own honey .... 
“The farmer wears the same clothes for 
all times. His voice is as raucous as a 
crow's. His fingers are always busy, his 
arms are dried up by the wind. He takes 
his rest—when he does get any rest—in 
the mud. If he is in good health he shares 
good health with the beasts; if he is ill 
his bed is the bare earth in the middle of 
his beasts. Scarcely does he get home at 
night when off he has to start again. 
“Therefore, apply your ‘heart to learning. 
In truth there is nothing that can compare 
with it. If you have profited by a single 
- day at school it is a gain for eternity.” 
— SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY 
Part Il, Chapter lI 
(The Social Structure) 
  
Portrait in stone of an unknown 
Sumerian who lived about 
5,000 years ago. Though seated 
in an attitude of prayer, the 
figure recalls the famous Egyp- 
tian scribe statuette (left) now 
in the Louvre Museum, Paris. 
Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, Copenhagen

## [Page 15](078200engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 62791: A Schoolboy in Sumer

This seated figure of a woman 
whose statuette was unearthed 
at Mari in north-west Sumer 
has been identified as a choris- 
ter. Her songs and dances may 
once have delighted the court 
of Mari some 45 centuries ago. 
Museum of Damascus 
 
  
      Crawing from * History of Mankind ** 
Thirty-seven centuries ago the city of Ur pos- 
sessed numerous schools. Above, the plan of 
a typical one which comprised several classrooms, 
a courtyard and a lavatory and could accomodate 
25 pupils, Sumerian schools were originally 
attached to temples but in time became secular- 
ized. With an ever-widening curriculum, the 
Sumerian school became a real seat of learning. 
“Within its walls’, the Sumerian scholar, S.N. 
Kramer, has written “flourished the scholar 
scientist, the man who studied whatever theolo- 
gical, botanical, zoological, mineralogical, geogra- 
phical, mathematical, grammatical and linguistic 
knowledge was current in his day, and who in 
a number of cases added to this knowledge". 
boys, setting his exercises, instructing him in the way 
in which they should be done, correcting them (prior to 
final correction by the headmaster) and flogging him 
when he deserved punishment. 
Discipline was strict. Boys might be “kept In” over long 
periods; probably already they were given impositions, 
though it is only in the Neo-Babylonian time that we 
find actual examples of pupils having to write “fifty 
lines” or “a hundred lines” by way of punishment: but 
for the most part correction was by the stick, and the 
stick was used freely, by masters and by pupil-teachers 
alike. 
This is made very clear in the “Schooldays” essay. 
“What did you da at school?” 
‘recited’] my tablet, ate my lunch, fashioned my 
inew] tablet, wrote and finished it; then they assigned 
me my oral work, and in the afternoon they assigned 
me my written work. When the school was dismissed. 
I went home, entered the house, and found my father 
sitting there. I told my father of my written work, then 
recited my tablet to him, and my father was delighted.” 
This must have been a lucky day, but on the morrow 
the boy was to be less fortunate. “When I awoke early 
in the morning I faced my mother and said to her: 'Give 
me my lunch; I want to go to school.’ My mother gave 
me two rolls and I set out. In the school the ‘man on 
duty’ said to me: ‘Why are you late?’ Afrald, and 
with my heart pounding, I entered before my teacher 
and bowed.” 
But the teacher was correcting the student’s tablet of 
the day before and was not pleased with it, so gave him 
a caning. Then the overseer “in charge of the school 
regulation” flogged him because “you stared about in the 
 
“I reckoned up for. 
street,” and agaln because he was “not properly dressed” 
and other members of the staff caned him for such 
misdemeanours as talking, standing up out of turn and 
walking outside the gate; finally the headmaster told him, 
“Your handwriting 1s unsatisfactory.” and gave him a 
further beating. 
The luckless youth appeals to his father to mollify the 
powers above in the orthodox way, s0 the father invites 
the headmaster to his home, praises him for all that he 
has done to educate his son, gives him food and wine, 
dresses him in a new garment and puts a ring on his 
finger; the schoolboy walts upon him and in the mean- 
while “unfolds to his father all that he has learnt of 
the art of tablet-writing.” 
The gratified teacher reacts with enthusiasm: “Of your 
brothers may you he thelr leader, of your friends may 
you be their chief, may you rank the highest of the 
schoolboys. You have carried out well the school’s actl- 
vities, you have become a man of learning,” the schoolboy, 
claiming now the proud title of “Sumerian...” 
The picture 1s, of course, satirical to the point of carl- 
cature. Admittedly, in the private schools at any rate, 
the headmaster had to make his living by means of the 
tuition fees collected from the students and may have 
been glad enough to receive something In addition: 
admittedly methods of instruction were primitive and 
sometimes brutal; yet the Mesopotamian schools did pro- 
vide a sound educatlon and did uphold the general res- 
pect for learning as such. 
— Part II, Chap. VI (Languages 19 
& Writing Systems, Education)

## [Page 16](078200engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd) 


### 62792: The First astronomers of China and Babylon

THE FIRST 
ASTRONOMERS 
OF CHINA 
& BABYLON 
Porous opinion has mistakenly ascribed 
to the Mesopotamians and, still more, 
to the Egyptians, a profound understanding of astronom- 
ical phenomena. It is indeed a fact that various buildings 
in Egypt and elsewhere were oriented on heavenly bodies; 
and to people for whom those bodies have no particular 
significance thls seems to be a mysterious fact implying 
scientific knowledge of a very abstruse sort. It really 
implies nothing of the kind; it is simply the result of 
careful observation of what could not safely be dis- 
regarded. 
Mere observation of the heavenly bodies, if carefully 
maintained, will suffice to show that their relative posi- 
tions change and repeat themselves in a definite space 
of time, and such movements can be related to the agri- 
cultural seasons or may themselves determine the times 
for religious celebrations. The sun, the moon and the 
planets were gods who, as such, directly influenced man’s 
fate. 
Civil life depended upon the regular succession of days 
and months and years, all of which are fixed by the 
course of the sun and the moon, and similarly the gods 
moving about in the upper spheres bring peace or war 
upon earth, destruction or prosperity; their movements, 
therefore must be watched and, if possible, interpreted 
in the light of experience or analogy. 
  
C ose from a very early time such 
phenomena were observed and recorded, but 
that is not the same as saying that astronomy begins 
early: men's interest in the celestial bodies was calendral 
on the one side and astrological on the other. Professor 
Neugebauer has defined that matter succinctly and 
authoritatively: “Astronomy does not originate with the 
recognition of irregular configurations of stars or the 
invention of celestial or astral deities. Scientific 
astronomy does not begin until an attempt is made to 
predict, however crudely, astronomical phenomena such as 
the phses of the moon.” That attempt came later... 
Only in the course of the first millennium B.C. did 
Babylonian astronomers succeed in predicling the lengths 
of the lunar months and it was only from Babylon that 
the Egyptians subsequently acquired such knowledge. 
The advance from observation to prediction was really 
made impossible for the Egyptian by the elementary char- 
acter of his mathematical system which could not cope 
with the elaborate calculations demanded by astronomy. 
It would appear that, having once obtained, by very simple 
observations, the agricultural and ritual data necessary 
to an ordered life, he had no urge to pursue the matter 
16 further. 
Thus we find in the Egyptian texts no reference at all 
    
This stele, dating back to about 2300 B.C., depicts 
the triumph of Naram-Sin, a king of Akkad. In his 
treatment of this scene of historical action, the artist 
has achieved a remarkable balance between the dra- 
matic and the decorative. It is the only Mesopotamian 
monument of its kind to have survived to our day. 
to lunar eclipses (I); such must presumably have appeared 
to the Egyptian as isolated events due to some super- 
natural cause and therefore incalculable and having 
nothing to do with the regular course of things. 
From China we have, in one Anyang bone inscription, 
a very early record of an eclipse which took place “on 
the fifteenth day of the twelfth moon of the twenty-ninth 
(1) Professor J. Leclant (France), however, suggests reference 
to a passage of the inscription on the Bubastis Gate at Karnak 
concerning the year 15 of Takelot II, ie. c. 820 B.C. [R.A. 
Caminos, The Chronicle of Prince Osorkon (Rome, 1958), 
pp. 58 s5q.1: “The sky swallowed not the moon”—the interpre- 
tation of which has led to a very considerable flow of ink.

## [Page 17](078200engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 62792: The First astronomers of China and Babylon

year of King Wu-Ting,” i.e. on November 23, 1311 B.C. (2) 
which shows an interest, and possibly a knowledge, ante- 
dating anything of the sort in Egypt. The inscription 
by itself is Insufficient to prove that the interest went 
beyond the recording of a striking phenomenon, and the 
fact that the record figures In an oracle-text may well 
raise doubts as to its scientific value. 
But in the Chou records we are told that in the thirty- 
eighth year of the reign of the Shang “emperor” Ti-hsin 
(1137 B.C.) the Chou ruler Chou-wen-wang ordered a 
sacrifice to be offered because “the eclipse happened not 
on the right day”: it occurred on the sixteenth day of the 
month, according to the calendar, Instead of on the 
fifteenth. 
This, if the construction put upon it be correct, surely 
implies that as early as the twelfth century B.C. Chinese 
astronomers were able to calculate the lunar eclipses in 
advance, and that with such confidence that an error 
of twenty-four hours was enough to alarm the authori- 
ties. The Anyang inscription may possibly imply know- 
ledge two centuries earlier... 
HE Babylonians, possessing a mathematical 
basis for astronomical calculations much 
superior to that of the Egyptians, made far greater 
progress In the astronomical fleld and started at quite an 
early date to amass a corpus of information which would 
ultimately supply the material for science. The earliest 
computations ‘were concerned with (a) the duration of 
day and night in the different seasons (b) the rising and 
setting of the moon, and (ec) the appearance and 
disappearance of Venus. 
(2) It should be moted that the date is not accepted by all 
scholars. 
From the time of the Third Dynasty of Ur (c. 2100 B.C.) 
onwards the omen texts, which combine astrological fore- 
casts with astronomical observations, prove the careful 
attention patd to astral phenomena. (3) Thus the sixty- 
third tablet of the great astrological series “Enuma, Anu, 
Enlil” which was put into shape between 1400 and 900 
B.C. contains a list of the hellacal risings and settings 
of Venus during twenty-one years of the reign of Am- 
mizaduga; the observations must have been made at the 
time, 1. e. in the late seventeenth or early sixteenth 
century B.C. But what we have here is simply observa- 
tion which was carefully conducted over a considerable 
period; it does not involve any scientific theory... 
The evidence that we possess justifies us in saying that 
by 1200 B.C. in Babylonia the foundations of real astro- 
nomical rescarch, as defined by Professor Neugebauer, 
had been well and truly laid. Further It appears likely, 
though it cannot be definitely affirined, that already the 
first tentatives steps had been taken In the direction of 
scientific thinking over the data which careful observation 
had amassed, and that certain rather crude and eiemen- 
tary results had been achieved which in the course of the 
following milennium would be developed into the astro- 
nomical science inherited by the Greeks. 
— SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY 
Part II, Chap. VII 
(The Sciences) 
  
(3) The character of the "omen texts” can be illustrated here 
by two examples; one, dated to the time of the First Dynasty of 
Babylon, reads, “1f the sky was dark on the first day the year 
will be bad. 1f the sky was clear when the new moon appeared 
the year will be happy.” A more elaborate text, taken Jrom the 
Ammizaduga tablets, reads, “1f on Sabatu 15th Venus disap- 
peared in the west, remaining three days Jjrom the sky, and on 
Sabatu 18th appeared in the cast, catastrophes of kings: Adad 
will bring rains, Ea subterranean waters; king will send 
greetings to king.” 
THE COMMONWEALTH 
OF MEDICINE 
.. More perhaps than any other art 
was medicine in the ancient world 
internationalized. =A famous Egyptian 
doctor might travel far afield to treat an 
important patient. Thus Parimachu the 
Egyptian was summoned to Asia Minor 
to the sick-bed of the king of Tarkhuntash. 
Ramses Il, according to a late story, 
sent his court physician to Hattusas to 
cure Bentzesh, the sister-in-law of the 
Hittite king Hattusilis—it is interesting to 
note that, when the doctor failed to drive 
out the demon that possessed her, 
Pharoah was constrained to send the 
holy image of the god Khonsu, by 
whose aid the cure was duly effected. 
The same Hattusilis, negotiating for a 
treaty with Kadashman-Enil Il of Babylon, 
was at pains to explain away the 
embarrassing fact that a Babylonian phy- 
sician who was visiting the Hittite coun- 
try had been forcibly detained there. 
Personal visits of the sort were really 
not uncommon, but what more than 
anything proves the universality of 
medicine is the fact that medical books 
circulated freely from one country to 
another; Hittite copies of Babylonian 
medical tablets have been unearthed at 
Bogazhoy, and it is evident that the phar- 
macopceia and the prescriptions based 
upon it .were in some measure the 
common property of doctors throughout 
the Middle East. 
It is this internationalization of medi- 
cine, and the great reputation won by 
Mesopotamian physicians, that account 
for the adoption by European peoples 
(through Greek and later through Arabic) 
of numerous Mesopotamian plant-names, 
while, on the other hand, the tablets 
definitely explain certain plant-names as 
being foreign and the herbs consequently 
imported, as, for instance, ricinus from 
Elam and cardamom from Anatolia. 
But while the evidence shows that in 
the art of healing there was throughout 
the Middle East a certain amount of free 
trade in medical service and in medical 
knowledge, it must still be remembered 
that by common consent the actual drug 
was held to be less potent than the magic 
rites with which it was administered. 
The successful physician was he who 
knew both sides of his profession, and it 
was because of this duality that there was 
a limit to the international character of 
medicine. The gods of the different 
countries were not the same, and a 
charm that worked satisfactorily in Baby- 
lon might fall upon deaf ears in Memphis... 
— SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY 
Part Il, Chap. Vil 
(The Sciences) 
17

## [Page 18](078200engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18 


### 62793: Birth of glass

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd) 
BIRTH OF GLASS 
ROM a very early date the Egyptian potter had, 
as a side-line to his ordinary business, prac- 
tised the making of vessels in glazed frit. 
Glaze had been known at the beginning of the 
Dynastic Age and was applied to small objects cut 
out of steatite or moulded in frit (or siliceous paste) 
and soon vases were made in the same way; the tech- 
nique spread quickly, and beads of glazed frit occur 
fairly freely in Sumer in the Early Dynastic period. 
The glaze, was, of course, glass, and about a 
dozen objects (nearly all small beads) made of real 
glass can be assigned to relatively early times—in 
Egypt to the Eleventh and Twelfth Dynasties and in 
Mesopotamia to about 2100 BC—and on the whole 
it seems that Mesopotamia may here have been 
the first in the field, especially as an example of 
glass from Eridu is a fair-sized lump, unshaped, a 
piece of the manufacturer's raw material. 
But shortly before 1600 B.C. the discovery was 
made that slender rods of coloured glass, half- 
melted, could be twisted round a core into the 
form of a bottle, then re-heated so that the rods 
should coalesce, and then polished; during the second 
stage the soft surface could be “combed” so as 
to produce waves in the rods, thus variegating the 
pattern at the craftsman’'s pleasure; the result was 
a little polychrome vase, lustrous and semi-translucent, 
unlike anything else known and certain to command 
a high price. 
HE earliest examples of such come from Syria, 
to which country the invention may be credited, 
but by the beginning of the Eighteenth Dynasty 
the Egyptians had taken it over and were making 
vases finer in quality than the Syrians had ever made. 
The same technique was used for manufacturing 
beads, large balls with polychrome inlay in the 
form of “eyes” or rosettes. 
These gaily attractive ornaments, easily portable 
and not too fragile, were ideal objects of trade 
with the peoples of less civilized or of barbarous 
lands, and they were exported widely, westwards 
to Italy and across the European continent, to come 
to light again in graves in Britain, while the eastern 
trade took them to China and to Indonesia—"eye- 
beads” from Loyang (the Chou capital) are proved 
by spectrographic analysis to be identical with others 
from Qau in Egypt. 
The Chinese imitated such imported beads with 
great success—so much so that the polychrome 
beads made in South China are only to be distin- 
guished from the foreign examples by their marked 
barium content, whereas the Egyptian and Syrian 
glass contains no trace of barium, and also by the 
presence of lead, which in the west is not found 
in glass until shortly before the Christian era. 
The facts seem to show that lead glass—"flint 
glass” as it is often called—was a Chinese invention; 
it is an invention that has had far-reaching results 
in glass manufacture, but it was due to experiments 
prompted by the beads of silica-soda-lime glass 
coming from the Middle East. 
SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY 
Part ll, Chapter IV (Tech- 
niques, Arts and Crafts) 
  

## [Page 19](078200engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 62793: Birth of glass

    
    
  
Lh 
CE ALPERT 
nt "igris-Euphrates oe as e 
as 3 ,500 B.C. ‘he J are those of worshippers, pr 
ng upright with thei ds cl: b h sefore 1 RUC E 
    
ie 
Lo WF a ofS 
HL ge 
Ar ha BD a 
%. idual and full of expression. One figure (on 
ferent from EUR ers shows EN CLCL RED kneeling, 
wd Aan To A oN x eH FL i - 
vo 3i5, he omer nr hbo Sugether wthiihoaios 
; sp in a ‘curiously yeometrical iba oct ; 
the heads, however grotesque they may appear 
ght) dif- 
hoa treatment of: he bod Ala Lull . ang sen tive 4 
  
 
alt 
19

## [Page 20](078200engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

REE in Tl gees 
~~ 1 
T
I
 
—
 
  
  
i 
  
  
Boissonnas-Geneva 
THE RED CROSS 
  
With the signature 
of the First Geneva 
Convention, “For the 
Welfare of Soldiers 
Wounded in Action” 
by representatives of 
12 countries (left) 
on August 22, 1864, 
the Red Cross was 
born and given a solid 
foundation in inter- 
national law. Today 
ninety-one states 
are parties to the 
Geneva Convention 
which has been re- 
vised and expanded. 


### 62794: The Red Cross: centenary of a universal banner

CENTENARY OF A UNIVERSAL BANNER 
by Hubert d'Havrincourt 
 

## [Page 21](078200engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

LS For three       
    prisoners LULEICR IL enough to help . 
HERE were tears in the eyes of the young man 
who was feverishly writing these lines at the 
corner of a blood-stained table. Henry Dunant, just turn- 
ed 31, was the eldest son of a well-to-do Genevese family. 
He was an enterprising young man and a great traveller 
always on the look-out for profitable transactions. But 
he had not come to the battlefield to open cases of lint. 
His purpose was to put before the Emperor Napoleon III 
a plan for building mills at Mons Djémila in Algeria. 
But the Emperor, caracoling on horseback in the 
distance in the midst of his brightly-uniformed staff, had 
other things to think of at that moment. It was the 
evening of the day of battle, June 24, 1859, and from all 
sides came the groans of the dying and the agonized 
screams of the wounded stricken with gangrene. Forget- 
ting what had brought him there, the stylishly dressed 
traveller hurried about the field of slaughter trying to 
ease the human agony that had upset his plans. 
There was only one dressing-station—in a church at 
Castiglione, the Chiesa Maggiore. Here, Dunant organiz- 
ed volunteers for first-aid. He got the village women to 
bring linen, water, and lint. He himself helped to wash 
wounds, distributed lemons and tobacco to the wounded 
and gave them water to drink. Thanks to his efforts, 
Austrian doctors among the prisoners of war were 
“freed” to treat the wounded. Helped by the Piedmontese 
peasant women he tended and comforted over a 


### 62794: The Red Cross: centenary of a universal banner

| days | have been looking after the wounded 
BRLCIUR GTN EVEREST CHL RED T U EAS ENT EY BEET 
“thousand of these unfortunate men. We have had 
URL REN AT GEV TEESE TT INTE SET ER f TYTN I 
enough doctors, and in their place | have had to make 
the best use | could of a few local women and the 
      
thousand wounded and if he still found time in the small 
hours to pen some lines, it was because sleep had deserted 
him and he felt somehow impelled to tell the influential 
people living peacefully at Geneva about the horror of the 
battlefield he himself had just left, exhausted with fatigue 
and emotion. 
The terrifying memory of the Chiesa Maggiore haunt- 
ed him and it was only by writing what were to be the 
first lines of a memoir that he could find some peace 
of mind again. Entitled “A Memory of Solferino”, this 
booklet of 128 pages was at first intended only for his 
family and his numerous friends. It was a private edition 
limited to 1,600 coples; ils subject, “the battle and its 
horrors, the suffering of the wounded left to dle, thelr 
cries, their tears, their agony which remain fresh and 
plercing in the author's memory”. In conclusion Dunant 
proposed the setting up in every country of “relief 
socletles” to give ald to the wounded in time of war. 
The book ‘was published In 1862. Dunant sent it to the 
leading citizens of Geneva to governments, to men of 
letters, to princes. Europe was shaken by its revelations. 
The Goncourt brothers hailed it as “finer, a thousand 
times finer, than Ilomer”, and declared, “one puts down 
thls book cursing war”. Dickens published extracts from 
Dunant's bodk in his “All the Year Round” review. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
. 
PRISONERS OF WAR during two world conflicts owe an incalculable debt 
to the Red Cross for whom there were no “nations’—either “enemy” or 
“friendly "—but only MEN. Between 1914 and 1918, the Central Prisoner of 
War Agency in Geneva classified 5 million files in its card index and despatched | 
over 2 million parcels. Re-opened in 1939, it received over 53 million letters 
a 
. and telegrams during the next five years and sent off an even.greater number. / 
=) * - 
iy » 
s - 
y jv, Ne 
ord § “ 
- £3 oe 

## [Page 22](078200engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 62794: The Red Cross: centenary of a universal banner

THE RED CROSS (Cont'd) 
Henry Dunant, a practical idealist 
The king of Saxony asked Dunant to visit him and told 
him: “A nation that does not take part in this human- 
itarlan work will be censured by European public opin- 
fon.” Queen Isabella II of Spain organized a “Permanent 
Committee for Help to the Wounded”. The king of 
Prussia and Sweden, the Tsar, and the Emperor of France 
all gave Dunant their support. 
Having made a triumphant tour of all the Courts of 
Europe, Dunant felt that the moment was ripe for inter- 
national action. With the collaboration of four Swiss 
friends—General Guillaume-Henri Dufour, Gustave Moy- 
nler, a barrister, and two doctors, Théodore Maunoir and 
Louis Appla—he set about persuading the different coun- 
tries to set up national societies for help to the wounded 
in time of war. 
The five friends held their first meeting at Geneva on 
February 17, 1863, under the chairmanship of General 
Dufour, a veteran of the Napoleonic wars, a well-known 
figure whose presence was an International guarantee 
for the movement. They decided to set themselves up as 
a “Permanent International Committee for Help to the 
wounded of the Armed Forces.” Eight months later, the 
Committee succeeded in bringing about an “International 
Conference” to remedy the inadequacy of medical services 
with armies in the fleld. Unofficial delegates from 16 
countries met at Geneva to approve the suggestions of 
the “Committee of Five.” 
The neutrality of the wounded and of medical personnel 
was dlscussed, and it was decided that thenceforward 
they should be protected by a distinctive sign—a red cross 
on a ‘white field—a reproduction of the Swiss flag with 
  
   
 
WHO 
the colours reversed. This symbol was eventually to win 
recognition from all governments, except Arab countries 
which chose the Red Crescent, and Iran which took the 
Red Lion and Sun as its emblem. 
But this was not enough, as the Prusso-Danish war 
1864 was soon to prove. The delegates of the Committee 
to the warring countries found themselves reduced to the 
role of observers. They could do little more than collect 
facts, though valuable use was made of this information 
in pressing home the aims of the Committee. The 
convening of an international conference of delegates 
who would sign specific engagements in the names of 
their respective governments was now considered. The 
Swiss Confederation invited 25 states to take part in a 
diplomatic conference at Geneva, starting on August 8, 
864. 
] HERE was, however, a great deal of suspicion to 
be allayed, vanity to be soothed, and opposition 
to be overcome. Bavaria and the Vatican did not send 
representatives. At the outset, the Russians were reluctant. 
Austria was convinced that her medical services were 
faultless. More than once, negotiations ground to a halt. 
Finally, after seven laborious meetings, the first Geneva 
Convention—the basic charter of the Red Cross, called 
the “Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition 
of the Wounded in Armies in the Field”—was signed by 
12 countries on August 22, 1864, and was left open for the 
accession of powers which did not sign. 
As war swept over Eur- 
ope in 1939 millions 
fled (left), families were 
scattered and countless 
men, women and chil- 
dren were deported and 
interned. More often than 
not the Red Cross was 
the last resource for tra- 
cing lost relatives (right) 
or getting news of miss- 
ing persons. Into the 
Geneva headquarters of 
the Red Cross came innu- 
merable demands for help 
in tracing missing rela- 
tives, combatant and non- 
combatant. Hope lived in 
the vast card indexes 
(below) of the Red Cross 
Agency manned by 
over 3,000 people. 
Today the Red Cross 
still manages to trace 
many missing persons. 
Red Cross Photos  
 

## [Page 23](078200engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 62794: The Red Cross: centenary of a universal banner

      
 
    
Ld 
-
 
- 
~
 
Y
A
N
 
T
e
 
’ 
- - 
A, 
. —_. 
Aad ¥ 
Sy, 
- 
_-— or 
/ 
A
 
Red Cross-Anpfoto, Amsterdam Today when a catastrophe strikes anywhere in the world where local resources are too small to 
relieve suffering, the Red Cross goes into action. In 1953 dykes In the Netherlands gave way and 
the floods this caused (above) affected 80,000 people. Red Cross help was given to thousands of 
destitute people. That year, 129 million Swiss francs (Nearly $30 million or over £10 million) 
worth of aid went to the world's victims of natural calamities, which Included floods in Yugoslavia, 
Japan and india, and earthquakes in Greece and Turkey. In the past 10 years 97 appeals have been met, 
However, the event passed practically unnoticed. As some contributions to the national socletles and gifts 
for Dunant, who had for the last five years been travell- flowed in. Lists of the French wounded In Germany and 
ing from one end of Europe to the other, he had some- of the German wounded in France were drawn up and 
what neglected his private affairs. His business in Algeria published for the benefit of thelr families. Numerous 
had been doing very badly and eventually he went bank- convoys of wounded were repatriated through Switzerland. 
rupt. Ruined and faced with scandal, he chose exile. 
Unlucky in finance, he was later to admit that “as a man Dunant was to save some other victims from death the 
of letters, he knew nothing about business”. following year at the time of the Commune of Parls, 
before he sank into a life of abject poverty which took 
At the same time, Gustave Moynier succeeded General him across Europe. Sometimes he slept on a bench In Dufour as President of the International Committee. some railway walting room or else took advantage of the Dunant now severed all links with Geneva. Shortly after- temporary hospitality offered by his few remaining wards, the Prusso-Austrian War of 1868 broke out. Serious friends in London, Paris, or Stuttgart. 
difficulties arose. Critics said the volunteer service was 
badly organized and that delegates were ill-informed 
about the situation and the real needs. Help came much 
too late, or very often, too lavishly where it was not 
required. There were not enough nurses on the first D 
hospital trains. The wounded were not always cared for 
in proper time. 
URING this perlod, he attempted to found a 
“Universal Alllance for Order and Civiliza- 
tion”, lectured In London on the conditions of prisoners 
. of war, outlined a plan for an “International High Court 
Pre anant pad settled Jn Gas. When the of Arbitration”, and preoccupied himself with the cam- wlio pve A hd oo th > aN minist re of th palgn against slavery. Then, one day, unobtrusively, he XE 50 94 ® oN C e hy c on 5 S L S drifted Into a poorhouse at leiden In the Swiss canton existence o € Lenéva Conventlon which France ha of Appenzell where he was to live misanthropically on signed. He also suggested that certain towns in the Paris three francs a day—the gift of a friend. lie was not then area should be neutralized and designated as “cities for 70 years old but he looked 80 ) 
he wounded”. ) 
Nevertheless, he started once again to launch pacifist 
appeals and humanitarian programmes. and at the same 
time worked unceasingly on his memolrs which are 
nothing but the long complaint of a tortured man. There 
Co. he remained, forgotten by his country and the world at B: now however, his ideas were being adopted. large, until the day he was discovered by a journalist, For the first time in history, 25 national socle- . who had believed him long dead and buried. Dunant ties offered their help to the belligerents. Here and there : A was sitting In his armchalr with his long white beard and on the front, field dressing stations and military hospitals his gentle, sad eyes, but his former eloquence was un protected by the sign of the Red Cross, were saving thous- dma. ' q 
ands of wounded from death. Despite great difficulties, : 
34 field dressing-stations had been organized at the front Long-denled recognition came at last. In 1897, he was 
by the French Society for Relief of the Wounded. This awarded the Prize of the International Congress of Medi- 
was still far too little, of course. At Worth, at Gravelotte, cine, and in 1901 the first Nobel Peace Prize which he 
at Sedan, barns fllled with wounded, resounded to the shared with Frédéric Passy. On October 30, 1910. the 
groans of the dying, just as they had at Solferino. In “Man In White”, as the soldiers at Solferino had called 
Germany, where the funds collected had reached the sum him, dled peacefully. le went almost furtively to his 
of 70 million marks, there were still only two doctors and grave, for by hls own request, there was no funeral pro- 
ten nurses to a thousand wounded! cession, It was the village carpenter who alone trundled 
. . the coffin to the graveyard on a simple handcart. 
Nevertheless, the International Committee sent off 
wounded in enemy hands and their families, and forward- 
ed up to 1,000 letters a day. Governments made hand- CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 24](078200engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 62794: The Red Cross: centenary of a universal banner

THE RED CROSS (Cont'd) 
Ready to help disaster victims everywhere 
Cross and its International Commitiee were already active 
throughout the world. The International Committee is 
an Independent collegial authority of which all the 
members (a maximum of 25) are Swiss citizens elected 
every three years. Alded by State contributions, collec- 
tions, and gifts from private individuals, the Red Cross 
was able to lend its services everywhere, Including the 
Boer War and the war between Russia and Japan. On the 
eve of the first World War, it ‘was ready and equipped to 
resolutely put Into practice its basic principles of human- 
ity, impartiality, neutrality, and independence. 
From 1914 to 1918, the Central Prisoner of War Agency 
received information from the belligerents about prisoners 
and filed 5,000,000 index cards. As many as 18,000 replies 
were sent each day. Four hundred and fifty thousand 
sick and wounded were exchanged. Two million parcels 
were distributed. Between the years 1919 and 1922, 
500,000 prisoners of war were repatriated. Each national 
soclety worked to the limit of its resources; by 1918, the 
British Red Cross, for Instance, was spending £20,000 
($56,000) a year. 
When civil war broke out in Spain, only skilled diplo- 
macy won the Red Cross the right to act In an internal 
conflict. It had already worked In other conflicts: the 
Gran Chaco war and wars in Ethiopia and in China. 
Then came the second World War. For 
five years, the International Committee 
gave help to prisoners of war and to 
civilians who had been {interned or 
deported. Red Cross representatives, 
some of whom met their deaths while 
performing their dutles, even succeeded 
in making their way into concentration 
camps. Four thousand people worked at the Central Pri- 
soner of War Agency which dealt with 40,000 documents 
each day, and received in all some 53 million letters. 
Through the International Red Cross Committee, 10 
million civilian messages were exchanged between belli- 
gerent countries; 36 milllon parcels to a value of 3,000 
million Swiss francs were sent to prisoners of war In 
Germany alone. Forty Red Cross ships travelled all over 
the world carrying sick and wounded, as well as food 
supplies. 
Shortly after the end of the second World War, 
“Geneva Law” was codified, and the four Conventions of 
August 12, 1949, are now its legal basis. They concern: 
  
@ the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and 
sick in armed forces in the field; 
@® the amelioration of the condition of the wounded, sick 
and shipwrecked members of armed forces at sea; 
® the treatment of prisoners of war; 
@® the protection of civilian persons in time of war. 
The Red Cross has carried out its work 
through all subsequent conflicts, wher- 
ever blood has been shed: In Greece, 
Palestine, Suez, Cyprus, Indo-China, the 
Lebanon, Cuba, Rhodesia, Algeria, the 
Congo, Laos, Nepal, Yemen. Every- 
where, it raises its voice against suffer- 
ing and brings effective relief. 
In 1919, just after the end of the first World War, Henry 
P. Davidson, President of the American Red Cross, pro- 
posed that a federation be formed of all the national 
societies so that the impetus of their work during the 
war should be carried on into peacetime. On May 5, of 
that year, there was born the League of Red Cross, Red 
9 
24 Crescent, and Red Lion and Sun Societies. 
Since that time, the League has given help all over 
the world wherever there is suffering, and whenever a 
disaster is too great to be met by a country’s own 
resources. 
Thus, practical form has been given an idea put 
forward by Henry Dunant, who appealed for the organi- 
zation of international help when floods ravaged the south 
of France in 1875. Today, the League groups 88 socleties 
totalling some 155 million members. Its aim is to en- 
courage the formation of national Red Cross Societies in 
countries where there are none, to contribute to the well- 
being of humanity, and to co-ordinate help in times of 
national disaster. 
The work of the League is co-ordinated by the Advisory 
Committee on International Disaster Relief which has its 
offices in Geneva. There are international centres, and 
a telecommunications service ensures constant liaison 
with the technicians of each national society. An Inter- 
national Relief Handbook (a complete guide to disaster 
rellef) defines in detail the work of specialists when wide- 
scale action has to be taken to help refugees, or the 
victims of epidemics, floods, earthquakes, and other 
natural disasters, and covers. in fact, all kinds of inter- 
national relief. 
Between 1947 and 1957, the total value of the relief 
co-ordinated by the League amounted to 400 million 
Swiss francs. These international activities are a new 
proof of the co-operative spirit which guides the Red 
Cross. 
Not a year goes by without appeals for help being made 
to the member societies. In 1953, the sea burst through 
the dykes in Holland and thousands of people were left 
destitute, losing their houses and the land they had cul- 
tivated. When the water receded ,salt had made the soil 
unfit for agriculture. The Dutch Red Cross received help 
amounting to 14,639,000 Swiss francs ($3.4 million or £1.2 
million) from 39 national societies. 
The year 1960 brought a series of 
disasters: there were floods In Greece, 
an earthquake in Peru, and famine in 
Brazil; the earthquake at Agadir in 
Morocco left 18,000 people homeless. Red 
Cross societies sent staff, and gifts of 
over 10 million Swiss francs ($2.3 million 
or £820,000) to meet these catastrophes. 
During the last 10 years, the League has responded to 
97 international appeals from 47 countries all over the 
world In order to help victims of all kinds of disasters. 
The aim is not to duplicate what others are doing already, 
but to give emergency aid whenever the need arises. 
The wide field of the societies’ activities, which range 
from nursing instruction to training first-aid workers 
to tend the victims of as terrible a disaster as an atomic 
war, has given them the status of public services, indis- 
pensable both on national and international levels. 
Though born on the battlefield, the Red Cross is above 
all a great force in time of peace which must be cons- 
tantly ready to relieve human suffering and to safeguard 
human values. It is not an institution but a movement 
able to adapt itself to all circumstances. 
Today the International Red Cross must adapt itself 
to the changing conditions of our contemporary world 
and with the development of atomic weapons has felt 
that it cannot blind itself to the consequences of a possible 
nuclear conflict. Recently the head of the Japanese Red 
Cross posed the problem openly and squarely and 
suggested that doctors should be given special training 
in radioactivity and also stressed the need for a co- 
ordinated study by all Red Cross societies of radioactivity, 
its dangers, and methods of treatment. 
As Ernest Renan wrote when he sent Henry Dunant a 
letter of congratulation on the Red Cross: “You have 
created the greatest undertaking of our century. Europe 
may have greater need of it than we think.”

## [Page 25](078200engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 62794: The Red Cross: centenary of a universal banner

  
THOUSANDS SAVED 
IN MOROCCAN TRAGEDY 
In 1959, thousands of persons of all ages were crippled in 
Morocco when cooking oil adulterated with mineral oil was sold 
on the market. The victims were left partially or completely 
paralyzed. Together the Moroccan Ministry of Health, the 
League of Red Cross Societies and the World Health Orga- 
nization launched an international rehabilitation programme. 
 
     
Doctors, physiotherapists, nurses and other health staff sent 
by Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies supervised and 
carried out the rehabilitation treatment shown in these photos. 
When the international phase of this campaign, which saved 
thousands from incapacitation, was completed, the work was 
taken over by Moroccan medical staff trained by the specialists. 
Photos © {nik Dreyer

## [Page 26](078200engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 62795: The Mental strains of Antarctic solitude

26 
  
  
  
     

## [Page 27](078200engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 62795: The Mental strains of Antarctic solitude

by Phillip Law 
  
Siation 3 
e res of 0 worl   
E
T
 
A
p
r
 
pe
e 
B
r
n
 
A
 
f
g
 
i : $  
LL: at an Antarctic station is life in a test 
tube; the environment is one in which men 
and their behaviour can be subjected to searching 
scrutiny. Observations which are made on small teams 
in this remote region will provide valuable material for 
the social scientist concerned with man In his more 
complex urban society and are not the least important 
Antarctic investigations (1). 
Men who winter at an Antarctic station are cut off from 
all except radio contact with the civilized world for many 
months. Their sense of utter isolation is increased by a 
number of deprivations—the lack of female compan- 
fonship, of comforts and luxuries, of variety in food, 
liquor and amenities, and of dally contact with a wide 
range of different human beings. 
The main stresses at such a station are psychological 
stresses—those between individuals, those between groups 
and those between the leader and his party. The mental 
stresses are aggravated by physiological factors resulting 
from the disturbance of diurnal rhythms in the body 
during periods of continuous daylight or darkness; in 
addition there is the depressing effect of high winds, dull 
cloudy weather and intense cold. 
In a large city a man with peculiar characteristics, 
strange prejudices, or embarrassing weaknesses, can often 
escape from stress situations merely by avoiding them. 
At a remote station a man’s avenues of escape are consi- 
derably restricted, and his chances of hiding his 
weaknesses are almost nil. Even the desire to hide them 
disappears. 
Deeply ingrained social or intellectual differences in 
 
(1) We remind readers that our January 1962 issue was entirely 
devoted to “Antarctica, International Land of Science.” 
  
men present some of the worst problems In such an 
environment. They tend to occur mainly amongst men 
of low intelilgence and inferior educational qualifications. 
A man with a strong sense of inferiority may tend to be 
aggressive and difficult in his relations with other men 
and therefore become unpopular. There is thus a 
descending spiral of deterioration in hls morale, often 
accompanied by a developing persecution complex. Exam- 
ples of superiority complexes, on the other hand, are not 
infrequent. Intellectual arrogance Is common among 
young freshly graduated scientists, but the influences at 
a station tend to correct this fault rather than to 
accentuate it as the year goes by. 
Most men at an Antarctic station instinctively realize 
the nced for holding thelr emotions on a tight reln. For 
instance, quarrels serious cnough to end in a brawl back 
home rarely terminate In physical violence In Antarctica. 
Men seem to be innately aware of the irrevocable nature 
of an actual blow in an environment where for months 
to come one must dally meet one’s antagonist face fo face. 
C. S. Mullin and H. J. M. Connery, writing in 1959 of 
United States Antarctic bases, noted that headaches were 
the most common psychosomatic complaint and that they 
occurred more frequently amongst the sclentists and 
offlcers than amongst the navy enlisted men. They 
reported that the headaches were apparently related to 
the sharply felt need for careful control of aggression and 
they ascribed the difference between the two groups to 
the more complete repression of their hostilities by the 
former group. 
At Australlan stations the commonest psychosomatic 
symptoms have been those associated with the digestive 
tract, such as dyspepsia and various abdominal pains. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
27

## [Page 28](078200engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 62795: The Mental strains of Antarctic solitude

28 
ANTARCTIC SOLITUDE (Cont'd) 
The torment of the long polar night 
Ilecadaches rate far lower on the list and are not more 
common amongst the intellectuals. When headaches have 
been notable amongst Australian intellectuals they have 
been associated with over-worked, over-conscientious 
men struggling day after day with heavy routines of 
observation and instrument maintenance in the face of 
numerous difficulties, rather than with the repression of 
aggressive tendencies. 
Other ills are insomnia, with Its consequent ailments, 
and rheumatic “aches and pains.” Both these have been 
noted at French and Argentine bases. Argentine Investi- 
gators also report that at their stations changes In diet 
and water produce mild gastro-intestinal troubles in more 
than 40 9% of men shortly after reaching Antarctica. It 
is possible that some of their trouble Is psychosomatic. 
Asi of the morale at a station shows a 
fairly regular pattern each year.. It starts off 
at a low level during the relief period, when the men who 
have just arrived, unsure of themselves in their new 
environment, feel ill at ease in the presence of the pre- 
vious, experienced party and look forward to the departure 
of the ship so that they can be completely alone with their 
new possessions and responsibilities. When the ship sails 
their morale surges up to its highest point and for several 
months the general activity and enthusiasm is maintained 
at this level. 
Then the long winter night, with its limitation of 
outdoor activity and its absence of sunshine, causes a 
general deterioration in morale, varying in degree with 
different parties. The graph rises again when the sun 
returns and men can busy themselves preparing for 
spring and summer field trips. Another high point Is 
finally reached in the last two months, when the prospect 
of relief looms attractively close and the contemplation of 
unfinished work spurs men who wish to complete their 
tasks to renewed efforts. 
During the return voyage, the men’s behaviour is in 
marked contrast with that exhibited during their outward 
trip. They tend to be lethargic, lacking in exhuberance, 
cynical, more individually isolated, drained of intense 
feeling and interested in little except their early delivery 
to a home port. 
The mid-winter low in morale is generally accompanied 
by Insomnia in a large proportion of men. In a big party 
this is not serious; as most suffer from it, it becomes 
accepted as normal. 
However, in a small party, the situation can be more 
serious. As we all know, the worst thing to do about 
insomnia is to worry about it, and a man who is the only 
“Insomniac” amongst four or five sound sleepers is hard 
to reassure. 
The Interesting feature of Insomnia is that it tends to 
occur more during the mid-winter period of 24-hour 
darkness than during summer's continuous daylight. No 
doubt the high peak of outdoor activity which coincides 
with summer 1s the differentiating factor here. 
0: of the most difficult subjects for study at 
an Antarctic station is that of sex. We know 
very little of the sexual disturbances and abnormalities 
caused by the deprivation of woman’s company suffered 
by men at these bases. We do known that no single 
deprivation counts as greatly as that of women. However, 
this matter 1s much broader than the narrow question 
of the lack of natural sexual intercourse. I venture to 
say that, for a number of reasons, sexual deprivation in 
the narrow sense is not nearly as important as many 
people might expect; while the lack of female compan- 
lonship in the wider sense is felt very greatly. 
In our experience men seem to accept the absence of 
any sex life realistically ; their attitude can be summed 
up by the sentence: “There is nothing you can do about 
it, so the less you think of it the better.” Ameliorating 
factors are, first, the absence of the constant sexual 
stimulants which abound in a civilized environment 
(pretty girls, advertisements, sexy magazines and films, 
and so on), and, secondly, the sublimation of sexual 
energy into hard work which undoubtedly occurs. 
Food becomes an item of the greatest importance in 
Antarctica. This is not only because the climate and the 
hard work encourage healthy appetites; in addition food 
acts as a psychological compensation for other depri- 
vations, 
The incidence of severe mental illness at Antarctic 
stations Is very low, owing to the care with which men 
are selected. Neuroses of varying degrees of severity, 
hdweyer, are fairly common. Frequently they occur 
amongst men ‘who are brought face to face in this 
exacting environment with their own ineptitude in some 
field or other and who suffer from an acute feeling of 
Insufficlency in the face of problems from which there is 
no escape other than a neurotic one. Aggressive, blustering 
behaviour is often adopted by such men to hide their 
feelings of inadequacy. 
Homeslickness, fear of the dangers of the environment, 
family problems at home, violent personal antipathies 
between men—these can all produce neurotic symptoms. 
The anxiety state of the authoritarian type of leader 
who falls to obtain the support of his party is another 
example of neurotic behaviour. This is a complex matter 
in which offended ego, a sense of fallure, a tendency to 
drive himself to the limits of his physical strength, and 
the reaction upon him of the resentment of the 
antagonised members of his party all play a part. 
J. H. Rohrer has stated that all six people evacuated by 
U. S. authorities from International Geophysical Year 
bases in Antarctica for psychiatric reasons developed 
symptoms of mental disturbance in from one to four 
weeks after arriving. Experience of Australian stations 
has been similar, the ‘worst cases of mental disturbance 
occurring within from two to eight ‘weeks of the departure 
of the rellef ship which landed the men. Apparently the 
impact of the environment is immediate and severe. 
Serious breakdowns in Antarctica occur mostly in young 
men less than 25 years of age. 
HE greatest obstacle to the building of a happy, 
contented, well-adjusted party is the diffe- 
rence in cultural levels of various men. What topics 
of conversation can be common to all? How does a leader 
prevent the development of an inteliectual clique at meals, 
when the more erudite men gather at one end to discuss 
philosophical profundities, and the less informed mem- 
bers, tiring of the continual highbrow conversation, sit 
and jeer and try to break it up? 
It is here that the cinema proves its worth as an 
amenity; not so much because it provides an escape from 
the environment, but because it creates talking points for 
conversation. A cinema is also a source of group 
enjoyment—men congregate together to partake of what 
the evening has to offer. 
A very marked feature of the psychology of Antarctic 
stations is the hunger for recognition and praise exhibited 
by many of the men. This is most apparent amongst 
those with strong inferiority complexes to whom I have 
already referred. This desire is a perfectly normal one, 
which is accentuated when the man down south counts 
up the hardships, the deprivations and the dangers he 
has to face in carrying out his work. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 38

## [Page 29](078200engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 62795: The Mental strains of Antarctic solitude

Life in an icy wasteland with buffeting blizzards 
and all the rigors of the Antarctic winter is a 
severe trial for the polar teams even when 
they are housed ina *village” like the one shown 
above at the Australian base of Mawson. Right, 
a great moment in the life of a polar station: 
a relief team takes over (in this photo, at the 
French Dumont-d’Urville station in Adelie 
Land). One group will soon begin the long 
voyage home; the newcomers are at the 
start of a grand adventure. Meantime, they 
exchange news and experiences. Below, unex- 
pected polar scene. Moscow music hall artists 
on tour near the North Pole entertain scientists 
manning the Soviet base, “North Pole |”, 
adrift on an ice-floe. In Arctic and Antarctic, 
every effort is made to maintain the morale of 
the men during their long period of isolation. 
V. Egorov - Tass 
  
H. Cvans = ANARL 
VILLAGE ON ICE 
0 Jacques Masson French Polar Erpeditions 
 

## [Page 30](078200engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 62795: The Mental strains of Antarctic solitude

ANTARCTIC 
SOLITUDE 
(Cont'd) 
) 
N 
F 
: ia 
i 
  
NATURE’S ICE-BOX. 
The conservation of food 
stocks presents no problem 
when a natural refrigerator 
can be built from blocks of 
ice. Food becomes an item 
of the greatest importance 
in Antarctica. This is not 
only because the climate and 
hard work encourage appe- 
tites; food also becomes 
a psychological compensa- 
tion for other deprivations.  ~ 
Jacques Masson-French Polar Expeditions 
The ideal expedition man 
When the task is completed he quite naturally expects 
a pat on the back. It is possible, also, that in Antarctica 
he suffers from the lack of such everyday recognition and 
praise which back at home arises normally in the home 
environment—the commendation and the loving adulation 
of mother, wife and children. 
A good leader can go far towards gaining the loyalty 
and goodwill of such men by the judlclous use of praise, 
by making sure that other members of the party are 
notified of the speclal achievements of individuals, and by 
guaranteeing that published reports will give adequate 
recognition of the personal achlevements of the separate 
men, 
Obviously, the selection of the personnel for an Antarc- 
tic station is a task of the greatest Importance. The man 
I have learned to avoid most In choosing an Antarctic 
team is the group-disruptive egoist. Overweening egoism 
is always dangerous, but a certain amount of ambition 
and pride is essential to produce the driving force which 
urges a man on when the going is toughest. If one can 
find a man with ambition, who is proud of his accom- 
plishments and Is eager to excel, but who Is humble in 
spirit and self-critical in outlook, then one has a very 
powerful combination indeed. 
The first and most important requirement in an expedl- 
tion man is that he shall love his job. A man is judged 
In Antarctica by his companions largely on the basis of 
his efficiency in his work. The man who won't pull his 
weight, and slacks or Is incompetent in his specialized 
30 job, is highly resented. A good man, on the other hand, 
experiences a double sense of accomplishment—the reali- 
zation of having done his job well, and the gratification 
of knowing that his competence has been appreciated 
by his fellows. 
The second essential is unselfishness, which embraces 
thoughtfulness for others. Closely behind unselfishness 
I would place tolerance—tolerance of other men’s views, 
other men’s idiosyncrasies, other men's fallings. 
Optimism, I think is also important. Pessimists I avoid 
like the plague, also cynles. A sense of adventure and an 
avid curloslty are desirable, but we have had good men 
who possessed neither. 
Character, guts and “stickability” are basically essential, 
for a year Is a long time and the difficulties which 
confront a man are many. 
Nevertheless, a year in Antarctica can be a most reward- 
ing experience. Apart from the more obvious rewards 
such as broadened experience, real adventure and magni- 
ficent scenery, one may experience the true companion- 
ship of men working together, In humour and kindliness 
courage and unselfishness, towards a common goal. 
PHILLIP GARTH LAW has been director of the Antartic 
Division of Australia’s Department of External Affairs since 
1949. He led the Australian National Antarctic Research 
Expeditions whicli established the first permanent Australian 
station at Mawson, MacRobertson Land, in 1954. His article 
is based on an address he delivered to the British Medical Asso- 
ciation in Melbourne, later published in the “Medical Journal” of 
Australia (Feb. 20, 1960).

## [Page 31](078200engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

THE CASE 
FOR ESPERANTO 
  
Sir, 
One has often seen nonsense written 
about the International Language and 
about the contemporary world lan- 
guage problem in general. Yet rarely 
does one find such a concentration of 
absurd statements as in Mr. Robert 
H. J. van Kuyk's letter which you 
published in your March 1963 issue. 
Mr. van Kuyk says “Esperanto is 
an artificial language—itself a 
contradiction in terminis...” It would 
perhaps be permissible to use the word 
“natural” as a figurative description 
of the spontaneous creation of lan- 
guage up to a certain stage in its 
development, although from a strictly 
scientific point of view it is absolutely 
erroneous to apply the term to lan- 
guage. Language did not arise and 
does not evolve as something “natural 
it is a product of human society. 
* 
The world-famous linguist Antoine 
Meillet has written: “Language is an 
institution belonging to the social 
group”, while the Russian linguist A. 
S. Cikobava states straightforwardly 
that “language is a social pheno- 
menon.” There are no serious 
contemporary linguists or sociologists 
who would deny this fundamental 
truth, And a society, in the sense of 
a group of people who use a given 
language to satisfy the needs of mutual 
comprehension, may be—as history 
shows—a tribe, a nation, a religious 
community, even a class or caste, or 
some other social grouping, not 
excluding an international collective 
using the International Language for 
the purposes of international commu- 
nication. 
[14 There are no “natural” or “‘un- 
natural” languages, but only languages 
as instruments of social communica- 
tion. For this reason the term 
“natural”, if applied to language, is 
erroneous, leading as it does to the 
unscientific treatment of a social 
phenomenon as biological and, 
consequently, to fatal mistakes and 
false conclusions. By the same token, 
the a priori formula “artificial lan- 
guage—a contradiction in terminis” is 
completely meaningless. 
Furthermore I find myself quite 
unable to understand how a person 
who asserts that Esperanto, as an 
“artificial” language, is a *‘contradic- 
tion in terminis”, and therefore 
impossible, can at the same time state 
that he has spoken it. If the word 
“logic” still retains its normal mean- 
ing, it would seem utterly impossible 
to learn a language which simply does 
not exist, since, being “self-contradic- 
tory”, it cannot function as a lan- 
guage. 
Mr. van Kuyk alleges that the 
International Language is not “viable 
because it lacks the cultural and 
spiritual foundations that give to a 
Letters to the Editor 
language its quality of language”. So 
at first, language is something *‘natu- 
ral”, whereby the “artificial” Espe- 
ranto is a ‘“‘contradiction in terminis"; 
but by the next line language is based 
on “cultural foundations”, that is on a 
purely social category which, accord- 
ing to Mr. van Kuyk, even gives it its 
quality of language. 
It is not clear what the author 
understands by “cultural and spiritual 
foundations”, since language as such 
—even that of the most primitive 
stages of development—represents the 
greatest single cultural value, linked 
to which are all of mankind's other 
cultural values. He seems to mean 
not this, but rather the cultural values 
created in a language, probably mainly 
those of literature. 
Now if this were the case there 
would not be very many languages in 
the world. According to Meillet and 
Cohen's major work Les Langues du 
Monde, the number of languages, not 
counting the “local forms of lan- 
guages” is between 2,500 and 3,500. 
Of these, only about 25 are important 
by virtue of being widely disseminated 
and in view of the works written in 
them, whilst only 40 to 50 languages 
have any literature at all, important 
or unimportant. If the criterion for 
the definition of a language were 
really “cultural foundations” in this 
sense, thousands of languages which 
exist in the world today or which have 
existed in the past would simply not 
be languages. 
Esperanto, on the other hand—in 
which a relatively rich literature, 
translated and original, has already 
been created (the library of the British 
Esperanto Association in London 
contains more than 30,000 items), in 
which various magazines and literary, 
scientific and specialist periodicals are 
published regularly throughout the 
world, and which is widely used in 
broadcasting, in international con- 
gresses and conferences, for scientific 
exchanges and for all manner of other 
international contacts—Esperanto, 
then, probably belongs with the 25 or 
so languages which are important by 
virtue of being widely disseminated, 
and certainly, at the very least, with 
the 40-50 other “cultural languages”. 
* 
The General Conference of 
UNESco, by its resolution of Decem- 
ber 10, 1954, noted, amongst other 
things, “the results attained by Espe- 
ranto in the field of international intel- 
lectual relations and the rapproche- 
ment of the peoples of the world” 
and recognised that “these results cor- 
respond with the aims and ideals of 
UNESco.” 
Knowing nothing of the cultural 
values already created and constantly 
being created in the International 
Language, and knowing nothing of the 
spirit of humanism which animates it, 
Mr. van Kuyk has attempted to define 
language in such a way as to force 
the exclusion of Esperanto. 
In fact, it was included even by his 
extremely narrow and quite unac- 
ceptable idea of language, while at 
the same time thousands of “natural” 
languages were  excluded—precisely 
those which one line higher up were 
the only “real” languages, since if the 
word “natural” is to be used at all 
when speaking of language, clearly it 
could possibly be applied, with all 
appropriate reservations, only to the 
languages and “local forms of lan- 
guages” which have not reached the 
stage of being literary languages, as 
observed by the famous linguist Max 
Miller as many as 100 years ago. 
Mr. van Kuyk would have us believe 
that his “study of Esperanto” has 
convinced him that “this language is 
not suitable for general use and thus 
can do little to build practicable roads 
between the nations™. It is not bare 
“study”, but rather practical utilization 
of the International Language in all 
aspects of international relations, 
which has convinced hundreds of 
thousands of men and women of all 
nations and in all five continents that 
the opposite is the case, as achnow- 
ledged further by the previously 
mentioned resolution of the General 
Conference of Unisco, 
* 
Unlike Mr. van Kuyk, the great 
Russian author Leon Tolstoy, who 
“was able after no more than two 
hours of study, if not to write, at 
least to read this language with case” 
(Vol. 67, p. 101 of the Russian edition 
of his “Collected Works"), wrote in 
1889 that “this language satisfies the 
requirements fully” and that he would 
“endeavour to spread this language” 
(Vol. 64, p. 34) to the best of his 
ability. 
Lastly Mr. van Kuyk advises us 
that preferably we should learn 
English, Russian, Chinese, Arabic, 
French, and Spanish, rather than 
Esperanto. Foreign national languages 
have of course been taught for many 
years in schools in all countries of the 
world, Millions of working hours are 
devoted to this end every week, with 
the net result that in the vast majority 
of cases the pupils, after several years’ 
study, are just capable of saying, in 
the language they have “learnt”, that 
they cannot speak it, or possibly a 
very litle more than that. 
IHas all this effort of learning 
foreign languages solved the language 
problem? Clearly no: prior to the 
First World War, French was morc 
or less the only language of diplomacy; 
the League of Nations had two official 
languages; the UN. has five, and 
Unesco itself, at its General Confe- 
rence, has cight official languages, of 
which four are working languages. 
Such is the reality, and it costs man- 
kind limitless effort and vast material 
resources. Esperanto does not aim to 
do away with the national languages, 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
31

## [Page 32](078200engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32 
Letters to the editor 
(Cont’d) 
but to resolve this chaotic situation in 
the interests of international under- 
standing on all levels and at the same 
time in the interests of all the national 
languages, both great and small, which 
represent the most valuable cultural 
treasures of all nations. 
Besides, a knowledge of Esperanto 
in no way hinders the learning of 
other languages by people who have 
the talent and the inclination to study 
foreign languages. On the contrary, 
experiments conducted in schools of 
various countries have shown that a 
knowledge of Esperanto, by virtue of 
the logical structure of its grammar 
and its syntactical transparcncy, 
facilitates not only the learning of 
forcign national languages, but also 
an improved understanding of one’s 
own literary language. 
I myself have active command of 
seven languages (in five of which I 
have written books or specialist studies) 
and passive understanding of another 
seven; on the basis of this personal 
experience I can say that (I) knowledge 
of Esperanto has helped me greatly 
in the acquisition of those languages, 
and (I) even with such a relatively 
wide mastery of languages I constantly, 
almost every day, face all manner of 
difficulties due to the language prob- 
lem. 
On reading Mr. van Kuyk’s letter 1 
recalled part of the brilliant foreword 
by Prof. P. Bargellini, one of the 
foremost contemporary Italian art 
critics, to the Esperanto edition of 
Dante’s complete Divine Comedy, to 
be published shortly in the Universal 
Esperanto Association’s “Orient-Occi- 
dent” series. 
Prof. Bargellini, describing the 
situation with regard to Dante at the 
end of the fifteenth century, remarks 
“the humanists, too, had changed 
their attitude towards the ‘vulgar 
poct’, and a scholar such as Chris- 
toforo Landino, who lectured on 
rhetoric at the Florence ‘Studio’... 
was entitled to deliver a commentary 
on Dante’s poem without violating his 
dignity as a scholar and a latinist.” 
Nearly two centuries had to pass 
before the scholars of that day dared 
to acknowledge this masterpiece of 
the world’s literature without the fear 
that in dealing with a poem written 
in a “vulgar” language they would 
jeopardise their dignity, prestige and 
reputation. The International Lan- 
guage is not the only language that 
has had to face, and still does face, 
the barriers of prejudice and supersti- 
tion. 
Prof. Ivo Lapenna 
Hon. General Secretary 
of Universal a Esperanto-Asocio 
Wembley, England 
  
‘Jacob's 
ho) 
ar 
  
Fill 
DANTE'S 
DIVINE 
COMEDY 
Ne 

## [Page 33](078200engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

R
P
 
ea
l 
a
 
h
i
 
AN
 
3 Both Michelangelo and Botticelli produce ; 
RUITES (EVE TE {To F-T0T CNR » TAVERN of 1 TY SV 
but the originals have been lost—Michel- 
angelo’s in a shipwreck in the 17th century 
and (ULE = TU TCT DE SE IR GT) 
~ through fire in an air-raid shelter in Berlin 
during the last World War. Fortunately, 
reproductions of Botticelli's drawings have 
figome down to us. These masterpieces of 
RUCK CEVR EL GEE OTR J CTC ER EH CLL 
shortly to appear in a special edition of the 
‘‘ Divine Comedy’ containing, opposite 
Dante's original Italian, a translation into 
LT TET CO VR TTAVET TTI SZ CHT TT J TY 
i: magnificent volume, entitled ‘‘La Dia Kome- 
dio" in Esperanto, will be published in Octo- 
ber by the firm of Edizione Siei in Milan. 

## [Page 34](078200engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
8 UBMARINE VILLAGERS: A team 
of ten men from the French oceanographic 
vessel “Calypso”, now on a research 
expedition in the Red Sea, will spend about 
two months on the sea bed, working from a 
“submarine village’ of three houses which 
will be built for them and their equipment. 
The divers will also explore the sea bottom 
to a depth of 6,500 feet. 
1 
Grants FOR IMPROVING EDUCA- 
TION: A grant of $200,000 from the 
Ford Foundation and another of $150,000 
from the International Bank for Recons- 
truction and Development have been made 
to help establish an International Institute 
for Educational Planning in Paris. Due to 
open this year, the Institute will provide 
training courses for civil servants, educ- 
ational planners and economists and will 
co-ordinate knowledge and experience of 
value to countries developing their 
educational systems. The establishment 
of the Institute was authorized by UNESCO's 
General Conference last December. 
K aunca FILM PRIZE 1964: The 
Kalinga Film Prize (the equivalent of 
£ 2,000 offered through the intermediary of 
UNESCO by the Indian industrialist, Mr. B. J. 
Patnaik, creator of the Kalinga Science 
Prize) is to be awarded, for the second 
time, in 1964. To be eligible, films must 
have been made between January 1, 1963 
and June 30, 1964 and must deal with 
an outstanding achievement in education, 
science or culture resulting from inter- 
national co-operation. Entries may be 
submitted only through National Com- 
missions for Unesco from whom full 
information can be obtained. 
T ovs FOR TEACHING: Girls and 
boys in Ibadan, Nigeria, recently flocked 
to a fascinating exhibition of educational 
toys, ranging from building blocks to 
model railway trains. Entitled “Learning 
to Live”, the exhibition stressed the special 
importance of the educational toy in 
newly-developing Africa where many 
children lack experience with mechanical 
and manipulative toys which can be of 
value from the age of three to adolescence. 
M OSCOW FILM FESTIVAL: The 
third Moscow Film Festival which is held 
“to choose and award prizes for the best 
productions of the cinema art, to develop 
co-operation between cinema workers of 
different countries and to strengthen 
friendship between nations”, will take 
place from July 7 to July 21. At the 
first festival in 1959, 44 countries took 
part and 134 films were shown. At the 
second, in 1961, 55 countries participated 
and 251 films were shown. 
T EcunicaL TRAINING IN TURIN: 
An international centre where workers from 
developing countries will take advanced 
technical and vocational training courses 
will be set up by the International Labour 
Organization in Turin. For the first two 
  
  
  
will be 
accepted annually for training as skilled 
workers, technicians, instructors, foremen 
years about 600 candidates 
and administrators. Italy is contributing 
about $7,500,000 towards costs for the first 
ten years and is to provide 300 fellow- 
ships annually. 
I Axcaroo SOS: A campaign has 
been launched in Australia to protect the 
kangaroo from wholesale slaughter. The 
kangaroo is killed for its meat, and in 
1961-62 over two and a half million pounds 
of kangaroo meat were exported. Professor 
A. J. Marshall, the Australian zoologist 
who started the protection campaign, aims 
to protect the kangaroo from the same 
fate as the other 35 species of Australian 
marsupials—animals which carry their 
young in their pouch—which he says are 
now extinct. 
Scouts FOR HEALTH: A group of 
Nigerian boy scouts has been working 
alongside a team of World Health Organiz- 
ation and U.N. Children’s Fund health 
workers. They took part in a campaign 
which has practically wiped out yaws, a 
disease which once attacked between 10% 
and 20% of the population. During a 
smallpox vaccination drive the scouts 
checked on 140,000 people, 86% of 
whom were vaccinated. 
\ 
QrA.BED ARCHAEOLOGISTS: Divers 
working with archaologists have been 
making exciting discoveries around the 
coasts of Finland. Wrecks of historical 
interest have been charted, including a 
ship dating back to the 16th or 17th 
century in a perfect state of preservation. 
The work has been done by members of 
a Finnish organization affiliated to the 
World Underwater Federation. This inter- 
national body, grouping 29 nations, aims 
to protect submarine archaological sites 
of historic and scientific importance. 
M OBILE EDUCATION TEAMS: Four 
mobile UNESCO teams composed of three 
educators and a woman specialist in home 
economics, hygiene, and mother and child 
care (supplied by the U. N. Children’s 
Fund), have been travelling through seven 
Congo provinces, giving refresher teacher 
training courses. An average of 100 to 
120 teachers has been attending each 
course. A fifth team in Leopoldville is 
supplying the roving teams with audio- 
visual teaching materials and textbooks. 
It is hoped to extend this operation 
throughout the Congo's 21 provinces. 
(umEsoox FOR INTERNATIONAL 
UNDERSTANDING: To help Australia’s 
teachers over the problems of a relatively 
new subject in the curriculum—education 
for international understanding—the Aus- 
tralian National Advisory Committee for 
UNEScO has recently issued a newly revised 
and expanded guidebook to the subject. 
This manual proposes different classroom   
approaches to such subjects as the meaning 
of race and nuclear energy, and presents 
bibliographies and quizzes. 
P ROTECTING NIGHT FLIERS: To 
prevent night-flying migrant birds from 
being dazzled so that they: collide with the 
Empire State Building in New York, the 
all-night beacon at the top of the 102- 
storey skyscraper was blacked out from 
April 9 until June 1. 
N ATURE’S WONDERS: “Harmonies 
Universelles”, a magnificently-illustrated 
two-volume work, recently published 
under the patronage of the International 
Union for the Conservation of Nature, 
opens a window on the infinite aspects 
and beauties of nature, For further 
information and to order, write M. Francis 
Brunel, Conseil International des Sciences 
de la Vie, Information et Culture, 6, rue 
Joubert, Paris (9°). The two volumes cost 
200 Fr. Frs (or equivalent in other 
currencies) and are obtainable only through 
subscription. 
A ID FOR EARTHQUAKE VICTIMS: 
Young people from Norway, Sweden, the 
Federal Republic of Germany, Austria, 
the United Kingdom, France, the Nether- 
lands, among other countries, have 
volunteered to rebuild the Iranian village 
of Dusaj, destroyed by last year’s devastat- 
ing earthquake. The project is being 
carried out in co-operation with youth and 
voluntary work camp organizations, 
including Service Civil International. 
Flashes ... 
 
Wl Thirty-eight million people suffering 
from the crippling disease of yaws were 
treated with penicillin during internation- 
ally-aided campaigns carried out between 
1950 and 1962, reports the World Health 
Organization. In campaign areas active 
cases dropped from between 10% and 
20% a decade ago to about 0.5% by the 
end of 1962. 
mW Out of 40,500 persons who lost their 
lives on U.S. highways last year (a 7% 
increase on 1961), 32,300 died in accidents 
caused by driver error and traffic law 
violations. 
W Soviet scientists are planning to raise 
wind power stations by balloon or airship 
to the tropopause—a thin layer of the 
atmosphere about 6 or 7 miles above the 
earth's surface—to make use of regular 
windspeeds between 1,000 and 2,000 times 
greater than those of atmospheric layers 
nearer the earth. It is thereby hoped to 
produce cheap electricity for rural areas. 
Wm At the end of 1952 Unesco had 445 
professional staff members at Headquarters 
as against 223 officials and experts in the 
field. By 1962, the proportion had been 
completely reversed: 790 in the field as 
against 460 at Headquarters. 
Wm Fifteen years ago the annual fish catch 
of all western South America was 130,000 
tons (1% of the world total). Today, the 
waters off Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and 
Chile give six million tons annually. Peru, 
with 5.2 million tons is the world's second 
greatest fishing power, after Japan with 
6.7 million tons. 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](078200engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
   
     
A window open on the world 
Every month 
 
ONE AND A HALF MILLION 
PEOPLE READ 
THE UNESCO COURIER 
in English, Arabic, French, German, 
Japanese, Russian, Spanish and Italian. 
The aim of The Unesco Courier is to be neither 
too ‘“‘technical” nor too ‘popular’. Its articles, 
richly illustrated with striking photographs, offer 
a vivid picture of the endless diversity of peoples 
and countries, a world on the march, the great 
adventures in science and the problems of our time. 
Recent issues included: 
FREEDOM FROM HUNGER 
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU 
NEW HORIZONS IN MUSIC 
‘MODERN ART' OF THE HITTITES 
SAFETY FIRST AT SEA 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU. 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Roya! 
Alghan Ministry of Education, Kabul, — AUSTRALIA, 
Melbourne University Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C. l., Victoria. (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch, 60.) — BELGIUM. Editions ** Labor ", 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgielei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA. Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd., Lake House Bookshap, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O, Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CUBA. 
E.C.C.D.A.L.D.,Neptuno 406, entre Manzique y San Nico- 
las Havana. (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. Artia 
Ltd., 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, A/S Tidsskriftafdelingen, Prags Boulevard 47 
Copenhagen $ (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. International 
Press Agency. P.O, Box 120, Addis Ababa. = FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
(Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de ['Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris-7. C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.). 
— GERMANY. R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosens- 
heimer strasse 145, Munich. For the Unesco Kurier 
(German ed. only) Bahren-felder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 (DM 8). — GHANA 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd, Atlantis House, Commercial 
St., POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom. — GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens, — HONG-KONG, Swindon 
Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P.O. Box 149. Budapest, 62. — INDIA, Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia House, New Delhi 
Indian National Commission for Co-operation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3, (Rs, 7}. — 
INDONESIA. P. N. Fadjar Bhakti, Djalan 
Nusantara 22, Djakarta, — IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores Lid., 35, Allenby 
Road and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv(1 £ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA, Sangster’s Book Roem, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings, 
(10/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.C. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co. 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman, — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22. Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Ltd., Times House, 
River Valley Rd., Singapore {(M. $ 500) — MALTA. 
Sapienza's Library 26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10/-). — 
MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd, 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30 BId 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo, (7 NF). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G. C. T. 
Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Curacao 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 
Wellington, Government Printing Office, P.O, Box 5344, 
Auckland and Government Bookshops, Auckland, 
Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin (10/-). — NIGERIA. 
C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O, Box 174, Lagos. (10/-). — NOR. 
WAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Grense., 7, Oslo 
For the Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Litteratur 
Tieneste, Stortingsgt. 4, Oslo, Poitboks 115 (kr 13.20 
—_ PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Cor 
Led, Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, S6-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA. 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 7a, No. Tl-49, Apartado 
de Correos 2018, Panama, D.F. (Balboas 3.). — PHI. 
LIPPINES. The Modern Book Co, 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manda, — POLAND. ““ RUCH * ul. Wilora Nr. 46, 
Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon, — 
PUERTO RICO. Spanuh English Publications Apartado 
1912, Hato Rey. — RHODESIA & NYASALAND. The 
Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. 
— SUDAN. A| Bashir Bookshop, P.O,Box 1118, Khart- 
oum.— SWEDEN, A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbok- 
handel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, — For The Unesco 
Courier: Svenska Unescoridet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); SWITZERLAND. Europa Verlag, 
5 Ramistrasse Zurich, Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. 
C.C.P. 1-236. '* Courier "only: Georges Losmaz, 1, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 1-4811, (Fr. S. 8). 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 
9030, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals). — TURKEY. Libraine Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri 
Building, Church Street, Pretoria, For the Unesco Cou- 
rier (single copies) only: Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg. (10/-). — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UMNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Gffice, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l, (10/-), — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
317 East 34th St, New York, 16, N.Y, ($5.00.) 
and (except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27 N.Y. — U.5.5.R. Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200.— YUGOSLAVIA 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazye 27/11, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](078200engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
   
  
    
  
fed      
lin n, os The 