# [073867](073867engo.pdf) 12

## [Page 1](073867engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
 
  
 
Volume I.—No 10 Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 20 Francs. NQVEMBER 1948 
 
oral) ~ 
CONFERENCE OPENS IN LEBANON 
iid 0 sp REN , 
Fh aa 
Li 
  
General view of Beirut, site of Third Session of Unesco’s General Conference scheduled to open this month, 


### 73868: Dr. Huxley's suggestions for... the advance of world civilization

| What The 
Dr. HUXLEY’S SUGGESTIONS FOR : 
“The Advance 
Of World Civilization” 
Just before this issue of the “Courier” was to go to press, .he 
editors received an advance copy of the Introduction written by Dr. 
Julian Huxley, Director-General, to his annual report on the activities 
of the Organization in 1948. This Introduction is the personal report 
of Dr. Huxley. Below, .our readers will find large extracts from this 
highly stimulating and provocative statement. 
HIS is my personal report, 
1) which the Executive Board 
through its Chairman will 
present to the General Con- 
serence. 
It 1S once again my own view 
of what Unesco has done—a 
gleam an the dark and disturbed 
waters of the world today—and 
of what, given good leadership 
and some luck, it may yet 
achieve—a stilling of the waters 
to a peace in which they might 
reflect the glory of the mind's 
inheritance for generations yet to 
come. Co 
I make no apology for writing 
freely of my <aith in the 1m- 
mense service which this Organ- 
ization might render to human- 
ity: otherwise I would not be 
here. As I hand over the reins, 
I have felt bound to affirm and 
set down, for comment and ap- 
praisal. what the work has meant 
to me. 
In writing this report..., I have 
wished to present not only a 
résumé of the events of 1948, but 
some general appraisal of the 
Organization in the presen state 
of its existence, together with 
some evaluation of its programme. 
While such an evaluation must, 
of necessity, be a purely personal 
one, in the majority of cases the 
views expressed have either the 
explicit backing of the Con- 
ference, or its implicit approval 
The first fact to be remembered 
is the extreme youthfulness of 
Unesco. As a definitive Organ- 
ization, it is, at the time this 
report goes to press, only 21 
months old; and its effective 
operation dates back only to a 
year and a half, to the time when 
the first programme and budget 
was agreed upon in April 1947. 
While much can be surmounted 
by goodwill, time and practice, it 
is prohably true that, in ‘tne 
present state of the world, no 
international staff can hope to 
attain quite the same degree of 
efficient co-operation that is pos- 
sible to a homogeneous group 
(although of course the heterog- 
eneity provides the necessary 
foundation for our ultimate 
ideal—an international group 
welded into a unified team). 
I would also remind my readers 
that Unesco has so far been 
operating in a period of unusual 
political tension and financial 
stringency. 
Any new organization, es- 
pecially a large international one 
of great complexity and novel 
type such as Unesco, will find 
itself in its first years much 
preoccupied with problems of ad- 
ministration and internal organ- 
ization. While Unesco still has 
many such preoccupations, I 
think it fair to say that it has 
now passed a critical point in its 
development. While 1947 was 
spent largely in trial and error. 
experiment and even sometimes 
improvisation, 1948 has seen the 
emergence of a more definite 
4 Middle East Cultural 
Office. Page 2. 
¢ Spotlight on Arab 
Thought. Page 3. 
® Year’s Roundup of 
Unesco’s Activities, 
Centre Page. 
® “Unesco In a Divided 
World”. P. 7. 
® Intellectual Activity in 
Arab World. P. 8.     
structure and assured continuity 
of operation. 
Work in Germany 
An important innovation in 
1948 has been the extension of 
Unesco’s activities to Genmany, 
and the decision of the Executive 
to recommend to the Conference 
their further extension to Japan. 
There has not unnaturally been 
a good deal of difficulty in agree- 
ing on a programme for Germa- 
ny, the nationals of some countries 
wishing Unesco to go much more 
slowly, those of others, much 
faster. A certain fact must be 
remembered. This is not vart of 
our reconstruction campaign: we 
are undertaking work in Ger- 
many, not for Germany. We are 
attempting a reorientation of the 
Germans towards ‘democracy and 
against all forms of aggressive 
nationalism and isolationism. 
(Continued on Page 6) 
November 17 th 
N estimated 1,500 delegates, official observers, members of the 
Secretariat, journalists and guests will gather in Beirut, 
Lebanon, on November 17, for the Third Session of Unesco’s 
General Conference. 
This annual assembly, devoted to the idea that the peoples of the 
world can live together in peace and understanding in spite of their 
differences by the interna ional 
development of education, science 
and culture, 1s scheduled tn meet 
for three and a half weeks to 
appraise Unesco’s actiri‘ies dur- 
ing 1948 and formulate a world 
programme of action for 1949 
and succeeding years, 
The Executive Board is suomit- 
Delegates 
Will Discuss 
in Beirut 
'WDER the Constitutio,1 of 
Unesco, the Executive 
Board prepares the agenda 
and programme of work for 
the General Conference. The 
provisional agenda, which the 
Executive Board has worked 
out this year for the Tkird 
Session of the General Con- 
ference, may be summed up 
briefly .as follows: 
The opening ceremony will 
take place at three o’clock in 
the afternoon of November }7 
in Beirut, with the Head of tne 
Mexican delegation presiding. 
Prior to this, at 11 a.rl. of the 
same day, there-will be a for- 
mal ceremony of welcome ar- 
ranged by the Lebanese Gov- 
ernment. 
Following the adoption of 
the agenda of the conference, 
the delegates will elect the 
President and the Vice-Presi- 
dents of the Third Session. 
The Conference will then 
consider recommendations of 
the Executive Board on the 
admission of new Memoers, 
Three Commissions will then 
be established for one of the 
most important jobs of the 
Conference: 
{Continued on Page 2)       


### 73870: MacArthur accepts UNESCO programme in Japan

  
MacArthurAcceptsUnesco 
Programme in Japan 
YENERAL Douglas MacArthur, Supreme Commander Allied 
¥ powers, has agreed to the extension of Unesco’s programme to 
Japan as a result of recent discussions with Dr. Kuo Yu-Shoa, 
Special Unesco adviser on Asia and the Far East. 
This announcement was made at Unesco House last month follow- 
ing the return to Paris of Dr. 
Kuo after a four-month visit to 
ten Far Easten countries, includ- 
ing Japan. 
The Supreme Commander Allied 
Powers in his meeting with Dr. 
Kuo expressed complete agree- 
ment with a 10-point programme 
of development which urged that 
“every effort should be made to 
make Unesco known and under- 
stood to all levels of Japanese 
society”, and “first priority should 
be that of encouraging, through 
SCAP (Supreme Commander 
Allied Powers), the Japanese 
people to study the philosophy, 
objectives and activities of Unes- 
co, and of making available 
appropriate materials and docu- 
ments which would contribute to 
a broad programme of education 
about Unesco’. 
“Japanese agencies”, it stressed, 
“are eager to undertake the 
translation and publication of 
appropriate materials immediate- 
ly. Selected materials are being 
re-printed in Japan at present”. 
General MacArthur requested 
the Organization to consider the 
establishment of a Unesco Office 
in Japan through which close 
relationship with SCAP and with 
the Japanese people might be 
developed. 
(Continued on Page 7)   
ting to the delegates for approval 
a programme covering a number 
of years and not merely a plan 
of work for the year 1949. This, 
it is hoped, will permit conti- 
nuity in Unesco's programme and 
facilitate fuller understanding of 
the Organization’s activities by 
Member States and the general 
public. 
The Session will elect a new 
Director-General and seven mem- 
bers of the Executive Board. 
and will consider the annual 
report of the Director-General 
(reported elsewhere in this issue). 
Selected items of special signi- 
ficance in the 1948 programme 
and new activities proposed for 
 
H.E. Sheik Bechara El-Khoury, 
President of the Lebanon. 
1949 are listed for discussion 
including a proposal for a Cul- 
tural Office in the Middle East. 
The Beirut Conference will he 
formally opened in the afternoon 
of November 17, in the presence 
ot His Excellency the Pres'dent 
of the Lebanon, Sheik Bechara 
El-Khoury, and leading educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural 
personalities of the host country. 
The ceremony will be presided 
over by the Head of the Mexican 
Delegation, His Excellency Senor 
Francisco del Rio y <Caitedo, 
Mexican Ambassador to raris, 
who will hand over the chair to 
a new president to be elected by 
the Conference. 
Invitations 
Invitations to attend the Con- 
ference have been senf to the 
44 Member States of Unesco. 
The other Specialized Agencies 
of the UN, 76 inter-goverumental 
and non-governmental organiza~ 
tions and 8 non-Member States 
of the UN or Unesco have also 
been invited to send official 
observers. : 
In addition, the Unes>c Exe- 
cutlve Board has cabled the 
Government of Ceylon, the Su- 
preme Commander for Allied 
Powers in Japan as wel! as the 
Military Governors of the British. 
US. and French Occupation 
Zones of Germany to appoint 
observers to attend the Confer- 
ence, : 
(Continued on Page 2)

## [Page 2](073867engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER November 1948 
 


### 73871: Middle East Cultural Liaison Office proposed

Middle East Cultural 
Liaison Office Proposed 
WHEN the Third Session of the General Conference of Unesco meets in Beirut 
 
culture. 
— 
- 
Information received so far indicates 
that the delegations will be composed of 
some of the outstanding world’s spokesmen 
in the [fields of education, science and 
Belgium and Afghanistan are 
sending their Ministers of Education as 
their chief envoys. The United Kingdom 
delegation will be headed hy the Parlia- 
mentary Secretary of the Ministry of 
£0 = Conference in Lebanon 
(Continued from Page 1) 
  
  
on November 17th, it will have before it a proposal {rom the Executive Board * 
on the representation of Unesco in the main cultural areas of the world. One such 
area is the Middle East, and the proposal urges the creation of a Cultural Liaison 
Office for that avea. 
.This suggestion tallies with the choice of the Middle East as the venue of the 
Conference <or, by meeting in a different place each year, Unesco arouses interest 
in its work among the people of that and neighbouring areas and thereby helps its 
activities to spread. 
Telling evidence of this can be seen in the fact that the meeting of last years 4 
conference in Mexico has resulted 
in the creation and development 
of a number of significant pro- 
jects by Unesco on the one hand! 
and by the Governments of Latin 
By 
Victor AZAM, 
Former News Chronicle cor- 
respondent in the Middle 
East. Ncw with the Unesco 
Secretariat.     J— 
America, on the other, Today, the 
countries and people of Latin 
America follow closely the work 
of Unesco and contribute to the 
. development of its activities. 
Similarly, the Middle East pre- 
sents a two-fold interest to Unes- 
co just as Unesco presents a 
multifarious interest to the Gov- 
ernments and peoples of the 
Middle East 
As far as Unesco is concerned, 
one experiment has already pro- 
duced sufficiently gcod results to 
warrant the encouragement of 
cultural liaison throughout the 
Middle East. The Unesco Field 
Science Co-operation Office which 
has been functioning in Cairo for 
over a year, has done valuable 
work in bringing Middle East 
scientists within the orbit of in- 
ternational science and putting 
within their reach the wealth of 
world knowledge. 
Similarly, a Cultural Liaison 
Office if voted by the General 
Conference, would be called upon 
to play a leading role in the 
development and spread of educa- 
tion and culture. Although the 
Arabs are heirs to one of the 
world’s great cultural™possessions, 
handed down to them over cen- 
turies of eventful history. they 
find themselves today striving 
vigorously for a tultural rebirth 
which twentieth-century condi- 
tions generally, and their aloof- 
ness and isolation from the rest 
- of the world. render more diffi- 
cult. This aim can. consequently, 
be brought nearer to realization 
through international co-opera- 
tion.—which is where Unesco can 
help. 
In such countries as Egypt and 
Irag, where the illiteracy rate is 
high, the problem facing the na- 
tional] education authorities is a 
very heavy one. It is, naturally, 
their concern in the first place. 
But it 1s undeniable that in co- 
operation with Unesco they can 
find solutions to their difficulties, 
through the technical assistance 
which the Organization can make 
available, in the same way as the 
Field Science Co-operation Offices 
are degmning to do. 
It must be made clear that 
Unesco does not and cannot 
substitute itself for national 
administrative bodies, or interfere 
in their affairs. If can only 
arrange for expert help and 
advice to be provided when it is 
needed. making the best ex- 
perience of one country available 
to another. This task should be 
made easier thanks to the Arab 
League Cultural Committee, which 
since its formation two years ago 
has done much to bring about 
‘closer ties between the Arab Gov- 
ernments in the cultural field 
In view of all these considera- 
tions, the Executive Board of 
Unesco decided to define the 
responsibility of the proposed 
Cultures! Liaison Office for the 
Middle East as follows: “To pro- 
mote the exchange of ideas, in- 
formation, materials and persons 
in the fields of arts, letters, philo- 
sophy and humanistic studies ” 
The small staff to be assigned 
to this task, if the Cultural Off- 
ice is approved, would initiaily 
spend several months at Unesco 
House in Paris and then travel 
throughout the Middle East. ‘No 
fixed regional office is con- 
templated at this stage. 
In addition to this experimental 
undertaking, the Executive Board 
also proposes to appoint, in areas 
to be determined by the General 
Conference, one or two regional 
representatives who will main- 
tain liaison with the Govern- 
ments and National Commis- 
sions, distribute information on 
the activities of Unesco, and 
represent Unesco at conferences 
and meetings convened by the UN 
and other agencies, in those 
areas, 
Should these new activities of 
© Unesco be sanctioned by the Gen- 
eral Conference, there is no doubt 
that a step forward will have 
been taken spreading understand: 
ing and interchange of culture in 
a world which needs such action 
to achieve the goal of One World. 
Palais de 
  
 
‘Above, the decorative portal of the famous 
Beiteddine in 
Upper left, the decorated 
same Palais, 
carvings executed by Arab artists. 
The Palais is one of the architectural and 
artistic landmarks of the Middle East. 
I ————————— 
a ——————— a —————— Whi -  — 
the Lebanon. 
inmerior of the 
showing the rich lace-work 
What The Delegates 
Will Discuss At Beirut 
(Continued from Page 1.) 
The Programme and Budget 
Commission will study a selecied 
number of items from the 1948 
programme and new activities 
proposed for the new year. Among 
those provisionally listed for dis- 
cussicn mention might be made 
of the preparation of a Scien- 
tific and Cultural History of 
  
Radio Experts Meet 
at Unesco House 
A Conference of Radio experts 
opened at Unesco House on Octo- 
per 28. and will continue until 
November 3. 
The Conference has been called 
to examine and advise on possible 
action to encourage the co-oper- 
ation of radio organizations in the 
production of cultural program- 
mes. and to bring to light the 
character of existing arrange- 
ments for international! relays. 
rebroadcasts and the wus: of 
transcriptions. 
Radio experts from sixteen 
countries are attending the con- 
ference. They include Australia. 
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China. 
Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, 
India, Italy. Mexico, Switzerland, 
Turkey. the Union of South Afri- 
ca, the United Kingdom and the 
United States of America. 
of Unesco. 
6-month subscription: 
Kléber, Paris-16e, France. 
Canada : 
Czechoslovakia : 
Denmark : Einar Mupksgaard, 
orders). 
Tower Lane ‘'— Belfast: 
Greece : 
India: 
Low Countries: NV.   
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Bureau 
2s.6d. or $0.50 or Fr. frs. 100. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A, Alstna 500, Buenos-Alres. 
Australia: H. A. Goddard Ltd. 255a, George St. 
Che Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West, Toroato. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga. R. de Smedt O'Reilly, 
Librairie PB Topic. 11 
6 Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Great Britain: H.M Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
way (Retall Counter Service} ; P.O Box 569, Lonrdyn, SE. 
— Manchester 2: 39-41 King Street 
Castle Street — Cardiff: | St Andrew's Crescent. — Bristol 1: . 
80 Chichester Street 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris, Se. 
Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale. Athens. 
Oxtord Book ana Stationery Co., Scindia House. New Delhi, 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie. Booksellers. The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle, Av. 
Martinus 
J Lange Voorhout. The Hague 
Sweden: Ab. O. E_Fritzes. Predsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot, Lausanne, 
Sydney. 
Habana. 
Narodnt, Prague, 
(Post 
— Edinburgh 2: 13a 
des Francais, Beirut, 
Nijhoff. Afd. Fondsaministratie     
  *
PERS sor “ - 
"3. 
Mankind; Unesco’s contribution 
to Reconstruction through direct 
emergency granis cout of the 
Organization's funds and stimula- 
tion of gifts by Member States; 
the Book Coupon Scheme, Unes- 
co’s role in furthering interna- 
tional social science organiza- 
tions, Clearing House functions 
as the central activity of Unesco 
in General and Fundamental 
Education, etc. 
The Administrative Commission 
will examine the organization of 
the Secretariat, personnel and 
financial questions. 
The Official and External Rela- 
tions Commission will report to 
the Conference on Unesco’s activ- 
ities with Member States (includ- 
ing regional offices), National 
Commissions, the UN and Spe 
cialized Agencies, and other in- 
ternational organizations. 
Eight sub-commissions will then 
be set up to consider certain tech- 
nical aspects of the programme. 
Following this, the Chairman 
of the Executive Board, Dr, E.R. 
Walker, will present to the As- 
sembly for discussion the Direc- 
tors-General’s report on Unesce’s 
activities this year. The Assembly 
will then proceed to a consider- 
ation of the reports for 1948 pre- 
sented by Member States. 
At this point in the Conference 
(Item 13 of the provisional agen- 
da), the delegates will discuss the 
final reports of the Programme 
and Budget Commission ang vote 
the total figure of the budget for 
1949. 
The Conference will then ap- 
point the new Director-General of 
Unesco, and elect seven members 
of the Executive Board. 
Other items included in the pro- 
visional agenda include a discus- 
sion of the season of the year 
in which the Fourth and Fifth 
Sessions of the Conference are to 
be held; the choice of the place 
of the Fourth Session and provi- 
sional consideration of the place 
of the Fifth; the presentation of 
draft amendments to the Consti- 
tution by Ecuador, New Zealand 
and the Director-General; and a 
discussion of selected items of 
general significance, such as the 
role and problems of education, 
science and culture in the modern 
‘world. 
Education, and will include the Chairman 
of the British Council. The chief 3iamese 
delegate will be the Under Secretary of 
State for Education, while the U.S. group 
will include 
educational and cultural leaders. It Js 
‘expected that the Middle Eastern States 
will send some of their most distinguished 
representatives. 
10 outstanding scientific, 
The Conference. which will 
meet in plenary sessions, com- 
mission, sub-commission and com- 
mittee meetings has been stream 
lined so as to achieve a maximum 
of efficiency. Provision has been 
made for 22 plenary sessions 
with simultaneous translation, 
and the setting up of three main 
commissions to study the pro- 
gramme and budget of Unesco, 
administrative and personnel 
questions, and the official and 
external relations of the Orga- 
nization, 
Elaborate Preparations 
In Beirut, the final touches 
are being put to the vast prepa- 
rations which the L#banese 
Government and people have 
been making to welcome delega-. 
tes and all those attending the 
Conference. The buildings have 
now been completed and will be 
fully fitted out and furnished in 
time for the opening ceremony. 
Elaborate arrangements have 
been made to give newspaper 
and radio correspondenis every 
possible facility to cover the acti- 
vities of the Session. 
Some of the main streets of 
Beirut are being widened to 
permit easier access to the Con- 
ference site, located at about 
10-minutes drive from the centre 
of the city. 
The Lebanese Government is 
organizing a series of cultural 
manifestations for the suecial 
“Unesco Month” and a number 
of exhihitions are being set up, 
one of which feature Arab cule 
ture in general and that of the 
Lebanon in particular 
Altogether, the Lebanese Gov- 
ernment is spending about 
three and a half million Lebanese 
pounds for the organization of 
the Beirut Conference and 
“Unesco Month”. 
During the course of the Con- 
ference, it should be noted. the 
Secretariat in Paris and inem- 
bers in the field will con'inue in 
full operation to carry out the 
programme of the Organization, 
World | 
Engineers Plan 
Cairo Meeting 
The World Engincering Con- 
ference (WEC), one of the in- 
ternational organizations en- 
joying consultative status with 
Unesco, is calling a second In- 
ternational Technical Con- 
gress in Cairo during March, 
1949, following an invitation 
extended by the Egyptian Gov- 
ernment. 
The Conference,” which will 
be devoted to the main subject 
of Raw Materials as an Indus- 
trial and Social Problem, will 
study three problems: 
Industrial raw materials 
and their rational utilization 
throughout the world; social 
aspects of technical develop- 
ment and of raw materia) pro- 
blems; and the problem of 
water in the Middle East 
It is expected that the Cairo 
Congress will furnish some 
basic information, in its study 
of water, on one of the cru- 
cial problems of the Middle 
East, Irrigation, drainage mna- 
vigation, drinking water and 
artificial rain will be some of 
the problems discussed at the 
meetings. 
The Executive Board of 
WEC has borne in mind that 
the Economic and Social Coun- 
cil of the UN is calling an 
International Scientific Con- 
ference on Conservation and 
Utilization of Resources 
(UNSCCUR) in the USA in 
June 1949. The programme of 
the Cairo Congress has been 
established so as to complement 
the UNSCCUR programme.     

## [Page 3](073867engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

November 1948 UNESCO COURIER 


### 73872: Spotlight on Arab thought: Taha Hussein calls UNESCO "common man-elite link"

  SPOTLIGHT ON ARAB THOUGHT   
Taha Hussein Calls Unesco 
“Common Man-Elite Link” 
S the month of November of 
this year draws to a close, 
the Arab World will witness 
in Beirut a great festival of cul- 
ture never before equalled in all 
its glorious and far-reaching his- 
tory. 
The Arab peoples have not for- 
gotten the cultural meetings 
which they held centuries ago, in 
their market - places - meetings 
which paved they way for the 
union of the Arab nation. Nor are 
they unaware of the fact that 
other ancient nations used to 
hold similar cultural meetings 
which gave similar results. 
The Arab World knows that, 
- although the effect of these meet- 
SALI IFAATIIENIR 5   Cr he oe Noa rw 
ings was limited, yet, at the same 
time, they helped to create na- 
tional unity on the one hand and, 
on the other, emphasized the in- 
dividual characteristics of each 
nation and defined the frontiers 
between them. 
These meetings, making nations 
conscious of their individuality, 
gave them self-confidence and 
helped them to realize what distin- 
guished them from others. Thus, 
they were at the same time a 
source of unity and of separation. 
Owing to them, the Arabs began, 
at the end of the pre-islamic period 
(called the “Age of Ignorance”), 
to realize their own importance, 
and they felt the differences be- 
tween themselves and their neigh- 
bours jus: as the Greeks, owing 
to their Academies, learned what 
ties linked together their various 
cities and realized at the same 
time what distinguished them 
from other nations and commun- 
ities. 
Cultural Festivals 
Besides, the Arab World is no 
stranger to the congresses to 
which mankind is to-day ac- 
customed and waich are held 
from time to time to examine 
varied problems: political, lite- 
rary, philosophical or artistic 
congresses, Never:heless, the 
Arab World felt that these con- 
gresses, owing to their composi- 
tion and their particular aim, 
were not of general or universal 
interest but were limited to spe- 
cialists in certain realms of know- 
ledge or in certain branches of 
art or political and social science. 
The Arab World tcok part in 
these congresses, often held mm 
Europe and America, and some- 
times in their own land. But 
never in their own land has a 
festival of culture been seen on 
so large a scale and so extensive 
in its aims as that which they 
will attend in Beirut. 
The Unesco session which is to 
hold its conferences in Beirut this 
year, is neither a cultural con- 
gress such as those of old, which 
had to unite on one hand and 
divide on the other; nor is it a 
scientific, artistic or political 
congress such as those which the 
  
modern world has witnessed and 
the direct benefit of which is ex- 
clusively limited to specialists and 
only effects nations indirectly. 
It is rather a cultural and human 
assembly in the widest sense of 
these two words: “cultural” be- 
cause it is not composed of spe- 
cialists in one particular science, 
but of all those who are dis- 
tinguished in different branches 
of culture; and “human” since 
it is not composed of those who 
represent a particular couniry or 
different countries united by 
common interests and common 
aims," but is composed of men 
who represent the cultural circles 
of all the nations of the world. 
Moreover, it does 
not aim, in its con- 
ferences to examine 
only limited pro- 
| blems of science or 
\ art; its object is 
| something more 
i extensive and of 
a deeper purport: 
that is, the realiza- 
tion of co-opera~ 
tion amongst vari- 
ous nations in all 
matters concerning 
the intellect, the 
heart and the con- 
science of man- 
kind. 
Thus, this Organ- 
ization is uniting 
nations that are 
divided, drawing 
nearer those who 
~ want to live apart, 
‘trying to help them 
to live and think in 
closer relationship 
with others, and to 
abolish differences 
and discord as far 
as is in its power. 
The aim of the ancient cultural 
“market-gatherings” in Arabia 
was to try tc unite one nation, 
biit this new Organization is 
endeavouring to unite all human- 
ity. “ or 
Xx Xx xX 
  
It is true that the Institute of 
Intellectual Co-operation of the 
League of Nations had already 
tried, between the last {wo wars, 
to perform the task which Unesco 
is trying nowadays. to accomplish. 
But its efforts were weak because 
its means were .imited, as it did 
not enjoy the same independence, - 
power and financial facilities as 
Unesco. 
In spite of its meagre privileges, 
however, the previous organiza- 
tion succeeded to a certain extent 
in drawing together nations sep- 
arated by discord and in achiev- 
ing a significant degree of cultur- 
al co-operation. It founded the 
Committee of Arts and Letters, a 
body which organized meelings 
every year in a different cap:ral 
of Europe, to examine the cultur- 
al problems of that time. But 
these meetings, and discussions, 
remained narrow and limited so 
that they did not go beyond the 
distinguished intellectual leaders 
and reach the general public. 
Reaching 
the Man-in-the-Sireet 
Unesco, on the contrary, has 
attached great importance, ever 
since its foundation, to getting in 
touch with the man-in-the-street 
much more than with an intel 
lectual elite; or rather, it has 
laboured to create a solid and 
fruitful link beiween that intel- 
lectual elite and the general pu- 
blic. This link allows leaders of 
culture to study problems of in- 
terest to all individuals, ard 
helps the public to profit fully 
by these ideas. 
The Committee of Arts and 
Letters founded by the Institute 
of Intellectual Co-operation of 
the League of Nations did not go 
heyond Europe, and did not even 
meet outside its assembly-rooms 
in great cities, because its prin- 
ciples and methods of research, 
discussion and argument were 
  
————————— 
  
Dr. Taha Hussein was born in 
Egypt in 1889 and became blind at 
the age of three. In spite of this 
serious handicap, he has become one 
of the major living figures in Arabic 
literature. He is considered as 
representative of modern thought in 
the Middle East and the spiritual 
leader of youth in the Orient. 
Taha Hussein was educated at the 
University of Egypt and at the Sor- 
bonne in Paris, He successively 
occupied the Chair of Arab Liter- 
ature at the Faculty of Letters in 
Cairo, became Dean of this Faculty, 
the First Rector of the University of 
Alexandria and later Under-Secre- 
tary of State at the Egyptian Min- 
istry of Education. - 
He is a member of the Royal Aca- 
demy of Arabic Language, of the 
Egyptian Institute and of the Aca- 
demy of Belles Lettres. Taha Hussein 
was also the Egyptian representative 
to the Institute for Intellectual Co- 
operation of the League of Nations 
and ai many international con-     gresses. - 
  
above the level of people of ave- 
rage culture. 
Unesco is fixed in Paris through 
its permanent Organization, but 
by its action and its public meet- 
ings radiates in all parts of the 
world. 
Moreover, when Unesco meets. 
in a particular country, it 
achieves two considerable aims: 
1t encourages different forms of 
cultural co-operation between 
governments and scientific, lite- 
rary or artistic bodies; and it 
narrows the gap which often 
separates the man-in-the-street 
from the technical expert and 
the intellectual specialist, 
Thus, it is not strange that 
‘Unesco and those who support it 
or seek its protection in a dirzct 
or indirect way should be striving 
for that peace amongst nations 
which may, at {ne moment, seem 
too difficult of fulfilment, but 
which is without doubt possible 
if genuine collaboration based on 
goodwill and sincere understiand- 
ing can be mobilized. 
If this Organization had no 
other aim than that of trying, in 
every act and every conference, 
to make nations feel that all 
forms of culture and all produc:s 
of the human intellect, hear and 
conscience are totally indepen- 
dent of geographical frontiers and 
are not influenced by material in- 
terests, or monopolized bv any 
single nation or cultural area; if 
it rendered no other service than 
this, it would still deserve to be 
helped by all nations and sup- 
ported by all governments. 
(Continued on Page 7) 
     
  
| 
a . 
5 . 
: 
7 £ 
» W 
ay. 2 
3 
  
A typical Middle East landmark: the minaret. 


### 73873: A Philosopher looks at Arab literature among world classics

  
A PHILOSOPHER LOOKS AT 
C- 
Arab Literature 
S already reflected by Arabic journals and reviews, the inter. 
A national cultural event in Beirut this month awakens wn the 
Arab peoples distant memories of the cultural festivals of 
“Qkaz”, perhaps the first ever held, when in the pre-Islam era the 
nomad tribes of Arabia met annually to appreciate and gauge lhe 
genius of their respective poets. 
In these annual literary com- 
petitions and in other circuin- 
stances, many of the poets com- 
posed their verse extempore, This 
was the so-called Era of Igno- 
rance, because no written alphna- 
bet yet existed. Poets of all 
beliefs, pagans, Christians and 
Jews, thus produced the first 
literary masterpieces in the Arab 
tongue; they were incomparable 
in their chiselled perfection of 
form and classic style. Outlstand- 
ing among all these works were 
the al-Mouallakat”, odes. 
Here we have Arab literature 
in all its purity, free of foreign 
influences, Those who know it 
best, Orientalists, arz firmly con- 
vinced of the importance of 
making it known ; 
alongside the 
world's classics. 
Unesco is work- 
ing in this di- 
rection in its’ 
plans for a wid- 
er diffusion of   
By 
Dr. S. ELFANDI, 
Professor of Philosophy and Socio- 
logy at the University of Farouk I. 
Alexandria, Now with the Philosophy 
ang Humanistic Studies Division of 
B Unesco. 
ES) 
public, is not due solely to the 
fact that 1t is international, 
thereby reflecting the different 
mentalities which together cons 
tributed to the progress of lite- 
rature, but aiso to the fact that 
1t reflects the soul steeped in and 
civilized by all the different phi- 
losophies and sciences known to 
the enlightened and refined 
Middle Ages. The works of Al- 
Djahiz, Al-Mutanabi or Al-Maarri 
are unrivalled from this aspect. 
For example, in his R:ssalat 
al-Ghofran’, the direct source of 
Dante's Divine Comedy, Al- 
Maarri transports us to a Paradise 
where we listen to the subtlest 
philosophic and scientific discus- 
sions of that time. It was the 
period of the in- 
comparable en- 
cyclopedists. Ve- 
ry many authors 
have left oe- 
hind, each mn 
his own hand- 
  
  
world classics. 
It is not possible here to give 
an outline of Arab literature, 
which dg, one of the richest and 
oldest and still one of the most 
creative in the world. Let us limit 
ourselves, therefore, to some of 
the features of the second great 
period of Arab literature, the Is- 
lamic Period. 
The Islamic Period 
The coming of Islam gave an 
enormous impetus to Arab lite- 
rature. Was not the exceptional 
eloquence of the Koran the one 
“miracle” of the Prophet? No 
doubt it suited the mentality of 
nomadic tribes who felt them- 
selves to be poets. Its influence 
was therefore very strong. But un- 
like the purely Arab age of “Igno- 
rance”, the Islamic period was 
genuinely “international”; it was 
also truly “humanistic” in the 
sense that it assimilated the val- 
ues, ideals and knowledge of the 
finest civilizations of the past. 
Internationalism and humanism 
are the two points of contact be- 
tween Unesco’s aims and Arab 
culture. That culture is already 
tinged with universalism, so that 
Unesco’s beneficent influence in 
this party of the 
world will be the 
most easily exer- 
ted. 
After the spread 
of the new religion, 
the nomads, who 
had become civil 
ized citizens of 
large towns extend- 
jing from China to 
the Atlantic, re- 
vealed great under- 
standing for other 
civilizations and an 
extraordinary ca- 
pacity to assimilate 
their values. In- 
dian, Persian, 
Egyptian, Greek 
and Roman culture 
filtered in side by 
side and formed 
the civilization hen- 
:  ceforth to be call- 
4 ed “Moslem” rather 
: than “Arab”. The 
only Arab element 
is the instrument 
of thought, the 
Arabic language, 
which thereby be- 
came - one of the 
first international 
languages. 
The extreme rich- 
ness of this litera- 
ture, which urges 
humanists to make 
it known to a world   
writing, 400, 500 
or 600 books, 
many of them consisting of 10. 20 
or 30 volumes, These classics will 
occupy a most important place 
among the others, once they are 
made known in foreign langua- 
ges. 
Some of the great literary 
works of this period were either 
translated from foreign langua- 
ges or written partly in popular 
AYtabic. An example is “Kalila 
and Dimna”, translated by Ibnal- 
Mokafaa from Sanskrit. Never in 
the history of Arabic has literary 
style reached such a degree of 
clarity and nobility as in this 
writer, 
The above-mentioned work, 
which is a collection of fables, 
fully deserves a distinguished 
place among world classics, be- 
cause unlike those of Aesop and 
La Fontaine, these fables are 
composed as syntheses in novel 
form, and not as fragmentary 
anecdotes, The characters are 
human beings, animals being 
used only {o personify human 
yualities. 
The writings in popular Arabic 
include the Arabian Nights and 
al-Mouachahat of Andalusia. The 
latter poems, which break with 
the traditional rules of Arab ver- 
sification, are specially suitable 
for translation, owing to the light 
they throw on the origins of 
French literature (the Trouba- 
dours). 
Modern Arab Literature 
Modern Arab literature dates 
from the end of the nineteenth 
century. The Lebanese, who were 
already more conversant with 
European culture, were pioneers 
in the movement. Men such as al- 
Bustani, al-Yazidji, Zidan and 
Matran, were the first of the 
modernists, But it is in Egypt 
that modernism is bearing ils 
fruit and being fostered. More 
familiar with the Arab classics, 
through the existence of the Un- 
iversity of Al-Azhar, and at the 
same time strongly attracted 
towards European culfure, this 
coundry has produced tamous 
writers such as Ismail Sabry, 
Chawki (prince of poets) Hafez, 
al-Manfalouti, Taha Hussein, al- 
Akkad, Hussein Haikal, Taimour 
and Tawfik el Hakim, whose 
works are celebrated throughout 
the Arab world and who in- 
troduced new themes and forms. 
unthought of in earlier periods. 
Cairo has thus become ine 
natural literary capital of this 
part of the world. The printing- 
works of Cairo, Beirut, and other 
intellectual centres are constantly 
publishing ancient and modern» 
works, 
(Continued on Page 7)

## [Page 4](073867engo.pdf#page=4) 3

### 73875: Educational, scientific and cultural reconstruction

YEAR'S ROUNDUP OF UNESCO ACI 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Yo 
RECONSTRUCTION 
La “It is estimated that by the end of 1948 over $50.000,000 will have 
"been distributed in educational relief by various bedies, in most cases 
in response to Unesco’s campaign for educational reconstruction. 
Furthermore, nearly $400,000 will have been expended out of Unesco 
funds for emergency equipment” writes Dr. 
report on the activities of Unesco during the current year. 
in his avnual 
This 
Huxley 
report which has just been published has served as the basis for the 
“Year Roundup” which we are presenting on this page. 
  
N order to advance educational, 
scientific and cultural recon- 
struction in the war-devastated 
countries, Unesco has been 
working during 1948, with the 
organs of the UN and other 
Specialized Agencies and with 
international non - governmental 
bodies by providing the Secreta- 
riat for TICER. Unesco has col- 
lected and analyzed evidence of 
needs and stimulated campaigns 
for voluntary aid. It has provided 
books, materials and equipment 
to a limited extent through emer- 
gency grants, and aided in estab- 
lishing national book exchange 
centres. It has worked with 
organizations on the educational 
problems of war -handicapped 
children and on voluntary work 
camps. 
This year, for example, the 
Director-General points out in 
his annual report to the General 
Conference that “members of the 
Secretariat have undertaken field 
surveys of educational, scientific 
and cultural needs in Burma, 
China, India. Malava. Sarawak. 
North Borneo, the Philippines 
and Malta”. 
~The Governments of Auslria, 
Belgium, Burma, China, Czecho- 
slovakia, France, Greece, Hungary, 
Italy, Netherlands, Pakistan and 
the Philippines have submited... 
data on war-damaged scnools. 
museums, laboratories, libraries. 
and other cultural institut ons.” 
This information has been 
analyzed, prepared in document 
form and distributed to inter- 
ested Member States and naticn- 
al organizations active in edu- 
cational reconstruction. 
“In consultation with Unesco”. 
the Director - General reports, 
“the Provisional Commission of 
the IRO currently is investigating 
the educational needs of displaced 
persons in Germany. Aus'ria and 
Italy.” 
Campaign aids 
During the current year 
Unesco has continued to produce 
materials suitable for mnanonal 
campaigns. These include the 
second volume of the “hock: of 
needs”, to be published before 
the end of 1948; the monthly 
“Reconstruction 'Newsletter” in 
English, French and Spanish; 
illustrated pamphlets such as 
“The Universities in Need”. 
published in August, and “TImpro- 
visations in the Teaching of 
Science’. 
In addition, 
film on the reconstruction of 
universities (in production jcintlv 
with the World Student Fund) is 
to be released before the eud of 
the year. 
A series of radio broadcasis on 
the reconstruction programme for 
1948 and international Voluntary 
Work Camps has been recorded 
in French, English, Spanish. 
Polish and Arabic and distributed 
through the UN Radio Service, | 
Radiodiffusion Francaise and the 
BBC. 
Donor Organizations 
The US Commission for Inter- 
national Educational Reconstruc- 
“tion (CIER) has distributed edu- 
cational supplies, books, periodi- 
cals. fellowships and study grants 
estimated at $39,714400 in 1947 
and $43.098.400 in 1948. 
The Canadian Council for Re- 
eonstruction through Unesco: 
Donation: $1,000,000 ($25,000 for 
direct expenditure by Unesco). 
“Very particular efforts have 
been made”, Dr. Huxley siates, 
“to ensure adequate co-operation 
by Unesco in the task of tne UN 
Appeal for Children”. 
As a result of these efforts the 
following sums have been set 
aside for educational reconsiruc- 
tion: 
Lord Mayor of 
London ....ciceevcinnnens £60,000 
Canada  .c.ciceverrciecanns $ 1,000.000 - 
NOIWAY ceernenemrirenencanin $ 100,000 
Expected (France, Switzertand, 
Bolivia, Venezuela). 
- Emergency Purchase 
Programme 
“The General Conference”, 
writes Dr. Huxley, “in recogn’zing 
the emergency situation which 
exists in war-devastated countries 
with regard to lack of books edu- 
cational materials and scieatific 
and technical equipment, autho- 
rized funds to be spent to pur- 
chase materials and egnipment 
for distribution. 
From unexpended 1947 funds, 
a supplementary grant of $220.000 
© and $175,000 from the 1948 budget 
have been used to distribute edu- 
cational materials to China. Po- 
land. Greece, Czechoslovakia, Phi- 
lippines, Italy and Hungary. 
War Handicapped Children 
The Secretariat has hean col- 
lecting and disseminating infor- 
mation on the educational prob- 
lems of war-handicapped children 
In July, Unesco sponsored the 
Conference of Directors of Child- 
ren’s Villages which met at Pes- 
talorzi Village in Trogen, Switzer- 
Jand. A special publication will 
_ be available before the end of 
1948 on Children’s Communities. 
Voluntary Work Camps 
During the current year, 
Unesco furnished 250 to 300 books 
on international subject: to 
27 camps in eleven coun‘ries. A 
conference of voluntary work 
camp organizations was held in 
Unesco House in April 1948 to 
discuss proposals of the TICER 
Work Camp Committee for the 
co-ordination of activities, A 
a documentary 
  
Exchange of Persons 
in 1948 
| summing up the Orgamniza- 
tion’s exchange of persons 
programme activities for 1948, Dr. 
Huxley writes: 
“Unesco is developing an act- 
ive centre of information on all | 
types of international educa- 
tional interchange, especially 
opportunities for international 
study financed by governments, 
public and private agencies and 
individuals”. 
This year a questionnaire was 
sen{ to Member States, the’ UN 
and its Agencies and non-govern- 
mental bodies, The data collected 
is to be incorporated into a 
“world-wide register of all types 
of awards or assistance available 
for persons wishing to go abroad 
for educational purposes”. TLe 
first issue to be published Jan. 49. 
Unesco fellowship programme 
up to and including September 
1948, comprises 60 direct-grant 
fellowships and 125 fellowships 
in collaboration with donor organ- 
izations “The most notable devel- 
opment during 1948 in this colla- 
boration in fellowship adminis- 
tration has been with the Cana- 
dian Council for Reconstruction 
through Unesco, which nas re- 
cently offered 64 ‘Canada-Unesco’ 
fellowships for candidates from 
about 15 Me=mber States™. 
pamphlet on work camps and 
their value in international 
understanding was published in 
July. 
Clearing House of Books 
Referring to the Importance 
of collecting accurate informa- 
tion on needs and sources of 
supply of publications, Dr. Huxley 
states: 
“One of the main factors 
enabling Unesco to carry out this 
function succassfully is the pub- 
lication and distribution of the 
Unesco Bulletin for Libraries. The 
Bulletin is now a well-establ'shed 
international library service. It 
has been issued every month 
since April, 1947, contains 40 
pages, is bi-lingual and is disiri- 
buted... to about 6,500 inctitu- 
tions.” 
The file of periodicals, offered 
or wanted, for free distribution or 
exchange, now covers aproxima- 
tely 3,440 titles. By mid-July 545 
sets of scientific periodicals (com- 
prising about 4,466 volumes), and 
- 20,644 miscellamreous publications 
were allocated by Unesco ‘o war- 
hit libraries. 
  
Science in the 
Service of Man 
   
  
  
  
  
    
2, Education 


### 73877: Emphasis on education clearing-house function

Clearing House 
Emp 
on Ed 
SHIFT of emphasis has taken place progressively this year. 
Thus the main undertaking of Unesco 
clearing-house activity. 
in Education is a 
“It is felt”, Dr. Huxley reports, “that by creating a central service 
to ‘provide technical information and advice on education at all 
levels, and by publicizing new and interesting national achievements 
in all parts of the world, educa- 
tional advance will be rendered 
not only more rapid, but more 
of an international venture, and 
new standards will gradually be 
set up.” 
Fundamental Education 
“This policy”, Dr. Huxley con- 
tinues, “has been especially 
emphasized in Fundamental Edu- 
cation”. 
“A programme is being suvbmit- 
ted for 1949”, the Director-Gener- 
al reveals, “that will give 
increased emphasis to central 
clearing-house services. It may be 
necessary to consider afresh. in 
the light of this year’s experience, 
what are the most valuable con- 
tributions that Unesco can make 
to a ‘pilot project”. 
“Our general policy is now 
becoming increasingly devoted to 
encouraging Member States to 
link projects in Fundamental 
Education with Unesco’s work, 
under the head of Associated 
Projects, 
Pilot Projects 
1) Haiti: Unesco-appointed so- 
cial anthropologist (Alfred Me- 
traux) began basic survey in 
Marbial Valley in April. susport 


### 73876: Natural sciences

  
NATURAL 
SCIENCES 
“Ia Natural Sciences”, Dr. Huxley writes,. “perhaps the most 
outstanding event has been the establishment of the first inter- 
nationai regional research institute under the auspices of a UN 
organization in the shape of the Institute of the Hylean Amazon, lo 
undertake research and: surveys on problems of the wet tropics 
(equatorial forest zone)”. 
“As a result of a conference 
held at Iquitos, Peru, in April and 
May. a draft convention and first 
year’s budget for the Institute 
were agreed upon, and an Interim 
Commission set up, with head- 
quarters at Manaus. Preliminary 
pilot surveys for the Institute are 
now being undertaken by Unesco 
in the Rio Huallaga.” 
Field Science Co-operation 
Offices 
“The Principle of regional field 
offices”, the Director-General re- 
ports, “has justified itself, and is 
beginning to yield valuable re- 
sults in raising the level of scien- 
tific activity in the regions con- 
cerned, as well as setting a 
pattern for field operation in 
other domains” 
* Latin America: Occupied 
chiefly with creation of Hylean 
Amazon Institute. “However, it 
has continued to make various 
contacts in the region, and has 
participated in the expert confer- 
ence held in Montevideo under 
the joint sponsorship of Unesco 
and the Government of Uruguay, 
which has made important re- 
commendations on the develop- 
ment of science in the Latin 
American region.” 
*¥ Middle East (Cairo): Office 
has been very, active. “It has 
found that the establishment of 
scientific contacts within the 
region is as important as that of 
contacts between the Middle East 
and other regions. Its List of 
Scientific Works published in the 
Middle East is the first publica- 
tion of any of Unesco's FSCOs.” 
* East Asia (Nanking, bramch 
office in Sanghai): “Responsibi- 
lity for distributing UNRRA edu- 
cational engineering equipment. 
Over 400 tons of supplies allocat- 
ed. 90 % delivered to Chinese 
universities by August.” 
* South Asia (New Delhi): 
established in April. Very favour- 
ably received. 
Grants-in-Aid 
Pure and Applied Sciences 
“As in 1947, a considerable sum 
was set aside for grants-in-aid to 
ICSU (the International Council 
of Scientific Unions) and its 
constituent bodies. 
“The field of medical science is 
one which interests both Unesco 
and WHO. In this joint activity 
considerable progress has been 
made, in regard to the interna- 
tional co-ordination of Medical 
Science Abstracting and of Medi- 
cal Science Congresses.” 
Preservation of Nature 
The international Union for the 
Protection of Nature was founded 
at a conference called by the 
French Government in September 
and October. A Unesco Technical 
Conference on this subject is 
scheduled to follcw the UNSCCUR 
conference in May 1949. 
World Centre 
Of Scientific Liaison 
In 1948, Unesco continued its 
clearing-house activities. Requests 
for assistance range from informa- 
tion on new indexes of mathe- 
matical tables for vitamins and 
chemical compounds to questions 
from scientific institutions on 
how to set up a microfilm unit. 
“Within its limited resources”, 
Dr. Huxley points out, “Unesco is 
developing an information centre 
on scientific apparatus to answer 
enquiries from the Field Science 
Co-operation Offices and else- 
where and what types of appar- 
atus are available.”   
hy Viking Fund (anthropological 
work) and Rockefeller Founda- 
tion (develop use of visual edu- 
cation techniques in Fundamen- 
tal education). WHO and FAO 
agreed to co-operate with U:aesco 
and Haitian Government, Presi- 
dent of Haiti invited UN to make 
survey of economic, agricultural, 
health and educational condi- 
tions of whole country. Unesco 
representat.ve appointed to UN 
team. 
“The most important conchu- 
sion coming out of the prel‘min- 
ary investigations was that the 
Haiti Project was a long-term 
one which could not be expected 
to show results of permanent 
value in less than five to ten 
years”, the Director - General 
reports. 
‘“The idea”, he continues, ‘that 
the UN and its Specialized Agen- 
cies might undertake a combined 
project in Haiti ovens up very 
- interesting possibilities”. 
2) China: Unesco consultant 
advising general fundamazntal 
education programmes of the 
Chinese Government, co-ordinat- 
ing efforts of several agencies, 
Chinese, international and for- 
eign. - 
3) East Africa: project going 
slowly—basic surveys completed; 
buildings are under construction; 
consultant gathering materials 
for clearing-house. 
4) Peru: development of rural 
arts and crafts to raise social 
and economic level of population. 
Mexican sociologist with a know- 
ledge of art, sent to Peru by 
Unesco to make survey and 
determine advisability for a full- 
scale pilot project. 
Educational Seminars 
“Among Unesco's most 
cessful activities in 1948”, 
suc- 
Dr. 
" Huxley states, “are to be reckoned 
-the three educational Seminars 
in Czechoslovakia, the UK. 
and the U.S.A”. These were: 
Childhood Education, Education 
and Training of Teachers and 
Teaching about the U.N. and its 
Agencies (the lastnamed arranged 
in co-operation with UN). In 
addition the Pan-American Union 
was aided in organizing a region- 
al Seminar on the Educational 
Problems of Latin America 
“Unesco has, by means of the 
Seminars”, states Dr. Huxley 
“acquired unique experience in a 
method of international co-opera- 
  
   
  
tion that is 
still novel.” 
Fundamental Eslewhere 
Education the Director- 
General re- 
marks: “We 
hope that 
the interna- 
tional Semi- 
nar method 
may become 
one of Unes- 
¢0’s most val- 
uable ad- 
juncts in this and other fields”. 
Higher and Adult Education 
A) Work with Universities: Uni- 
versities conference held in 
Utrecht, Netherlands, during 
August. “It was possible”, Dr. 
Huxley writes, “to shed light 
from many different angles on 
the problems besetting universi- 
ties in all parts of the world The 
success of the discussions encou- 
raged the Conference to take 
preliminary steps towards setting 
up a permanent intermational 
organization of Universities. This 
will be of the greatest importance

## [Page 5](073867engo.pdf#page=5) 4

### 73880: Echanges culturels : arts - lettres - philosophie

### 73877: Emphasis on education clearing-house function

VITIES 
hasis 
ucation 
Programme 
to Unesco in the field of higher 
education. 
B) Adult Education: Prepara- 
tory work has been carrieg out 
this year for world conference 
on adult education 1m 1949 
Pamphlet on “Unesco and Adul: 
Education” completed and ready 
for publication. Material for an 
“International Directory of Adult 
Education” being collected; to be 
published probably early in 1949. 
Children and Youth 
“A major responsibility of 
Unesco, as the educational orga- 
nization of the UN network. 1s 
to provide materials and auvice 
for the teaching of international 
understanding in schools” A 
wide range of activities has been 
carried on. A report on all 
Unesco activities in this field 
has been printed and submitted 
to the Economic and Social 
Council. 
Two international poster and 
essay contests on Unesco on 
theme “Together we build a new 
world” launched for children 
12-15 and 15-18 years. Winners 
are to be announced next year. 
Two pamphlets published ‘o in- 
terest both age-groups in Unesco's 
work: “Let’s Visit Unesco House” 
and “You and Unesco’. 
  
New Organizations 
Created in 1948 
During 1948, Unesco helped 
the creation of a number 
of important international 
non-governmental organi- 
zations, in specialized fields, 
such as those of Universi- 
ties, Political Science, Men- 
tal Health, Sociology, Eco- 
nomics, Scientific, Abstract- 
ing. 
Other important organiza- 
tions created with Unes- 
co’s help are: The Inter- 
national Council for Philo- 
sophy and = Humanistic 
Studies, the International 
Theatre Institute, the In- 
ternational Union for the 
Protection of Nature.       
M
a
n
 
he
lp
in
g 
m
a
n
 
to
 
hv
e 
t
o
g
e
t
h
e
r
 
In
 
s
o
g
h
b
o
u
r
i
n
e
s
s
 
an
d 
pe
ic
e 
wh 
= 
oe 
— 
<< 
— 
wd 
= 4 
—t 
- 
2 
oo 
= 
<< 
= 
- 
= 
 
  
  
a
V
p
s
j
m
o
u
y
 vr
 
wou
d 
03
 
v
o
w
 D
un
dp
ay
 
vi
g 
N
O
I
L
Y
I
N
A
3
 


### 73878: Achievements in the social sciences

. Achievements 
In the Social Sciences 
N the Social Sciences, “the 
most important single ad- 
vance in 19487, writes Dr. 
Huxley in his annual report, “has 
been made in relation to the 
Tensions Project... Representative 
research organizations in the 
field of public opinion are con- 
ducting surveys designed to bring 
out the ideas of the general public 
in various na:ions, on their own 
country and culture and those 
of other nations... Special men- 
tion must be made of the first 
International Congress on Mental 
Health, which Unesco attended 
and to which it made a con- 
siderable financial contribution. 
Continuing co-operation is assur- 
- ed with the permanent body set 
up, the World Federation for 
Mental Health”. 
Unesco’s activities in this field 
may be briefly summarized as 
follows: 
Tensions Affecting 
International Understanding 
1. Pilot Monographs of “Way 
of Life?” in Prance, Norway, 
Poland and Switzerland are being 
prepared. To be published in En- 
_ glish and French, and if possible 
in language of country concerned. 
Work carried out in collaboration 
with International Studies Con- 
ference (ISC). 
2. Surveys of adult populations 
to determine their concepts of 
their own and other nations are 
being conducted by puklic opinion 
institutes in Argentina, Australia, 
Belgium, China, France, Hungary, 
Italy, Norway, UK and USA, 
"3. Techniques for changing 
mental attitudes: Memoranda 
have been prepared by Auna 
Freud, the New Education Fellow- 
ship (USA), the Tavistock Ins- 
titute of Human Relations (UK), 
the Danish Folk High School, the 
International Schoo! of Geneva, | 
the Jung Institute (Switzerland), 
and ten research groups in the 
U.S. working jointly. 
4. Aggressive Nationalism: In 
July, psychologists, sociologists, 
psychiatrists, psychoanalysts rrom 
Brazil, France, Hungary, Norway, 
UK and USA me} to discuss in- 
fluences encouraging aggressive 
tendencies. 1,500-word unanimous 
statement issued and widely dis- 
tributed by Unesco. 
Secretariat has prepared memo- 
randa on the cultural assimila- 
tion of immigrants, and the ef- 
fects of education on the occu- 
pational structure of countries. 
Methods in Political Science 
1. Preparatory work for sympo- 
sium in 1949, Collection of papers 
during 1948 written by outstand- 
ing scholars on standards and 
methods employed in current po- 
litical science. 
2. Preliminary work for propos- 
ed International Political Science 
Association. ] 
Preparatory work in 1948 on 
promotion of groups in" Member 
States to discuss social implica- 
‘tions of science. Suggested sub- 
jects: tele-communications, avia- 
tion, scientific improvements in 
agriculture, substitute products in 
applied chemistry and genetics. 
“The main new feature in the 
field of Mass Communications”, 
the Director-General states in his 
annual report, “has been the crea- 
tion of the ‘Projects Division’ 
(originally styled the Interna- 
tional Ideas Bureau). 
“Themes for world presentation 
have been decided on and worked 
out, and contracts made with the 
« existing Mass Communications 
agencies who are co-operating in 
Presenting the material. Priority is 
glven to radio, as yielding the 
| most immediate results, but press 
and film are not being neglected.” 
One of the projects presented in 
concrete detail by the Projects 
Division (organized in June 1948) 
is the publication of a Unesco 
Caléndar of World Affairs. con- 
taining anniversaries of important 
* figures and events in education, 
science and culture. international 
Co-operation and human progress. 
It is intended as a reference book 
for writers, editors and producers 
and will also aid school and dis- 
| pussion groups. The Calendar will 
be ready for publication by the 
spring of 1949 and will apply ta 
the year 1950. 
The Projects Division has also 
Prepared draft international film 
lists on International Understand-   
  
ing and Co-operation; Fundamen- 
tal Education (including elemen- 
tary hygiene, public health and 
agriculture); the Arts; and the 
Popularization of Science. When 
revised and edited the lists will 
be made available for publication 
in all countries for the use of pro- 
ducers, 
tional film users. 
Technical Needs 
The 1948 surveys were extended 
to 17 additional countries, largzly 
in Latin America and the Far 
East; Cuba, Dominican Republic, 
Ecuador, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, 
Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela in 
Latin America; Burma, India, 
Pakistan, Malaya and Singapore 
in the Far East; Austria, Hungary 
and Italy in Europe. The results 
are being published in English 
and French. The 1947 surveys 
were highly praised at the UN 
distributors and educa-- 


### 73879: Mass communications

‘Mass Communications 
Conference on Freedom of In- 
formation at Geneva. 
Free Flow of Information 
The Secretariat has prepared a 
draft analysis of the political, 
economic, financial. technical and 
professional obstacles to (1) ac- 
cess to sources of information, 
(2) publication of information of 
foreign origin or affecting foreign 
countries, (3) transmission of un- 
published information from one 
country to another, and (4) 
dissemination of published in- 
formation from one country to 
another. 
Unesco collaborated fully with 
the Economic and Social Council 
in the preparation for the UN 
Conference on Freedom of In- 
formation and of the Press and 
in the conference itself. “Unesco 
upheld a distinctive line of policy 
at the conference, siressing the 
need for a balance between free- 
dom on the one hand and respon- 
sibility and control on the other. 
“Resolutions were passed favour- 
able to Unesco’s work in the 
Survey of Technical Needs, con- 
clusions concerning newsprint 
shortage, and the proposal to set 
up an International Institute of 
Press and Information.” 
‘and 
  
Cultural Interchange 
In Arts, Letters, Philosophy, Museums 
DRRING the current year, 
Unesco’s cultural Inter- 
change programme has 
achieved notable success in Arts 
and Letters, Philosophy and Hu- 
manities, and Museums. 
I. — Arts and Letters 
A. International Theatre Insti- 
tute: established at ~~ Prague 
in June 1943. A draft formal 
agreement between Unesco and 
the I.T.I. wille be submitted to 
the Beirut Conference for ap- 
proval. 
B. International Music Institute: 
Preliminary work in 1948. 
. C. International Pool of Litera- 
ture: 332 reviews have been con- 
tacted so far and 157 answers re- 
ceived of which 136 favoured the 
idea of encouraging the flow of 
published and unpublished art- 
icles betveen reviews in different 
parts of world. The response has 
been particularly favourable irom 
Indian and Chinese reviews. 
D. Reproductions in Visual Arts 
and Music: Particular attention 
was given during 1948 to (1) Euro- 
pean painting from 1860 to the 
present day; (2) Italian Renais- 
sance painting; (3) Persian Art. 
Catalogues of these periods are in 
preparation and will be ready 
for publication before the end of 
the year. 
“The Secretariat is alco engag- 
ed” Dr. Huxley reports, “in stim- 
ulating the production of spe- 
cial folios of fine colour reproduc- 
tions: 25 folios of fresco paintings 
in Vatican: folios of Italian Re- 
naissance paintings by Italian 
Government: Persian Art folios 
by English publishers. “Publishers 
appear particularly eager to un- 
dertake this work.” the Director- 
General concludes. 
In music, a Committee of Ex- 
perts meeting in Paris in July, 
recommended setting up a centre 
to establish a general index of 
classical Western music. and the 
possibility of establishing special- 
ized catalogues of Eastern music 
and folk music in general. “First 
contacts.” Dr. Huxley says, “with 
record producers. institutions eol- 
lecting commercial or scientific 
records, and musicologists have 
already resulted in the collection 
of a considerable amount of in- 
formation. Certain sections of the 
general catalogue will be ready for 
publication in 1948.” 
HI. — Philosophy and 
Humanities 
A. Trans- 
Philoscphy & lation of 
Humanistic ‘Great Books: 
Studies fficial lists, 
‘of works suit- 
‘able for 
‘translation 
have keen 
received from Australia, Belgium 
Canada and the U.K, together 
with suggestions from the P.E.N. 
Club and other organizations and 
individuals. Plans for ensuring ade- 
quate translation of contemporary 
works in literature, philosophy 
the social and natural 
sciences are being developed. A 
questionnaire was sent in March 
for information from leading pub- 
lishers on the present conditions 
of book translatioms. A report on 
the subject was submitted to 
ECOSOC in June. 
B. The International Institute 
of Philosophy has, under the 
terms of its contract with Unesco, 
secured publication of articles in 
special issues of leading philo- 
sophic journals on the same 
topics as those discussed at the 
Unesco - sponsored round - table 
meetings in Amsterdam during 
August. Subjects: “Philosophic 
basis of humanism”, “The basis of 
freedom”, and “Philosophic bases 
of the various concepts of demo- 
cracy”. 
C. International Council for 
Philosophic and Humanistic Stu- 
dies: A Preparatory Commission 
for the Council has already been 
organized with representatives of 
the International Academic 
Union, International Committee 
for Historical Sciences. Perma- 
nent International Committee of 
Linguists, International Commis- 
sion for Folk Arts and Folklore, 
and International Federation of 
Philosophical Societies. The last 
named federation was formed in 
August in Amsterdam during the 
      
    
  
International Congress of Ph:loso- 
phy. in conformity with Unesco 
recommendations. 
D. International African Insti- 
tute: Under the terms of a con- 
tract with this organization, the 
first draft of a report concerning 
plans for research on the native 
cultures of Africa, has been re- 
ceived. 
E. Middle East 
son: (see special 
page 2). 
III. — Museums 
Cultural Liai- 
article on 
In 1948, Unesco has concentrat- 
ed on developing and widely pub- 
licizing Museum techniques as a 
means of education; encouraging 
exchange of exhibitions among 
Member States: Belgium, China, 
France, Mexico, Netherlands, 
U.S.A. (including Hawaii). 
The first Biennial Conference 
of the International Council of 
Museums (I.C.O.M.) met at Unesco 
House last June-July. 370 delegates 
from 29 countries discussed ways 
the museum profession could help 
Unesco. 
- 
Arts and 
Letters 
The publi- 
cation of 
the quarterly 
review “Mu- 
seum” has 
met with 
approval. 
  
       
  
  
 
  
Unesco Action 
In the Book Field 
URING the current year, 
Unesco has carried out the 
following principal activities in 
the field of Libraries. Abstract- 
ing, Publications and Copyright: 
Public Libraries 
Development 
1. The Book Coupun Scheme 
initiated experimentally ‘his vear. 
China. Czechoslovakia, France. 
India and the UK have ind.cated 
willingness to co-operate. 
2. Summer School for Public 
Librarians held in Manchester 
and London during September 
succeeded in increasing awareness 
of public library service to educa- 
tion and understanding, 
3. A survey of low-price book 
publishing has been made by 
means of questionnaires, corres- 
pondence, interviews and the col- 
lection of written materials 
Abstracting 
As a result of the mee’ing on 
scientific abstracting as Unesco 
House last April, an Internation- 
al Conference on Scientific 
Abstracting is projected for June 
1949. 
The first meeting of the 
Interim Co-ordinating Committee 
‘on Medical and Biolegical 
Abstracting met at Unesco Bouse 
in April. WHO and FAO invited 
to join in sponsoring (future 
meetings. 
As a result of this meeting, a 
co-operative experiment has been 
undertaken by four abstracting 
services 
Publications 
1. Museum: first issue (double 
number) of this new qua:terly 
magazine appeared in July. The 
second double issue appeared in 
October. Bi-lingual English and 
French. 
2. Digest of Human Rights: 
French and English texts of the 
volume of essays on the Philoso- 
phical principles of human rights 
have been completed. Jacques 
Maritain has written introduction. 
Negotiations for publicatior in 
English, French and other lan- 
guages is being sought. 
3. A Bibliography of Creative 
Writing under Axis Occupation 
has been prepared from material 
collected in 1947 from Member 
States through National Commis- 
sions and other agencies. 
COPYRIGHT 
The comparative and critical 
study of copyright problems con- 
tinued this vear. First issue of 
Copyright Information Bulletin 
appeared in English-French.

## [Page 6](073867engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER November 1948 
 


### 73868: Dr. Huxley's suggestions for... the advance of world civilization

Dr. Huxley On “The Advance of World i 
(Continued from Page 1) 
We are not operating in any sense as 
agents of the Allied Authorities (though 
almays with their agreement and.co-opera- 
tion). but as an international non-political 
organization; and it is clear that such an 
organization will have a much greater 
possibility ol success in any “re-education” 
o! Germany than could be expected by an 
occupuing Power, 
¢Advance of World Civilization” 
year ago I was thinking in term of a 
general Unesco philosophy, and of its 
gradual building up over a comparatively 
Jong period. Today. while still believing 
that this might and probably should 
eventually be undertaken, I now feel that 
we should search for a single unifying 
idea, and that we should make this an 
immediate task. 
{ would like to throw out the suggestion 
that for the purpose of a unifying and 
general appeal, the underlying idea behind 
ah} 
pressed in the five words “The 
Advance of Word Civilization”, 
Civilization because civilization 
implies peace, and is indeed in 
essence the technique of peaceful 
living; World civilization because 
peace must be global, and because 
civilization confined to one section 
of humanity is not compatible 
with Unesco’s constitution, and is 
indeed provocative of violence and 
war; advance of world civilization 
because world civilization is in its 
infancy, and because we need the 
gynami appeal of a distant and 
gver-receding goal. 
This idea of the promotion of 
givilization on a world basis has in 
ghe first place the advantage of 
peing practical and coacrete 
However, vast in scope, however, 
vague at the edges, it adds 
up to a series of definite and 
limited tasks. It introduces no 
pote of ideological theory. 
furthermore, it commends itself 
fo the great majority of people, 
whatever their underlying phi- 
losophy. It commends itself im- 
mediately to the educated portion 
of the world's population, and can 
be readily made intelligible and 
desirable to the rest. 
Thre advance of civilization can 
readily be fitted into the broader 
concept of evolutionary progress, 
but is quite independent of it. or 
indeed of anv general ideology 
or philosophy except those which would 
entirely reject this world for the sake of a 
seli-centred and sterile asceticism. 
As with any other general and com- 
prehensive concept, civilization can be 
defined in various ways and can mean 
rather different things to different people. 
There is, however, an area of common 
agreement. The advance of civilization 
implies better cultivation of the arts of 
peace. It implies the advance of knowledge 
and the exploration of new and more outlets 
for creative activity and expression. 
a 
Mind and Spirit 
IT is not for me here to try to formulate 
a detailed definition which will fit both 
the facts and Unesco’s purpose. That is a 
matter, it seems to me, for the world’s 
leading thinkers and creative workers to 
hammer out for Unesco over a period of 
years. 
I would here only throw out the sugges- 
{ion that the advance of civilization consists 
essentially, or at least most importantly, in 
tha development of those human activities 
which can be shared and participated in 
wihout being destroyed or quantitatively 
divided-—namely the higher activities of the 
human mind and spirit. Knowledge is ac- 
tually multiplied by being shared: a work 
of art ean influence and be emjoyed by an 
indefinite number of people. For such 
development of the higher activities of man, 
there is of course needed an elaborate 
framework of material things and activities 
which cannot be shared in the same way: 
but this, though part of civilization, its 
machinery rather than its essence, is means 
rather than end. 
The idea of world civilization has a 
further advantage in that it transcends 
both nationalism and the limitations of 
that hopeful offspring of nationalism, 
internationalism. I use the phrase “inter- 
nationalism” in the strict sense of collabora- 
tion between separate sovereign nations. 
Nations in our world still claim unrestricted 
sovereignty, and all existing international 
organizations are debarred from interfering 
in the matters of internal concern to their 
member nations. 
In practice, however, this line can rarely 
be drawn sharply. To mention two out of 
innumerable possible examples, a nation’s 
educational policy is legally a matter of 
pureiy domestic cepcern; but it may affect 
Unesco’s activities can best be ex- 
external matters, such as mutual under- 
standing with other nations; and a nation’s 
population policy (or equally, its lack of 
suc'. a policy) may readily become one of 
the tensions threatening peace. 
Unesco is an inter-governmental organ- 
ization. Accordingly while its purposes are 
either world purposes (implicitly like peace, 
or explicitly like promoting the general 
wetfare of mankind), its very nature puts 
difficulties in the way of their realization, 
since the ultimate control of its policy is 
in the hands of official delegations repres- 
enting the points of view of separate 
national goveraments. 
Leaders of Civilization 
my mind, the best method available 
for securing any immediate advance in 
this direction, is for Unesco courageously 
to delegate an important part of its work 
to private individuals, chosen not as official 
delegates of governments, but as leaders of 
civilizations—outstanding thinkers, artists, 
writers, men of science, owning their best 
allegiance not to nations, but to humanity— 
representatives not of government depart- 
ments, but of departments of the human 
mind. 
“We Must Run the Risk” 
HERE are, however, certain special fields 
in which Unesco must begin by bravely 
delegating the discussion of the question 
from the official and governmental to the 
unofficial and individual level, even if it 
runs the risk of finding that some suscep- 
tibitities, including those of some of its own 
Member Governments, are offended in the 
process. For if it does not run this risk, it 
incurs the certainty that little or nothing 
will be accomplished. 
The Economic and Social Council have 
worked along these lines in regard te the 
UN Scientific Conference to be held in 1949, 
on the Conservation and Utilization of the 
Resources. The Conference is designed to 
bring out the scientific and technical 
aspects of the subject, as far as possible 
removed from purely national interest, in 
the hope that the illumination and the 
rational motives thus provided may 
influence possible later official action. Such 
a method, I suggest, will be even more 
necessary if we are to deal with the prob- 
lem of world population, 
In fact I do not believe that it be brought 
on to the international stage at all unless 
it were previously made a matter of public 
world concern; and there is no hope of 
effecting this except by means of a con- 
ference of private individuals, free to say 
what they believe on the basis of the full 
facts, and to arrive at any conclusions they 
liked without being tied by official instruc- 
tions or susceptibilities or by purely na- 
tional interests. 
A New Interpretation of Life 
JDEED, we may go further, and sav that 
the advance of world civilization in the 
immediate future depends upon the emer- 
gence of a new interpretation of life, which 
would provide the basis for the driving force 
of belief and for its realization in action. 
Such an interpretation would have to be 
in one aspect humanistic, based on the 
possibilities and the limitations of human 
nat'rre, including its spiritual and emotional 
and intellectual as well as its physiological 
aspects; it would have to be based on 
scientific knowledge of the universe; and 
it would have to be dynamic, concentrating 
on the possibilities of change, not on the 
statuy quo, nor yet on a static ideal. 
Same such dynamic humanism, some such 
sister agencies, FAO and WHO, 
view of human destiny as the crown and 
continuation of the cosmic process of 
evolution, seems necessary to synthesize 
what is of value in the crowd of warring 
beliefs and interpretations to be found in 
the world today, and to provide the spur to 
fruitful action on a world scale. That 
Unesco might make a contribution towards 
some such dynamic synthesis is an inspiring 
thought. J 
Value of Personal Contact 
A considerable part of my time and 
energy has been spent in travelling, I 
having visited no less than 19 countries 
during the spring and summer, some of 
them twice. Since 1 have been with the 
Organization, I have visited 32 countries, 23 
of them Member States, and two protector- 
ates or colonies of a Member State. 
This has been of great value to my work 
for Unesco; indeed I regard travel as an 
indispensable part of the duties of the high 
officials of the organization. 
Such visits are of importance in making 
personal contacts with the authorities and 
leading personalities in the countries con- 
cerney, and in bringing home to them that 
Unesco is a living reality, not merely a 
remote and shadowy organization operating 
in far away France. 
I should add that this applies not only 
to visits from highranking officials, but to 
all official travel and to the influence of 
representatives in the field, such as the 
staff of the Field Science Co-operation 
Offices. 
For instance, the representatives of the 
Reconstruction Department travelling 121 re- 
mote parts of the countries of South and 
East Asia have noted the deep impression 
made by their mere presence. Through: it 
the UN and its agencies came alive to the 
local population, who could feel that they 
were participating in international life, 
instead of being distant and neglected 
objects in a scheme of things run by a 
mysterious “They” in some far-off and 
alien region. 
Grave Population Problem 
1 stress the gravity of the world population 
problem largely, because I have seen the 
undernourished children of the Marbial 
Valley in Haiti and the erosion of its hill- 
sides under the pressure of its already 
excessive but still increasing population, 
and have realized at first hand the impos- 
sibility of relieving that pressure by 
emigration. It is because I have seen the 
general low standard of life in the in- 
habitants of countries like Tunisia and of 
Egypt, where the population has doubled 
in approximately one gexeration. 
To see with one’s own eyes erosion, as 
in West Africa and the southern U.S.A. and 
Haiti; the effects of deforestation, as mn 
Mexico and North Africa and the Middle 
East, the low state of general health in the 
poorer people of Latin Awmerica and the 
Moslem world;—to see such things :s to 
realize forcibly that Fundamental Educa- 
tion must always be concerned as much 
with teaching people how to raise their 
standard of life as with education in the 
narrower sease, and that Unesco in all such 
ventures cannot hope for success unless it 
works in the closest co-operation with its 
Discrimination 
1 have talked personally with represent- 
atives of the hundreds of University 
teachers who have been dismissed or driven 
to resign in various countries; I have 
heard with my own ears Lysenko lead the 
[| | |] i 
now resulted in the dismissal of some of 
the leading biologists in the USSR, and the 
strait-jacketing and distorting of one of the 
most important branches of Science. And 
such experiences have brought home to me 
how far the world is from those ideals of 
freedom of research, thought and expression 
which are enshrined in Unesco’s Constitu- 
tion. 
Again, it is one thing to read about 
discrimination. It is a much more forcible 
experience to see it at work in many parts 
of the world, including, alas, parts of 
countries whish are States Members of 
Unesco; or to hear a leading academic 
personality in Peru maintain that the 
Indians should not be given educational 
opportunities because they were, racially 
and inberently, so inferior as to be un- 
educable. 
On the other hand, I have seen with my 
own eyes the evidence that this is not so, 
in the remarkable success of Mr, Truman 
Bailey in training Peruvian Indians in 
skilled eraftmanship and habits of regular 
work. 
To see this, and the almost complete 
absence of any social colour-bar in a 
country like Brazil, and the intelli- 
‘gence and public spirit of many 
African chiefs and professional men 
in West Africa, and the wealth of 
artistic talent, previously unsus- 
pected, that has been elicited among 
the Haitians by the modest encour- 
agement provided by the Art Centre 
at Port au Prince, or in Turkey by 
the mere removal of the traditional 
ban on representational art, is to 
be given very real faith in the 
results which could accrue from a 
genuine application of non-discrimi- 
natory principles. 
International Publicity 
UCH facts lead on to the 
encouraging belief that inter- 
national publicity is one of the most 
fruitful methods open to Unesco. 
If Unesco brings to light the 
positive successes which have been 
achieved where discrimination has 
not been practised, and where the 
authorities have genuinely believed 
in equality of opportunity, the facts 
will confound the forces of reaction. 
University Development 
N a more restricted fietd that of 
University development it is of 
great value for someone familiar 
onty with European and North 
American practice to see at first 
hand university life in other regions. 
To have Latin-American pro- 
fessors tell you of their duties and their 
salaries is to realize that the concent of 
university teaching as many educational 
systems in the region. To see for oneself 
how, in eastern Europe and the USSR, an 
increasing amount of research work is 
being assigned to the Academies of 
Science is to realize that the western idea 
of research being mainly a university 
function is not the only one possible, 
To talk to the staff of one of the Islamic 
institutions of higher learning attached to 
the Great Mosques is to realize that in 
Islamic countries . two entirely different 
conceptions of higher education exist side 
by side, with little or no correlation. 
During my official visit to Yugoslavia, 
Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia, every- 
where I went I saw the immense efforts 
being made in the cultural, scientific and 
educational fields, as regards not only 
reconstruction but also new ventures and 
achievements; I found no barriers between 
me and my academic colleagues, and in’ 
general a great willingness to exchange 
information with other countries and to 
co-operate in Unesco projects. Indeed, so far 
as I could ascertain, barriers to cultural 
exchange are at least as great between 
these countries and the USSR, as they are 
between them and Western Europe. 
In the Middle East, I was accompanied 
py Dr. Raadi who was acting as Consultant 
on the project of establishing an office of 
Cultural Co-operation in the region. He and 
I were equally struck by the general 
readiness to think in terms of a broad 
cultural region, embracing Turkey, Iran 
and Afghanistan as well as the countries 
of the Arab League, as against the cultural 
aationalism of single countries or the more 
insidious temptation of a narrower region- 
alism based solely on Arabic culture. 
The first two years of Unesco’s existence 
have proved that the new organization is 
viable and healthy, and that a number of 
practical projects, which could not be 
undertaken by any other body, lie ready to 
its hand. 
In its second year, Unesco has for one 
thing achieved a much more satisfactory 
organization. But what in the long run 
will be more important, it has begun to 
glimpse the way towards a central unifying 
concept, or, to use Monsieur Maritain’s 
phrase, a central principle of practical 
action, which will serve both to illuminate 
its path more clearly, and to give added 
energy to its action. 
N

## [Page 7](073867engo.pdf#page=7) 5

### IGNORE

November 1948 UNESCO COURIER 


### 73881: U.S. Commission studies "UNESCO in a divided world"

“U.S. Commission Studies 
“Unesco In A Divided ore 
hub of Unesco activities in the United States when the U.S. 
OR four solid days, 26th-29th September, Boston became the 
National Conunission for Unesco held its fifth meeting .here. 
The Commission went about its work with remarkable organizational 
precision, notwithstanding its complex and highly advanced structure. 
The radio, press and filin. of the nation responded well and the 
proceedings of the plenary ses- 
sions were filmed and recorded 
in sound. 
While its primary purpose was 
to examine the proposed pro- 
gramme of Unesco for 1949. to 
advise the U.S. delegation to the 
Beirut Conference and to con- 
sider implemertation of the 
Unesco programme for the Unit- 
ed States, its focal point, which 


### 73872: Spotlight on Arab thought: Taha Hussein calls UNESCO "common man-elite link"

SPOTLIGHT ON 
ARAB THOUGHT 
Taha Hussein 
{Continued from page 3) 
But how much more so, since it 
also allows philosophers and ar- 
tists, men of science and literature 
to meet and work together despite 
- the great distances which sepa- 
rate them. In this way, it seems 
to me, Unesco aids world civiliza- 
tion and progress, giving them a 
scope, depth and universality 
which they have never known 
before. EE 
     
EE 
There is yet another point 
which we of the Arab World 
should remember and the value 
of which we should appreciate: 
tha; 1s, that the modern world 
has emphasized the differences 
between Orient and West, and 
neither politics nor economics 
have ever succeeded in bridging 
the gulf between ihem. 
Knowledge and culture, however, 
cannot fail, because they know 
neither Orient nor West. They 
know only the Human Being, 
wherever he may be. No better 
proof of this can be found than 
the distinguished men of know- 
ledge and culture coming from 
the West who will attend the 
* meetings in Beiru: with under- 
standing for the culture of the 
Orient, co-operating with us and 
inviting us to a loyal and honest 
collaboration. 
Here, then, is the salute of the 
West offered to the Orient, sin- 
sere and disinterested: a salute, 
worthy of being joyfully received’ 
and truly appreciated by the 
Arab World, more especially as 
the Arab World is influenced bv 
the civility of the Koran which 
says: “If you are saluted; answer 
the salute by a better one or 
return it similarly.” 
(Translated from the Arabic), 


### 73873: A Philosopher looks at Arab literature among world classics

Arab Literature 
(Continued frem page 3) 
.. A Cairo review, al-Kitab, in its 
January 1948 issue, gives ap- 
proximate figures for the literary 
and scientific output of the Arab 
countries in 1947; the following 
figures relate to literature in 
Egypt alone: 
History of Literature and Cri- 
ticism, 450; Collections of mod- 
ern poems (“Divans”), 10; Col- 
Jections of ancient poems in 
popuiar Arabic, 13; Novels and 
plays. 80; Literary biographies, 53. 
The General Assembly of the 
United Nations, through the 
Economic and Social Council, has 
recommended that Unesco make 
accessible in all languages the 
outstanding works of each cuiture. 
Dr Charles Malik, President of 
the Economic and Social Council, 
has advocated that, to begin with, 
these measures should be applied 
to the Arab countries. He no 
doubt realized that the West was 
dangerously ignorant of the great 
works of Arab literature and that 
this was an underlying cause of 
misunderstanding and distrust 
between the two cultures. 
As part of its Translation of 
Great Books programme, Unesco 
has been attempting to determine 
those classics which should be 
translated from Arabic into Eu- 
ropean languages and the West- 
ern classics to be translated into 
Arabic. 
 
~ 
casily caugt ‘the imagination 
of the people. was the theme, 
“Unesco in a Divided Worla™ 
In the public meeting at the 
crowded Symphony Hall, where 
this theme was debated, 1* be- 
came clearly evident that the 
American people want U:zesco 
to press on with its ideals and 
activities on the practical level, 
even in the precarious peace of 
to-day. and without compromis- 
ing the dignity, respect and 
freedom of man. 
The proposed programm: of 
Unesco for 1949 gained wide 
support. Further strengthening 
of the proposals emerged {rom 
the six programme sections of 
the meeting on recons'ruction, 
communications, education, cul- 
tural interchange, human and 
social relations and natura! 
sciences. The Commission came 
ous strongly for a more effective 
encouragement by Unesco in the 
establishment and development 
of national commissions or co- 
operating bodies in all Member 
States. 
As regards the General Confer- 
ence, it was the consensus of 
opinion that after two vears of 
experience the annual adoption 
of the programme and budget 
should now be subordinated to 
discussion of the broader questions 
of Unesco Policy which will help 
in marshalling the forces of edu- 
cation. science and culture for 
world understanding and peace 
It was also suggested that since 
the achievement of peace is a 
highly political objective, Unesco 
might invite world statesmen to 
participate in the General Confer- 
ences in order to further 
understanding c¢f the relations 
between political problems and 
the forces of education, science 
and culture. 
Presiding over the Commission 
was Dr. Milton S. Eisenhower, its 
Chairman. Dr. Laves. D-puty 
Director-General of Unesco, par- 
ticipated actively not oniv in the 
meetings but also in two coast- 
to-coast radio broadcasts over 
CBS and NBC and in the panel 
discussion at Symphony Hai}. 
In his address he emphasized 
that Unesco is now delinitely 
under way, not as an American 
or European organization, but as 
a truly international instrument 
which cuts through and scross 
boundary lines and is already 
beginning to make itself felt and 
heard in all parts of the world 
It is concerned, he said, with 
all of the different kinds of divi- 
sions to-day existing in the world, 
and particularly those between 
Occident and Orient, between 
Occupied and Unoccupied count- 
ries, between Eastern Europe and 
the rest of the world, and 
between the "less industrialized 
and more advanced regions 
  
Turkish National 
Commission Meets 
The Turkish National Commis- 
sion for Unesco (Unesco Turk 
Mili Komisyonu) held its first 
meeting on 9 September, 1948, un- 
der the Chairmanship of Professor 
Hamdi Akverdi, the Director- 
General of Higher Education. 
The following are the first nine 
members to be appointed : 
Professor Hamdi Akverdi, President of 
the Commission, is the Director- 
Genera} of Higher Education. 
Professor Orhan Alisbah, Professor at 
Ankara University, 
Professor Renizi Oguz Arik, Historlan 
and Professor of History at Ankara 
University. 
Professor Fopat Baymur, Professor of 
Pedagogy, Ankara University. 
Dr. Emin Bilgie, Archeologist, Professor 
at Ankara University and President 
of the Commission for the Protection 
of Historical Monuments. 
Professor Irfan Sahinbas, Professor of 
English Literature at Ankara Un-| 
iversity. 
Mr. A, Kutsi Tecer, Director-General of 
Fine Arts at the Ministry of Na- 
tional Education at Ankara. 
Professor Bedrettin Tuncel, Professor of 
French Literature at Ankara,     
Pandit Jawaharlal! Nehru, 
Prime Minister of India visit- 
ed Unesco House on October 
27. The Prime Minister, who 
was accompanied by. his wife, 
was received by the high offi- 
cials of the Organization whe 
discussed with him some of 
the educational, scientific and 
cultural problems of his 
country, Above: Pandit Nehru | 
is seen with Indian members 
of the Secretariat during a 
- luncheon given in his honour 
by Unesco. Left to right: Dr. 
R. Naidu, Mr. S. Adiseshiabh, 
Mr. S.N. Sen, Pandit Nehru, 
Mrs. Nehru, Mr. S. Chandra- 
sekhar, Mr. Das Gupta and 
Mr. B. Dhingra. 
¥* : *     


### 73870: MacArthur accepts UNESCO programme in Japan

MacArthur 
Accepts Unesco 
Programme 
in Japan 
(Continued from page 1) 
In addition, the Supreme Com- 
mander suggested that Unesco 
serve as the agency to encourage 
the exchange of scientific, educa- 
tional and cultural publications 
between Japan and other coun- 
tries. He al5o recommended that, 
in view of the financial difficul- 
ties which today face Japanese 
students wishing to study abroad, 
Unesco undertake to make known 
existing fellowships and scholar- 
ships for which Japanese may be 
eligible. 
It was pointed out to Dr. Kuo 
that Japanese desiring to go 
abroad for educational and cultur- 
al purposes required sponsors 
who could guarantee their total 
expenses while away from their 
country. 
+ General MacArthur also point- 
ed out the desirability for SCAP 
representatives and selected Jap- 
anese experts to attend, as 
observers, sessions of Unesco’s 
General Conference, certain 
technical conferences (par‘icular- 
ly those concerned with texibook 
revision), seminars, etc. He sug- 
gested to Dr. Kuo that SCAP 
might furnish Unesco with in- 
formation on Japanese tex'book 
revision and that Unesco in turn 
inform SCAP of progress made in 
developing criteria for textbook 
reform. 
At the end of this meeting, 
General MacArthur told Dr. Kuo 
that the Japanese people, with 
SCAP assistance, have under- 
taken a nation-wide programme 
‘of educational, scientific ana cul- 
tural activity which is in har- 
mony with the aims and pur 
poses of Unesco. Working through 
Unesco, the Supreme Commander 
said, SCAP might encourage 
those activities by continued ma- 
nifestation of interest and bv the 
extension to Japan of special 
assistance in certain areas and 
projects. - 
During his ten-day stay in 
Japan, Dr. Kuo met with the 
heads of various sections of Gen- 
eral MacArthur's staff including 
Civil Information and Education: 
Public Health and Welfare; Eco- 
nomic and Sciéntific; Natural 
Resources; Civil Communications; 
Diplomatic and Government He 
also held conferences with Jap- 
anese Civil Authorities which 
had been arranged for him by 
SCAP,   


### 73882: The Place of women in UNESCO: an Indian view

 
AN INDIAN VIEW 
The Place of Women 
In Unesco 
The article printed below is reproduced from the “Behar Herald,” 
Patna, India. 
HE Charter of Unesco states that the purpose of the Organization 
will be realized by giving fresh impulse to popular education and 
the spread of culture by instituting collaboration amongst the nations 
to advance the idea of equality of educational opportunity without 
regard to race, sex or any distinction, economic or social. 
It is of vital importance that. 
the intention to provide equality 
of opportunity for girls and 
women, expressed with equal 
forcefulness in the Education 
- Plan for India, should be imple- 
mented, and not remain a vague 
and unrealized assertion. 
The tirst educational efforts in 
all countries have 
destruction but for the glory of 
living. 
The family is the social unit 
and it is the mother who has to 
provide the almosphere in the 
home which fosters, virtue, the 
spirit of service and sacrifice, the 
true understanding of charity, the 
belief in the di 
invariably been 
devoted to the 
male child in the 
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur 
gnity of labour 
and, above all, 
tolerance that 
mistaken belief 
that the girl child could pick up 
all that was necessary to make for 
an economically and biologically 
useful member of the community. 
Economic usefulness was consider- 
ed to be the preparation of food 
and tre making of clothing, with 
manual asistance of varying in- 
tensity with the caitle and in the 
fields; biological usefulness con- 
sisted in the provision of children 
to maintain the race, along with 
incidental assistance in gaining 
the common livel hood. : 
No one wll deny that the 
greatest influence on .he child, 
and hence on the succesding gen- 
eration. derives from the mother, 
nor that woman's true vocation, 
settled biologically from thz dawn 
of time, is motherhood. Yet it 1s 
only comparatively recently that 
recognition has been given to the 
fact that the uneducated mother 
can do the greatest harm to our 
children through her own ignor- 
ance, and hence can do the 
greatest harm to the race. Even 
woman's great function as a spiri- 
tual guide is vitiated by ignorance 
and it follows that that deep re- 
ligious belief which inspires and 
stirs the noblest sentiments can- 
not be imparted effectually. 
Discrimination 
We in India are very conscious 
of discrim:nation in education bet- 
ween the sexes. Our women today 
are steeped in ignorance and 
poverty. But it must at the 
same time be admitted that 
the general attitude to women’s 
education can only be described 
as lukewarm. It is the relatively 
small handful of educated women 
in India who must act as pioneers 
in their own land. Further, they 
must join with Unesco and look 
to the help and support of women 
of other lands for the proper edu- 
cation of children all over the 
world. 
It is the mothers in all lands 
who suffer from the doctrine that 
might is right on which the world 
has rested so tar, and, in their 
millions they mol only see their 
children slaughtered and maimed 
but sense their children’s failure 
to learn from the past. If wars 
are to be prevented, coming gen- 
erations must be imbued with the 
conception of their futility, and 
the children, from their earliest 
years, must be filled with a pas- 
sionale love of mankind as God’s 
creation for His purposes, not for 
knows no distine- 
tinction of caste race and creed; 
Women without education can 
play but a small part in mould- 
ing the future generation, and 1 
would be tempted today tc say 
that in my country the education 
of girls should take precedence in 
all schemes of educational develop. 
ment over the education of boys 
until such time as the lag in girls 
education - has been overcome: 
Women must be in Unesco and 
the instruments organized to 
achieve its aims to ensure that 
the essential opportunities to 
learn are provided and, further- 
more, provided in the right way. 
Duty for Women 
In the spread of scientific 
knowledge there is an escential 
duty for women. Here everything 
possible must be done to ensure 
that scientific advances shall be 
directed to the bénefit and not 
to the destruction of mankind, 
In the two wars in the lifetime 
of this generation science has, 10 
its everlasting shame, been hare 
nessed to the destruction of life 
and its very foundations. 
Apart from the immediate ef 
fect in killed and wounded, it is 
still bringing about the deaths of 
millions in all parts of the world 
with the exception of the jew 
favoured nations who have ap- 
parently remained wuntouchedy 
and the end lo misery, starvation 
and death is not yet in sight. 
The motherhood of the world 
must lift ils voice to heaven and 
say “Never again shall this be 
done to our sons and our daugh- 
ters” and this voice must be ably 
represented in all national and 
international councils. 
Representation, however able 
it may be, will be of little value 
unless women can unite in their 
determination that there shall be 
understanding amongst all peo- 
ples, races and creeds. They have 
the common bond of endurance 
and suffering, which are the 
tadge, so to speak, of womanhood, 
Women are in particular the 
repositories of their national 
culture and of spigitual under- 
standing. In these things, neither 
race nor creed discriminates. But 
women must be active in the ex- 
pression of their determination. 
They must steadfastly refuse to 
co-operate in all that makes jor 
war and must inculcate their 
ideals in their children from their 
earliest years so that the gene- 
ration to come may live in the 
reality of peace.

## [Page 8](073867engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER . November 1948 
 


### 73883: Conditions of intellectual activity in the Arab world: a Lebanese speaks out

( Lebanese Speaks Cut » 
“ Conditions of Intellectual 
Activity In the Arab World” 
HAT Unesco is holding its 
conference in the Lebanon 
this year is no insignificant 
event; and it is necessary, I think 
for us to consider the full mean- 
ing of this fact. 
It means that the Arab world 
is no longer a mere geographical 
expression, or nothing more than 
an important strategical point or 
a fertile field for colonial exploi- 
   
    Pe Na a 
Dr. Charles MALIK, 
Minister Plenipotentiary of 
the Lebanon in the U.S.A. 
President of the United Na- 
tions Economic and Social 
Council and Chairman of the 
Committee of the UN General 
Assembly for Social, Humani- 
tarian and Cultural Affairs.     
 
"A Lebanese mountain shepherd, 
tation; no longer do the people 
of this region seem confined 
within its boundaries, and isclat- 
ed from the intellectual activities 
end the history of the world. 
The coming to the Lebanon of 
this high international Organiza- 
tion for Education, Science and 
Culture, shows that the Arab 
world, and more generally, the 
Middle East, are gradually comi- 
ing out of their deep mental iso- 
lation, trying to study the prob- 
lems with which they are faced 
and the possibilities which lie 
before them. It shows thar they 
are trying also to respond to 
the daring example given them 
by other nations and peoples, 
and to become fit for cultural ex- 
changes and collaboration based 
on total mutual respect. 
It shows moreover, that the 
world has begun to believe in the 
grea; importance and possibilities 
of the Arab people. As for the 
Lebanon, the coming of Unesco 
to 1ts territory shows that the 
important position of this coun- 
try both in the Western and in 
the Arab world is a clear reality 
which lays upon it a positive in- 
ternational mission that 1t must 
modestly prepare and lovingly 
fulfil. 
I say that we are gradually 
coming out of our mental isola- 
tion, and in our present state, it 
is difficult and even impossible 
to say more, In order really to 
escape from this isolation, to 
realize thoroughly our importance 
and possibilities and to play an 
active part in the great world 
pageant of thought, in order that 
our judgment may be valued and 
our opinions respected in Hel- 
sinki, Bordeaux, Boston, Buenos 
Aires, Sydney, Minsk or Cape 
‘Town, there are seven conditions 
which we must fulfil, and these 
are the conditions of the exis- 
tence of our mental activity. 
I A complete and fundamental 
"reform of our social and economic 
principles 
I can confidently assert that 
our opinion will never be res- 
pected, nor will our judgmen; be 
valued so long as the majority 
- of the people in the Arab. coun- 
tries have insufficient social and 
economic rights. This state of 
affairs is most prejudicial to us, 
as I myself have been compelled 
to feel, time and again, when 
III. The preservation of our true 
cultura] heritage 
This means that we must 
distinguish clearly between what 
is positive and what is negative, 
what is true and what is false, 
and this distinction is the touch- 
stone by which we will test our 
judgment. As this touchstone 
shall truly reveal all that is false, 
so shall we discard these false 
things readily and with a true 
heart, Thus, and thus only, shall 
we be able to benefit fully from 
our true cultural heritage. 
IV. The translation of the classics 
into Arabic 
If the Arabic mind is steeped 
in Aristotle, Pilato, Augustine, 
Akwini, Ibn Rushd, Al-Faraby, 
Galai-Eddine Elroumi, Ibn 
Khaldoun, Hegel, Dostoievsky, 
Nietzsche, Tolstoy and other great 
inkers; if the Arabic mind 
studies deeply the practical appli- 
cation of experimental science, 
and, conssquently, seeks to pierce 
mysteries of nature, then the 
~ Arab world will be able, before 
‘the close of the 20th century, to 
create and express something 
new which will have repercussions 
in Helsinki and Cape Tcwn. But 
if it remains a stranger to these 
accumulated riches, I do not see 
when it will take a serious place 
in the intellectual world. 
  
i —— — -— 
The Cedar, national emblem of the Lebanon, in a winter setting. 
dealing with international affairs. 
These facts are there, to be seen 
and faced with the .necessary 
courage and decision. . 
II. The complete emancipation of 
women and the normalizing of 
) the emotions 
This is an essential part of 
social reform, for so long as we 
do not consider women as a human 
entity in their own right and 
so long as the emotional side of 
our being is unsettled, the mental 
side also will have neither order 
nor stability. In history, with a _ 
few exceptions which cannot be 
taken as a standard, we find 
that it is impossible for a nation 
to produce anytiaing in the realms 
of intellect and culture, uniess 
its emotional side, fundamentally, 
is first normalized. The choice 
then remains between keeping 
apaxg from any intellectual and 
cultural movement and preserving 
emotional disorder, or taking an 
active part in those movements 
after mastering those emo.ions. 
V. Freedom of Thought 
and Conscience 
To desire truth and to find it, 
to adopt it and change our men- 
ta] outlook accordingly; to gain 
further freedom with each new 
discovery of truth: that is the 
most important principle of any 
responsible mental activity. For 
any objective intellectual develop- 
ment there is one indispensable 
condition: that our society and 
our governement should guarantee 
the responsible use of freedom in 
the expression of personal opi- 
nions and beliefs in science, art, 
philosophy and religion, Bug if 
our real being is not entirely 
known to us and if our attitude 
deprives us of this knowledge or 
of the free expression of it, then 
I do not see how we can ever 
attain true intellectual activity. 
The condition of this intellectual 
activity is that it must be at the 
same time a substance and a 
form and not always a substance 
for another form. 
 
The “Krak des Chevaliers”, ancient Lebanese fortress, dating from the period of the Crusaders. 
 
‘The famous ruins of Baalbek, northeast of Beirut. 
VI. The Disinterested Pursuit 
of Truth, 
As long as we shall consider 
that the greates; catastrophe ot 
our existence is our failure in 
spheres of practical interest: com- 
mercial, material, literary or poli- 
tical, our voice will never make 
itself heard in the “temples” of 
pure intellect. 
Science did not grow and pro- 
gress, sublime art did not flourish, 
nor philosophy impose itself ex- 
cept by disinterested research and 
thought. He who believes in some- 
thing objective and real, outside 
his own self, and who trusts in 
the possibility of attaining it; he 
who desires above all else to 
arrive at this point, who will im- 
pose upon himself absolute priva- 
tion fer its sake, to whom the 
joy of intellectual vision is a 
greater satisfaction than any 
pleasure or profit; he who aspires 
to free, conscicus, logical and 
analytical thought, he alone will 
have = lasting place in intellec-   — 
together for the common good. 
If this union were surrounded by 
an atmosphere of freedom and 
understanding, with the search 
for truth as its aim, and if there 
were far-sighted sympathisers 
ready to offer it all material ne- 
cessities, and if it remains in 
constant contact with practical 
life and its responsibilities, never 
shrinking or drawing back, then 
we can say that reason has at 
last come and that it may 
perhaps stay. 
In order that it may stay, and 
be established on sound founda- 
tions, this Arabic intellectual unity 
must maintain contact with other 
intellectual circles throughout the 
world, with universities and cul- 
tural institutions, in a spirit of 
noble modesty ready to accept the 
plain truth. The most important 
condition is that great thinkers in 
the Arab world should know cach 
other and be united in genuine 
friendship, the spirit of which is 
love, and the framework hopeful 
patience. Then what heights can- 
Two typical Druze gentlemen of the Lebanon. 
tual life. But he who demands 
. profit from all things, will be 
deprived of both the things and 
the profit. 
VIL. Close collaboration between 
leading thinkers 
Intellectual activity implies a 
living and unfettered exchange 
among the enlightened spirits of 
the age. Seclusion and isolation 
have never produced any respon- 
sible thinkers. If we wish reason 
to flourish and develop in the 
Arab World, then al] great think- 
ers should co-operate and work 
not be attained and what hidden 
lights cannot be revealed ? 
There may be some scoffers 
who do not believe in the possi- 
bility of the Arab world, realizing 
these conditions, and, as a result, 
do not believe in intellectual ac- 
tivity for the Arab world. Great 
may be their number. But all 
these conditions, I am convinced, 
are quite easy to fulfil. I affirm 
that the future is for him who 
believes in the possibility of their 
realization. It may be that we are 
already on the threshold of all 
this, and that we know it not. 
(Translated from the Arabic) 
Editorial 
Editor : S.M. KOFF 
Oftices : Unesco, 19, 
LER. 
Avenue Kléber, Paris (l16e). . 
Director : H, KAPLAN. 
All Reproductions Authorized 
IMPRIMERIE DU “NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE”. 21, Rue de Berri, Paris (8e). 
Unesco Publication 222 '