# [078211](078211engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](078211engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
of the 
5
 
$
s
 
AW
 
S
S
 
A 
ry
 
-~
 
a 
by
 
> 
- 
a
n
a
l
 
A 
REG 
N
h
 
a
 
a 
a
n
a
 
- 
. 
 
 
 
 
November 1965 (18th year) U.K. : 1/6 stg. Canada 30 cents - France 1 
Uricr 
F 
  
The ~~ 
UNESC     
A wi ndow open on the world

## [Page 2](078211engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

WONDERS 
OF 
THE BUSH 
a a oa 
—pe——— al Sd #! 
\ al 
sr oT   
| =X 
do + N g 
rv ELE 0 ENTS 
In this painting by the Senegalese artist, Papa Ibra Tall, an uncle supports his young nephew high on his shoulders 
as he introduces him to the plants, the birds, and other wild life of the bush. Entitled, “Wonders of the Bush”, it is 
one of the designs contributed by artists from many lands to the United Nations Children’s Fund, for reproduction 
on UNICEF greeting cards in 1965 (see page 32). Papa lbra Tall grew up in Tivaouana, a well-known Senegalese 
centre for handicrafts, and later studied in France. An artist of great versatility, whose work ranges from ceramics and 
tapestry designing to painting and sculpture, he now heads the Plastic Research Section of the Dakar Art School. 
UNICEF

## [Page 3](078211engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
‘mCourier 
NOVEMBER 1965 - 18TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
  
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
Published monthly by UNESCO, 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7°. 
Annual subscription rates : 15/-stg.: $3.00 
(Canada) ; 10 French Francs or equivalent; 
2vyears:27/-stg.; 18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.: 
30cents;1F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in July and August when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in Englsh, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese and Italian. In the United Kingdom it is distributed 
by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E. L 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor, Signed articles re- 
‘printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
tne opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature published by 
H. W, Wilson Co., New York. 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin:Ilchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Illustrations : Phyllis Feldkamp 
Research: Olga Rodel 
Layout & Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief. 
Page 
  
11 
14 
16 
18 
24 
30 
31 
32   
Ne
 
11
 
- 
19
65
 
M
C
.
6
5
-
1
-
2
0
7
 
A 
  
THIEF-PROOFING OUR ART MUSEUMS 
By Richard LeBlanc 
INTERPOL 
A world-wide warning system against stolen art 
MONA LISA ON THE MOVE 
V.l.P. protection par excellence 
57 PAINTINGS LOST IN ONE ROBBERY 
HAVOC WROUGHT BY VANDALS 
CONFRONTING THE IRASCIBLE IRAZU 
By Haroun Tazieff 
DISMANTLING ABU SIMBEL 
By Louis A. Christophe 
WORLD CONGRESS ON ILLITERACY 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
UNICEF GREETING CARDS 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
  
  
Cover photo 
 
Among the thousands of masterpieces 
that have survived the centuries, their 
beauty still intact, is this magnificent 
statue on the Puerta Santa of the Cathe- 
dral of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 
which dates from the twelfth century. 
But masterpieces of beauty are far too 
often exposed to theft or vandalism. 
Stricter protection of museums and 
monuments open to the public is need- 
ed today when modern techniques can 
facilitate surveillance. (See Page 4).

## [Page 4](078211engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

© Monuments Historiques, Paris 
— 
El AI ALIEN A TI ER I EY EE EET EEE .r 
WC EW ST Nl REI tt Wn BE WEG Elo Nr 4 ad We 7 a 8 le 
" NY : A 
  
~ Ee Bf Cube ie eli ei ir ti EA AE SE Ei de a 
P72 
- eB ’ ! ’ "SEE 4: Vf ' 
AT A AIAN Na FAD a TATA RT XY WaN AIO Rr "RN ANY RIA = aR . . 
\ «{ . 
! : Aa : To, 
! 3 3 F ¢ a 
me . y 
Ad . n 1) 
A AN : * 
i. 
ET ba 
- Fy | A - 
¥ EN 
ad 
4 x 
he » § A pn — - A - » oo, } 
"Bad Ba ad bed Ld AW ER RT


### 60652: Thief-proofing our art museums

THIEF-PROOFING 
OUR ART MUSEUMS 
by Richard LeBlanc 
It was a quiet afternoon. The citizens of Florence strolled 
in the streets of their lovely city. And art-lovers flocked to 
the Uffizi museum to view the rich collection of Italian 
Renaissance paintings. But drama struck that day in one 
of the modern art rooms. To the consternation of the 
crowd collected around a painting of Morandi, the picture 
suddenly fell from the wall with a crash. Upon inspection, 
the authorities were dumbfounded to find scrawled on the 
back of the canvas: “Thank you. | have always liked 
Morandi.” And the date of the theft was added. For theft 
4 it was; the painting that had been hanging for weeks in that 
spot was a reproduction. 
And the newspapers had another headline. 
| T is generally agreed that one of the happier 
explosions taking place today is the increasing 
interest in matters cultural. Symphony orchestras are 
playing to full houses, theatres are enjoying long runs, and 
museums are reporting ever-increasing crowds. Critical 
publications have subscription lists almost as long as the 
popular reviews Even the commercial cinema has done its 
part with film biographies of artists and musicians. 
However, there is another side to the coin.. Too many 
pecple have become too well aware of an artist's work 
through the headlines: ANOTHER PAINTING STOLEN; 
POLICE HUNT ART THIEF; RANSOM DEMANDED FOR 
FAMOUS CANVAS. Too many who had never heard of

## [Page 5](078211engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 60652: Thief-proofing our art museums

This “Adoration of the Shepherds” weighs 100 Ibs (45 kg). It was stolen from the Basilica 
in Saint-Denis, near Paris, one ni ght in December 1963. A 17th Century altar front in gilt 
vermeil, it measures 9 ft 10ins by 2 ft 5 ins (3 m by 75 cm). This splendid work is still missing. 
IRIE EIT ' ‘ . roe 
RVR ew bh MTL Tw» oF . . re) 
Few a SHE a SRW NEA als 
¢ RE. oy § Nr gud 
  
Goya before, have been able to discourse learnedly on 
the value of his “Duke of Wellington” since the painting 
was stolen from the National Gallery in London in 1961. 
And there are those who insist that the Louvre's “Mona 
Lisa” by Leonardo is the more interesting (though hardly 
on purely aesthetic grounds) for having been the victim of 
a sensational theft just over fifty years ago. 
Art is very much in the news, then. But the real irony 
behind this boom is the danger to a museum's art treasures, 
a danger which lies in direct proportion to the rise in 
public interest. As countries make a greater effort to 
display more works to a wider public, the shortcomings 
of the museums become dramatically evident. Too few 
of them increase the size of their staffs adequately, still 
fewer the quality. A large European museum recently 
opened 28 new rooms of art treasures, but not one extra 
guard was hired to oversee and protect the new material. 
This, of course necessitated a greater dispersion of the 
existing guards. 
This inadequacy in buildings and protective systems is 
reflected in the increase in art theft as an industry. It is 
said that in the United States alone three or four art - 
objects are stolen every day from museums. 
The problems of a museum are greatly increased by the 
soaring value of works of art. If a painting by a modern 
artist can sell for as much as $50,000, its attraction to a 
thief is obvious. 
Most stolen paintings are recovered, however. In one 
six-week period of 1961, 65 canvases were stolen—besides 
  
Ch
. MIR 
E
S
 
fe
 
C
a
 L
L
 
L
o
 
. 
“4 hr dL 
Sekai RAN A ha) a va MERA od A 
the aforementioned Goya—in both England and France. 
All but one have been restored to their places of origin. 
Some thieves are apparently unaware that police organi- 
zations the world over are given all details of a major 
art theft and go to work immediately. Other thieves, who 
have done their homework, realize that it is nearly 
impossible to sell a recognized work. The normal proce- 
dure in such a case is to demand a ransom for the 
picture—a ransom which is all too frequently paid. Still 
other criminals, more timorous perhaps, merely abandon 
their treasures in the face of so much pressure. 
Of course, in the case of other art objects, different 
procedures can be used. Jewellery obviously lends itself 
to the diamond cutter’s art and can be reduced to readily 
saleable cut stones. And sculptures can be and often 
are, melted down, even if only to recover the intrinsic value 
of the metal itself. 
There are known cases where whole paintings have 
been carefully cut up into smaller sections—either for 
attempted resale as a verifiable piece of a famous work 
or merely for sale to the type of person who would rather 
have a section of a celebrated painting than nothing at all. 
Tapestries fall into the same melancholy category and 
are frequently dismembered for piecemeal resale to the 
unscrupulous. 
The team that makes life so miserable for art thieves is 
the International Criminal Police Organization—known as 
Interpol. It is Interpol that distributes reports on such thefts 
to every major police force in the world, giving all the 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](078211engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 60652: Thief-proofing our art museums

THIEF-PROOFING MUSEUMS (Cont'd) 
Security expensive 2... Not the morning after 
pertinent data that may lead to recovery of the object. 
This process has proved particularly effective in blocking 
resales, since most pictures are taken for disposal to 
countries other than those they were stolen from. 
But Interpol is also aware of the high value of an ounce 
of prevention; how much simpler it would be if the thief 
never managed to get away with that canvas. 
To this end the International Council of Museums (ICOM) 
has been working with Interpol since 1957. The Council, an 
organization subsidized by Unesco, has given special 
attention to the protection of museums against thefts. In 
January of 1957 it asked Interpol to undertake a study that 
would emphasize the preventive aspect, rather than 
recovery, and would stress the combinations of human 
beings and mechanical devices that might best discourage 
any attempt at theft, or at least catch the thief before he 
could leave the premises. 
The results of this study have been published by Unesco* 
in the quarterly magazine “Museum.” The article was 
written by Mr. André Noblecourt, chairman of the ICOM 
Sub-Committee on Security in Museums and a technical 
adviser on security to the museums of France. 
Between the Interpol report and Mr. Noblecourt’s article, 
countries the world over were approached and asked to 
contribute to the sum of knowledge on the subject. The 
response was heartening. The presidents of national 
committees of ICOM submitted reports of their own which 
were collated in the final documentation. 
The sixth ICOM General Conference, held in The Hague, 
in July 1962, devoted considerable attention to the problem, 
and the President of the ICOM Commission for Security 
delivered a paper summarizing the progress made to date. 
But the findings of these studies were often shocking. 
A reer of countries reported using no pro- 
tective devices whatsoever to guard their art 
treasures. Others listed inadequate or outdated methods 
which would present no real problem to a determined 
thief. 
One of the most reassuring replies came from a museum 
in Vienna. A system of thirty signals is activated if any 
of the guards fail to report on a pre-arranged schedule. 
When the alarms sound the main doors close automatically, 
and local and federal police receive a “theft signal” by 
means of a direct-contact cable. However, the museum 
is forced to admit that the whole system is so expensive 
to operate that it is only used to protect the most valuable 
items. As the British point out, rather plaintively, “There 
are no alarm systems which combine high efficiency with 
low cost.” The protection systems in the Louvre alone 
cost over $45,000. 
The consensus of museum experts is that devices using 
electromagnetic fields are the most effective. Instruments 
such as television, radar and even infra-red detectors for 
night-time can give the kind of spatial coverage which 
protects large areas of the establishment by keeping them 
constantly in view. The images from such fields can be 
Bb 
* “Museum” Vol. XVII No. 4, 1964 
led to a central observation post, thereby simplifying the 
staff's job. 
A museum in Columbia, South Carolina, which has 
delicate devices attached to every one of its pictures, 
reports that the paintings in one of its galleries are 
“touched” 85 times every day. These are not thieves 
but merely art lovers who cannot resist personal contact 
with a canvas which attracts them strongly—in the same 
way that one Rembrandt lover has always wanted to pick 
off that tiny point of white pigment that sits on the very 
end of the master's nose in the self-portrait which hangs 
in London's National Gallery. 
The experts agree that a combination of systems is 
preferable, since a single device could be studied and 
overcome by a painstaking criminal or gang. It is also 
pointed out that all systems dependent on electrical power 
should have their own source of supply, since any interrup- 
tion in the regular current would put them out of action. 
An important consideration in any system should be the 
dispersion of the warning signal. Almost all authorities 
are agreed that in addition to the resident guard unit, the 
signal should go automatically to the police—preferably 
at a federal, as well as local, level. 
T HE mechanical techniques used in the protec- 
tion of works of art are often obvious. Armour 
plating, pickproof locks, unbreakable laminated glass—all 
are in standard use, although rarely remarked by the 
museumgoer. 
Few visitors to a museum are aware that they are 
constantly under surveillance through one-way glass strips 
which are often disguised as decorative elements in the 
gallery. But it is the “space-age” devices which are the 
more exciting. 
An enterprising thief, who had otherwise avoided the 
devices elsewhere in the building, might find himself 
caught out by a special microphone which can be so 
adjusted as to “ignore” all other sounds except the noises 
peculiar to his tools—saws, hand-drills, blowtorches. 
Certain instruments can be positioned so as to emit 
a continuous ultra-sonic wave. When a would-be thief 
breaks this wave, the resultant interruption activates an 
electric cell which signals the fact to the guards. 
Most of the rugs in museums are wired. At closing 
time, the current is turned on and anybody who steps on 
the rug from that moment on closes a contact, sets off 
an alarm bell and floodlights the room. 
The professional burglar who feels that he is on to an 
easy thing in exercising his craft in the realm of art, may 
find that as his blowtorch starts to cut through a steel 
plate he has caused a heat-sensitive detector to react. 
One of the most effective follow-up devices, in this case, 
is to have a charge of explosive set off by the detector, 
designed to throw the thief into a panic. 
Close cousins to the ultrasonic devices are photo- 
electric beams, usually used in the daytime, and infra-red 
instruments for the night. All work on the principle of 
a field of waves which reacts to interruption. 
Television cameras are highly practical aids to the 
modern museum. Either fixed or movable they can cover 
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

## [Page 7](078211engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

      
  
     
notice, issued jointly by the Toronto Art Gallery and the Canadian Police, =o Tag 
“was circulated after the theft of six priceless paintings which were cut out of their ~~ 
frames during the night of 14-15 September 1959 and ‘stolen from the mu- 
~ seum. Doors of the museum were fitted with safety locks but not the windows, gS 
: had been broken. Two weeks later the paintings were recovered. 
i 4, Ep! ere > 5 a - : 0 - Az Bato LN J i Ei Hie '§ Ni 
lB FOR THE RECOVERY OF PAINTINGS Hi 
J \ 
STOLEN FROM oh 
THE ART GALLERY OF TORONTO 8 
   
      
. feds! 
2 On Tuesday, September 15th, 1959 yd 
g 
: of 
x 
a 
Ee 
) 
os 
i 
had 
oh 
REMBRANDT: REMBRANDT: : HALS: 1 
"Portrait of a Lady with a Handkerchief" "Portrait of a Lady with o Lop Dog’’ "Isaak Abrahamsz. Massa" 
Oil on canvas, 49 x 392 Qil on canvas, 32 x 25% Oil on canvas, 31% x 25% ar 
4 
) 
- 
Th 
- al 
HALS: : RUBENS: RENOIR: Ey 
h¥ "Vincent Laurensz. von der Vinne'' "The Elevation of the Cross" "Portrait de Claude" ! 
Oil on canvas, 252 x 19% Oil on paper on canvas, 28 x 52 Oil on canvas, 16 x 12% Wi 
A substantial reward is offered for information leading to the recovery of any or all of these 
stolen paintings. Telephone or wire collect to 

## [Page 8](078211engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNITED KINGDOM 
1 Goya 
1 Reynolds 
1 Gainsborough 
1 Raeburn 


### 60653: Interpol theft warnings alert police in 95 countries

INTERPOL 
THEFT 
WARNINGS 
ALERT POLICE 
IN 
95 COUNTRIES 
NESCO and the International Council of Museums (ICOM) 
have launched a campaign to make the museums of the 
world more security-conscious. In this work, they are 
being helped by Interpol, the International Criminal Police Orga- 
nization. Interpol, neither a super police force nor an inter- 
national detective agency, was founded in-1923 as a public service 
to prevent and check crime. At the request of ICOM, Interpol 
carried out the first world survey of alarm systems and other 
devices used to protect museums against theft. When a theft 
does occur, Interpol’'s own alarm system moves into action. 
From Interpol headquarters in Paris, full details of the stolen 
painting, sculpture or work of art are immediately circulated to 
the police services of some 95 countries. No fewer than 
fourteen different nations have notified thefts from museums, 
galleries or public monuments during the last five years. Map 
shows only thefts of publicly-owned works of art. It does not 
list losses from private collections or galleries. There are 
about 12,000 museums in the world today and they attract, be- 
tween them, some 220 million visitors every year. This is why 
the problem of adequately protecting art treasures worries 
museum authorities as never before. 
DUKE OF WELLINGTON by Goya, 
stolen from National Gallery, London, 
recovered in the left-luggage office 
of Birmingham station this year. 
  
  
PERU 
ANA 
CANADA URUBAMBA 
OCONGATA 
QUEBEC 11 paintings 
(many thousands of art 
MONTREAL objects have been stolen 
in recent years from pre- 
TORONTO Columbian burial sites). 
32 paintings : 
  
Rembrandt, Corot, fois cons ENING ¢ a NIGERIA 
Boudin, Monticelli, DEATH OF JACOB, by Rembrandt, sepia wash and pen, 
stolen from the galleries of the Montreal Museum of Fine 3 wood sculptures 
etc. Arts in October 1964. This drawing still remains untraced. stolen from lllobu

## [Page 9](078211engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 60653: Interpol theft warnings alert police in 95 countries

FRANCE 
SWEDEN 
BAYONNE 73 paintings : a 
2 paintings : 
ENCE Cézanne, Picasso, Utrillo, 
: Frans Hals 
ST. TROPEZ Matisse, Dufy, (or school of) 
Vlaminck, Signac, MENTON 
PARIS Foujita, Utrillo, etc. oh 
THE CARD PLAYERS, one of 8 paintings 
by Cézanne stolen from the Aix en Pro- 
vence Museum in 1961. Recovered in 1962. 
  
     
    
   
NETHERLANDS 
ROTTERDAM 
HAARLEM 
AMSTERDAM 
2 Rembrandt 
GERMANY 1 Provoost 
(Fed. Rep.) 
1 Bertram 
1 Wouwerman 
AUSTRIA 
BELGIUM 
34 sculptures 
stolen from ten NAMUR 
different chur- ANTWERP 
ches. BRUSSELS 
2 paintings. GHENT 
9 paintings 
2 icons  
   
  
   
    
    
SWITZERLAND 
CRANACH THE ELDER. This 
16th Century portrait of Prince 
Johann Friedrich was stolen in 
1961 from the Museum of Fine Arts 
in Basel, Switzerland. Recovered. 
GREECE 
1 sacred book (12- 
th Cent.) stolen 
from the St. Denis 
Monastery of 
Mount Athos. 
ITALY 
ROME 100 sculptures | 
and i 
PALERMO works of art | INDIA 
TURIN Frescoes ic 
FLORENCE (15th Cent.) i: 16 bronze Buddhas 
17 paintings, | 
MINTURNO retables and | from the 
MARZOBOTTO triptyches. : Archaeological 
£ seum. sen PL 
SYRACUSE two and a half 14 statuettes stolen 
feet high in the 
GROSSETO pica), mu- 
f i - 
ASCOLI PICENO te. Sicily. In Oo- 
AGRIGENTO tober 1962, it 
vanished myste- 
NAPLES E
T
 
ta
r 
C
e
 
riously and is 
still on the 
missing list.   
Nalanda 
Mu- 
in August 1961, two 
more in March 1962. 
Buddha 
20 inches in height. 
1 Byzantine triptych 
   
NEGRO HEADS, by Ru- 
bens, stolen from the 
Musée d'Art Ancien in 
Brussels on 16 February 
1964. Painting was re- 
covered on the next day. 

## [Page 10](078211engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 60652: Thief-proofing our art museums

10 
THIEF-PROOFING MUSEUMS (Cont'd) 
Qualified guards & electronic traps 
a wide field, can be realigned from a distance by remote 
control, and enable a single man to watch an entire floor. 
Even more useful for purposes of identification after a 
theft, are photographic cameras which are set to film a 
forced entry automatically. Used mostly in night work, 
the cameras may be hidden and the criminal may not even 
be aware that he is being “recorded” for Interpol. 
Any and all of these systems have, normally, both 
manual and automatic settings. They may serve to alert 
the guard force by alarms, lights, or the direct vision of 
a watching employee. They may also set off flares and 
smoke bombs to further confuse a thief. 
It is natural that museum authorities are loath to divulge 
the types of devices they use. Even the makers of the 
instruments keep details of their manufacture a closely 
guarded secret and vary the designs frequently. Obviously, 
if a thorough criminal could find out what systems a given 
museum used, and could also study the devices them- 
selves, his work would be enormously simplified. Secrecy 
about the entire subject is imperative—as anyone who has 
tried to discuss it with a museum security officer will know. 
Museums, however, have every facility for finding out 
about protective equipment. Detailed and attractively 
designed catalogues are published by all the leading manu- 
facturers of anti-theft devices, and each offers to send 
around an expert to advise a museum which equipment 
to use for its particular needs. 
But as the Interpol-Unesco report stresses, “Mechanical 
devices alone are insufficient. The human being must be 
there." Bells, smoke, dye—sheet steel-—none serve any 
purpose if the responsible museum staff cannot catch 
the thief. And if the men responsible are sufficiently well 
trained, the theft itself may never take place. 
T HE careful selection of able men (whose back- 
grounds can be checked) is an absolute requi- 
rem~.it tor any museum. The quality of the personnel using 
all these modern mechanical devices must be at least as 
high as the devices themselves. 
The guards or watchmen must be thoroughly familiar with 
the layout of the museum. They must know of the presence 
of all security devices and how to operate them. Their 
patrols should normally be made at irregular intervals and 
they should follow different routes. 
In at least one New York museum the guards hired are 
sworn into the regular police force and have all the powers 
and responsibilities that go with such a position. In the 
museum, there are a few of these security men whose job 
it is to mingle with the art-viewers, pass through the galleries 
with them, and even occasionally sit down with the crowds 
to rest their weary feet—but never their eyes. 
According to Joseph Chapman, formerly with the United 
States Federal Bureau of Investigation and currently an 
international art “detective,” the training of personnel 
should be systematic, covering the areas of direct physical 
intervention, warning procedures, and crowd control. He 
points out that in 1964 a trio of thieves was able to take 
the “Star of India” sapphire from its showcase in New 
York's Museum of Natural History because the staff had 
never been told of the existence of a contact alarm attached 
to the case—and had therefore not turned it on. 
Mr. Chapman estimates that 409, of museum thefts are 
the work of men who have secreted themselves in the 
building while it was being closed down. They had thereby 
eliminated their first problem—that of entry— but the fact 
that they could do so is an indictment of the care taken 
by the guards in their final-closing inspection. 
A well trained staff must be constantly on the alert for 
what is not visible, as well as for that which is. In one 
provincial museum in France, a sketchbook of Cézanne 
had lain open at the same page for some time before it 
was discovered that an enterprising thief had cut out all 
the pages from behind the two that were visible. 
A LLIED to this alertness is the need for a staff to 
know exactly what the museum does contain, so 
that a theft can be spotted as soon as possible or, if worst 
comes to worst, an accurate description of the missing 
object can be broadcast. Most museums keep multiple 
records of all possessions. This precaution led to the 
downfall of one dishonest employee of an American museum 
in 1963. He carefully took all the records he could find on 
the objects he had stolen, but was unaware of a further 
set of records kept in a different place. This was enough 
to trip him up. 
Museum authorities in India suggest that in addition 
to the normal records kept, a photographic file of every 
picture should be made, preferably more than one of 
each, and each file should be kept in a different locality— 
including a safe place outside the museum itself. 
Overall responsibility for the security in a museum should 
rest in the hands of one man, Mr. Chapman stresses. 
Division of the load results in duplication of effort, and 
greatly increases the risk of a “hole” in the system which 
each person believes the other is responsible for. 
Mr. Noblecourt has this to say on the financial aspect 
of the problem : “.. the need for (staff) quality involves 
extremely careful selection. In order to obtain the services 
of a picked staff who meet these criteria, it is important 
to make the posts well paid enough to attract and retain 
good men. All those involved are agreed upon the 
principle, but the same is not true of its application in 
practice. 
“Some foundations or private institutions which are 
administered with an eye to profitability do not regard 
money devoted to ensuring the protection of the collections 
as unproductive ; the guards are therefore decently paid... 
“We have thought it necessary to emphasize the primary 
importance of the quality of the human factor, for however 
efficacious material equipment may be, it must always 
be borne in mind that the value of a fortress is measured 
by the value of its defenders.” 
The sine qua non of the problem is the attitude of the 
authorities toward their responsibilities. With more than 
220 million people visiting some 12,000 museums throughout 
the world, the problem has achieved vast proportions ; the 
range of protective devices is impressive—but they are 
expensive. Yet, as Mr. Noblecourt concludes, “Security 
is a field in which facts must be faced...”

## [Page 11](078211engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

omy | ML = 
SAI ’ ) ary A ] Sew ~— ea 4 a y 
a AAR an geal 
Fue wR fits ol { WR Ce ad : 
on 87 EA eA age bd AH 1 aI LER 5 pny + 
Eh mete SA ELA A Te ds aE : 
  
   
 
    
  
     
     
    
        
: y* . 1) : i NE . ™ FRAO I “th Mg 2 My J J : a 
a Wi i : 8, d : 
[rw ao ah pe “aa 
         
© Agraci, Paris 


### 60654: Mona Lisa: V.I.P. protection par excellence

Mona Lisa 
V.I.P. protection 
nar excellence 
N December 14, 1962, in the dawn 
light of a winter morning, a motor, 
car escorted by police pulled out 
of the Louvre Museum in Paris (photo 
left) and took the road for the port 
of Le Havre: one of the world's most 
famous paintings, Leonardo da Vinci's 
“Mona Lisa" was off to America. It was 
then exhibited for four weeks at the 
National Gallery in Washington and for 
a further month at the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art in New York, to hund- 
reds of thousands -of admiring visitors. 
In arranging for the “Mona Lisa" to 
make this transatlantic voyage, the Lou- 
vre gave a demonstration par excellence 
of how to protect a work of art against 
every kind of danger. Technicians 
planned the operation down to the last 
detail. First, X-rays and large scale 
photographs were made of the painting. 
Then, removed from its frame, it was 
placed between blocks of nylon as a 
precaution against vibrations and packed 
into a case weighing 80 kilogrammes 
(187 Ibs) specially designed to protect it 
against shocks and changes of temper- 
ature (above). 
. -— x 3. * Fe Sa  
TEA rade tA Fs pr od . 3 Shad 
The Louvre had already had occasion 
to test the efficiency of similar air-con- 
ditioned containers when it sent paint- 
ings by Rembrandt to an exhibition in 
Vienna. Even the possibility of a ship- 
wreck had been considered and to pro- 
vide maximum safety for such a VIP 
passenger, the protective case had been 
made unsinkablel Six guards kept 
constant watch over the “Mona Lisa” 
which travelled in a reserved cabin 
fitted with a device to keep a 24-hour 
check on the temperature. 
The “Mona Lisa,” now over 450 years N 
. " old, was brought from ltaly to France 
by Leonardo in 1516. It was given its . ‘ "diay |e ax N=» near RN LE cai ey Te as £2 LE LE original name, “La Gioconda” because 
Photo © Pans - Match, Courniére 
  »

## [Page 12](078211engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 60654: Mona Lisa: V.I.P. protection par excellence

MONA LISA 
(Cont'd) 
it is believed to be the portrait of the 
wife of an Italian, Francisco del Giocon- 
do. Francis | of France bought it from 
Leonardo for 4,000 gold florins (a sum 
that now corresponds to $600,000), but 
its present-day value is inestimable. In 
1911 it was stolen from the Louvre and 
was not recovered until two years later 
in Italy. In 1957 it was struck by a stone 
thrown by a vandal who was trying to 
mutilate it, but fortunately it suffered only 
slight damage. Since then it has been 
protected by a sheet of bullet-proof 
glass. 
In 1962, when the French Government 
agreed to loan it to the United States, 
the conditions under which it was to be 
exhibited were specified in detail. While 
on view in Washington and New York 
it was under constant surveillance; only 
natural lighting was used throughout its 
exhibition and the use of flash bulbs by 
photographers was forbidden—the heat 
generated by them might have changed 
the temperature of the air-conditioned 
hall. As the voyage of the “Mona Lisa" 
proves, works of art can now travel 
great distances without serious danger 
of damage or deterioration, thanks to 
modern protective techniques. “Mona 
Lisa" returned to the Louvre in perfect 
health on March 12, 1963 after being 
seen by nearly 1,600,000 people in the 
United States. 
. 
x 4 i 
b
i
d
e
 
¥ 
T
e
y
 
Le
e)
 
o
o
n
 
ra
 
Sat
u 
- 
oo
 
- 
t
d
 
F
r
 
F, 
T
R
L
 
T
L
 
R
R
 
P
I
T
A
 
w
h
e
n
 
+ - £ 
-
 
-
 
P
r
e
 
o
o
 
F
r
y
 
o 
-
r
 
mr
 
al 
a
 A 
L
i
l
 
  
n
e
 o
t
 
  
.-
 E
R
 
p
i
 
- 
pr
 
E
—
—
 
—
—
—
 
wa
r A
=
 
aal
en 
La 
a
 
   
     
 
    
     
  
       
“FE. 
a 3 
LPL SHE 
   
 
   
   
   
  
    
 
  
—
—
 
Sle 
ETE 
 

## [Page 13](078211engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 60654: Mona Lisa: V.I.P. protection par excellence

           
   
wri pian swe 
ia Ee oy FRAP PRERTISPIN oan SR or, 
“ Mona Lisa” in the National 
Gallery, Washington. 
Constant watch was kept 
on the painting by 
means of television cameras 
———— covering the entire hall. 
Image picked up by the cameras 
was transmitted to a central 
observation post. 
Above, during the night, 
one of the guards on 
duty keeps his eyes fixed 
on the masterpiece in 
the now empty hall. 
At the slightest sign of anything 
- suspicious he can sound a 
general alarm. 
Left, crowds file past 
the “ Mona Lisa”, guarded 
by armed sentries. 
As a further measure to 
facilitate surveillance, only a 
limited number of persons 
at a time were allowed 
into the hall. 
Photos © Paris-Match 
  
  
13

## [Page 14](078211engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 60656: 57 oil paintings lost in a single robbery

LL 
ali 
A 
22 
HL Bi 
LA Tropez (Duno- “yer ‘de Segon- 
zac). The only 
one of 57 works stolen from the Annonciade ~ Museum in St. ~ Tropez in 1961 still missing. 
Thy weed ati 
LO 
{Ya yr > 
y 4 
d 
. 
| 
: 
y 
: 
: 
i 
x
: 
A 
5
1
 
6d
 
of
 
Dg
 
ap
 
4 
Westminster, 

## [Page 15](078211engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 60656: 57 oil paintings lost in a single robbery

Sy LE 4S 
ald? 
FA LN i 1 i . 
abl Wade FIRES 8 
“ pr The 2S y Yi J 
el et 
A wi 
cone ae TO hey e Hs : (¥ ety 
i" re 
= 
we JUL x 
= | of the Annonciade Museum at St. Tropez, 
on the French Riviera, on the morning of 
~~ Sunday, July 17, 1961, got the shock of her 
life. The walls of the ground floor galleries 
~ were completely bare. During the night 
thieves had broken in and helped themselves 
to 57 paintings—well over half the total collec- 
tion. The museum normally had a guard on 
duty at night but on this particular occasion 
ois ~ he was absent, visiting a sick relative. Matisse, 
BR = [oT LETS RE TET MAVIET TL V ETC ITE A oT Een TI 
~~ names of just a few of the artists read like 
a roll-call of giants in nearly half a century 
of French painting, from 1890 to 1935. The 
ER UL CSET ER TEEN RT I ERE ERLE TT I 
~ to have one of France's finest collections of 
modern painting, ranking, according to some 
authorities, in fourth place after the two great =~ 
museums of modern art in Paris and the Gre- 
~ noble Museum. This was the fifth art robbery 
to take place on the Riviera within a year. 
~ Almost all the works taken in the earlier thefts 
Rar 
~ (the missing one is shown opposite page, top). 2 : HH N al - ul | or 5 q -_——\ 
RL PUEREL RT St  ER TE SE TT Woman-at a Balustrade (Van:Dongen), 
~ Wo Ed yf 

## [Page 16](078211engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 60660: Havoc wrought by vandals

HAVOC WROUGHT 
BY VANDALS 
The Corcoran Gallery in Washington, 
thwarted the thief who tried 
to make off with this painting, 
Rembrandt's 
“Man with Hat Holding Scroll”. 
The painting, however, 
was damaged slightly. 
Museum restorer here works on cut 
at bottom and right borders. 
This Buddha at Pagan, Burma, 
was the victim of man’s greed. 
It was completely disemboweled 
by vandals in search of gold 
they believed to be hidden inside. 
Most of the statues 
at Pagan are similarly mutilated. 
  
© J. l.avaud 
  vy > 
ee 
16 
ae = 
i 
j: 
-

## [Page 17](078211engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 60660: Havoc wrought by vandals

In January 1962, 
the famed Uffizi Gallery in Florence 
suffered its worst case 
of vandalism since the war. 
One morning, 
twenty-five masterpieces worth 
almost $2 million were discovered 
slashed and damaged, 
all apparently by the same 
deranged individual. 
Finger in photo points 
to long slash mark on 15th Century 
masterpiece of “Madonna Enthroned” 
by Hans Memling. 
Museums are now redoubling 
their efforts to safeguard 
their art treasures. 
O protect their works of art mus- 
eums have to be constantly on 
the alert. Museums know this, 
but are often short of the material 
means to provide proper protection. 
A lack of surveillance, an excessive 
dispersion of guards and the result 
may be disastrous. Works of art may 
not only be left as relatively easy and 
tempting targets for the thief; they 
can also become the victims of van- 
dalism of all kinds. [In 1914 the 
splendid “Venus" of Velazquez in 
the National Gallery, London, was 
slashed through and through by a 
suffragette who chose this way to 
alert the public to the urgency of 
granting women's rights. In 1959 a 
mentally unstable person tried to 
slash a work by Rubens, “The Fall of 
the Damned”, in a Munich museum. 
Two years later it was the turn of 
a Montreal museum to suffer at the 
hands of a visitor who, in a fit of 
destructive fury, damaged valuable 
works by Renoir, Daumier, Fantin-La- 
tour, Monticelli and Coburn. Grapho- 
maniacs are not satisfied with defac- 
ing public buildings and monuments. 
To protect the painting, “La Source”, 
by Ingres from being defaced by 
these scribblers, the Louvre in Paris 
has been obliged to cover it with 
glass. Even true art lovers are some- 
times guilty of minor misdemeanours. 
Delicate electronic devices attached 
to paintings in one museum reveal 
that they are touched anything up 
to 100 times a day. To add to all 
these problems, there is the omni- 
present one of finance, for as yet 
there are no alarm systems which 
combine high efficiency with low cost. 
  
5 
a 
».
 
W
A
R
 
A
 
E
R
E
 
RE
T 
R
E
T
 
REE 
w
a
 
B
s
 
B
a
 
H
h
 
  
of by ba 
> 
Ae i 
e
d
 
S
u
p
t
 
  S
S
I
S
 
S 
S
S
E
 
R
E
E
 
ot
 
Ch
r 
T
i
 
Se 
\ 
ve
 
hd
 
=
 
  
 
  
  
> y  
wr} Lig 
I : 
TR ¥ 
influ 
AERA 
BY) ACTH ns ES 2 
pa Al ra TR Oy 
Lb »  
© Associated Press

## [Page 18](078211engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
arm a yh rN - : —_ __ = ; Te 4 
* LAT AF a or LU Le Foy BR A Vp : : a 3 oC SS 3 
\ 0" 3 - FY -— - ~N $ on age : . ‘A 
wv - we. = or A : a 12a yA ay 
-~ i - Some dW (> fi . =. —t. 
. 
18 
  
  
. Ay 
=a Yl wr Va y : 
i SR TIRlt. “Er VEER oy 
EN a Ne ro . Et A ras - 
a thie chev 2% oo of a al Wa TH 
- ISN SNE Tas 
Fore WARE 00 BE i a (= RAGA ; pS 
: ’ ig ? - _- 
. v on ot " " . : rs : lh . 
w PI w 
© Haroun Tazieft 


### 60661: Confronting the irascible Irazu

On the night of September 27, 1965, the Taal volcano, in the Philippines, erupted 
suddenly and violently, causing hundreds of deaths and widespread devasta- 
tion. Taal had already erupted three times since the beginning of the century. 
Its last eruption in 1911 also caused heavy loss of life. The most recent catas- 
trophe is one more reminder of the vital need to keep constant watch over vol- 
canoes. Few eruptions fail to give some warning signs. If these are observed 
and interpreted accurately and promptly, the local population can be evacuated 
in time. Accurate methods of observation have now been developed. Principally, 
these involve: the recording of earth tremors due to underground movements 
of magma masses; the analysis of gases to detect changes in their composition 
which occur before an eruption; and precise surveys of a volcanic crater as it 
expands under the pressure of magma when an eruption is due. This last type 
of diagnosis has been used by the American geophysicist, Robert W. Decker, 
Last year he made repeated measurements with electronic equipment across 
the Kilauea volcano crater in Hawaii, and recorded a 30 centimetre expansion 
across its 4 kilometre diameter just before an eruption. Tellurometers, the in- 
struments used, have an accuracy of one millimetre per kilometre. Unesco is ac- 
tively developing a programme of international co-operation in volcanological re- 
search; since 1953 it has sent three missions to make on-the-spot investigations. 
In 1964, Unesco sent a mission to Costa Rica following the eruption of the Irazu 
volcano. This was led by the Belgian volcanologist, Haroun Tazieff, who de- 
scribes below the special problems of Irazu and the warning and protective mea- 
sures proposed by the mission. 

## [Page 19](078211engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

  
"Volcanology is like medicine,” says the famous Bel- 
gian volcanologist, Haroun Tazieff. “Before a doctor 
can give a prognosis, he has to know his patient. It 
is the same with a volcano: the better we know it, the 
greater chances we have of predicting its behaviour.” 
In March 1964 a Unesco emergency mission led by 
Haroun Tazieff spent several weeks observing the 
"feverish” volcano of Irazu in Costa Rica. Bell-shaped 
helmet seen in this photo is the latest type of protec- 
tive headgear worn by volcanologists. It can withstand 
the shock of a 60-pound weight dropped from 500 feet. 


### 60661: Confronting the irascible Irazu

CONFRONTING 
THE 
IRASCIBLE 
IRAZU 
by Haroun Tazieff 
| RAZU, a volcanic peak over 11,000 feet high in 
the massive cordillera that dominates Costa 
Rica, lies fifteen miles east of the capital, San José. Since 
the day in 1723 when it awoke with fury, destroying the 
city of Cartago, then the capital of Costa Rica, it has erupt- 
ed at least eight times. 
razu had been dormant for almost half a century when 
it suddenly erupted on May 13, 1963. Huge clouds of vol- 
canic ash shot skywards; the earth near the crater was 
blasted open for hundreds of yards and covered with 
several feet of ash. Nearly four miles from the crater 
ash soon lay a foot deep. 
Yet the greatest threat to Cartago and nearby commun- 
ities was not volcanic fire, but the combination of ash 
and water. Tropical rains can transform volcanic ash into 
a river of mud that sweeps everything before it—trees, 
rocks, house-sized blocks of lava—at the speed of an 
avalanche. This was how Herculaneum was buried during 
the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 A.D. that also 
wiped out nearby Pompeii. 
In December 1963 a mud-flow coming down the Rio 
Reventado on the slopes of Irazu advanced on Cartago 
eight miles away, and swept through its lower section, 
killing thirty persons and wreaking heavy damage. 
Following this calamity, the Government of Costa Rica 
asked Unesco to send an emergency mission to lrazu 
in order to study with Costa Rican engineers and scientists 
the measures that could be taken to prevent a recurrence 
of the disaster. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 21 
19

## [Page 20](078211engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 60661: Confronting the irascible Irazu

  
IRAZU (Cont'd) 
A verdant landscape of woods 
and growing crops surrounded 
the volcanic peak of Irazu 
until May 1963 when vast® 
clouds of smoke and ash began 
to belch forth from the volcano 
(left, still in eruption in Feb- 
ruary 1964). Vegetation of ali 
kinds has since disappeared 
beneath the deadly rain of ash 
(right) which covers everything 
within a range of 12 miles and 
in places is several feet deep. 
With the arrival of tropical 
rains, the mass of ash becomes 
a sea of liquid mud, forming 
torrents which slide down the 
slopes, sweeping all before 
them. Below, a jeep used by 
the Unesco mission to lIrazu 
follows a narrow track cut 
into a desolate mountainside. 
Photos © H. Tazieff 
  

## [Page 21](078211engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 60661: Confronting the irascible Irazu

  
& E ] A 
, 
“RA 
on 
- 
- 
Deadly rain of ash 
In February 1964 we were entrusted with this volcano- 
logical mission to lrazu. 
The Costa Rican Government was eager to know how 
the eruption that had been going on since May 13, 1963 
was likely to develop. The crater was throwing out vast 
quantities of ash (fresh liquid lava and old solid lava 
pulverized by the explosions) which was jeopardizing the 
coffee crop—Costa Rica's chief economic asset—and to 
some extent was perturbing the life of San José, the 
capital. 
Was the discharge of ash going to continue, intensify 
or cease? How great a risk was there of a sudden violent 
explosion that might endanger the communities around the 
volcano? 
Such questions were difficult to answer, in the first 
place because the present state of volcanology does not 
permit acdéurate forecasting either of the intensity or 
duration of an eruption. Secondly, in this instance the 
absence of previous studies meant that even an approxi- 
mate forecast was out of the question. 
Volcanic forecasts—often very reliable concerning the 
start of an eruption—are based on changes in certain 
chemical and physical factors, essentially the composition 
of gases, their temperatures and pressures, the nature 
and depth of volcanic disturbances, the nature of micro- 
seismic tremors, the tilting of the ground and so on. But 
it is not yet possible to forecast the duration of an eruption 
in progress. 
The Costa Rican Government placed at the disposal of 
the mission two jeeps fitted with radio transmitter-receiv- 
ers; a tracked vehicle without radio; a fixed radio trans- 
mitter-receiver; a petrol driven power unit for charging 
batteries; two banks of accumulators and a volcanic bomb- 
proof shelter which was installed in a trench dug at our 
request through the rim of the crater. 
This shelter, the first volcanic observatory to be set up 
on the American continent, was constructed of semi- 
cylindric. steel sections placed end to end and covered 
with earth. Entrance to it was gained through a doorway 
at the valley side of the trench, while two windows, 
protected by sliding timber shutters, looked out on the 
crater side. The whole was erected speedily and effi- 
ciently by the Costa Rican Institute of Electricity, to which 
the members of the Unesco Mission would like to express 
their gratitude. 
Once completed, this observatory-shelter became the 
base station. A seismograph, installed in a concrete pit, 
and generally functioning 24 hours out of 24, was connected 
by cable to a pen-recorder placed in the observatory. A 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](078211engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 60661: Confronting the irascible Irazu

22 
  
IRAZU (Cont'd) 
The big killer : avalanches of mud 
radio station was set up in the observatory by the Tele- 
communications Service of the Guardia Civil. 
The mission then set up two mobile seismological sta- 
tions by placing a set of instruments—seismograph, ampli- 
fier, recorder and chronostat—in each of the radio-equipped 
jeeps. These mobile stations were used to locate the 
exact position and depth of the earth tremors. 
This part of the programme was at first seriously hamper- 
ed, partly by difficulties with the radio-telephone links, "and 
partly by noise interference picked up in the populated 
areas where the mobile stations had to be sited. Several 
nights had to be spent in trying to reduce such inter- 
ference to a minimum, and this additional work caused 
extreme fatigue, for during this time it was vital to maintain 
the daily recordings and observations. 
During the six weeks it spent in Costa Rica, the seismo- 
logical team used six miles of recording paper for its 
seismograms. This enormous. volume of data was analyz- 
ed immediately it had been recorded, thanks to the devotion 
of the experts who often worked 18 to 20 hours per day. 
“FIRST OBSERVATORY-RE 
Protection against heat, explosions, showers of debris and 
other hazards of a volcanic eruption has always been a major 
problem for the volcanologist. Here, on the rim of the lrazu 
crater, engineers of the Costa Rican Institute of Electricity 
  
It was thus possible to provide the government with a 
day-to-day record of the seismic activity of the volcano 
during that period. 
The first studies of the volcano and its activity showed 
that -there was little immediate danger of a paroxysmal 
explosion—though the possibility of it happening in the 
future could not be excluded—or of an outflow of lava. 
However, there was a definite and very serious risk for 
the whole area lying on. the leeward side of the volcano 
—in relation to the prevailing winds. The danger was from 
torrents (or avalanches) of volcanic mud, known also as 
“mud-flows", .or lahars. It is difficult to understand why 
this danger is everywhere so seldom realized, for on the 
average, lahars cause greater losses of life and property 
over the whole world than outflows of lava or volcanic 
explosions. 
Lahars can either occur during the violent phase of an 
eruption, due to the sudden melting of snow or ice by the 
glowing lava or, in the case of a volcano with a crater 
lake, through the ejection of the water (sub-lacustrine vol-

## [Page 23](078211engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 60661: Confronting the irascible Irazu

  
  
    
’ 
UGE IN THE AMERICAS 
x 
build a volcanic bomb-proof shelter of reinforced steel sections 
covered with earth for the Unesco mission. Photos show 
stages in the construction of this armour-plated volcanic 
observatory—the first to be set up on the American continent. 
Photos © H. Tazieff 
3 ~
 
 
canic explosion). They may also be caused by the effect 
of rain falling on the thick layer of ash, sand and dust 
that has accumulated on the slopes during an eruption. 
It was the third cause with which we had to deal at 
Irazu. By the time we arrived in the district the dry season 
had already lasted two months, during which the eruption 
had neither diminished nor changed in nature. Immense 
quantities of ash, with no rain to wash them away had 
gradually accumulated on the lee side of the crater. 
Although stable when dry, such a mass does not remain 
so when wet, and it seemed inevitable that heavy down- 
pours during the rainy season would create torrents of 
mud capable of devastating the inhabited areas on the 
slopes and at the foot of the volcano. 
Our exploration of the slopes at lrazu showed that the 
thick layers of ash had built up chiefly in the upper valleys 
of the rivers Durazno (to the west), Tiribi (south west), 
Reventado (south) and to a lesser degree the Taras (south 
east). Ash also covered the northern and western slopes 
of the volcano, but the danger here was less because the 
0
 
or
 
if AS 
eg 
(5 
Th
al
 
+ 
X
N
 
W
o
k
,
 
forests had not been cleared for pasture to the same 
extent as towards the south. : 
On the southern slope the danger was greater because 
of the lack of vegetation and the effects of previous 
erosion. There would thus be few obstacles to slow down 
or halt the progress of mud-flows once they.had started. 
Less than 30 per cent of water is enough to transform 
dry volcanic ash into liquid mud. As a mud-flow builds 
up and surges to the bottom of a valley, its initial volume is 
swollen with debris of all kinds and sizes that the mud 
sweeps along with it: trees are uprooted, rocks and stones 
are torn away from the sides and bottom of the valley. 
It has been found that a lahar may increase its volume 
sixfold in this way. 
While it remains. in the higher part of the mountain this 
mass is contained by the deep ravines, or quebradas. 
These, however, usually peter out suddenly where the 
slope decreases near the foot of the volcano. At this 
point the mass of the lahar suddenly spreads out like a 
CONT'D ON PAGE 30 
23

## [Page 24](078211engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

Giant sandstone baboons over six feet 
high (right) topped the facade of the 
great temple of Abu Simbel until they 
were cut into blocks last August. For 
3,000 years they were the first figures on 
the facade to be lit by the rays of the 
sun as it rose above the hills on the far 
side of the Nile. The dismantling of the 
Abu Simbel temples must be completed 
by August 1966; to reconstruct them on 
higher ground will take until May 1970. 
Photos Unesco-Nenadovic 


### 60662: Dismantling Abu Simbel

  
  
DISMANTLING 
ABU SIMBEL 
T HE dismantling of the great temple of Abu 
Simbel has begun; 300,000 tons of rock have 
been removed; the hill above the temple has been 
excavated. On the fagade the frieze of baboons and the 
hieroglyphic inscriptions beneath it have been cut into 
blocks. Last August, the ceiling of the sanctuary was 
removed and for the first time light from above shone down 
on the gods seated in the darkness within. 
The operations at present proceeding at Abu Simbel— 
the first of their kind in the world—have but one object: to 
save intact for posterity two unique monuments. These have 
to be transported, block by block, to a position near the 
original site but higher up so that the waters rising behind 
21 the Aswan High Dam can never reach them. 
The initial stage of the work is nearing completion. lt 
began with the separation of the two temples from the 
by Louis A. Christophe 
hillside out of which they were hewn, by removing the entire 
mass of surrounding rock. This called for precisely cal- 
culated protective works: the reinforcement of the facades 
by sandhills as a precaution against damage being caused 
to the statues by falling blocks of stone, and the installation 
of scaffolding to support the ceilings in the interior of both 
monuments. 
Indeed, there is no denying that for the returning traveller 
the remembered charm of Abu Simbel has vanished. And 
this first sad impression is in no way mitigated by the 
spectacle of the sandhills which cover the facades, by the 
long laborious walk through the long metal tunnel leading 
inside the monuments and by the sight of the complicated 
network of scaffolding which fills the various halls. 
But when reason finally triumphs over emotion, every- 
thing immediately becomes clear. The coffer-dam, some 
400,000 cubic metres of rockfill material whose crest now

## [Page 25](078211engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 60662: Dismantling Abu Simbel

rises 135 metres above sea level, is there to remind us of 
the danger which threatened this historic site. Had this 
coffer-dam not raised its protective mass before the temples 
of Abu Simbel, they would have been submerged and 
damaged during the winter of 1964-65, and perhaps some 
of their treasures—the Osirian pillars with their huge statues 
in particular—would already have been destroyed. 
The great temple is now completely separated from the 
mass of rock which surrounded it and, in August 1965, the 
first ceiling, that of the sanctuary, was cut into three blocks, 
each weighing from 15 to 20 tons. These blocks were lifted 
by a giant crane and deposited not far from the site where 
they will be put back in place next year. A trench is now 
being dug behind the sanctuary to facilitate the cutting of 
the walls of that hall and of the four seated figures that are 
its main adornment. 
On the facade, other blocks have likewise been cut away 
with infinite precaution and stored: first, those directly 
surrounding the sculptured part, the pylon of the monument, 
which is to be used again in the reconstruction so that the 
framework will consist of the original stone; then those of 
the facade itself—the frieze of baboons, the cornice and 
the hieroglyphic inscription just below the baboons. By 
the end of August, the work had reached the horizontal 
torus and it was planned to make an early start on cutting 
up the top of the crown of the huge statue seated at the 
south end of the fagade. 
The removal of the mass of rock from above the small 
temple was begun much later and has just reached the 
  
series of blocks which will be used again when the temple 
is re-erected. However, since this monument is smaller 
than its neighbour, it will be easier to cut up and work will 
begin in the near future, even before all the blocks of the 
great temple have been transported, on reassembling the 
pieces of the small temple on the site now being prepared 
for it. 
In fact, as one climbs from the river bank to the plateau 
towering over the temples of Abu Simbel, one passes 
through a series of work-sites. Below, men are cutting 
into the living rock; above they are levelling off sites for 
the new foundations of the two monuments; nearby, tra- 
velling cranes are busily storing away the huge stone 
blocks which are brought up several times a day by special 
trailer lorries. 
These different centres of activity, where workmen labour 
for twenty hours out of the twenty-four, are linked by a net- 
work of asphalted roads. These roads also lead further 
south to a village—by now almost a straggling town— 
which is nearing completion. Workshops and equipment 
stores have sprung up near the work-sites as well as 
installations which supply water and electricity. A little 
further away are offices and homes (the engineers often 
have their families with them) built around a dining hall and 
a club, where a swimming pool is now being constructed. 
In front of these simple, rectangular houses built in 
Nubian style, alluvial soil—brought up from the river bank 
when the lake was at its lowest level and just before the 
beginning of the flood season—has been laid down to 
CONT'D ON PAGE 29 
23

## [Page 26](078211engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 60662: Dismantling Abu Simbel

A Tn cof CAH ays TAR VE 
Ea +4 re ko SE ome ih 
26 
The facade of Abu Simbel as it appeared in 
the spring of 1850 to the French writer, 
Maxime du Camp, who took this daguerre- 
otype—the first photograph ever made of 
the temple. The colossi were half hidden by 
a river of sand flowing down the hillside. 
Abu Simbel was probably invaded by sand 
during the XXVI Dynasty, 2,500 years ago. 
3.40 nh =" ~ td 
Unesco 
  
Unesco-Laurenza 
    
  
The statues of Rameses on the northern side of 
the temple entrance as seen for half a century. 
The huge sand dune which had half hidden the 
temple was not completely cleared until 1910. 
A a i 
The rise and fall of 

## [Page 27](078211engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 60662: Dismantling Abu Simbel

  
   
ox ye " 2 ¥ AT IRAN" » st 19a ih ¢' 
Photos Unesco-Nenadovic 
  
. 
Bulldozer covers the facade with sand to History appears to be repeating itself. 
protect the giant statues of Rameses during Only the heads of the colossi emerge from 
the dismantling operations. These are sched- the man-made sand dune, as they did in 
uled to be completed in the autumn of 1966. 1850. Since September 1965 the statues 
of Rameses have been completely hidden 
from sight and the frieze of baboons 
above them has now been cut up and 
removed. (See drawing next page.) 
21 ie Nubian sands 

## [Page 28](078211engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 60662: Dismantling Abu Simbel

= = 
ws 
0 I 
From left to right, hieroglyphic 
inscription on upper facade 
(IER UCI LCE IR Cl J CRE TAT 
Simbel is split into huge blocks. 
I= 3 I  F=1s Uo JE-F- VTE To) io TeATiV/ 1
tools, are used for this oper- 
ation. Blocks are numbered 
(foreground, centre photo) and 
~ stored to await temple's re- 
~ construction on hilltop. Far 
right, section is gently lowered 
to giant transporter. It bears 
the graven inscription: "Rame- 
“ses, beloved of the gods”. 
: ~ Photos Unesco-Nenadovic gE 
oe - 3.0 I ‘“ ore 
  
Architect's drawing gives section view of great temple during dismantling operations. Arrow 
marks emplacement of colossal statues of Rameses |l on fagade of the Great Temple of Abu 
Simbel, totally covered with sand as a protective measure. Temple has been completely separated 
from mass of rock around it. Statues surrounded by scaffolding are Osirian pillars of the first hall. 
Drawing VBB, Stockholm Last September, sanctuary ceiling was cut into three blocks each weighing between 15 and 20 tons. 
     
  
e
t
 
HN . = 
els . 
L 
SF 
Th 
» n a 
J oy i 
1 
a i 
=X \ 
BY » 
> i 
po \ 
[aS . 
Lakeic® 1 
1a ) N 
eh i 
WE, Kl 
NN - 
Fy I  
  
wv 5 
i 
WY
 
S
E
L
 
S
P
 
MN
 
w-
 
F
I
 
A
 
PY
 
bg
 
A 
y 
 

## [Page 29](078211engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

- A 
hod } » ! 
. 4 
“ : R 
fi Tig IRE Th Les oh 
¥ 
kA . 
, ap, 
’ 70s a 
FIC. 7, FAT 7 [ZZAN 
et” se tS 
ev Lp /] 
= 
’ » 
“WN 
\ 
a . 
DISMANTLING ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd) 
receive shrubs and flowers. Finally, beyond the hospital, 
the round-roofed houses of the workmen hide the runway 
where light aircraft land every day, maintaining rapid com- 
munication with Aswan. 
The desert-like plateau, which was once the exclusive 
domain of scorpions, snakes, jackals and hyenas, is now a 
place of bustling activity, full of the constant movement of 
squads of workmen, transport lorries, mini-buses carrying 
foremen and engineers, and motor cars taking the key men 
in this vast enterprise to points where the most delicate 
operations are going on. Here, as elsewhere in Nubia, 
birds are rare; they all seem to have flown away to more 
fertile regions. There is only a flock of vultures at the 
western edge of the village, attracted from no one knows 
where by the cries of the animals at the slaughter-house. 
In scorching summer heat and during the near-freezing 
nights of the Nubian winter, engineers, foreman and labour- 
ers are working without respite to save the temples of 
Abu Simbel! from the threatening waters. 
By the end of 1966, when the reconstruction of the 
smaller temple will be well advanced, the first blocks of the 
great temple are to be fitted into place on the new site. 
And two or three years later, visitors to Abu Simbel will 
have the surprise and pleasure of seeing that a dream has 
become reality. The waters of the Aswan High Dam will 
again mirror the majestic facades of the temples, behind 
which, rebuilt exactly as before, the monuments will stand 
within the heart of a man-made mountain. 
This monumental achievement of modern times recalls 
symbolically one of the noblest of the Osirian legends. 
As the story is told, Set, being jealous of Osiris, imprisoned 
his brother in a chest, and to gain undisputed sway over 
Egypt, killed him, cutting his body into twenty pieces which 
he cast into the Nile. Isis, the wife of Osiris, searched 
along the river until she found the twenty pieces and was 
able to reconstitute the body of her husband. After under- 
going the magic rites of embalming, Osiris ensured his 
succession on earth through his son, Horus, before 
descending to the underworld to become the god of 
the dead. 
In like manner, thanks to the international campaign 
launched by Unesco, the temples of Abu Simbel will rise 
again in all their ancient majesty. 
LOUIS A. CHRISTOPHE, Assistant Secretary-General of the In- 
stitut d’Egypte, was appointed by Unesco in 1960 to supervise 
the work of preservation of the Nubian monuments in the UAR. 
He is the author of many papers on ancient Egypt and has just 
published a book on Abu Simbel (boxed note below). 


### 60662: Dismantling Abu Simbel

The Discovery of Abu Simbel 
Since the day on 22 March 1813 when the Swiss Traveller 
Johann Burckhart stumbled upon the temples of Abu Simbel 
deeply buried in the sands, the monuments of Rameses II 
have had a long and eventful history. Their many adven- 
tures form the subject of a new book by Louis A. Christ- 
ophe “Abou Simbel et I'épopée de sa découverte”. An English 
translation of the work is in course of preparation. (Published 
under the patronage of Belgium's Queen Elizabeth Founda- 
tion of Egyptology and with the co-operation of the Belgian 
Ministry of Education and Culture. Editions P. F. Merckx, 
Brussels, 1965. 35.50 French francs; 395 Belgian francs.     29

## [Page 30](078211engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 60661: Confronting the irascible Irazu

30 
IRAZU (Cont'd from page 23) 
Interpreting 
a volcano’s 
early warning system 
fan, overflowing the banks of the river and destroying 
everything in its path—not only by flooding, but through 
the tremendous battering-ram blows given by the rocks 
and tree trunks it carries along. 
To meet this danger two types of defence—active and 
passive—can be adopted. Active defence consists of 
diverting or deepening river beds, building dams or, as a 
long term measure, drainage and reafforestation. 
In the case of lrazu, with less than two months to go 
before the onset of the rains, “active” defence methods 
could have done no more than protect densely populated 
places that were specifically threatened, and in particular 
the city of Cartago on the lower reaches of the River 
Reventado. 
“Passive” defence techniques, on the other hand, could 
be and were in fact put into effect immediately. Broadly, 
these consisted of installing observation posts at carefully 
chosen points. These posts functioned throughout the. 
24 hours, and were equipped with apparatus designed to 
give the alarm, at any moment of the day or night and 
whatever the weather, as soon as the warning level was 
reached. 
0 UR mission also recommended the installation 
of automatic rain gauges which would transmit 
a radio warning the moment rainfall reached a critical level. 
We also suggested that automatic gauges be placed in the 
ravines to alert the authorities to an excessive rise in the 
water level. 
This warning system had to be supplemented by careful 
planning of the orderly evacuation of the people in the 
threatened areas in case of an alert at any time of the 
day or night. 
Finally, arrangements had to be made for the eventual 
rehousing of people whose dwellings might be destroyed, 
and road maintenance carried out so as to provide alter- 
native escape routes to the main road, whose bridges, like 
those carrying the San José-Limon railway, were threatened 
with destruction. 
The Costa Rican government decided to give effect to 
the measures recommended by the Unesco Mission, which 
can consider that its goal was achieved. 
As it happened, two months after the departure of the 
mission, the first lahars occurred at the start of the rainy 
season. Only one life was lost whereas without the warning 
system the death roll would have been heavy—almost 
certainly numbered in hundreds. 
 
HAROUN TAZIEFF, Belgian geologist and volcanologist, is the 
author of many scientific studies on volcanology and works for 
the general reader. English-language editions of his books include : 
“Craters of Fire”, Hamish Hamilton, London, 1952; Harper, New 
York, 1954; “The Orion Book of Volcanoes”, Orion, New York, 
1961 (Volcanoes, Prentice-Hall, London, 1963); and “When the 
Earth Trembles”, Hart-Davis, London, 1964; Harcourt, New York, 
1964. Haroun Tazieff has produced several prize-winning scientific 
and documentary films on volcanic eruptions. 
  
From Semaphore 
to Satellite 
History 
of 
Communications 
  
  
To mark the hundredth year of world co-operation 
in telecommunications, the International Telecom- 
munication Union (ITU) has published a popular 
history of the media since the beginning of tele- 
graphy. Entitled “From Semaphore to Satellite” 
the 340-page, richly illustrated book offers a fascin- 
ating account for readers in all walks of life. 
Young people will find in it the full experience of 
a century of technical progress and international 
collaboration in one of the most exciting branches 
of knowledge, as well as the promise telecommuni- 
cations offer in the space age. Available through 
bookstores or from ITU, Place des Nations, 1211 
Geneva 20, Switz. in English, French or Spanish 
(40 Swiss Frs. or US $9.50).     


### 60663: World congress spurs fight against illiteracy

  
WORLD CONGRESS 
HE first World Congress of Ministers of Education on the 
Eradication of llliteracy, which ended September 19 in Teheran, 
addressed a unanimous appeal to the United Nations, its 
specialized agencies (particularly Unesco), regional bodies, non- 
governmental organizations and public and private foundations to 
help finance a movement to eradicate illiteracy which currently 
blights 44 per cent of the world's adult population. 
Among the most important points stressed in over 80 recom- 
mendations adopted by the 88 countries attending, were the fol- 
lowing: 
Firstly, delegates from both industrial and developing countries 
have recognized that illiteracy is truly a world problem. Delegates 
from the more advanced countries have offered aid mainly for 
training teachers specialized in literacy techniques. 
Secondly, the need to integrate literacy fully into economic 
development has now been unanimously accepted. This does not 
mean, as several delegates observed, that education should be 
regarded as important solely in economic terms. It is also the 
leaven of cultural and intellectual growth and a means to make 
every person aware of his rights and duties as a citizen. 
Thirdly, delegates agreed that the conflict between schooling 
for children and adult literacy is actually a false dilemma. In fact, 
both are necessary, the former being a long-term investment and 
the latter a short-term investment with immediate impact on nation- 
al development. This is why adult literacy must be integrated 
into national economic planning to the same extent as the develop- 
ment of the educational system as a whole. 
The congress gave its full backing to Unesco's experimental 
literacy programme and particularly to pilot projects for which 
financial help has been requested from the United Nations Special 
Fund. Some delegates asked that this programme be extended 
and the number of pilot projects increased. 
Mr. René Maheu, Unesco Director-General, declared that Special 
Fund's proposals were realistic and could be handled by the 

## [Page 31](078211engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

USEUMS OF A THE FUTURE. The 
training of personnel to better appre- 
ciate the place of museums in the life 
of the community was proposed by the 
650 participants at the meeting of the 
International Council of Museums (ICOM), 
held at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 
New York in September. Delegates to the 
meeting criticised the present approach to 
training and approved the Secretary of the 
Smithsonian who said: “Museums must 
establish themselves as essential and top 
-rank educational institutions equal to... 
all levels of educational activities”. 
M ONUMENT PRESERVATION. A society 
for the preservation of historic and 
cultural monuments has been founded in 
the Federal Republic of Russia in the USSR. 
Some 30,000 monuments have been cata- 
logued so far. The new society will even- 
tually comprise a network of municipal, 
regional and national organizations. 
|p REHISTORIC FLOODS. A new theory 
that the ancient cities of the Indus 
flood-plain were gradually engulfed by mud 
is advanced by R.H. Raiker, writing in the 
September 1965 issue of “Antiquity”, the 
British quarterly review of Archaeology. 
Mr. Raiker, a hydrologist, cites recent field- 
work at Mohenjo-Daro to support his hypo- 
thesis. 
HE FIRST RAZOR ? Radio carbon dating 
of charcoal discovered with an ancient 
bronze razor during excavations in the 
Chichen-Ingushetian Republic of the Nor- 
thern Caucasus, makes it probably the 
earliest piece of shaving equipment known. 
The razor is between 10,000 and 13,000 years 
old. 
From the Unesco News 
OVIET STUDENTS. More than 3,500,000 
students are now studying at Soviet 
colleges and universities — an increase of 
some 250,000 over last year's figure. Only 
370,000 of the 836,000 first-year students 
are studying full time. The others are 
taking evening classes or correspondence 
courses. 
ONE WITH THE VICUNA. In common 
with many other animals, the vicuna is 
threatened with extinction. The vicuna is a 
ruminant related to the llama, that roams 
in herds over the higher mountains in Peru, 
Bolivia and Equador. Its wool is delicate 
and soft and, although it is a protected 
animal, it is estimated that tens of thou- 
sands are killed by poachers every year. 
A meeting of experts, held recently in 
Peru to study the protection of the vicuna, 
counselled the creation of national parks 
and reserves to protect the surviving herds 
and the formation of experimental breeding 
stations. 
NTERNATIONAL RESEARCH IN BIO- 
LOGY. A proposal for an international 
laboratory for fundamental research in bio- 
logy has been endorsed by an expert 
committee of seven leading biologists 
meeting in Paris. But the committee recom- 
mended that if such a laboratory were 
  
founded, it should be Europe-oriented, at 
least for the first few years of its existence. 
The Paris Committee included three Nobel 
Prize winners—Prof. Severo Ochoa of New 
York, Dr. Max Perutz of the Medical 
Research Council (United Kingdom) and 
Dr. Peter Medawar, director of the London 
Institute of Medical Research—as well as 
distinguished biologists from France, Bel- 
gium, Italy and the Soviet Union. 
OOKS IN BRITAIN : In the item entitled 
“Giants of Publishing” (page 15, Sept. 
1965) the United Kingdom was not listed as 
third amongst the world's six largest produ- 
cers of titles of books. In 1962 the UK. 
published 25,079 titles as compared to 
21,904 in the U.S.A. In 1963 the number 
of book titles in the U.K. rose to 26,023 
and that of the U.S.A. to 25784. The 
United States is rapidly catching up with 
Britain in the number of titles published 
each year. 
ORRECTION : In our October Issue 
we omitted to mention that the article 
“Science, a New Social Force” by Mikhail 
Millionshchikov was an abridgement of the 
address delivered by the chairman of the 
U.S.S.R. Pugwash Committee on Science 
and World Affairs at the United Nations 
in New York earlier this year. 


### 60663: World congress spurs fight against illiteracy

SPURS FIGHT AGAINST 
Unesco secretariat. At the same time, he asked the Special Fund 
to consider the possibility of increasing its effort for literacy. 
He made it clear, however, that the problem of financing mass 
literacy work will depend upon the extent to which nations concern- 
ed succeed in integrating literacy campaigns into their develop- 
ment plans. Each country, he said, must come to a sovereign deci- 
sion concerning the relative importance it wishes to give literacy in 
these plans. In this way, the financing of literacy should become 
part of the general financing of development. 
In this context the congress also asked the U.N. and its 
agencies to exert their influence on all responsible leaders to: 
1) ensure that literacy is an integral and essential part of every 
development plan in countries where illiteracy is a problem; 
2) increase, as far as possible, the national and international 
resources devoted to the fight against illiteracy; 
3) make possible the provision of additional resources for de- 
velopment in general and literacy in particular as further funds 
become available following a reduction in military expenditures; 
4) harness fully all information media to progagate the new 
concept of adult literacy. 
( ERTAIN developing countries expressed their intention 
to increase funds devoted to literacy. Others stated 
they had already reached a maximum figure which could not be 
increased without running the risk of seriously disturbing their 
national economy. 
The congress also agreed that large-scale but spasmodic attacks 
on illiteracy, despite the enthusiasm they may have aroused, have 
not prevented thousands of adults from lapsing back into illiteracy. 
This is why delegates placed a priority on functional literacy 
conceived in conjunction with vocational training. In this .respect, 
as many of them explained, every country cannot adopt the same 
ILLITERACY 
strategy: this must vary depending upon social and economic 
structures, traditions and overall national goals. 
Concerning public opinion, the congress stressed the need to 
bring home to illiterates the reasons behind any literacy drive. 
Strategy alone cannot make such a drive succeed, warned 
Mr. Maheu, if it is not galvanized by public opinion, “It would 
be impossible to carry out a large-scale campaign without mobilizing 
public opinion,” he said. 
In discussing literacy methods, delegates from several countries 
where many languages still have no written alphabets announced 
they have recently been able to devise alphabets for these lan- 
guages. Others, on the contrary, appealed to linguistic institutes 
for help in finding solutions. 
During the closing session of the congress, Prime Minister Amir 
Abbas Hoveyda of Iran announced that an annual prize will be 
placed at Unesco’s disposal to reward a person, or institution, 
making a contribution in the field of literacy. Then Mr. Maheu 
stressed the importance of the congress which marked decisive 
progress in a field of ideas important to Unesco. Equally impor- 
tant, he added, was the remarkable unanimity with which delegates 
adopted a strategy for national and international action. He stated: 
“From their deliberations has emerged a new concept for concerted 
means for large-scale action. Illiteracy can be wiped out in a 
relatively short time if all those who seek to further progress in 
developing countries will aid literacy as an integral part of deve- 
lopment. This is true for bilateral programmes, it is also true 
for international programmes.” 
The congress, convened by Unesco upon the initiative of the 
Shah of Iran, was opened by the Shah on September 8. “The 
existence of an enormous mass of illiterates [is] the root cause 
of the inequality which splits mankind into two separate segments,” 
the Shah declared in opening the congress, adding, “it is a 
constant menace to social peace [and] to peace itself.” The Shah 
then proposed that all nations help finance literacy by making 
small deductions from their military budgets.   
  
31

## [Page 32](078211engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32 
    
   
      
& Ves sity 
“Fairy Tale" by the Soviet artist Oreste Vereisky, whose skilful 
illustrations have enhanced many books, including Nobel Prize- 
winner Mikhail Sholokhov's epic work “And Quiet Flows the Don.” 
~
r
 
~
 
vd}
 
, 
1 
. 
-
 
“|
 
T
s
 
—
—
 
- -
 
i
L
]
 
y 
I 
hil
 
1 
c
i
t
e
 
AL
 
- x 
L
E
 
. 
- 
‘.
y 
Y
R
 
 Australia 
UNICEF 
GREETING CARDS 
This year, “ Unesco Courier’ readers will find a wide 
choice of designs among the 19 greeting cards 
which UNICEF is putting on sale for the 1965-66 
festive season. Each year the sale of greeting cards 
enables UNICEF to help needy children in over 
100 countries. In this way UNICEF last year raised 
$2,400,000; this year it hopes to sell 40 million 
cards. Fifteen artists from all parts of the world 
have contributed this year's designs: Papa lIbra . 
Tall (Senegal—see page 2); Brian Wildsmith 
(United Kingdom); Beni Montresor, Mario Topi 
and Paolo Tomasi (italy); André Bouquet and 
Louis Toffoli (France); Yaroslava Mills, Hope 
Meryman and Andrew Wyeth (United States); 
Oreste Vereisky (USSR); Maria Vall (Spain); 
Christian Larsen (Denmark); Shalom of Safed 
(Israel). This year's cards include the water colour 
design which the French painter Raoul Dufy 
donated to UNICEF in 1952. It depicts UN 
Headquarters in New York and is being reissued 
to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the 
“founding of the United Nations and to celebrate 
International Co-operation Year. We reproduce 
here some of the new UNICEF greeting cards. 
“Dreaming of Christmas” (right) by 
Christian Larsen, a young Danish 
book illustrator and poster designer.

## [Page 33](078211engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

   aa
a 
R
o
k
 
ad
 5
.
 
  
T
R
 
T
O
 
World of {ancy 
Brian Wildsmith, a British artist, is one 
of the world’s most stimulating illustrators 
of children’s books. For UNICEF he has 
done five designs entitled “A World of 
Fancy” featuring favourite animals of chil- 
dren on all the continents. : Painted in 
warm colours, they reflect the fantasy and 
excitement of a child's imaginary world. 
  
  
Above, “Playtime”, a design in colour lithography by Hope 
Meryman, a young American artist. 
  
    
UNICEF cards come 
in boxes of ten pric- 
ed at 7/6 (U.K); $1.25 
(US.A); 7 F (Fran- 
ce). Large format 
cards (design by An- 
drew Wyeth) cost 
15/-; $2.50; 12 F. For 
further information 
(free illustrated full 
colour brochure is 
available) and orders 
write to the follow- 
ing addresses: UK, 
Cttee. for UNICEF, 
New Gallery Centre, 
123 Regent St., Lon- 
don W.1,; U.S A. 
Cttee. for UNICEF, 
United Nations, New 
York, N.Y. 10017; Ca- 
nadian Cttee. for 
UNICEF, 737 Church 
St., Toronto 5, Ont; 
Comité Frangais pour 
I'UNICEF (section 
cartes de voeux), 24, 
rue Borghése, Neuil- 
ly-sur-Seine, France. 
Please do not 
address orders for 
cards to Unesco. 
33

## [Page 34](078211engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
letters to the Editor 
YOUTH NOT YEAH-YEAH 
 
! have just finished reading your July- 
August issue—the special youth num- 
ber. | was pleased to see that, after 
reading those excellent articles, the 
older generation will at least know 
that some of us have other thoughts 
and aims than those generally attri- 
buted to the youth of today. All we 
hear about are juvenile delinquents 
and the yeah-yeah set. But besides 
these, there are other young people 
who have to find their place in 
contemporary society. It was also a 
good idea to stress that today’s youth is 
not completely selfish. We try to help 
those who need assistance as in the 
case of the international work-camps, 
which have so many supporters. 
Cécile Clément, 
Périgueux, Dordogne 
France 
MAHARAJA JAI SINGH 
 
Sir, 
We are not only surprised but 
shocked to know that in the June 
1965 Issue of the Unesco Courier the 
Prince Jai Singh Il has been described 
as a powerful Muslim ruler. 
The Maharaja described as a prince 
is Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh Il who 
ruled over Amber from 1699 to 1727 
AD. He shifted his capital In 1727 
AD. to Jaipur after carefully and 
systematically planning the city, and 
ruled till 1743 A.D. 
Anybody acquainted with the history 
of the Muslims and Rajputs (Hindus) 
would not have been confused. The 
rulers of Amber and Jaipur have always 
been Hindus, 
The Royal House of Jaipur traces 
its history from Lord Rama, who had 
two sons—Lava and Kusha. Since 
the family descends in direct line from 
Kusha the clan is known as Kush- 
waha, They in the begining ruled 
over Ayodhaya, then shifted to Gwa- 
lior and Narwar, then to Dausa, later 
to Ramgarh and finally to Amber 
. which was annexed from the Mina 
clan chief. 
Jaipur is not sixty but 191 miles 
from Delhi. Maharaja Sawai Jai 
Singh Il is not the last Muslim ruler, 
but ruled during the time of the last 
powerful Mughal ruler—Aurangzeb. 
The only astronomical observatory 
in the Amber territory was at Jaipur, 
which was built while Mohammad Shah 
the Mughal Emperor was ruling over 
Delhi. . 
The other places where the remain- 
ing four observatories were built were 
all in the Mughal territories as Sawai 
Jai Singh was siding with the Emperor 
at Delhi. 
Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh was one 
of the most outstanding rulers of Jai- 
pur. He was a great scholar, a fine 
politician, a shrewd diplomat, an 
expert architect and town-planner, a 
capable mathematician and astrono- 
mer, a fearless soldier and an able 
general; therefore, his name will go 
down to posterity as the builder of a 
kingdom and the founder of a civi- 
lization. 
He came to the throne of Amber as 
a very young man in 1699 and at a 
period when the foundations of the 
great Mughal Empire, built by Akbar, 
had already started shaking, before 
crumbling to pieces after the death 
of Aurangzeb. The Maharaja had 
great foresight and tact. He very well 
realized the approaching changes. He 
anticipated an era of peace and pros- 
perity and therefore decided to have 
a larger kingdom, expanded his terri- 
tories and made himself powerful. 
Once this ambition was fulfilled he 
gave serious thought to having a new 
capital for his state, because Amber 
was surrounded by hills and could not 
be expanded nor could it become an 
ideal capital of the Kachwaha Raj, as 
contemplated by him. After ruling and 
thinking for twenty-eight years at 
Amber and making additions to the 
Amber Fort and building laigarh Fort 
and Sudarshangash Fort (now known 
as Nahargarh), he decided to have a 
new city in the plains. 
The foundation of the new city, 
named after the Maharaja, was laid 
in the year 1727. There are various 
stories to account for the regular plan 
of the city. One is that the observa- 
tory was the first thing made and that 
the Maharaja, following his mathema- 
tical bent, had the city laid out 
with mathematical precision. Another 
account is that Constantinople was 
taken as a model and yet another that 
the Chandni Chauk at Delhi gave the 
Maharaja his idea. Whatever might 
have given him the inspiration, the 
result has been to produce a most 
striking and remarkable city. 
The Maharaja built astronomical 
observatories at Jaipur, Delhi, Mathu- 
ra, Banaras and Ujjain. For himself 
he built a palace at Jaipur which occu- 
pies one seventh of the total area of 
the originally planned city. 
Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh fought 
many battles and was always success- 
ful because he had the resourceful 
ness of Caesar and Hannibal, the 
shrewdness of Napoleon, the political 
sagacity of Pitt the Younger, the taste 
for learning of Vikramaditya and the 
planning of Vishvakarma. Thus by his 
genius he extended the prestige of the 
Kachwahas throughout the country and 
his voice commanded great influence 
at the Imperial Court and also in 
Rajasthan. 
His court was adorned by nine gems 
who had shed lustre by their great 
achievements in various spheres of 
human activity. Rajamal, the Prime 
Minister; Rao Kripa Ram, the am- 
bassador at Delhi; Pandit Ratnakar, 
the preceptor; Samrat Pundarik, the 
Purchit; Panna Miyan, the Nadir; Pan-. 
dit Vidyadhar, the town-planner and 
architect; Rao Dalel Singh of Dhula 
and Deep Singh of Kasli, two famous 
generals; and Juovierde - Silva, the 
famous Portuguese astrologer. 
Maharaja Jai Singh persuaded the 
Mughal Emperor to abolish the hated 
Jazia tax and was the first ruler of 
Jaipur to get the title of Maharajadhiraj 
Raj Rajendra and the rare distinction 
of “Mahi Maratib”.,, He was the only 
ruler who performed the Ashvamegha 
Yagna. 
Col. James Tod, the diplomat and 
traveller, writes, “The astronomical 
studies of Maharaja lai Singh were 
wonders of the age. The observato- 
ries which he erected in the early 
18th century at Delhi, Mathura, Ujjain, 
Banaras and Jaipur are monuments 
which irradiate this dark epoch of the 
history of India. He attached himself 
to no particular school but studied 
Hindu, Muslim and European methods 
impartially.” 
To sum up, in the words of the 
English writer, Arthur Garrett: “Jai 
Singh, firstly revived Hindu astronomy 
and gave such an impetus to its study 
as had not been known in India since 
the time of Brahma Gupta in the 
7th century: secondly he promoted the 
study of mathematics, history and 
learning and collected a large hbrary; 
thirdly he issued a revised star cata- 
logue, reformed the calender and pro- 
duced a set of tables of the sun, moon 
and planets of greatly increased 
accuracy; and lastly, he has left to us 
the most important record of all, viz. 
his instruments.” 
In the book “The Discovery of 
India,” Jawahar Lal Nehru, writing 
about Jai Singh and his planning, 
states: “The City of Jaipur was so well 
and wisely planned._that it is still con- 
sidered a model of town-planning... 
Jai Singh would have been a remark- 
able man anywhere and at any time." 
Jai Singh was really a remarkable 
man and a ruler who shall never and 
should never be forgotten. 
Sangram Singh 
Director 
Maharaja of Jaipur Museum 
laipur, India 
Next month : 
Eight pages 
infull colour 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](078211engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Binders for the 
UNESCO COURIER 
We offer subscribers a special 
binder for their copies of the 
Unesco Courier. Holding a year's 
issue of the magazine, these 
convenient and attractive bin- 
ders cost: 
12/6 stg. 
$2.50 
6 F. 
Order from Unesco National 
Distributors listed below.   
  
Don't wait until the end of the year! 
GIVE A NEW YEAR'S 
GIFT-SUBSCRIPTION 
TO THE 
UNESCO COURIER 
Each month friends will remember 
your gift and thank you for it. 
A full year’s subscription only: 
15/-stg. — $3.00 (Canada) — 10 F (France). 
UNIQUE IN THE WORLD OF JOURNALISM 
the Unesco Courier offers a vivid picture of the endless 
diversity of peoples and countries, the great adventures of 
art and science and the outstanding problems of our time. 
A CHOICE OF EIGHT LANGUAGE EDITIONS 
English, French, Spanish, Russian, 
German, Arabic, Japanese, Italian. 
Your friends will receive a card announcing your gift subscription 
before the New Year. providing you place your order early and mark 
it “please inform addressee” 
(Order from Unesco National Distributors listed below.) 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. {See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Prest Department, Royal 
Aghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Tradco Agencies, 109 Swanston Street, G. P. O. 
Box 2324 V, Melbourne C. Il. (Victoria); United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
8th Floor, McEwan House, 343 Little Collins St, 
Melbourne C. |. (Victoria). (22/6). — AUSTRIA, 
Verlag Georg Fromme & Ce, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.-). — BELGIUM. All publications : Editions 
Labor", 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard- 
Boek-handel, Belgielei 151, Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (140 FB) and art slides only; Louis De Lannoy, 
412,rue du Tréne, Brussels 5.CCP 3380.00. —-BURMA., 
Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, Rangoon. 
}). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont, 
{8 3.00). — CEYLON. lake House Bookshop, Sir 
Chittampatan Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B, 244, Colombo, 
2.{Rs. 13)50). — CHINA. World Book Coltd., 99 Chung- 
king South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — 
CYPRUS. “MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3 rd Avenue, P.O. 
Box 1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L, 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display): Zahrahnici lite- 
ratura Bitkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar Munks- 
gaard, Prags Boulevard 47, Copenhagen S$ (D. Kr. 17). — 
ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O. Box 120, 
Addis Ababa {10/-). — FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirja- 
kauppa. 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 9.40). — FRANCE. 
Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenay, Paris-7° C.C.P, 
12598-48. (10 F.). — GERMANY. All publications: 
R.Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 145, Munich. 
8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) Bahren- 
felder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
  
Ltd. Atlantis House Commercial St.,, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens, — HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, 
Nathan Road. Kowloon, — HUNGARY. Kultura, 
P. O. Box,149. Budapest, 62. — ICELAND. Snaebjsrn 
Jonsson & Co. H.F,, Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
(120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd. Nicol 
Road, Bellard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyberabad, 1; 36a, Mount 
Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. 
Box 386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co., 17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia 
House, New Delhi, Indian National Commission Co-ope- 
ration with Unesco, Ministry of Education, for New Delhi 3. 
(Rs.7). — INDONESIA, P.T.N.“ Permuta-Nusantara™ ¢/o 
Dept.of Commerce,22,DjalanNusantara,Djakarta.~1RAQ. 
Mackenzie'sBookshop,Baghdad. —~1RELAND, The National 
Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. 4. (15/5). 
~ ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores 35, Allenby Road 
and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (I£8). — 
JAMAICA, Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, 
Kingston. (15/-). — JAPAN, Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo 
{1,200 yen). — JORDAN, Joseph L. Bahous& Co., Dar ul- 
Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman, — KENYA. E.S.A. 
Bookshop, P.O, Box 30167, Nairobi (10/-). — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA, Cole and Yancy Bookshops 
Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia (10/-). — LUXEM- 
BURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, Luxemburg 
{F.L.140),—MALAYSIA, Federal Publications Ltd., Times 
House, River Valley Rd., Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3 rd 
floor), 110, Jalan Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M. $ 7.50). 
— MALTA. Sapienza's Library 26 Kingsway, Valletta, 
(15/-). — MAURITIUS, Nalanda Company Ltd, 30, 
Bourbon Street, Port-Louis (10/-). — MONACO, Britsh 
Library 30, Bld des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (F. 10). — 
NETHERLANDS. N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange 
Voorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl. 8.50). — NETHERLANDS 
WEST INDIES. G. C. T. Yan Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) 
N.Y. Willemstad, Curacao. N.A, {NA fl 4,50). — NEW 
ZEALAND. Government Printing Office 20, Molesworth 
Street {Private Bag) Wellingston, C. 1 Government Books 
hops: Auckland (P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 
1721), Dunedin P.O. Box 1104)(15/-}. — NIGERIA. 
C.M.S., Bookshops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-). — 
NORWAY. All publications : A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille 
Grensen 7, Oslo. For the Unesco Courier also: A.S« Nar- 
vesens Litteratur Tjeneste, Stortingsgt. 2 Oslo, Postboks 
115 (17.50 kr.).'! — PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Pu- 
blishing Co. Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 
374 56-N Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PHILI- 
PINES. The Modern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue Manila. 
— POLAND. “RUCH”, ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 
(zl. 60). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria 
Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO, 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115, 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — RHODESIA. The Book 
Centre, and Educational Supply Co., Colonial Mutual 
Building Salisbury, — SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN, All publi- 
catiens ¢: A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16. — For the Unesco 
Couner: Svenska Unescoridet, Yasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 12); SWITZERLAND. All publications : 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse Zurich. Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P, 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811, (Fr. S. 10). — TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 uicals). —~ TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istikla! 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala {10/-). — REPUBLIC OF 
SOUTH AFRICA All publications : Yan Schaik’s Boak- 
store, Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724 fre- 
toria. For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Cen- 
tral News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesbourg. (R1.- 
50). — UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librai- 
rie Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Subfagent: 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 St. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM, H.M. Stationery Office, -P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.l. and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester. 
Birmingham and Bristol. (15/-). — UNITED STATES, 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, New York, 
N.Y. 10016 ($ 5.00) — U,S.S.R. Mezhdunarednaja Kniga, 
Mocow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska Kn- 
jig, Tzranje 27, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](078211engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

CONFRONTING THE IRASCIBLE IRAZU 
Irazu is one of Costa Rica's most formidable vol- 
canic peaks. It has erupted nine times in the past 
250 years (1723, 1726, 1822, 1844, 1847, 
1882, 1917, 1920 and 1963). In 1964, a Unesco 
scientific mission led by Haroun Tazieff made an on - 
the-spot study of this irascible giant (see page 18). 
© H. Tazieff 
 