# [068778](068778engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](068778engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
THE REAL MYSTERY 
OF EASTER ISLAND 
 

## [Page 2](068778engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
    
   
      
    
    
  
p
—
"
 
a
 
i.
 -
 
|
 
- 
  
R
a
a
 
a
n
 
A 
S
f
 
A
e
r
     
ue 
f
s
 
a
.
 
=
 
<
o
 
S 
  
  
oe « NO ADMITTANCE ’ 
A great many countries continue to hurt themselves 
and their people by import duties on educational, scien- 
tific and cultural materials. Duties are prohibitive on 
every kind of scientific equipment, from test tubes and - 
measuring spoons to cyclotrons, a famous biophysicist 
recently said. Countries fighting illiteracy and trying 
to industrialize have barriers against books and teaching 
aids. Regulations are complex, troublesome and: often 
illogical. Unesco has been working to abolish duties 
on a wide range of such materials. (See story on page 25) 
: | CESSES)

## [Page 3](068778engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### 189998: (Editorial)

  
  
  ‘mCouricr 
JULY-AUGUST 1956 N° 7-8 
9th Y E AR 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
3 EDITORIAL 
By Alfred Metraux 
NO ‘HOCUS POCUS’ IN THE MEDICINE MAN 
By Erwin Ackerknecht 
CURARE: DEADLY KILLER TURNED HEALER 
8 WITCH DOCTORS AND PSYCHOANALYSIS 
By Claude Lévi-Strauss 
‘POSSESSION’ DANCES 
A treatment for mental illness 
Il AS THE CARTOONIST SEES IT 
12 UNIQUE JUNGLE ‘MUSIC BOX" 
14 THE REAL MYSTERY OF EASTER ISLAND 
By Alfred Metraux 
18 CHAMPION EXPLORERS OF THE VAST PACIFIC 
By E.G. Burrows 
22 CIVILIZATIONS OF GOLD AND COPPER 
By Paul Rivet 
25 VIOLINS TAXED BY THE KILOGRAM 
Knowledge blocked at the frontier 
By P. Soljak - 
30 THE SCHOOL BEYOND EBOLI 
By J. Marabini 
33 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
34 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
* 
FN
 
[]
 
LJ
 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, 19 Avenue Kleber, Paris 16, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Alexandre Leventis 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Carrera Andrade 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Circulation Manager 
Jean Groffier 
U.S.A. : Henry Evans 
* 
Individual articles not copyrighted may be reprinted from THE UNESCO 
COURIER but must be accompanied by the following credit line: “Reprinted 
from UNESCO COURIER", Signed articles reprinted must carry the author's 
name. Prints of non-copyright photos are available on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied by an inter- 
national reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of THE UNESCO 
COURIER. 
Annual subscription rates of THE UNESCO COURIER : 8/-;%2.50 or 400 
French frs or equivalent. 
(MC. 56.1.104 A)   
COYER PHOTO 
 
Giant statues with deep-set eyes and 
forbidding expressions dot the bare 
slopes of Easter Island. For nearly two 
centuries an aura of mystery has sur- 
rounded the island and its statues, but 
the real mystery of this “speck in the 
Pacific” does not lie in the monuments 
carved in stone. See story page 14. 
A. Metraux, copyright Bishop Museum, Honolulu. 
  
Y one of those contradictions which the human mind 
readily accepts, peoples described as “primitives” or 
as “savages” are often hailed for their remarkable 
scientific knowledge. They are sald to possess secret 
formulae which are far more effective than anything 
used by modern chemists or doctors. Those who despise 
primitive peoples yet speak with awe and admiration of 
their almost supernatural knowledge, often display an 
exaggerated naivety and credulity, but they are actually 
closer to the truth than others who deny that primitive 
peoples possess any science worth knowing about. 
The Indians of South America may not have any “mir- 
acle drugs,” but it was they who discovered the qualities 
of chinchona bark, of coca leaves and of the lianas from 
which they make curare. The conquest of the tropics by 
the white race would have been impossible without qui- 
nine ; the role of cocaine in modern surgery is known to 
all. As for curare, an extraordinary poison which acts on 
the nervous system, this is being put to ever greater uses 
in neurology. 
These three discoveries are indicated merely as examples 
of our debt to the so-called primitive peoples, but the list 
could be greatly extended if we considered other fields and 
other parts of the world. It was also the “savages” of 
the Amazon who revealed to the world the wonderful qua- 
lities of rubber and who first made practical use of them. 
For long the methods used to transform latex from the 
Hevea tree into rubber twere those of the Indians. Let 
no one say that these were accidental discoveries and not 
the result of scientific enquiries. To extract curare from 
strychnos toxifera called for many long experiments and 
for qualities inherent in the true scientist ; a keen sense 
of observation, patience and the urge to experiment. 
Is it necessary to remind those who, when speaking of 
the Indians or of the peoples of Oceania, refer to them 
as “savages” that these same men succeeded in mastering 
their environment and that they possess an empirical 
science in agriculture which agronomists are quick to 
praise and to draw inspiration from. 
Biologists have not always admitted the debt they owe 
to “primitive” peoples who have made available to them 
observations of the greatest precision and accuracy. It 
is of course natural for a man who lives by fishing and 
hunting to know the habits of his quarry down to the last 
detail. Yet if in this respect “primitives” are valued 
aides for the scientist it is also true that their ideas 
on the development of living things are just as fantastic 
as those of the naturalists of antiquity and even those of 
the Renaissance. But their credulity and naivety are no 
greater than those shown by the ancient Roman natura- 
list, Pliny the Elder. 
This issue of The Unesco Courier devoted in part to 
aspects of “science among primitive peoples” may in a 
small way serve to remind those concerned with the edu- 
cation of “primitives” that they are not dealing with 
backward or ignorant minds and that those to whom they 
are today bringing the rudiments of Western science are 
themselves capable of teaching lessons in many fields. 
Let us remember too that the death of the “primitive” 
civilizations which so many people advocate in the name 
of progress, will also see the vanishing of much knowledge 
that is not without significance for our own civilization. 
Alfred METRAUX 
 

## [Page 4](068778engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 68718: No 'hocus pocus' in the medicine man

NO ‘HOCUS POCUS’ IN 
THE MEDICINE MAN 
HE activities of the primitive medi- 
T cine man arc brushed away by the 
average individual as “hocus po- 
cus”. This, of course, they arc not. 
They are actually magico-religious rituals 
which always and in all places must 
appear grotesque to those who do not 
believe in the premises of such a ritual. 
They are based on the idea that dis- 
case is in most cases not produced by 
natural forces, as it has been accepted 
by us for the last two and a half thou- 
sand years, but by such supernatural 
agencies as spirits, gods, ghosts and sor- 
cerers. These forces have been provok- 
cd by the patient or one of the members 
of his family through actions contrary to 
the moral code of the tribe. The super- 
naturals will attack by injecting myste- 
riously disease-producing magic substan- 
ces or spirits, or by abducting the soul 
of the patient. 
It is quite logical that our methods 
of diagnosis, based on observation of the 
patient, could not reveal such super- 
natural causes, and that the primitive 
diagnostician therefore has to rely on 
the supernaturalistic techniques of divi- 
nation by trance, dreams, crystal-gazing, 
bone-throwing, etc. It is equally logical 
that therapeutics have to consist primari- 
ly of rites to force out spirits, placate 
ghosts and gods, and hunt up displaced 
souls. Such aims are best achieved by 
incantations, spells and prayers, actom- 
panied by singing and dancing. 
Effective psychotherapy 
Tr is obvious that from the biological 
point of view—which is ours in the 
case of disease—such practices are 
absurd and devoid of meaning. This 
does not mean that they are devoid of 
any meaning. They are, for instance, 
quite meaningful from the psychological 
and psychotherapcutic point of view. As 
this aspect of primitive medicine is the 
Dr. Ackerknecht is Professor and Chairman of 
the Department of History of Medicine at the 
University of Wisconsin, U.S.A. Previously he 
was a Research Fellow at Johns Hopkins 
University, New York (1941-1944) and Assistant 
Curator, American Museum of National History 
(1945-1948). He is currently engaged in research 
on medical pathology, including the psycho 
pathology of primitives. 
4 
by Erwin H. Ackerknecht 
subject of a special article in this issue 
(see page 8), I can be quite short on it 
here. Suffice it to say that the two main 
mechanisms of our own psychotherapy, 
suggestion and confession, are used ex- 
tensively. By the very fact that disease 
is made meaningful in terms of the 
world view of the afflicted and that the 
medicine man now substitutes for the 
patient in fighting evil powers, anxiety 
is dispersed, faith is established, energies 
are mobilized and psychological, and 
therefore physiological, relief is obtain- 
ed. It is beyond any doubt that many 
of the undeniable successes of primitive 
medicine men (like those of modern 
doctors) are due to unconscious but 
effective psychotherapy. 
This season’s ‘miracle drug’ 
N addition, the magico-religious ritual 
I of the medicine man contains at 
closer scrutiny numerous elements 
which will account for success beyond 
psychotherapeutic factors. In the course 
of such rituals, whether they take place 
in the African bush, the South American 
forest, or among the Navaho of arid 
Arizona, magic potions are imbibed, 
which very often contain highly effective 
drugs, and magic manipulations and puri- 
fication rites are performed, which cor- 
respond largely to our own physio- 
therapy. ’ 
It so happens that the “miracle drug” 
of this season, serpasil, so beneficial in 
high blood pressure and mental disease, 
is not a synthetic drug, like some of its 
predecessors {the arsenicals, or the sulfa- 
drugs), but is derived from a plant, 
Rauwolfia serpentina, which, for de- 
cades, medical missionaries in Africa 
had vainly pointed out to western phar- 
macologists as a very effective drug of 
primitives. 
Serpasil is only one of many drugs of 
primitive origin which play an important 
role in our present-day pharmacopoeia. 
We mention here only such dramatically 
effective specifics as strophantine, the 
heart drug; emetine, used in amoebic 
dysentery; and picrotoxine, the stimulator 
of respiration in barbiturate poisoning. 
Cocaine and- quinine once came from 
Peru. It would be useless to enumerate 
here all the effective emetics, purgatifs, 
expectorants, and diuretics known to be 
used by primitives. 
It is quite obvious that besides useless 
substances, as they occur in all phar- 
macopoeias, even in our own, primitive 
pharmacopoeias contain a surprising 
percentage of effective drugs in spite of 
the magic ideas which govern their use. 
The Spanish conquerors of the 16th 
century were sufficiently impressed by 
the drug lore of the Indians to organize 
research in this field. Modern science 
has stood aloof from such studies among 
the “superstitious heathen” for at least 
a century. But lately, pharmaccutical 
industry has been sufficiently impressed 
by the potentialities of such studies to 
spend a considerable amount of money 
for research on primitive drugs. We 
have no doubt that from those studies 
will come forth further evidence of the 
amazing and surprising knowledge of 
effective drugs possessed by primitive 
peoples. How they acquired this know- 
ledge (they do not use our inductive 
methods, and would in any case have 
had a very hard time to do so) is 
another problem, which so far has not 
been solved, and whose discussion is 
outside of the limits of this article. 
Sweatbaths and drycupping 
RUGS are not the only cffective 
D therapeutic agents primitives use. 
During their rituals, physical 
agents of known value like baths of all 
sorts (including sweatbaths), massage, 
sucking (or drycupping) are frequently 
and successfully applied. Except for 
sucking which we have given up, we 
still practise them all. 
Primitives are less active in the field 
of surgery than they are in drug treat- 
ment or physiotherapy. This is partly 
due to irrational attitudes, especially 
fear of mutilation, which is used by 
them rather for punishment or ritual 
than for treatment. But this is also due 
to technological backward- 
ness which till a hundred 
years ago made even the 
practice of the Western 
(Cont’d on 
page 7)

## [Page 5](068778engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 68718: No 'hocus pocus' in the medicine man

The Unesco Courier 
  
  
  
7
 
-
 
o
n
e
s
 
T
t
 
a
s
 
. 
       
g
o
 
- 
5 » ~ 
CURARE: DEADLY KILLER TURNED HEALER 
Among the many drugs and compounds known to primitive peoples and which modern - : 
science has found dramatically effective in medicine and surgery, one of the strangest is : . oq 
curare. Preparation of this deadly poison is still a closely guarded secret of primitive : a A 
tribes at opposite ends of the earth—Amazon Basin and Borneo, Both Indians in South a 
America and Dyaks in Borneo use blow-pipes for hunting, though the velocity of the darts - 
they fire is not sufficient to inflict fatal wounds. For many years these people have known ¢ 
that a dart smeared with curare paralyzes its victim and brings rapid death to any animal 
or bird it strikes. The knowledge that curare blocks nerve impulses and produces muscle 
relaxation has been put to use by modern medicine and surgery. The curare though has 
first to be refined and its dosage carefully controlled. Some of its specific uses: to produce 
muscular relaxation during surgical operations, to eliminate muscle pull in treatment of 
fractures and dislocations; to relieve spastic paralysis and to prevent convulsions 
being caused during electro-shock treatment sometimes given to mental patients, 
     
    
  
Photos on this page and overleaf illustrate the use of curare In Borneo where Dyaks still manu- 
facture and use blow-plpes to shoot death-dealing darts at jungle game. (1) Between the leaves 
of a giant jungle fern, a hunter spots a monkey. (2) A short, sharp puff and the dart shoots out so 
swiftly that it cannot be followed in flight. (Cont'd on next page) Photos copyright A Martin   

## [Page 6](068778engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 68718: No 'hocus pocus' in the medicine man

  
  
CROSS-LEGGED on platform, Dyaks take turns piercing tree 
trunk, which takes about five days. With metal spike held in 
wooden handle they strike base of trunk with slow up-and-down 
movement. As they hollow out centre, they pause now and then 
to make sure trunk has not moved from vertical position. When 
finished, blow-pipe will be about 8 feet long, roughly diameter of a 
horizontal vaulting bar and will be pierced by hole 1/5 th of an inch 
across. With blade attached it becomes a spear. South American 
blow-pipe (sarbacan) consists of two parts held by bark strips. 
Rslr 
All photos OE A. Martin 
‘COAT OF MAIL’ worn by this old Dyak is a jacket of vegetable 
fibres which serves as protection against poisoned darts. In Borneo, 
as in South America, the preparation of curare is the privilege of 
certain tribes. Witch doctors alone know the secret of its compo- 
sition. They surround it with mystery and perform intricate magic 
rites as they mix an amazing number of ingredients. After simmer- 
ing for two days it is shaped into sticks which are then used for 
barter with other tribes. To make it malleable, the huntsman 
has to moisten it and then pound it with small wooden pestle. 
  
   
 

## [Page 7](068778engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  
PRECISION of blow-pipe is largely due 
to skill and care with which Dyaks pierce 
a tree trunk to make the tube. They 
first build a platform about || feet from 
the ground, then with an ingenious system 
of horizontal bars, they set up above the 
. platform a roughly squared tree trunk. 
This will become the blow-pipe. Here, 
two men put in place long iron spike 
. which is to pierce tube of blow-pipe. 
gL 
4
 
! g
ul
ec
in
pi
in
 T
E
 
a
g
]
 
4
 ="
 
ES 
  
IN BORNEO, two different kinds of 
curare are used—“tadjum” on small darts 
like knitting needles for birds, and “ipu” 
on darts with two barbs for bigger game. 
As many as 20 ingredients are used to 
make curare, but basis of “ipu” is the sap 
of the tree “antaria toxicaria”, and for 
“tadjum”, the sap from the “tadjum” tree 
and juice of “kaba” bark are used. Left, 
a Dyak collects sap from “tadjum” tree.    


### 68718: No 'hocus pocus' in the medicine man

No ‘hocus pocus’ 
surgeon consist primarily of wound and 
fracture treatment. “Active” surgery, 
which to us today is the essence of sur- 
gery, is a quite recent phenomenon even 
in the West, appearing on a large 
scale only after the invention of anes- 
thesia, asepsis and the localistic ap- 
proach in pathology. It is thus not 
surprising that primitive surgery is 
usually limited to lancing of boils, 
blood-letting and what seems quite ef- 
fective wound and fracture treatment. 
Caesarian operations 
CCASIONALLY primitives have in- 
O vented quite clever devices like 
the closing up of wounds with the 
mandibles of large ants whose head is 
broken off (Somalis, Brazilian Indians). 
In a few regions surgery has developed 
farther. The East African Masais 
amputate hopelessly fractured limbs and 
enucleate eyes. From the same region, 
drainage of empyema (pus resulting 
from pleurisy) by cauterisation of the 
thorax, excision of neckglands, removal 
of uterine polyps, and suturing of the 
intestine are reported.” The Ellice 
Islanders in Polynesia use shark teeth 
to remove fatty tumours, the elephan- 
tiasis scrotum, tuberculous glands and 
old ulcers. 
The most baffling aspect of primitive 
surgery is the successful performance of 
.two operations, greatly dreaded by 
Western surgeons up to the end of the 
last century: Caesarian section and 
trepanation. The former is reported 
again from East Africa, the latter from 
several African regions, most of Oceania, 
and the Americas, especially Peru. 
In the field of obstetrics we must 
admit that the more or less sitting 
position during childbirth, adopted in 
most primitive tribes, is considerably 
more physiological than that customary 
with us. Certain Eskimos and Bantus 
have invented, independently, incubators 
for premature babies, a technique 
developed in the West only in the second 
half of the 19th century. 
Smallpox inoculations 
T is the “superstitious” (that is magi- 
I co-religious) fear of witchcraft 
which makes many primitives hide 
their excrements.  Objectively such 
actions, however they may be rationali- 
zed, are of considerable preventive value. 
The same holds good of circumcision, 
certain food taboos, taboos against early 
intercourse after childbirth, fumigation, 
The Unesco Courier 
(Cont’d from 
poge 4) 
ritual bathing, or isolation of infectious 
diseases. Inoculation against snakebite 
is practised by certain South American 
and African natives, inoculation against 
smallpox only by the latter, The South 
American Yuracare, Guato and Me- 
setene manufacture mosquito nets from 
bark cloth, which should objectively be 
of prophylactic value in mosquito-borne 
diseases. 
As we have seen, medicine in primitive 
society is part of religion; it belongs to 
the sphere of the sacred. Primitive 
religion does not interpret nature on its 
own terms, but as if man’s relations with 
nature were another set of personal 
relations. Disease-producing influences 
are not seen impersonally like our 
bacteria or glands; spirits and gods act 
like punishing parents, sorcerers like 
aggressive siblings. These explanations 
reflect the fact that, psychologically 
speaking, man, an animal with an un- 
usually prolonged infancy, is first and 
foremost impressed directly not by 
nature, but by his social relations on 
which his survival primarily depends, 
and which he symbolizes thus in religion. 
Disease in sacred terms 
HAT medicine in primitive society is 
T couched in religious terms, symbo- 
lizing society, has an unexpected 
and important consequence: mcdicine 
and disease acquire social meanings and 
social functions which they do not 
possess in our society. The social 
meaning of primitive medicine is easy to 
spell out: Be peaceful, and disease will 
spare you or go away. 
Disease becomes the most important 
sanction against asocial behaviour; fear 
of disease and the  witch-smelling 
medicine man play the role which the 
fear of courts, policemen, newspapers, 
teachers, priests or soldiers play in our 
society, The fact that medicine is such 
an important pillar of the social edifice 
is perhaps the most influential of all the 
reasons we have given in this analysis 
of why primitives remain attached to 
their medicine—and their religion. 
To the extent that medicine leaves 
the sphere of the sacred and becomes 
secularized, that disease is interpreted in 
naturalistic, not supernaturalistic terms, 
it loses its social meaning and its social 
control function. Those who want to 
bring Western medicine to people who 
still regard disease in sacred terms, can 
often be more successful in adapting 
their practices to such sacred notions. 
But, as Kipling said, this is another story. 
7

## [Page 8](068778engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 189520: Witch doctors and psychoanalysis

WITCH DOGTORS 
AND PSYCHOANALYSIS 
by Claude Lévi-Strauss 
ost of us regard psychoanalysis as a 
revolutionary discovery of twen- 
tieth-century civilization and place 
it on the same footing as genetics 
or the theory of relativity. Others, prob- 
ably more conscious of the abuses of 
psychoanalysis than of the real lessons it 
has to teach us, still look upon it as one 
of the absurdities of modern man. In 
both cases, we overlook the fact that 
psychoanalysis has simply rediscovered 
and expressed in new terms an approach 
to mental illness which probably dates 
back to the earliest days of mankind and 
which the so-called primitive peoples 
have always used, often with a skill that 
amazes our foremost practitioners. 
A few years ago, Swedish ethnologists 
recorded and published a long healing 
ritual used among the Cuna Indians of 
Panama in cases of difficult childbirth. 
In the ritual, the tribe's witch-doctor or 
shaman stands before the suffering 
mother and begins a chant-recitation, 
explaining that her ailment is due to 
the temporary absence of the soul which 
controls procreation. The Cuna Indians 
believe in the existence of a multitude 
of souls, each of which has charge of - 
some particular function of life. In this 
particular case, the soul has been kid- 
napped and has been carried away to 
the other world by some evil spirits. 
In quest of a 
captive spirit 
HE witch-doctor tells the expectant 
mother than he is setting out on a 
supernatural quest for the lost 
spirit. With a rare luxury of detail he 
describes the obstacles he meets and the 
enemies he has to face, how he over- 
comes them by force or guile before 
reaching the prison of the captive soul. 
Then he releases the soul and induces 
it to resume control of the suffering 
body lying at his side. 
This cure (we have no reason to sup- 
pose it is not successful at least in certain 
cases) is interesting for a number of 
reasons. Firstly, it is purely psycho- 
Professor Lévi-Strauss is director of research 
in religious science at the Ecole Pratique des Hau- 
tes Etudes, and Secretary-General of the Inter- 
national Council of Social Science in Paris. He 
was formerly Deputy Director of the Musée de 
I'Homme in Paris and was recently elected as 
member of the Royal Academy of the Netherlands. 
His latest book Tristes Tropiques (Sud Tropics) has 
had a notable success in France. 
8 
logical; no drugs are used nor is the body 
of the patient touched. The witch- 
doctor simply recites or chants, relying 
on speech alone to effect his cure. Sec- 
ondly, two people must participate in 
the treatment—doctor and patient—al- 
though, as we shall see in a moment, 
this does not mean that other members 
of the community may not be present, 
Cures conducted 
in public session 
F the two persons, the witch-doctor, 
whose powers are recognized by 
the whole tribe, embodies social 
authority and order, while the other— 
the patient—suffers from what we 
should call a physiological disorder, but 
which the Indians attribute to an advan- 
tage gained by the spirit world over the 
human world. Since these two worlds 
should normally be allied, and since the 
spirit world is of the same nature as the 
souls possessed by the individual, the 
problem as the Indians see it, really 
stems from a sociological disturbance 
caused by the ambition, ill-will or re- 
sentment of the spirits that is by both 
psychological and social factors. 
In describing the causes of the ailment 
and recounting his adventures in the 
other world, the witch-doctor conjures 
up for his listeners familiar pictures 
drawn from the beliefs and myths which 
are the common heritage of the whole 
community. Since the cures are con- 
ducted in public, the adolescents of the 
tribe witness them and thus gain a 
detailed knowledge of the tribe’s beliefs. 
Several of the characteristics described 
are strangely reminiscent of psychoana- 
lytical treatment. Here too, illness is 
considered of psychological origin and 
the treatment applied is exclusively psy- 
chological. Because of symptoms which 
he is unable to control, or more simply 
because he is suffering from mental 
stress, the patient feels cut off from the 
community and calls in the doctor 
whose authority is recognized by the 
group, to help him to regain his place 
in society. 
induce the patient to describe events 
buried in his subconscious mind but 
which, despite the passage of time, still 
govern his feelings and attitude to life. 
Now there are events or Cont’d 
stories that have their (Cont'd on 
origin in so distant a past Page 10) 
  
The. treatment seeks to -   


### 68780: Possession' dances: a treatment for mental illness

  
“POSSESSION” DANCES: 
A TREATMENT FOR 
MENTAL ILLNESS 
sion cult” dancers were gener- 
ally considered fanatics indulg- 
ing in horrible excesses under a spell 
brought on by frenzied collective 
dancing. It is only in the last ten 
years that scientists have begun to 
take a closer look at the dances, par- 
ticularly in the light of our know- 
ledge of psychology and psycho- 
analysis, to see if they had a deeper 
meaning than met the eye. After a 
number of pioneer studies carried 
out in Brazil and Haiti, investigators 
U until a short time ago “posses- 

## [Page 9](068778engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 68780: Possession' dances: a treatment for mental illness

The Unesco Courier 
  
propounded the theory that the 
possession dances were release mech- 
anisms or saitety valves designed to 
enable the members of a group to 
express the subconscious desires or 
tendencies normally denied them in 
their daily life. 
Now a leading French psychiatrist, 
Dr. Charles Pidoux, who has recently 
returned from two expeditions to 
Africa where he carried out a series 
of careful investigations into the 
matter, has come forward with a new 
interpretation. The possession rites 
practised in the Niger and certain 
parts of Africa, he concludes, are 
techniques of very ancient origin 
which constitute real psychotherapy 
applied to mental disorders which are 
attributed to the influence of tradi- 
tional “spirits” of the jungle. 
In the Niger, he explains, river and 
jungle spirits (called folley) are 
considered the descendants of Adam 
  
and Eve just as human beings are, 
except that they are deprived of bod- 
ies. But though invisible, they are 
alive and must borrow the body of 
a person to manifest themselves. 
The person chosen becomes the 
spirit’s “horse”, that is, the spirit 
“climbs on his shoulders” and “pos- 
sesses” him, 
When a man or woman shows signs 
of mental instability or behaviour 
oddities, it means that one of the 
spirits ‘wishes to possess his body. 
The individual visits a zima (priest 
and doctor combined) who, after 
initiation and conditioning lasting 
sometimes as long as a year, 
identifies the particular spirit and 
prepares the new “horse” for the 
dance ritual. As a result of the 
possession dance the individual is 
cured of his disorders and is enabl- 
ed to resume a normal life. 
Photos on this page show several 
  
  
“horses” in a possession dance film- 
ed in Africa. The men are unskilled 
labourers at Accra (Gold Coast) who 
originally came from the Niger. In 
the Hauka sect to ‘which they were 
admitted after showing signs of psy- 
chotic disorders, the initiation lasts 
a year. But after being “possessed” 
they are cured at least for a long 
period, but need to attend the cere- 
monies of the sect every Sunday. 
“Independently of their religious 
value and significance”, writes Dr. Pi- 
doux, “these possession rites are a 
rich fleld for studying a type of 
psychotherapy in which a precise 
knowledge of diagnosis, pathology 
and therapeutic action are applied 
with a rigour comparable to our mod- 
ern psychiatric treatment. It cannot 
be denied that the mastery displayed 
is most exceptional in a domain 
where our own definite knowledge is 
so much more recent.”  

## [Page 10](068778engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 189520: Witch doctors and psychoanalysis

  
PSYCHOANALYSIS 
(Cont'd from page 8)     
that the very recollection of them has 
been lost, yet, better than more recent 
events, they permit us to understand the 
nature of things occurring today. These 
stories are what sociologists call 
“myths”, and it would be difficult to 
give a better definition of the word. 
The main difference between the 
medicine man’s treatment {as in the 
cxample of the pregnant mother above) 
and treatment by psychoanalysis is that 
in the first case it is the doctor who 
docs the talking while in the second it 
is the patient. A good psychoanalyst 
we know, says hardly a word during 
most of the treatment; his role is to 
offer the patient a stimulus (one might 
almost say provocation) which the pre- 
scnce of another person provides, sO 
that the patient can vent all his pent-up 
aggressive emotions on this anonymous 
“other person”. 
Ready-made myth 
calmed mother 
N both cases the creation of a myth 
I is part of the treatment. The differ- 
ence is that with the Cuna the myth 
is ready-made, familiar to everyone and 
perpetuated by tradition, the witch- 
doctor merely adapting it to each indi- 
vidual case. 
In the childbirth case, for example, the 
witch-doctor translates the myth into 
terms that are meaningful to the 
mother. This permits her to name, 
then understand and perhaps thereby 
dominate the anxieties which until then 
she had been totally incapable of 
expressing in any form. 
In psychoanalysis, however, the 
patient elaborates his own myth. When 
we stop to think about it the difference 
is not so great since psychoanalysis 
reduces the causes of psychological 
disorders to a very small number of 
possible situations from which the 
patient can choose, but do little more. 
All of them deal with the patient’s 
earliest experiences in life and his rela- 
tions with his family as a child. Here 
too, a state of release is reached when 
the anxieties which the patient could not 
express or dared not admit are at last 
translated into terms of a myth which 
fits his particular story. 
To reassure psychoanalysts and their 
followers, let me make it clear at once 
that, in using the word “myth”, I am 
in no way implying that the story in 
question is either untrue or invented. 
Many myths are based on real occur- 
rences but as I have already indicated, 
what makes a myth depends not so 
much on how accurately it reflects the 
original story or event but its capacity 
to give meaning to the present. 
10 
Thus it is not surprising to discover 
that skilled psychologists who have 
visited primitive societies to carry out 
enquiries with the most up-to-date 
methods of investigation, have found 
themselves to be on a footing of equa- 
lity with the medicine man, and in some 
cases have even acknowledged the latter’s 
superiority. 
This was the experience of Dr. Kilton 
Stewart, an American psychologist who 
has given us a delightful account of it 
in his book, Pygmies and Dream Giants 
(New York, 1954). He had set off for 
the intertor of the Philippines to study 
the mental make-up of the extremely 
primitive pygmy tribes called Negritos. 
His methods closely resembled those of 
psychoanalysis. The witch-doctors not 
only allowed him to do as he wished, 
but immediately accepted him as one of 
them; in fact, regarding themselves as 
specialists with a thorough knowledge 
of the techniques employed, they 
insisted on helping him in his studies. 
Dr. Stewart considers that in certain 
respects their psychotherapy is even 
ahead of ours. 
I have already mentioned that the 
treatment administered by the shaman is 
given in public. Thus, all the members 
of the community gradually acquire the 
belicf that any disorders from which 
they themselves may eventually suffer 
can be treated by the same methods they 
have so often seen used. Furthermore, 
since they know all the stages of the 
treatment in advance, they are all ready 
and willing to take part in it punctuating 
it with words of encouragement, helping 
the patient to marshal his memories, and 
displaying an infectious enthusiasm as 
the patient recovers from his disorder. 
Negrito therapists 
probe into the past 
s Dr. Stewart observes in this 
connexion, this takes. us beyond 
psychoanalysis to one of its most 
recent developments, namely, group 
psychotherapy. One of its most familiar 
forms is the psychodrama in which sever- 
al members of the group impersonate 
the characters in the patient’s myth in 
order to assist him to see them more 
clearly and thus bring the tragedy to an 
end. This is possible only if the patient’s 
myth .itself is social in character. Other 
individuals can play a part in it because 
it is their own myth too, or to put it 
another way, because the critical situa- 
tions in which individuals are liable to 
find themselves in our society are broad- 
ly speaking, the same for all. 
We thus see how deceptive it is to 
think that the forgotten events which 
psychoanalysis helps the patient to bring 
TRIBAL VERSION OF 
PSYCHIATRIST'S COUCH 
back to mind, are something private and 
personal. Even that difference between 
psychoanalysis and shamanistic treat- 
ment, thus disappears. 
“As in Paris and in Vienna”, writes 
Dr. Stewart, “the Negrito therapists were 
helping the patient to contact patterns 
.and incidents from a long-forgotten past, 
painful incidents buried deep in the 
early time layers of the accumulated 
experience which made up the per- 
sonality.” - 
Turn mental disorder 
into creative talent 
N one respect, at least, the primitive 
system seems to be more daring and 
more efficacious than our own. Dr. 
Stewart describes an experience which 
he might have had anywhere in the 
world, among any of the peoples we like 
to call primitives. When he was about to 
rouse a patient from the waking dream 
in which he was giving a haphazard 
account of incidents in his past life— 
conflict with his father transposed into 
the myth-form of a visit to the country 
of the dead—his Negrito colleagues 
stopped him. To be definitely cured, 
they said, the spirit of the sickness must 
bestow a gift on its victim in the form 
of a new drum beat, a dance or a 
song. According to tribal theory, it is 
not enough to remove the social infe- 
riority attributable to the illness: it must 
be transformed into a positive advan- 
tage, a social superiority comparable with 
that which we see in the creative artist. 
This connexion between an abnormal 
psychological balance and creative art 
is not of course unknown in our 
own theories. We have treated many 
geniuses, such as Gérard de Nerval, Van 
Gogh and others, as psychotics. At best, 
we are sometimes prepared to pardon 
certain follies because they are commit- 
ted by great artists. But even the poor 
Negritos in the jungles of Bataan are 
far ahead of us in this respect, for 
they have realized that one means of 
remedying a mental disorder, harmful 
both to the individual suffering from it 
and to the community which needs the 
healthy co-operation of all, is to trans- 
form it into a work of art. This is a 
method seldom used among us, though 
it is to it that we owe the work of such 
artists as Utrillo. 
We have much to learn, therefore, 
from primitive psychiatry. Still in 
advance of our own psychiatry in many 
respects, how far ahead it must have 
been not so long ago (traditions die so 
hard with us) when we knew no other 
means of treating mental patients than 
to put then in chains and starve them.

## [Page 11](068778engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

#5 
Si
 
TO 
R
T
 
R
m
 
   
   
0 
Yd » a 3 . 
PL . A el TAR AEN Dam a ab ml ERA 
8 a 
a wr. 
FAG 
. nm RA —————— - 
BTA hs RE XC GE ST hn TA rE i 
—— 
i phe ii { 
mi shbl 
| lit oi 
  
=
 
=
 
r 
E
p
 
ay ap ol Hk Af by 1; He 
YL ha, ful hh Ee 
if A I RL CREEL 
| ! i , ‘ L] 
1 
Free ia pid erie PA 
HE ed gl 
(Copyright COLLIER’S) x 
oda, MV S 
“Wouldn't you know that at a time like this Haley would be off 
somewhere photographing some damn ritual 2” 
(Copyright THE NEW YORKER) 
CN OTE UL A al SU SA fo TT VN Gd TBA PRE DT Be 4 STATED TN 4 pa EO TR EL Ed $ % ERT Py 
Sh 
- 
The Unesco Courier 
oe] 
“lt may be mere prejudice on my part, but per- 
sonally | wouldn't care for a woman doctor.” 
(Copyright THE NEW YORKER) 
“Say what you will, we never had this crazy weather 
until they started using those bows and arrows.” 
(Copyright TO-DAY’S HEALTH) 
—_— NY a |". 
AC 15S LL

## [Page 12](068778engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 68781: Unique jungle 'music box'

UNIQUE 
WUSIG Box [E 
  
  
By Franz Laforest 
Photos by Dominique Lajoux, 
copyright Laforest Mission 

## [Page 13](068778engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 68781: Unique jungle 'music box'

  
  
The Unesco Courier 
N the interior of . Indo-China, 
isolated by the high mountains of 
Viet-Nam, lives a primitive people 
called the Mois. Primarily farmers, 
their life depends on their rice crops. 
To propitiate the “good spirits” of 
the rice harvest, one of the tribes, the 
Sedang, has invented a unique music- 
al instrument, the construction of 
which requires considerable know- 
ledge of music, mechanics and 
hydraulics, 
The instrument is a giant bamboo 
carillon (1) actuated by running 
water diverted into a bamboo tube 
from a nearby stream (4). The con- 
tinuous power supply enables the 
carillon to play uninterruptedly for 
months at a time. The Sedang are 
convinced that the rice spirits will be 
pleased by the music played in their 
_ honour and that the crop will be 
; plentiful. They know too that the 
' noise of the carillon will scare away 
animals from the growing rice. 
* 
HE carillon operates only during 
the months of the rice season, 
after which it is abandoned. As 
the Sedang tribe chooses a fresh plot 
of land for rice growing each year, 
a new carillon playing a different 
tune is built. 
The carillon of the Sedangs com- 
prises 50 bamboo pipes each of a 
different length and thickness which 
are struck by 50 hammers made of 
bamboo. The pipes, which are some- 
times as much as 150 feet in length, 
are suspended vertically in a frame- 
"work measuring 50 feet by four feet. 
The horizontal hammers are held 
at one end by posts fixed in the 
ground (3). The free ends of the 
hammers are linked by cords to a 
movable frame fixed overhead, which 
is attached by a liana to a kind of 
scoop placed under the tube of 
running water. 
* 
HEN the scoop is filled with 
water (4) it goes down and 
swings over, pulling on the 
cord which works the movable frame 
and in turn on the fifty hammers 
which simultaneously strike the 
bamboo sounding pipes. A large 
rock (5) acting as a counterpoise 
immediately brings back the mov- 
able frame to its original position. 
Thus a continuous movement is set 
up. (The blurred effect in the centre 
of photo N° 2 shows the movement 
of the hammers). Each day the 
“carillon master” comes to “tune” the 
tubes and adjust the hammers (1). 
13

## [Page 14](068778engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 68782: The Real mystery of Easter Island

  
   
    
    
’ J rons £) iY Xl york 
ti aT - “i “PW ar i | 
i Ean ed . p fi! wil LS  § f A i Y 1673 ? 
- - 4 pa ~ i 1 ZS 
& 3 
Bi ha ¢ “LEI A5\ J) ALES 
A Ly = 
{ J 
| F - A S : R 
75) 2) 44 
| 
LAY (HG 
8 Jip! ir 
7 " Ha dn 
7 
RIS bl cr RN By \J/M 
a i 2%, 
in <3 
- ’ é J 457 
Se 
h 
C
C
 
—
 
$ bp 
by Alfred Metraux   
  a : oh . 
’ J 
Photo A. Metraux. Copyright, Bishop Museum, Honolulu 
GIGANTIC STATUES on Easter Island amazed Dutch voyagers who first saw them. Their leader, Jacob Roggeveen, wrote: “Ye could not 
understand how a people deprived of stout spars and ropes could have raised them upright.” A good 300 statues may once have dotted the island 
but many, carved in soft stone, have disappeared. Some are over 30 feet high, Their purpose and mode of transport are still shrouded in mystery. 
14

## [Page 15](068778engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 68782: The Real mystery of Easter Island

The Unesco Courier 
  
 
>
t
 
2 
27
 
2 
  Ak   e
e
 
>E
€ 
> 
2»
 
> 
      
ZL 
N
Y
 
& ( 
0 © 
w of 
po 
l
e
 
A
 
C. 
De
s 
    
STRANGE HIEROGLYPHS have been discovered on Easter 
Island. Most are engraved on wooden tablets (far left) or other 
wooden objects such as fish (below). They depict human beings, 
birds, fish, plants, shellfish and ceremonial objects but so far 
no definitive evidence as to their meaning has been discovered. 
SIMILARITIES between Easter Island writing and that of 
ancient China and the ancient Indus Valley civilization have been 
noted by a Viennese scholar who concludes that Easter Island 
writing had been transported to Pacific from Central Asia or 
Iran via Southern China. In columns, on left, are (a) Indus 
writing; (b) Easter Island symbols; (c) Ancient Chinese writing. 
Drawing from "Die Osterinselschrift'’, by Heine-Geldern, Vienna, 1938 
Photos copyright Musée de I'Homme, Paris 
  
. statues 
VER since a Dutch vessel chanced 
E across it two centuries ago, 
Easter Island, no more than a 
" speck in the vastness of the South 
Pacific, has intrigued the world with 
mysteries ‘which have so far been 
only partially and tentatively ex- 
plained. For long the principal 
mystery of Easter Island lay in the 
colossal statues ‘which still dot the 
bare slopes of the Rano-Raraku vol- 
cano and ‘which once stood in far 
greater numbers like sentinels over 
the mausoleums along the seashore. 
In my opinion the greatest “mys- 
tery” of Easter Island 
is not to be found in 
the crop of colossal sta- 
tues. There is no doubt 
that it was the ances- 
tors of the present Po- 
lynesian inhabitants 
who hewed out these 
and dragged <Q 
them to their present 
sites, abandoning tne 
workshops ‘where they 
carved them perhaps 
only three or four 
centuries ago. How- 
ever, no one has yet 
been in a position to 
give a satisfactory ex- 
planation for what appears to be a 
form of writing among a population 
still living in the Stone Age. 
This writing first came to light 
around 1860 when the people of the 
island, newly converted to Christi- 
anity, sent the Bishop of Tahiti, a 
Monseigneur Jaussen, a long cord 
braided from their own hair and 
wound around an old piece of ‘wood, 
as proof of their devotion. Looking 
casually at the improvised spool, the 
Bishop 'was surprised to see that it 
was covered with small figures, all of 
the same height and carefully ar- 
ranged in straight lines which re- 
minded him of Egyptian hieroglyphs. 
He wrote to the missionaries on 
Easter Island asking them to look 
for other tablets and to try to deci- 
pher them. 
Brother Eyraud, the first mis- 
= 
sionary to go to the island, had 
already noticed carved wooden sticks 
in the huts while Father Sumbohm 
had picked up a fragment of a worm- 
eaten tablet. Seeing how interested 
he was in this object, one of the 
islanders brought him a large tablet, 
perfectly preserved. Since then, 
other tablets have been found on the 
island and now total 24, including 
one large wooden rod covered with 
hundreds of symbols. 
At the time when the first. tablets 
were discovered, it ‘would probably 
have been possible to obtain the key 
“AS, 
- 
Tae a, 
to the mystery from the surviving 
members of the priestly caste. The 
old civilization of Easter Island had 
only recently collapsed as a result of 
the raids made by Peruvian slave- 
traders, but there were still a few 
“wise men” who, had they been 
questioned, could have explained the 
meaning of the strange symbols 
covering these tablets. 
Unfortunately, the missionaries 
were not skilful investigators. They 
questioned the islanders who, at the 
sight of the tablets, began to intone 
chants, instead of “reading” them. 
The missionaries treated them as 
frauds and lost interest in the matter 
after a few unsuccessful attempts. 
Mgr. Jaussen, however, ‘was more 
persevering. In Tahiti, he found an 
Easter Islander, called Metoro, who 
had learnt the mysteries of the 
  
tablets under a famous master. The 
Bishop handed him a tablet and 
asked him to “read” it. Metoro turn- 
ed it this way and that and suddenly 
began to chant. He “read” the 
tablet from left to right, then from 
right to left, without bothering to 
turn it round, although in each line 
the signs are upside down in relation 
to that preceding or following. 
Jaussen took down the text as 
Metoro recited it, and his manuscript 
has recently been published. If each 
phrase is compared with the corres- 
ponding symbols, it appears that 
what Jaussen "had 
taken to be a connect- 
ed text is simply a dis- 
jointed succession of 
brief descriptions of the 
symbols viewed by his 
interpreter, and a se- 
ries of isolated words 
or phrases suggested 
by those symbols, There 
is no logical develop- 
ment or general sense 
in the chant or recital. 
Mgr. Jaussen ended by 
losing heart himself 
and abandoned his 
efforts to get to the 
. bottom of a mystery 
which he might otherwise have 
managed to unravel. 
Other attempts were made to 
extract from the islanders inform- 
ation which might have made it pos- 
sible to fathom the system underlying 
the symbols. On a visit to Easter 
Island in 1886, an American paymas- 
ter, Mr. W. Thomson, was taken to 
the house of an old man called Ure- 
Vaeiko, who, in his youth, had attend- 
ed the school of the Tangata rongo- 
rongo (singers or bards) and had 
learnt to read the tablets. As it hap- 
pened, Ure-Vaeiko, having become a 
good Catholic, did not wish to make 
even a momentary return to the 
former heathen practices, and fled. 
He was recaptured one , 
stormy night in the open (Cont'd on 
country, and finally con- next page) 
sented to “read”, if not 
Us

## [Page 16](068778engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 68782: The Real mystery of Easter Island

THE REAL MYSTERY OF EASTER ISLAND 
(Continued) 
the tablets themselves, at least photo- 
graphs of them. He had recognized 
them by certain details and recited 
their contents from end to end 
without a moment’s hesitation. It 
was noticed, however, that he was 
not paying attention to the number 
of symbols in each line and, worse 
still, that he did not even notice it 
when the photographs before him 
were surreptitiously changed. He 
went happily on reciting hymns and 
legends until he was accused of being 
a fraud. 
Responsibility for these lost oppor- 
tunities lies, not with the islanders, 
who appear to have acted in good 
faith, but with the early investigators, 
who were incapable of imagining a 
system of writing different from their 
own and were bent at all costs on 
having the tablets “read”. 
During my stay on Easter Island in 
1934-35, I tried to discover, in the 
memories of my informants, some in- 
dication, however vague or apparently 
insignificant, which might have put 
me onto the right track; but it was 
all useless. The people assured me, 
indeed, that the tablets were similar 
to the “cat’s cradle” patterns, each 
of which suggests a chant to the 
viewer. This interpretation tallied 
with the attitude of the natives of 
the last century who, when asked to 
“read” the tablets, simply recited a 
poem or intoned a chant. I conclud- 
ed that the tablets were mnemonic 
pictographs used in reciting the 
genealogies and long sacred hymns 
which form a very large part of the 
Polynesian liturgy. I was all the more 
inclined to this interpretation be- 
cause, in the Marquesas, which are 
probably the original home of the 
Easter Islanders, the singers or bards 
associate their liturgical poems with 
small fibre pouches from which hang 
thin knotted cords. It was therefore 
possible that each symbol on the 
tablets represented a sentence, a line 
or even a stanza. 
Two script sleuths 
urs, then, was the supposition at 
which I arrived and which was 
accepted by other ethnographers. 
However, I have been less sure that 
my interpretation is correct since a 
letter from a German anthropologist, 
Dr. T.S.Barthel, suggested to me that 
it was something far more complicated 
than mere picture-writing, and that 
the system used by the Easter Island- 
ers was a real script, partly ideogra- 
phic and partly phonetic, employing 
the rebus in somewhat the same way 
as the Mexican and Maya scripts. It 
consisted of symbols indicating the 
general meaning of a sentence and 
suggesting a number of catchwords. 
It will be impossible to decide whether 
the long-standing riddle has finally 
been solved until Dr. Barthel’s book 
is published, but his findings are con- 
vincing and decisive progress seems 
to have been made towards decipher- 
ing these texts. 
No article on the “hieroglyphs” of 
Easter Island would be complete 
without some reference to the com- 
16 
parisons drawn by Mr. Hevesy, a Hun- 
garian linguist, between certain of 
the Easter Island symbols and those 
of a still undeciphered script which 
has been discovered among the ruins 
of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, two 
ancient cities of the Indus Valley 
where a brilliant civilization flourish- 
ed some six thousand years ago. 
Link with the Lolo? 
N Austrian scholar, Professor Hei- 
A ne-Geldern, considers it doubtful 
whether there is a direct 
connexion between these two scripts, 
since the number of symbols differing 
is greater than that of the symbols 
which are similar. His archaeological 
research had led him to believe that 
the Polynesian civilizations originated 
in China, and it was therefore in that 
country that he sought the first begin- 
ning of this system of writing. Com- 
paring the symbols of the Indus cities 
and Easter Island with those of the 
ancient Chinese writing with which 
we are familiar through inscriptions 
on shells and bones dating back to 
2,000 B.C., he found that some of the 
symbols were common to all three 
scripts. He concluded that the writ- 
ing of Easter Island had been trans- 
ported to the Pacific by a people from 
Southern China, having a system of 
writing which must have originated 
in Central Asia or Iran. 
Heine-Geldern has also compared 
the Easter Island writing with the 
pictographs ‘which are still used 
among the Cuna Indians in Panama, 
while the famous prehistorian, Dr. 
Koenigswald, has pointed out similar- 
ities between the Easter Island sym- 
bols and certain drawings on fabrics 
found in Indonesia. An Argentine 
scholar, Dr. Imbelloni, has compared 
the Easter Island symbols with scripts 
found in Ceylon and with that of the 
Lolo of South China. 
I think it is fairly easy to dis- 
cover startling similarities between 
scripts of the pictographic type. The 
very fact that it is so easy should put 
us on our guard. Whatever the true 
nature of the symbols on the tablets, 
it is certain that the scribes who 
made them sought their models in 
the natural and cultural environment 
of Easter Island. 
To me, all the indications seem to 
be that the writing of Easter Island 
was invented in that remote little 
island, probably on the basis of some 
mnemonic system brought by the an- 
cestors of the Easter Islanders from 
their original home. If it is proved 
that these symbols are indeed hiero- 
glyphics which can be “read,” then 
the Easter Islanders, who have 
already amazed the world by the qua- 
lity of their art and the impressive 
proportions of their monuments, could 
claim the additional honour of hav- . 
ing made a decisive step forward in 
the development of civilization. 
Alfred Meiraux's career as a practising ethnologist 
has taken him over most of Latin America and 
the South Sea Islands. He is the author of a 
hook on Easter Island, due to appear in English 
in October. 
 
FANTASTIC FIGURES and symbols were 
found carved on rocks at Easter Island in 1934 
by a Franco-Belgian research expedition which 
included Dr. Metraux. Stylé and subject of 
carvings (below) are often same as those on 
Island’s mysterious wooden tablets showing 
human beings, fish and turtles. Cliffs at 
Orongo village contain many carvings of 
“bird-men” (above). Village was once centre 
of a “bird-man” cult. Carvings were outlined 
with chalk before they were photographed. 
Top photos Alfred Metraux, copyright Bishop Museum, 
Honolulu 
Bottom photos copyright Prof. Henri Lavadery, Brussels 
 
 

## [Page 17](068778engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 68782: The Real mystery of Easter Island

The Unesco Courier 
  
   
  
     
LIKE FALLEN SKITTLES, giant statues of Easter Island lie 
scattered on soil or half-buried in earth. Time and rude climate 
have eaten away much of the statues made of soft stone. When 
European navigators visited island two centuries ago many statues 
were still upright. Some had red-coloured cylinder-shaped stones  
    8    
 
    
        
I of an AP on their heads. Drawing below, made on spot by member of Soest lr) (a I 
Captain Cook’s expedition to South Seas in 1774, is only exist- 
i. SATIS ody 
Fo 8 4 d “lp wy 
ing document showing how island looked nearly 200 years ago. 2 Ps SO 
LAR 
Photos A, Metraux, copyright Bishop Museum Drawing copyright British Maritime Museum, Greenwich 
 
a 5 
17

## [Page 18](068778engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Polynesian navigators: 
 


### 68784: Champion explorers of the vast Pacific: Polynesian navigators

CHAMPION EXPLORERS 
OF THE VAST PACIFIC 
by Edwin Grant Burrows 
  
First inhabitants of the mid-Pacific islands were the Polynesians—the world’s most daring deep- 
sea voyagers and explorers. They found and populated every habitable island in the vast expanse 
bounded by Hawaii on the north, New Zealand on the south, Easter Island on the east, and 
Tonga and Samoa on the west. The word Polynesia means “many islands"—those which form 
triangle shown on map (right). Dotted lines crossing to South America show route by which 
Polynesians are thought to have-travelled from Marquesas to Peru. Above, |8th century engrav- 
ing from “The Voyages of Captain Cook’, showing a Tongan ship equipped with lateen sail. 
sTRONOMY is the most ancient of the sciences, and still 
the most accurate in its predictions. Applied astrono- 
my has been vital to man for thousands of years: 
for landsmen in agriculture, giving them foreknowledge of 
seed-time and harvest; and for mariners in navigation, 
showing where to point the prows of their ships so as to 
make a landfall. Of all the peoples who have found their 
way about the earth with the aid of this kind of applied 
astronomy, the Polynesians have the best claim to be called 
world champions. 
To us of European tradition that seems a bold statement. 
How about Columbus? How about the earlier Vikings, Moors, 
Phoenicians ? There is no wish here to dim their glory ; 
they have earned it all. Yet Columbus had the compass and 
a forerunner of the sextant ; besides, he sailed centuries 
later than the explorers famed in Polynesian legend. As for 
Vikings, Moors, even Phoenicians with their fabled circum- 
navigation of Africa—all their feats were coastwise sailing 
compared with the Polynesian ventures through the widest 
of oceans. 
There is still some doubt as to when Polynesians first 
landed on the islands where European explorers, pushing 
out into the Pacific at least a thousand years later, found 
them established. Some doubt, too, as to where they started, 
and what route they followed. At present the most likely 
answer seems to be that they did not all come at once, but 
at various times, and along more than one sea-lane. 
The question as to the general direction of their shoving- 
As an ethnologist, Professor Burrows has studied native cultures in Polynesia 
and Micronesia and is the author of many articles and monographs, including 
“Songs of Uvea and Futuna”, “Hawaiian Americans”, and “Western Polynesia’. 
He is now Associate Professor of Ethnology ar the University of Connecticut. 
18 
   
  
   
  
Rd NEW 
BRITAIN 
    AUSTRALIA  
40° 
  
  120° #0° 
NEW | 
Nea 
ATN 
J 
off place has seemed easier to answer. It must have been 
mainly one region, for they are, broadly speaking, one 
people ; from Hawaii in the north to New Zealand in the 
south, and from Easter Island in the east to little islands, 
scattered among larger ones of different population, in the 
west. The usual answer has been that they came from the 
west ; that is, from the direction of south-east Asia. 
But now comes Thor Heyerdahl, who with his intrepid 
crew sailed the raft “Kon Tiki” from Peru to Polynesian 
Raroia. That voyage, which he recounted in a memorable 
tale that will surely hold its place among stories of men 
against the sea, was only part of an enormous piece of re- 
search into Polynesian origins, His answer to the question 
“Whence the Polynesians?” is given in the title of a volume 
of more than 800 large pages, published in 1952: “American 
Indians in the Pacific.” 
To sift the evidence for his claim that the Polynesians 
came from America would take at least 800 pages more. 
Failing that, it may be worth while to list impressions left 
on a student of Polynesia by a re-perusal of the work: 
(1) No one can examine this monumental treatise without 
admiring the industry, determination and ingenuity that 
went into it. ] 
(2) The data are presented, not in the manner of a judge 
or dispassionate scientist displaying the facts to let them 
lead where they may, but in that of an advocate, using all 
his powers to put his case in the best light and belittle that 
of his adversaries. (Admittedly the adversaries have often 
done the same.) 
(3) Throughout the discussion, the possibilities of local 
development and of convergence, whereby devices of dif- 
ferent origin come to look alike, are either overlooked or 
lightly dismissed; as if human beings could never invent

## [Page 19](068778engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 68784: Champion explorers of the vast Pacific: Polynesian navigators

The Unesco Courier 
  
180° 0° 
  
    
 
arp 
AEE wert 
FTA 
 
AMERICA 
  
EQUATOR o* 
:, SOUTH 
EX AMERICA 
“9: ELLICE / 
. - - Ay 
d.-". RCT ls Wwe cof pies mbar oe Sag p Raed Y Foire phen goo fader brie ded. 
ON Lae wo i od ITS SR Sal RECN i a ER et i i. i STO We er a) a ee i i bey 2 
; Lin i) N 
NEW § EA b.} 
HEBRIDES, ii be 
° SC 
] 7 LY » 20% 
“NEW F iY { 
CALEDONIA eo 2 o Spa ~N f) 
 / i BLVUSTRAL a HR a iy é ; Ky PITCAIRN nig re 
4 
"© “RAPA EASTER ) ; 
— 7% Ee 
-— 
— 
— 
— = 
PR Bi 
ATE ret [ — 
£35 
vy N_-— LY 
rr 1 
5 
$2. i apo Mm ied 2 
MILES AT THE EQUATOR ! 
ss0° 180° 40° 20° (00° 40° 
  
     
anything more than once. (But demonstrably they often have.) 
(4) Despite many dubious details, the cumulative evidence 
of early contact between Polynesia and South America is 
convincing ; and it may well have been more important than 
most Oceanists have been willing to admit. 
(5) The preponderance of evidence still indicates that the 
Polynesians and their culture came originally from the vi- 
cinity of south-east Asia. 
(6) The claim of early influence on Polynesia from north- 
western North America is unconvincing. 
(7) Finally, research of this sort is a perfectly respectable 
. occupation. Yet to an anthropologist who has abandoned 
an archaeological point of view for sociological and psycho- 
logical interests, it is deplorable to see good time and brains 
wasted on problems that concern only the remote past and 
can never be settled beyond doubt ; and this when many 
timeless problems and urgent present ones, are crying for 
solution. 
One such problem lies before us, involving the past indeed, 
but leading into the timeless question of man’s adaptation to 
his environment. Not when and whence did the Polynesians 
come, but how did they manage? It is beyond dispute that 
they made at least two voyages of some two thousand sea- 
miles with perhaps only one stop-over; made them, returned, 
and repeated them. These voyages were from the Society 
Islands, evidently a centre of dispersal for Polynesian cul- 
ture, to Hawaii, perhaps by way of the Marquesas; and from 
the Society Islands to New Zealand, in all probability by way 
of Rarotonga in the Cook group. 
What puts these voyages past dispute? First, the fact that 
the first Europeans to land at Hawaii and New Zealand—in 
both cases under the British Captain James Cook—found 
them already populated. Second, the fact that both had 
Map and photo taken from “Polynesians, Explorers of the Pacific” by 
J. E. Woeckler, Jr, published by Smithsonian Institution, Washington 
traditions of ancestral voyages from islands the New Zealand 
Maoris called Hawaiki and Tawhiti, the Hawaiians Hawai'i 
and Kahiki. Third, the matter was investigated in the islands 
of those names in the Society group: Hawai'i (the ancient 
name ; now Raiatea) and Tahiti (Tawhiti, Kahiki). Sure 
enough, they had corresponding traditions of the same voya- 
ges with the same leaders; and genealogies in all the island 
groups checked back fairly well to ancestors credited with 
manning pioneering canoes. Fourth, comparison of cul- 
tures of three island groups confirms the close relations. 
How did they do it? Unfortunately, that question is easier 
to ask than to answer. Great overseas voyages had ceased 
long before Captain Cook appeared, though he did learn 
something about native navigation. And by the time the 
matter was investigated more thoroughly, still more had 
been forgotten. 
Some have offered highly speculative answers. No less an 
authority than Admiral Hugh Rodman, U.S. Navy, thought 
one out from a huge gourd preserved in the Bishop Museum 
at Honolulu. The smaller end has been cut off, leaving the 
top of the gourd open. A row of small holes runs all the 
way around just below the upper rim. Hawaiian tradition 
credited this gourd or calabash with supernatural powers 
concerned with navigation. 
In an article entitled “The Sacred Calabash,” published 
in the Proceedings of the U.S. Naval Institute (1928), Admiral 
Rodman suggested that the ancient navigators had filled the 
gourd with water and used the holes below the rim, in con- 
nexion with the level of the water, to obtain a true horizon 
to fix their position and plot their course. 
Unfortunately, Admiral Rodman did not 
know enough of the tradition. Mrs. Lahilahi 
Webb, a Hawaiian woman of chiefly lineage 
{Cont’d on 
next page) 
19

## [Page 20](068778engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 68784: Champion explorers of the vast Pacific: Polynesian navigators

RI WP IT EF 
EP — 
Se LL i -— - 
  
SEA-GOING CANOES of many types were built by Polynesians. Above, an engraving made from descriptions brought back from South Seas by one 
of Captain Cook’s expeditions in | 8th century. Similar canoes with double hulls and vertical sails are still used today in central and eastern Polynesia. . 
who had been a retainer of Queen Liliuokalani in 
her youth, and who spent her elder years as a hostess and 
guide at the museum, said that she had known of this 
calabash most of her life. The holes below the rim were 
for lashings, to hold on a lid, which she remembered but 
which had since disappeared. The calabash was used to 
hold, not water, but wind—all the winds. By opening the 
lid a little and intoning the right chant, an expert could 
call forth whichever wind he needed. Moreover, Mrs Webb 
added, she knew the chant. But some unauthorized per- 
son had taken off the lid; so all the winds escaped; and 
that is why the weather is now uncontrollable. 
Quite recently the hints to be found in old chants, early 
European accounts and surviving myths and traditions, 
have been assembled and analyzed by the astronomer 
Maud Makemson in her book “The Morning Star Rises : 
an Account of Polynesian Astronomy” (New Haven, 1941). 
‘Whatever can be made out of the scraps available, she 
has set down. In some respects, one fears, she has set 
down more than can be made out with all certainty. Yet 
several points are beyond doubt. 
In pre-European times the Polynesians had a consider- 
able knowledge of the heavenly bodies and their move- 
ments, varying in some details from one island group to 
another, yet consistent in the main. They had a calendar 
based on the annual northward and southward motions 
of the sun. The year was divided into months, each 
 
pur —— 
 
    
   
 
‘FROM ACROSS THE SEA’. At time 
of discovery of America, the Mantas Indians, 
living on what is today coast of Ecuador, 
used rafts of balsa wood with vertical sails 
like those of Polynesians. Legends of the 
Mantas Indians told of landing on their 
coast by “men who came from across the 
sea”. The first Spaniard to see a giant 
balsa raft carrying 50 tons of goods in 
the 16th century was Bartolomé Ruiz. 
From afar he took it for a Spanish caravel. 
Right, the first engraving of a balsa raft 
by a Milanese traveller, Girolamo Benzoni, 
in his book “Dell’historia del Mondo 
Nuovo”, published in Venice in 1527, 
20 
Photo taken from “Polynesians, Explorers of the Pacific” 
subdivided into “nights of the moon,” from the moonless 
night through all the waxing and waning until another 
dark of the moon. The moons were distinguished from 
each other by the rising of specified constellations. 
The astronomic lore of which the above is an -outline 
was treasured especially by navigators, who exchanged 
information on guiding stars, landmarks, currents, and 
winds with their colleagues in whatever islands they 
visited. In the season of variable winds, a navigator could 
sail out for a day or several days, steering by a given 
star ; then, if he sighted no land, return 'when the wind 
shifted. It is evidently by some such method that the 
Polynesians gradually explored the Pacific. 
Some voyagers, exceptionally bold or else desperate be- 
cause of some trouble at home, set off on longer sorties 
into unknown seas. Others, storm-driven, made long 
voyages unintentionally. Of such pioneers, voluntary or 
not, many doubtless never found land ; and of those who 
did, not a few never found their way home again. Yet, 
through the generations and centuries, enough voyages 
were successfully completed and retraced to build up a 
body of sailing directions which at last, during the great 
age of navigation, made most of the Polynesian Island 
accessible to each other. : 
As to the particular long voyages chosen as examples, 
Dr. Makemson concludes, by combining astronomy and 
mythology, that the pilots steered from the Society Islands 
A 
  | i 
  
(H
i 
Ho
p 
ill 
  
it 
( 
! 
) 
  
Lo =] dT. 
/; 77 nf 
£m 
GC) "4 
J) (orl passed ENB ZN 
#   
     
 
  
  
  
- Ln 
x, = —— 
S = sc ——— — ey — = _==X a — — — p—

## [Page 21](068778engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 68784: Champion explorers of the vast Pacific: Polynesian navigators

Polynesian 
navigators 
(Continued) 
     
    BIG SHIPS built by Polynesians 
carried large numbers of men, women 
and children, with supplies of food 
and water, on long ocean voyages. 
They were commonly 60 to 80 feet 
long and sometimes over 100 feet. 
To build their ships, Polynesians had 
only simple stone and shell cutting 
tools and no nails. Their huge 
canoes were sewn together with 
coconut husk fibre. Right, one of 
the last large hulls made in the ancient 
Polynesian fashion, ribless and with 
its planks sewn together with fibre. 
wo TIE 
EH — 
Photo by K. P. Emery, Bishop Museum 
to the Marquesas during the months June to August 
(months of shifting winds in those latitudes) by following 
Spica as morning star, and continued on the ame course 
until they reached the latitude of Hawaii, which they 
recognized by the appearance of Aldebaran just over the 
sea. Thereafter, she finds, they turned sharply westward 
and ran before the trade wind, following an evening star, 
probably Venus, until they saw on the clouds at night the 
glow of an active volcano in Hawaii. 
From the Society Islands to Rarotonga the most likely 
guiding star is Antares or Fomalhaut, “or by steering a 
few degrees south of the sun or Venus on the western 
horizon when near the December solstice.” From Raro- 
tonga to New Zealand, one tradition says “Venus by night, 
the sun by day.” Another names Antares. Dr. Makemson 
finds that both would lead too far west. This problem 
remains unsolved, Yet there is no question about the fact 
that Polynesians, steering by the stars, did repeatedly find 
their way to New Zealand. 
Much clearer information is obtainable from Micro- 
nesia. In the western Carolines the old lore of navigation 
is still remembered and, at least in some more remote 
atolls, still used. The writer had the good fortune to 
spend several days taking sailing directions from the 
leading navigator of one of these atolls. Sitting with a 
compass between us (for Ifaluk, as the navigator was 
called, had worked on British and American ships, too), 
~ » oe Le . 4 Ul pe
: i 8 = adi i, = SE 
ASR. ADS RCE ri 4 Ll 
The Unesco Courier 
we ul cad = a — 
= 
—
—
—
 
- 
: ) a ' 
Ul pee UR dn aN 
we worked out a celestial chart with 32 stars on it, going 
all round the compass, and names of islands to which 
they would lead. 
Most spectacular of Micronesian aids to navigation were 
“stick maps,” known only to the Marshall Islanders, but 
made and used by them up to the first decade or so of 
the 20th century. These consisted of strips of coconut 
leaflet midrib lashed together in a rigid frame, with both 
straight and curved lines, and small white shells repre- 
senting islands. They were of three main kinds: .one 
used as a teaching device ; another an outline of the 
whole Marshall group or a large part of it ; the third rep- 
resenting in more detail a few nearby islands and seas. 
Only one source, and that not of the best, says that 
guiding stars were shown on the map. - More likely, un- 
less in some exceptional case, they were memorized sep- 
arately. Distances and directions were not accurate 
enough to steer by ; indeed it would have been a disgrace 
for a navigator to consult such a map while at sea. They 
were used to refresh memory while planning a voyage. 
These details from Micronesia suggest some of the re- 
sources possibly included in the now forgotten navigation 
lore of the ancient Polynesians. Whatever its shortcom- 
ings, it served to bring the first settlers to islands widely 
spread in the Pacific, which their descendants still occupy. 
21

## [Page 22](068778engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
European explorers who opened up Americas in |6éth century found that Indians were skilled metal workers, having used gold to make 
ornaments and to decorate religious objects and weapons for some 2,000 years. 
Pre-Columbian 
  
America 
  


### 68785: Civilizations of gold and copper: Pre-Columbian America

Civilizations 
of gold 
and copper 
by Paul Rivet 
T is sometimes said that when 
America ‘was discovered, the 
people were still living in the 
Neolithic or polished stone age. This 
is only partially true, for many of the 
native peoples ‘were in fact familiar 
with the use of metals, though the 
regions in which metals were known 
did not form a single group. 
Among the different divisions into 
which they can be placed, the first 
was North America. The Indians liv- 
ing there used copper from the Great 
Lakes area and possibly also from 
Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, 
Connecticut, New Jersey, Arizona, 
New Mexico, Nova Scotia and even 
Mexico and Cuba. This copper was 
cold-hammered and, sometimes, re- 
heated and then hammered again. 
The second large area of metal 
working covered the whole of Central 
Professor Paul Rivet, former Director of the 
Musée de "Homme, Paris, has devoted more than 
hall a century fo the study of the ancient peoples 
of the Americas and the Indian civilizations of 
today. His many works include Recherches 
Anthropologiques sur la Basse-Californie, Ethno- 
graphie Ancienne de PEquateur and L’Orfévrerie 
Précolombienne. He is Presidensr of the French 
National Commission for VINESCO. 
First engravings depicting exploitation of gold in New 
World appeared in 1590. They were published by Theodorus de Bry, German engraver and publisher. De Bry visited London, where he met 
America, Colombia, the West Indies 
and the southern tip of Florida, the 
Guianas, Venezuela and, in general, 
all the land north of the Amazon and 
all the territories constituting the old 
Inca Empire. This region was not a 
single unit but a complex group of 
different components. 
Gold and copper were generally 
used throughout the area, so that, 
from what we know today, it is im- 
possible to say where these metals 
were first discovered and how the 
idea of using them spread throughout 
the region. There may well have 
been two centres of discovery, one in 
Peru and the other in the hinterland 
of the Guianas. Gold was undoubtea- 
lv used before copper, since it makes 
its appearance on the Peruvian coast 
in early Nazca times (dated by the use 
of the carbon 14 radio-isotope as 
2,211+200 years ago), and in the 
northern Cordillera of Peru at the 
beginning of the roughly contempor- 
ary Chavin civilization, while copper, 
which was unknown in Proto-Nazca 
and Chavin times, was not introduced 
into Peruvian metallurgy until the 
advent of the Tiahuanaco civilization 
S
s

## [Page 23](068778engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 68785: Civilizations of gold and copper: Pre-Columbian America

The Unesco Courier 
  
famous geographer Richard Hakluyt with whose assistance he 
tiones Peregrinationum in Indiam Orientalium et Indiam Occidenta 
on Caribbean island, probably Curacao. Right, caravan of gold 
collected material for finely illustrated collection of voyages and travels, Collec- 
lium. Two of de Bry's engravings, above, show: Left, party of Dutchmen landing 
-laden llamas (the “camels” of the Incas) crossing Andes under Spanish guard. 
about the fourth century of our era. special colouring process, used on Thence it was introduced into the 
Throughout the north-eastern area 
(the West Indies, Florida, the Guianas, 
Venezuela and the territories north of 
the Amazon), in Colombia, in the 
northern and maritime provinces of 
Ecuador, and on the Peruvian coast, 
copper was only rarely used for mak- 
ing tools and did not appear on a 
large scale except in combination with 
native gold, while in the specifically 
Inca area it was principally used, 
either in the pure state or alloyed 
with tin, for utilitarian purposes. 
The working .of gold and a gold- 
copper alloy known as tumbaga was 
most highly developed in Colombia, 
the Isthmus of Panama and Costa 
Rica. There are good reasons for 
.believing, however, that tumbaga was 
discovered not in Colombia but much 
further east, in the hinterland of the 
Guianas, among the Arawak and 
Carib tribes of the region, who called 
it guanin and karakoli respectively, 
These tribes, or one of them, must 
have introduced the alloy into the 
West Indies, Florida, and Colombia. 
The Colombian goldsmiths develop- 
ed many new techniques, including a 
alloys of copper and gold to imitate 
gilding, gold plating, autogenous 
welding, soldering, and casting by the 
waste wax process. These improved 
methods of metal working spread 
northwards through the Isthmus of 
Panama to Costa Rica and southwards 
to the northern part of the inter- 
Andean valley and the coastal pro- 
vinces of Ecuador and Peru. On the 
Peruvian seaboard, tumbaga appears 
in the Early Chimu period (2,823=500 
years ago) autogenous welding and 
soldering in the Middle Chimu period, 
and the special metal colouring pro- 
cess in the Late Chimu period 
(1.838190 years ago). 
The Incas did not master the prin- 
ciples of tumbaga working until after 
their conquest of the coastal regions, 
which, according to Philip Ainsworth 
Means, took place in the first half of 
the fourteenth century in the south 
and in the second half of the fifteenth 
century in the north. 
Silver working was developed, in 
the main, on the Peruvian seaboard, 
where it first appeared in the Para- 
cas peried (2,257+200 years ago). 
high mountain regions, and reached 
Ecuador during the Inca conquest. 
The use of bronze was certainly 
discovered in the high mountain re- 
gions of Peru and Bolivia. The alloy 
of copper and tin was unknown on 
the Peruvian coast until the Late 
Chimu period. There is no doubt 
that it was chiefly due to the Incas 
that the use of bronze spread through 
all the provinces in their Empire, and 
with it spread the knowledge of 
metallurgy acquired from the Peru- 
vian coastal population (the use of 
tumbaga, derived from Colombia, and 
the use of silver, developed locally). 
The Inca Empire, as it existed at the 
time of the discovery of the Americas, 
was thus a clearly defined metallur- 
gical region, in which the contribu- 
tions of Colombia, the high mountain 
regions of Peru and Bolivia, and the 
Peruvian seaboard were combined. 
The use of lead was introduced into 
Peruvian metallurgy at a very late 
stage, in Inca times, but 
we do not know whether (Cont'd on 
it first appeared on the ,..¢ page) 
the coast or in the moun- 
23

## [Page 24](068778engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 68785: Civilizations of gold and copper: Pre-Columbian America

Pre-Columbian 
America (conra) 
tain area. It is even possible that it 
was first used in Mexico and then 
spread to Peru, by way of the sea 
communications between these two 
countries. 
In time, the expanding sphere of 
influence of the Colombian peoples 
overlapped with that of the Incas, so 
that in certain areas the two combin- 
ed; in this way mixed industries, 
showing some of the characteristics 
found in both the zones already des- 
cribed, grew up in Ecuador and on 
the coast of Peru. While bronze, 
silver and its alloys, and lead were 
entirely unknown in Colombia, and 
while the craftsmen in the high 
mountain areas of Peru and Bolivia 
were unfamiliar with fumbaga and 
the characteristic techniques associat- 
ed with that alloy, all these metals 
and alloys were used in Ecuador and.’ 
on the Peruvian seaboard. 
Once this is established, a compari- 
son of the metallurgy of the Peruvian 
coast and that of Mexico reveals 
extraordinary similarities, not to say 
complete identity, between them. It 
is clear, moreover, that at the time of 
the discovery metals were still not 
employed on a large scale in Mexico, 
and we know that their use was a 
recent innovation. At Monte Alban, 
metals do not appear until about the 
eleventh century, and then only in 
small quantities. On the other hand, 
despite the lack of roots in the past, 
the period at Monte Alban, corres- 
ponding to the beginning of the 
sixteenth century, shows evidence of 
the use of remarkably complex me- 
  
  
» ge. SL A 
»s 2 
 ‘ a= " 
Vi 
RN 
Courtesy Société des Americanistes, Paris 
HUMAN BELLOWS. When Sir Walter Raleigh, the English navigator and explorer, reached 
Guiana in 1595 at the head of an expedition in search of the fabled city of El Dorado, he was the 
first white man to see the Indians making a gold-coppe: alloy. “The Indians”, he wrote “used a 
great earthen potte with holes round about it and when they had mingled the gold and copper 
together they fastened canes to the holes, and so with the breath of men they increased the fire 
till the metell ran, and then they cast it into moulds of stone and clay and so make the plates and 
tallurgical techniques and a remark- 
ably wide range of metals. 
The fact that the art of metal 
working in Mexico has exactly the 
same characteristics as on the Peru- 
vian seaboard and that, though 
Bibliothaque Nationale, Paris 
EMPEROR'S RANSOM. Atahualpa, last of the Inca Emperors, was taken prisoner by the 
Spaniards who offered to release him if he would fill his prison with gold (22 feet by 16) “to the 
height of a man with his arms upraised.” In this engraving by Theodorus de Bry, the Inca people 
are seen here bringing gold ornaments and vessels with which to pay their emperor's ransom. 
24 
! the underside of metal) etc. 
images.” Sir Walter described this in his fascinating narrative “The Discoverie of Guiana”. 
comparatively new and by no means 
widespread, it shows a remarkable 
perfection and variety in technique, 
for which there is no evidence of 
gradual local development, strongly 
suggests that the metal working in- 
dustry was introduced into Mexico as 
a fully developed craft equipped with 
all the necessary technical resources, 
and that it came from the Peruvian 
coast. We now have proof that there 
was trade by sea between Peru and 
Central America in pre-Columbian 
times. The craft used were balsas or 
rafts, of which the old writers have 
left us descriptions and drawings. 
As a last note in this brief sketch 
of pre-Columbian metal work, it may 
be mentioned that platinum nuggets 
were used in a limited area—the 
northern coastal strip of Ecuador and 
the adjacent coastal regions of Co- 
lombia. There is evidence that the 
Indians of Esmeraldas could form a 
kind of homogeneous mixture of gold 
and platinum, although, with the 
techniques they used, neither it nor 
pure platinum could be melted down. 
It is impossible, in such a short 
article, to describe all the techniques 
used by the Indian craftsmen—melt- 
ing down and casting, the metal 
colouring process, plating, welding, 
wire-drawing, embossing and repoussé 
(chasing and work in relief done from 
The 
wealth of technical skills they com- 
manded is yet further evidence of the 
fertile imagination of the pre-Colum- 
bian Indian, for although R. Heine- 
Geldern has attempted to show that 
American metallurgy is derived from 
that of South Asia, I still believe that 
the industry was indigenous and that 
no outside influences affected its 
development.

## [Page 25](068778engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier 
Knowledge blocked at the frontier 
 
VIOLINS TAXED 
  


### 68786: Violins taxed by the kilogram, art rated as 'vegetable fibre': knowledge blocked at the frontier

BY THE KILOGRAM 
ART RATED AS "VEGETABLE FIBRE’ 
  
  
   
WV 
ea - A ” re ’ v y >. J = re Sap, LT NT 
NE af A 
: a A \ or A i 2a) VIRT NEN FE ted 
= $. ’ of hen r 4 x. n, ey 
% A \ - 
Ly ) bh - EA “ Vs 
§ 
   
    
MR b a pun + 
, RIL SF 2 Si 
STN EA rel aA tT) , , Por » 
" fr i Sr 
3 2s a La Cli tak, 
: Jv &’ h PA ¥ 2, = 
 » SRY 
    ad 
AN Se ~~ 
| p—_—— 
  
Copyright Roger Viollet 
by Philip L. Soljak 
News item: Albert Burri, the controversial Italian artist, 
became even more controversial. When a U.S. customs in- 
spector examined one of his works—a collage of canvas and 
other fabrics sewn and stuck together and stretched on a 
frame—he accepted the buyer's evaluation of $ 450, but balked 
at calling it a work of art, which left it free of tax. Under 
customs law he ruled it a “manufacture of vegetable fibres”, 
which carries a 20 per cent tax. The proud owners, Mr. and 
Mrs. Donald Peters of New York, paid the $90 fee and 
promptly filed an appeal. “It isn’t a matter of the money”, 
explained Mrs. Peters firmly, “it’s those archaic laws. They've 
got to be changed some time and this is the only way to do 
it.” (“Newsweek”, New York). 
HE world press frequently reports similar incidents showing 
how complex and illogical trade restrictions bar the in- 
ternational flow of works of art, books, films and other 
sources of knowledge. 
At one busy North American port, it took an art dealer . 
many hours to convince customs officials that three posters 
by the French painter, Henri Matisse, were “art” and not 
subject to import duty. The officials claimed that the posters 
were “packing material” and therefore. taxable. 
  
At another port, a piece of abstract sculpture, done in brass 
by the Rumanian artist Brancusi, was classified as “block 
matter” and duty was charged for industrial metal. 
In Europe, the French producer of scientific films, Jean 
Painlevé, became so embroiled in customs formalities while 
travelling to an international conference that he left his films 
in disgust at the frontier and gave his lecture at the conference 
without them. Across the English Channel, Sir Stanley Unwin, 
as president of the International Publishers Association, pro- 
tested that books were being taxed abroad by the kilo, like 
bags of potatoes, instead of being treated as “the noblest of 
man’s works.” 
- 
UNEsco, which is permanently committed to “promote the 
free flow of ideas by word and image”, is waging an extensive 
campaign to abolish trade restrictions on educational, scientific 
and cultural materials. Every week it receives protests from 
people in various countries who find it expensive, difficult or 
even impossible to obtain these articles from abroad, or send 
them to other lands because of the restrictions now in force. 
A librarian who had arranged to show a 
Unesco film about books recently wrote saying (Cont’d on 
he was reluctantly returning the film “because next page) 
the duty (measured by the foot!) is quite 
25

## [Page 26](068778engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
 
 
    
  
 
exorbitant.” A bookseller who had ordered books from 
another country complained that “although the books cost 
the equivalent of only 40 cents each, the export licence per 
copy is $2.00—just five times the price of the book!” A 
teacher enquired whether she could obtain wall charts for 
her school without paying duty. “We have great difficulty in 
importing visual aids”, she added “and our customs officials 
don’t seem to know if wall charts should be taxed or not.” 
A common problem is that even when exemption is granted 
under a country’s tariff laws, it may not be adequately applied 
in practice. Protests made to Unesco on these and other 
grounds are listed on page 29. 
* 
The taxation of knowledge goes back for centuries and has 
often been associated with “protection” or “privilege”. In the 
early days of printing, rulers of States granted certain printer- 
booksellers the monopoly to print or publish. Others who 
produced books were fined, imprisoned or executed and their 
books destroyed. 
In 17th century England, these restrictions evoked the 
celebrated attack by John Milton in his Areopagitica : “Truth 
and understanding”, Milton declared “are not such wares as 
to be monopolized and traded in by tickets, and statutes and 
standards. We must not think to make a staple commodity 
of all the knowledge in the land, to mark and license it like 
our broadcloth, and our wool packs.” Milton's appeal was 
later re-echoed by Voltaire and also by Benjamin Franklin. 
With the development of the popular press during the 18th 
century, the licensing system was replaced or strengthened 
by heavy taxes on publications. Designed to stifle political 
criticism, these taxes curbed the circulation of the cheaper 
newspapers and pamphlets which were read by the common 
people. Many liberal thinkers, including John Wilkes in 
England and Mirabeau in France, opposed these restrictions. 
* 
In the 19th century, the battle was renewed by William 
Cobbett and Charles Dickens in England, and by Victor Hugo 
and Félécité de Lamennais in France. Gradually, throughout 
western Europe, the hated “newspaper taxes” were swept 
away. There was also a move to free the exchange of ideas 
between countries, and a number of governments reduced 
import duties on books, printed music, maps and paintings. 
The first World War brought this liberal, free trade period 
to an end. Many countries increased their tariff and licensing 
restrictions and educational articles were taxed indiscriminately 
with “ships and shoes and sealing-wax” and other products. 
The economic depression of the 1930’s and the second World 
War brought more rigid tariff, quota and exchange controls. 
Frequently the object of these restrictions was to “protect” 
a local publishing or equipment industry from foreign 
competition. In most cases, however, the cost of collecting 
the taxes excecded the revenue obtained. Their actual result 
was to “protect” the minds of people from the ideas and 
attainments of their neighbours in other lands. 
Following its establishment in 1946, UNEsco launched a 
26 


### 68786: Violins taxed by the kilogram, art rated as 'vegetable fibre': knowledge blocked at the frontier

BLOCKED AT THE FRONTIER (Continued) - 
Books worth 
their weight... 
in potatoes 
campaign to end these restrictions, and before long was receiv- 
ing the support of a growing number of countries. Its first 
action was to draft an international agreement which, as 
described later, exempts a wide range of educational, scien- 
tific and cultural materials from import duties. At the same 
time, UNEsco made a world-wide survey of tariff and trade 
regulations affecting the international flow of information 
materials. ‘This report, published as a manual entitled “Trade 
Barriers to Knowledge”, is designed to help publishers, libra- 
rians, educators, scientists, film exhibitors and others obtain 
these articles from abroad, or send them to other countries. 
Trade Barriers brings many startling facts to light. The 
current edition (1) shows, for example, that of 92 major 
countries throughout the world, eleven (12 per cent) levy 
import duties on books, newspapers and magazines; 28 (30 per 
cent) charge duties on paintings and sculpture; and 51 (56 per 
cent) similarly tax scientific instruments. Newsprint, sound 
recordings and radio sets are even more widely taxed. Duties 
are imposed on newsprint by 59 (64 per cent) of the coun- 
tries; on recordings, by 62 (68 per cent); and on radio sets 
by 91 (88 per cent). The most widespread obstacle, however, 
(1) “Trade Barriers to Knowledge” (Echanges culturels et barridres éco- 
nomiques ; Unesco, Paris; 364 pp.; $5.00; 25/-; 1,250 frs. 
  
 
“lsaid, there is a thirty per cent duty to pay on that instrument."’     

## [Page 27](068778engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 68786: Violins taxed by the kilogram, art rated as 'vegetable fibre': knowledge blocked at the frontier

is the restriction of imports through exchange controls and 
licensing; 64 countries (over 70 per cent) limit trade in educa- 
tional materials in this way. . 
The restrictions themselves are complex, onerous and at 
times illogical. Following are some examples, listed accord- 
ing to the main groups of materials with which “Trade 
Barriers” deals. 
Books and other publications, Denmark charges a duty 
of $0.09 a kilogram on children’s books in Danish, but 
exempts books in other languages. Ethiopia levies a 9 per 
cent duty on all books. Martinique charges a 12 per cent 
“sea” duty on books bound in leather, but exempts others. 
Guatemala exempts most publications from duty but on the 
other hand levies a consular fee, an import tax, a toll tax and 
a consignment tax together representing 20 per cent of the 
value. India, Pakistan and Thailand exempt current news- 
papers, but impose dutics on old ones. Indonesia levies a 
100 per cent import charge on newspapers and tourist posters, 
and 33 per cent on manuscripts. 
In Ireland, religious books pay a 30 per cent duty, but 
other books arc free. Italy charges a 13 per cent duty on 
books bound in leather and 18 per cent on illustrated volumes. 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands impose a 20 per cent duty 
on children’s picture books and the Netherlands also charges 
15 per cent on illustrated magazines, In Norway, children’s 
picture books pay a duty of $0.34 a kg. if the pictures are in 
one colour, and a duty of $1.12 if the pictures are in two or 
more colours as also do coloured tourist posters. 
On books, newspapers and magazines, Panama levies an 8 
per cent consular fee, plus a tax of $0.02 per package, and 
stamp duty. Paraguay charges a similar consular fee on 
publications. The USA levies a 71/2 per cent duty on 
children’s books and a 5 per cent duty on books in English. 
This latter duty was established over 50 years ago to “protect” 
an infant publishing industry which has now become one of 
the largest in the world. Italy, Mexico, Norway and Portugal 
also tax imported books in their national languages. 
* 
. Works of art. In Australia, an Australian artist who has 
lived abroad over 7 years pays a $5 duty if he returns with his 
own painting. On non-Australian paintings the duty is bet- 
ween $5 and $6, and on statues between 12 and 32 per cent. 
Austria and Czechoslovakia levy varying duties on stone 
statues weighing over 5 kg., Angola charges a 32 per cent duty 
on paintings and 27 per cent on sculpture. India’s duties on 
works of art are 25 per cent, Iran’s 50 per cent, Iraq's 33 per 
cent, Jordan’s 30 per cent, New Zealand's 45 per cent and 
the Sudan’s 25 per cent. 
Burma charges 25 per cent and Pakistan 60 per cent on 
works of art, unless imported for public exhibit. Canada’s 
and Portugal's duties on foreign works of art range from 15 
to 30 per cent. China (Formosa) levies a flat 40 per cent, 
Ecuador 75 per cent, Morocco 12 per cent and Costa Rica 
10 per cent. Czechoslovakia and Denmark exempt canvases, 
but charge a separate duty on the frames. Indonesia levies a 
30 per cent duty on works of art, plus a “luxury” import 
charge of 300 per cent. Ireland charges 100 per cent on 
statues in stone, and 75 per cent on those in plaster of Paris. 
Japan levies a 50 per cent duty on ivory statues, and Liberia 
charges 25 per cent on wooden ones. 
Norway imposes a duty of $0.28 per kg. on pictures in 
wooden frames. Panama charges 15 per cent on paintings, 
and Paraguay 48 per cent, plus consular and other fees. 
Peru's duty on paintings is $1.00 a kg. plus 14 per cent, and 
Venezuela’s $0.30 a kg. plus 15 per cent. Venezuela also 
has a charge of $0.60 a kg. on metal statues. 
Educational films and newsreels, Many countries fail to 
grant any concessions to these films. Angola levies a gencral 
import duty of 30 per cent; Austria, $32.16 per 100 kg.; the 
Belgian Congo, 25 per cent; Bulgaria, $160 per 100 kg.; 
Burma, $0.03 a foot; China (Formosa), 80 per cent; Czecho- 
slovakia, $139 per 100 kg.; Denmark, $4.33 per kg.; the 
Dominican Republic, 15 per cent; Ethiopia, $0.30 per 100 
The Unesco Courier 
metres plus 9 per cent; Guadeloupe and Martinique, 12 per 
cent; French West Africa, 20 per cent. 
In the German Federal Republic, the rate is 24 per cent 
(copyable film); India, $0.05 a foot; Iran, 50 per cent; aly, 
$0.06 a metre (35 mm. film); Japan, 30 per cent; Korea 
(South), 40 per cent; Luxembourg, $0.03 a metre; Morocco, 
12 to 20 per cent; Mozambique, 23 per cent; the Netherlands, 
$0.03 a metre; New Zealand, 45 per cent; Norway, $1.12 a 
kg.; Paraguay, 15 per cent plus 8 per cent consular fee; Peru, 
$2 a kg. plus 14 per cent; Portugal, $2.76 a kg.; Saudi Arabia, 
30 per cent; Syria, $14 a kg.; French Togoland, 10 per cent; 
the USSR, 100 per cent; Venezuela, $0.78 a kg. 
Educational recordings. Few countries make any attempt 
to discriminate between educational and “entertainment” 
sound recordings, and only Hong Kong, Mexico, Singapore 
and South Africa grant complete exemption. Countries 
levying the highest general rates are Angola, 35 per cent; 
Austria, $80 per 100 kg.; Bulgaria, $48 per 100 kg.; Burma, 
40 per cent; China (Formosa), 100 per cent; Costa Rica, £0.53 
a kg.; Czechoslovakia, $0.42 a kg.; Ecuador, $2 a kg.; Gua- 
temala, $0.75 a kg.; India, 50 per cent; Iran, 40 per cent; 
Ireland, $0.11 a record; Mexico, £0.95 a kg.; Portugal, $3.32 
a kg.; Saudi Arabia, 35 per cent; USSR, $12.50 a kg. 
  
    
       
Music. Twenty countries impose duties on printed music, 
and over 90 on musical instruments. On music, French West 
Africa and the USA charge 5 per cent, Panama 8 per cent, 
Ethiopia 9 per cent, Canada and Costa Rica 10 per cent, 
French Equatorial Africa and Guadeloupe 12 per cent, French 
Cameroons and Paraguay 20 per cent, Indonesia 33 per cent. 
On each kg. Bulgaria levies a duty of $0.16; El Salvador, 
$0.72 plus 8 per cent import tax; Iran, $1.00; Peru, $0.06 
plus 14 per cent tax; Venezuela, $0.06. South Africa charges 
10 per cent on manuscripts. 
Duties on instruments are levied variously by weight, value 
or type of article concerned. For example, Bulgaria charges 
$16 a kg. for hurdy-gurdies, but double that for harps; 
Mexico's stiffest duty is on mouth organs and street organs 
($3 a kg.); Spain charges $1 a kg. on hurdy-gurdies and a 
general duty of $300 or more on pianos. The USA’s duty 
on violins is 40 per cent, Finland's $1.47 a kg., and Guate- 
mala’s $1.00 a kg. Norway charges $0.84 on a zither, Swit- 
zerland $0.16 a kg. on ocarinas and Sweden $0.68 a kg. on 
accordions. Australia levies a general duty of 
17-47 per cent on instruments; China (Formosa) (Cont’d on 
40 per cent; Cuba and Sierra Leone 50 per cent; next page) 
Egypt 53 per cent; Ethiopia 34 per cent; France 
27

## [Page 28](068778engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

  
BLOCKED 


### 68786: Violins taxed by the kilogram, art rated as 'vegetable fibre': knowledge blocked at the frontier

AT THE 
FRONTIER 
(Continued) 
      
  
  
  
    
  
  
      
 
15-40 per cent; Italy 12-21 per cent; India 50 per cent; Indo- 
nesia, Sudan and Liberia 30 per cent; Iraq, Ireland and the 
United Kingdom 33 per cent ; Israel 50 per cent ; Korea 40 per 
cent and Pakistan 60 per cent. : 
Scientific instruments arc essential to social progress and, 
in the case of the less developed countries, are needed parti- 
cularly in raising their health, agricultural and industrial stan- 
dards. Yet over 70 countries levy duties on these articles. 
Angola charges 3-28 per cent; Australia 17 per cent; Burma, 
Canada, Ethiopia, German Federal Republic, Iraq, Mozam- 
bique, French Togoland and Libya, 10 per cent; Morocco, 
Guadeloupe and Martinique, [2 per cent; Denmark, Portugal 
and Colombia 7 per cent; China (Formosa), French West 
Africa, Lebanon, Paraguay, Puerto Rico, Saudi Arabia and 
Syria, 15 per cent; Luxembourg and the Netherlands, 10-15 
per cent; Panama 10-20 per cent; Japan and New Zealand 
20 per cent; Jordan 21-34 per cent; Korea 10-40 per cent: 
USA 20-40 per cent; Sudan 25 per cent; Ireland 30 per cent; 
and lran 30-75 per cent. Austria, Bulgaria, Ecuador, Finland, 
Guatemala, Peru and Venezuela tax instruments by the kg., 
the highest rates being Ecuador's ($3.35 a kg.) and Guate- 
mala’s ($0.15-33 a kg.) 
Maps, charts and models are obviously essential to a know- 
0 
=    AE 
  
  
     = 
Pyle 
“777 T TV 
   
“What? Pay duty?! Then you have it.’     
28 
ledge of the world around us. However, although good quali- 
ty maps and charts are produced by relatively few countries, 
some 30 countries levy duties on those from abroad. 
Australia charges 17 per cent; Ethiopia 9 per cent; French 
Togoland and French West Africa 20 per cent; French Guiana 
and Guadeloupe 5-7 per cent; Indonesia 33 per cent; Ireland 
15-50 per cent (in bulk); Italy 13 per cent; Lebanon 25 per 
cent; Morocco 12-20 per cent; Panama 8 per cent; Paraguay 
23-34 per cent; Peru 12 per cent. Bulgaria charges $1.60 a 
kg. plus 5 per cent; the Dominican Republic $1.50; Portugal 
$0.14; and Norway $0.28 if maps are glued; others are exempt. 
Materials for the handicapped. It is hard to believe that 
a country would charge duties on articles needed by the blind, 
the partially sighted and the deaf. Yet over 50 countries tax 
one or more of these groups of materials. 
Duties on all three groups are levied by French Equatorial 
Africa, French West Africa, German Federal Republic, Indo- 
nesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Lebanon, Panama, Sudan, and French 
Togoland. On braille writers, duties are charged by Angola, 
Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Repub- 
lic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, India, Mexico, Mozambique, Portugal 
and Spanish Morocco. Hearing aids are taxed by Algeria. 
Australia, Burma, Cambodia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, 
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Morocco, Guadeloupe, 
Martinique, Greece, India, Italy, Laos, Libya, Pakistan, Para- 
guay, Philippines, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Venezuela. 
Highlighting this maze of restrictions on the flow of know- 
ledge, “Trade Barriers” has evoked widespread interest in the 
world press. Sir Stanley Unwin, who has particularly 
championed the cause of books over many years, wrote of 
the handbook: “It is a sad reflection upon the age in which 
we live that it should require a large and closely set volume 
merely to summarize all the many artificial barriers which 
obstruct the free flow of information from one country to 
another... Let us hope that the energy to sweep away these 
‘Trade Barriers to Knowledge’ will not be lacking.” 
Governments have, in fact, shown an increasing willingness 
to support UNEScO’s efforts to this end. In 1949, the 34 nations 
which are the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) helped uUNEsco to draft an 
international convention (The Agreement on the Importation 
of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Materials). 
Countries joining this agreement grant duty-free exemption 
to books, newspapers, periodicals, music scores, works of art, 
maps and charts. Also exempt are newsreels, educational 
films, recordings, models, scientific instruments and articles 
for the blind if for approved institutions or organizations. 
In addition, internal taxes on imported articles may not 
exceed those charged on domestic products, and import fees

## [Page 29](068778engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 68786: Violins taxed by the kilogram, art rated as 'vegetable fibre': knowledge blocked at the frontier

must be limited in amount to the cost of the services rendered. 
Under another provision, governments agree to grant import 
licences and foreign exchange for books and other publications 
needed by public libraries. They also undertake to simplify 
their import procedures, to ease the customs clearance of 
educational, scientific and cultural materials, and continue 
their efforts to promote the free flow of these articles. 
The UNEsco agreement entered into force in May 1952 
and is now being applied by 22 countries, embracing over 
450 million people. These countries are Belgium, Cambodia, 
Ceylon, Cuba, Egypt, Finland, France, Greece, Haiti, Israel, 
Laos, Monaco, Pakistan, the Philippines, El Salvador, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom, Viet-Nam 
. and Yugoslavia. The United Kingdom has also extended the 
convention to almost all of its overseas territories, so that mil- 
lions of British subjects abroad are now sharing the benefits 
of the agreement equally with those at home. Twelve 
countries have signed but not yet ratified it (1). 
Urging the United States to join the Agreement, the “New 
York Times” commented: “It is hardly likely that placing on 
the free list any such items on which tariffs are now collected 
would result in dire consequences for this country... This is 
one field in which it might be easy to beat the protectionists. 
In the first place, the United States is a book exporting 
country, and in the second place the tariff we do impose on 
books is low and has little economic significance anyway... 
Approval of the pact on free importation of educational, 
scientific or cultural materials would give a psychological 
boost to the whole movement for freer cultural exchange 
among the nations.” These points might well be considered 
by other countries which have not yet joined thc agreement. 
The convention has received support from the UN Economic 
and Social Council and the Council of Europe, which have 
The Unesco Courier 
by over 20 international associations, including the World 
Federation of United Nations Associations, the League of 
Red Cross Societies, the International Publishers Association 
and the International Federation of Newspaper Publishers 
(FIEJ). Most of these associations have asked their national 
member associations to urge the governments of their countries 
to join the agreement. These appeals indicate that perhaps 
the most eflective way of reducing taxes on knowledge would 
be to secure universal adoption of the uUNEsco convention. 
Meanwhile, UNEsco has sought directly to encourage inter- 
national negotiation for the reduction of tariffs on information 
materials. Early in 1956 it requested the Contracting Partics 
to the GATT that they consider removing dutics on these 
articles at their tarifl negotiating confcrence in Geneva. In 
response, the conference noted that the 26 participating 
countries were urged to “eliminate or reduce barriers to the 
free flow in international trade” in the items covered by the 
UNESCO agreement. 
The conference ended in May with [4 nations agrecing 
to grant reductions. The U.S.A. is cutting tariffs on maps 
and charts; Chile and Swcden, on films; Belgium, German 
Federal Republic, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, on 
sound recordings ; German Federal Republic, Norway, Sweden 
and the United Kingdom on radio receivers or parts; Japan 
on television reccivers ; Sweden, the United Kingdom and the 
U.S.A. on certain musical instruments; Australia, Canada, 
France, Italy, Sweden and the U.S.A. on various scientific 
instruments ; Canada on newsprint ; and the United Kingdom 
on printing paper. These concessions mark new gains jin 
Unesco’s campaign to make articles of knowledge more fully 
available to the world’s pcoples. 
(1) Afghanistan, Bolivia, China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
- urged governments to adhere to it. It has also been endorsed Guatemala, Honduras, Iran, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand. 
  
ERE are typical examples of the 
many appeals for help or advice 
which UnEsco has received from 
people trying to obtain books, works of 
art, films and other educational articles 
from abroad. 
* Belgian teacher : Our schools have the 
right to obtain books free of duty if they 
import them directly. However, import 
procedures are so onerous that few 
schools can undertake this work. Most 
schools therefore ask agents to do the 
importing. But they then lose their right 
of exemption, which apparently exists 
only in theory. 
This problem is solved, now that Bel- 
gium has joined the UNESCO Agreement 
on the Importation of Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Materials. The 
Agreement grants duty-free entry to all 
books, regardless of destination, as well 
as to many other articles. : 
* Indian importer of documentary films, 
We have imported a film on agricultural 
training which would be most useful in 
an under-developed country like ours. 
Although the film is purely instructional 
and was made by another government 
(United States of America), our authori- 
ties have refused to classify it as educa- 
tional. They have accordingly charged a 
5.0.8. 
duty equivalent to $43.75, whereas the 
film itself cost only $36.27 to rent. 
When India joins the UNESCO Agree- 
ment, films like this could be granted 
duty-free entry without the formality of 
classification. The importing organization 
.would, however, need to obtain recogni- 
tion from the authorities as an approved 
importer of educational films. 
* French museum director : I have just 
paid duty on three sound recordings from 
abroad and must now pay an even higher 
tax on a fourth record, although it is 
not new, Can I obtain tax exemption and 
have these payments refunded ? 
France has joined the UNEsco Agree- 
ment, which exempts sound recordings 
under certain conditions. If the records 
were educational, scientific or cultural 
and were consigned to the museum, the 
authorities would probably agree to re- 
fund the sums paid. 
* United States publisher : We export 
numerous technical books but often find 
‘that booksellers abroad have trouble in 
obtaining foreign currency to pay for the 
books after they have arrived. The book- 
sellers fall behind in’ their payments to 
us and we naturally hesitate to extend 
them further credit. The ultimate losers 
are schools and libraries, who are th 
booksellers’ largest customers. 
A shortage of foreign exchange pre- 
vents many countries from making funds 
readily available for the importation of 
numerous articles, including books from 
USA. and other “hard currency” 
countries. However, this obstacle may be 
overcome through the UNEsco Internatio- 
nal Coupon Scheme, which enables per- 
sons in “soft currency” countries to 
obtain books from “hard currency” 
ones. The scheme also applies to periodi- 
cals, educational films and scientific 
equipment. 
* British educational foundafion : Des- 
pite UNEsco’s help in making a film on 
Shakespeare’s theatre available to us, we 
have run into an unexpected snag. The 
film is being held by the customs until 
we get an import licence, which will take 
weeks to obtain. Since most of the 
schools will then be closed for the holi- 
days, my only course is to return the 
film to you. 
The British Board of Trade points out 
that although the United Kingdom 
exempts educational films from duty 
under the UNESCO Agreement, importers 
(or exhibitors) in many cases are requir- 
ed to obtain an import licence for the 
necessary foreign currency. Application 
for the licence should be made well in 
advance, to avoid delay in delivery of 
the film.       
29

## [Page 30](068778engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 68788: The School beyond Eboli

  
    
luigpnipjy ubdf Aq 
0X39 TOOHDS dH 
» MN 
S -t 
7 
      

## [Page 31](068778engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 68788: The School beyond Eboli

RACO is a village in southern Italy. 
C It lies on a hilltop, somewhere 
on the borders of Lucania and 
Calabria, in a region rich in folk 
traditions, which is still little known 
even to most Italians. 
Describing this part of Italy— 
beyond Eboli—the novelist Carlo Levi 
has said that it is like a series of 
“islands” each with its own folklore 
and ancient traditions. The description 
is apt sitice in these mountain valleys 
thunder, heavy rain began to fall and 
‘we burst a tyre. 
But the next day the “evil eye” 
seemed to have been exorcised. The 
sun was shining brightly and I set 
off to visit the 234 children who are 
attending school in the converted 
barn of a former monastery. The 
headmistress, a stout and friendly 
woman, was anxious about the lack of 
space in her school. “We get a sub- 
sidy from the Government and from 
  
On way to Craco village 
school set up in converted 
barn of former monastery, 
farmer's children in south- 
ern Italy's Calabria region * 
take many paths, often 
walk miles to class. Upper 
left, Giovanni follows rail- 
road track; lower left, 
Maria crosses village drag- 
ging nanny goat along. 
Goat attends all classes, 
particularly dislikes arith- 
metic lessons, but serves 
as free milk bar for Maria 
at luncheon break. Right, 
improvised dining hall in 
former monastery gets so 
cramped during lunch hour 
that children often eat 
their meal standing up. 
(UNESCO) 
Greek and Albanian are spoken- as 
‘well as Italian. Byzantine churches 
adjoin cave dwellings, and Protestant 
sects still subsist together with Jewish 
communities and so-called “Tolstoy- 
an” hermits. 
Craco is a typical village of these 
parts. I arrived there late one after- 
noon over a rough, winding road 
fringed ‘with olive trees which seemed 
to be clinging to the bare hillsides. 
A storm was threatening and my 
driver remarked: “You have to beware 
of the evil eye in this part of the 
country.” As we drove into the village 
we met a group of women dressed in 
black; there was a sudden clap of 
 
the Food and Agriculture Organiza- 
tion, to serve a hot meal at midday”, 
she explained. “But our improvised 
dining hall is so eramped that the 
children have to eat standing up.” 
It was quite a task, the headmis- 
tress told me, to persuade parents to 
send their children to school instead 
of putting them to ‘work in the fields. 
Of course, the 3,000 sheep, 60 cows 
and 300 mules owned by the villagers 
all need looking after. But thanks to 
the skill and diplomacy of her eight 
assistant-teachers, the headmistress 
has gradually succeeded in winning 
over the parents. 
In one of the classrooms, I met 
The Unesco Courier 
eight-year-old Maria who comes to 
school with her goat because there is 
no one to look after it at home, The 
goat bleated pitifully during the 
arithmetic class but at lunchtime it 
provided a large bowl of milk for its 
young mistress. There seemed to be 
more boys than girls in the school, 
probably because you must be able 
to read to obtain a driver’s licence for 
a motor-bike or car. Unfortunately, 
this obligation does not reduce the 
number of accidents 
on the roads. How- 
ever, it is not so much 
because of motor-bikes 
as through the Go- 
vernment’s efforts that 
illiteracy is practically 
wiped out in Craco. 
But in spite of the 
changes wrought by 
modern techniques, the 
peasants of Calabria 
and especially of Luca- 
nia remain very much 
attached to their an- 
cient traditions. Side 
by side with religious 
ceremonies, they still 
practise ancient rites 
which seem to be the 
heritage of a distant, 
pre-Christian past. It 
is a hard struggle to 
eke out an existence on 
these barren hillsides, 
and their belief in the 
power of magic is a 
kind of defence against 
the uncertainties of 
life. In the end they 
almost confuse these 
practices with religion. 
  
They believe that on 
occasions such asbirths 
and weddings it is par- 
ticularly important to 
protect their families 
from evil influences. 
Many of the school- 
children in Craco still 
] wear a tiny bag sus- 
pended on a chain round their necks 
which contains the ashes of their 
umbilical cord. And a nine-year-old 
schoolboy, Giorgio, told me how, when 
his little brother ‘was born, his 
parents made a show of putting the 
baby into the oven so as to protect 
him all his life from the dangers 
of fire. 
Similarly it is not unusual for young 
people to ask their relations to stand 
watch over their house on their wed- 
ding night in order to keep out the 
monacello (little monk) a 
mischievous goblin whom (Cont’d on 
they hold responsible for next page) 
all the misfortunes of 
31

## [Page 32](068778engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 68788: The School beyond Eboli

"BEYOND 
EBOLI 
(Continued) 
  
  
married life. To keep the “little 
monk” from doing any harm, a 
scythe is placed by the door with its 
tip pointing upwards, or newspapers 
are laid on the ground. Since the 
monacello considers himself obliged to 
count every single letter or symbol in 
the paper, he will be kept busy for a 
long time—at least till morning. 
Such practices, however, are fast 
disappearing. Since the opening of 
the school and the introduction of 
books and newspapers in the village, 
young people view these ancient super- 
stitions with increasing scepticism. 
But they still retain their gift of 
poetic expression. Tales are told on 
winter evenings when the family 
gathers round the hearth, and at 
funerals long poetic laments are 
improvised by the deceased’s next-of- 
kin and recited by all the mourners. 
Schools can play an important part 
in helping to improve living condi- 
tions in isolated villages such as 
Craco. They are headquarters in the 
figi.t against illiteracy and help to 
banish out-dated ideas. They can 
also help to build up a written record 
of the tales and legends composed by 
local poets and which form the basis 
of a cultural heritage of colourful 
and varied folklore and traditions. 
32 
 
NEW PATHS TO THE EAGLE’'S NEST 
Village of Craco looms against sky like mountain eagle's nest, its houses huddled together in 
serried clump. Once practically cut off from new ideas from the outside world, Craco, like 
hundreds of other small villages in Calabria and Lucania, has been waging campaign against illite- 
racy since 1947 with support of Italian Government and voluntary organizations. Unesco experts 
have also aided these campaigns. Local doctors, engineers, veterinarians and parish priests have 
come forward as volunteer teachers of reading and writing for adults. Since opening of new 
schools illiteracy has been practically wiped out in many places. Parents now send children to 
school (below) instead of putting them to work in the fields or to look after animals, 
Credit UNESCO 
    

## [Page 33](068778engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier 
From the Unesco Newsroom 
Mission TO BOMBAY: An inter- 
national UNEsco mission of scientists and 
engineers recently went to India to work 
with the Indian Government in setting up 
an institute of technology in Bombay. The 
team, led by the Deputy Director of 
UNEsco’s Department of Natural Sciences, 
included six engineers from the Soviet 
Union and a British aeronautical engineer. 
Other UNESCO experts joined it in New 
Delhi. The mission which was sent to 
India under the U. N, world programme of 
technical assistance for economic and social 
development, will help to draw up final 
plans and determine equipment require- 
ments for the Western Higher Institute of 
Technology, the second of four technologi- 
cal institutes being set up by the Govern- 
ment of India. Following this preliminary 
work, UNEsco will begin a long-term pro- 
gramme of aid to the new institute, sup- 
plying both professors and equipment. 
HM CENTRE OF CULTURE: The 
Burmese Government is setting up a 
national cultural centre in Rangoon 
consisting of a library, museum and an 
art gallery. UNESCO is aiding in plan- 
ning and organizing the centre by con- 
tributing $2,500 for architects’ fees, and 
$2,000 worth of equipment for the mu- 
seum and library. UNEsco has also 
offered four fellowships for Burmese 
librarians and museum specialists to 
study abroad. 
Use YOUR MUSEUM: Forty-four 
countries intend to take part in UNEscCO's 
world-wide campaign next October to high- 
light the role of museums in community 
life. "The campaign aims to show how 
important a part museums can play in 
educating the public, just as libraries, news- 
papers, films and radio do in their respec- 
tive spheres. To help national, regional 
and local authorities who plan to hold 
special exhibitions, UNEsco has just issued 
a poster illustrating the development of 
museums. 
HB MULTI-RACIAL UNIVERSITIES: 
The opening of new African universities 
“brings the principle of race equality to 
the forefront in central Africa” states 
a recent report of the U. N. General 
Assembly’s Committee on Information 
from Non-Self-Governing Territories. 
The growing list of universities in Afri- 
can non-self-gcoverning territories could 
prove an important ingredient in a 
changing racial situation, it adds. 
Among the 92 students last autumn at 
the University of Leopoldville in the 
Belgian Congo, which opened its cour- 
ses in 1954, 77 were Africans and 15 
were Europeans. The report also quotes 
a British statement that the new Rhode- 
sia-Nyasaland University will be on a 
multi-racial basis which it is hoped, 
“will prove a potent influence in the 
improvement of race relations in this 
part of Africa within the concept of 
partnership.” 
B rincinG ASIA INTO FOCUS: 
" Teachers and historians from 16 Western 
countries and from Asia held a series of 
meetings in Paris on May 2 to study how 
the presentation of Asia in Western text- 
books and teaching materials can be im- 
proved. Basis of the discussions were reports 
sent to UNEsco by its National Commissions 
in 18 Western countries where educators 
have examined the place given to Asia in 
their textbooks. Summarizing national re- 
ports, a discussion paper before the Com- 
mittee stated that the treatment of Asia was 
in general “superficial, episodic, incomplete 
and impersonal”. (See “Asian History 
Through Western Glasses,” in The UNEsco 
Courier, March 1956; U.S.-May). 
HB HELLO OLD FELLOWS : Over 
1,300 men and women who have follow- 
ed courses in other countries through 
UNESCO fellowships and who are now 
back at work in their own lands are 
today linked in all parts of the world 
through a UNEsco Fellowship Bulletin. 
When this was put out as a trial issue 
at the end of 1955 UNEsco fellows in 40 
countries wrote back to say what they 
were now doing. The second number 
of the bulletin issued recently shows the 
wide variety of fields in which these 
men and women are using knowledge 
gained abroad. It is now proposed to 
form associations of UNESCO fellows in 
different countries. 
Ow JOB—NEW LAND : Leather 
workers, joiners, shop assistants and dairy 
workers have been taking part in a long- 
term workers exchange initiated last year 
by UNEsco to enable European workers to 
visit other countries for from three to 12 
months and to learn about the life there by 
working among the people. The first 
person to take part in the scheme, a 25- 
year-old Swedish leather worker, has just 
returned home after working for nine 
months in a shoe factory at Leicester, 
England. Other exchange workers have 
come from Austria, Belgium, Denmark, 
Germany and Switzerland.- The plan is 
administered with the help of international 
trade union and co-operative organizations 
and travel expenses are paid by UNEsco. 
B CYBERNETICS AND YOU : Scien- 
tists from many countries were present 
at an International Congress on Cyber- 
netics which was held in Namur, Belgium, 
from June 26 to 29, under the spon- 
sorship of the Belgian Ministry of Edu- 
cation and UNESCO. Today, the term 
cybernetics means little to the average 
person. One dictionary defines it as 
“the comparative study of the human 
nervous system and of complex elecc- 
tronic calculating machines aimed at 
increasing the understanding of how the 
human brain functions” while another 
describes it more briefly as “the theory 
of control and communication in the 
animal and the machine”. This new 
science, however, is radically transform- 
ing industry and is bound to affect all 
sectors of human activity. At Namur, 
scientists will consider its implications 
in such varied scientific fields as the 
mathematical theory of communications, 
mechanical computation, biology, phy- 
siology, medicine, psychology and social 
sciences. 
N OMAD SCHOOLS : Seventy-six 
nomad schools were set up in southern tran 
during 1954-55 to provide classes for 
children of wandering tribes. During the 
present year these schools will be increased 
by 41. More than 500 of these schools, 
organized by the Iranian Higher Council 
for Education, are now operating through- 
out Iran. 
RB ‘TALKING BOOKS?’ : Libraries from 
which blind people can borrow “talking 
books”— the texts of literary works 
recorded on magnetic tape or discs—are 
a well-established institution in the 
United States. Their development in 
Europe, where they are at present in the 
experimental stage, can now be expected 
following a recent meeting of represen- 
tatives from 15 countries to discuss a 
European edition of “talking libraries”. 
BB rimisn BOOK BOOM : A record 
annual total of 19,962 titles published was 
reached by publishers in the United King- 
dom during 1955. Of these titles—an 
increase of 774 over the previous year— 
5,770 were reprints or new editions, As 
in 1954, the four largest classes were fic- 
tion, children’s books, educational works 
and books on religion. 
B® ONE GOOD TURN : 4 Dutch orga- 
nization “to promote international soli- 
darity by giving technical, economic 
and financial assistance” to less-devel- 
oped countries was recently set up in 
Amsterdam. In providing technical as- 
sistance it will co-operate with the U.N. 
and Specialized Agencies, using funds 
raised through employers’ associations, 
waorkers’ unions, youth movements, re- 
ligious groups and other organizations. 
The new organization was founded, in 
part, as a response to the aid which 
many countries gave to Netherlands 
when disastrous floods devastated part 
of the country in February, 1953. 
33

## [Page 34](068778engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco’s National distributors from 
Letters to the Editor 
Sir, 
The January issue (N° 11, 1955, Euro- 
pean edition) of The Unesco COURIER on 
the changing role of women is most 
excellent, as your issues uniformly are. 
There is, however, one aspect of woman's 
accomplishment which is rarely noted. 
I refer to the opportunities afforded and 
realized in the Church. Notable jobs are 
being done by nuns as administrators of 
widespread religious orders, as deans and 
presidents of colleges, as heads of hospitals 
and orphanages ctc. Much of this activity 
is centuries old. Some is new, like the 
nun doctors for the medical missions. 
Francis Burke 
Matawan, New Jersey, 
U.S.A. : 
Sir, 
The article by Prof. Ashley Montagu of 
issue N° 11, 1955 (U.S.-January 1956) of 
The Unesco Courier was rather sensation- 
al. I have been waiting for comments by 
the scientists but so far I have scen none. 
However, it was interesting to read the 
newspaper and magazine extracts in the 
March issue (U.S.-May). 1 have not— 
since I was a litile boy—believed in the 
general inferiority of a woman. I {ind 
it as difficult to believe in her general 
superiority. I am no scientist, but a good 
common sense view seems to be that the 
sexes are rather equal as to quality. 
Is Prof. Montagu recording a scientific 
fact? If so, we shall have to accept it. 
If not, it seems to me that René Leyraz 
is right when writing (in the Courrier, Ge- 
neva): “Masculine superiority and femi- 
nine superiority are two equally dangerous 
myths.” While waiting for the scientists’ 
comments to the statements of Prof. Mon- 
tagu, I quote from Murphy and Newcomb 
—Experimental Social Psychology. “From 
such material as we have, we can therefore 
say that as a rule sex differences in in- 
telligence are not found.” Otto Klineberg 
seems to take the same position, when 
talking of intelligence—as most other 
traits as well. 
1 often wonder: Of what use are those 
“scientific” speculations of the superiority 
of the one sex (or race) as compared with 
the other? No "inferiority" or “superiori- 
ty” follows sex or colour of skin. Wouldn't 
that assumption be a more useful starting- 
point? Isn't the attempt to prove something 
clse a waste of time and powers? 
Johan Schiong 
Bergen, Norway. 
Sir, 
In your March (U.S.-May 1956) issue of 
The Unesco CoURIER there is a serious 
error in the answer to one of the questions 
in the Asia Quiz, namely that the inhabi- 
tants of Ceylon are called Sinhalese. The 
inhabitants of Ceylon are called Ceylonese 
and not Sinhalese. The Ceylonese Commu- 
nity consists of Sinhalese, Ceylon Tamils, 
Indian Tamils, Muslims, Malays, Burghers 
and Europeans. Of these the Sinhalese 
form the majority community in the island. 
According to available population statistics, 
Sinhalese form 69.3 percent of the total 
population. The Ceylon Tamils are second, 
forming 11.2 percent of the total popula- 
tion. The Muslims total 503,770, Malays 
28,736, Burghers 43,916, Europeans 5,418. 
The total population of Ceylon is 8.1 
million. I am aware that in most publica- 
tions the mistake of calling the inhabitants 
of Ceylon Sinhalese still exists though some 
have rectified it in recent years. 
S.N. Jeeweshwara 
University Park, 
Peradeniya, Ceylon. 
EpiToR'S NOTE: Qur reader is right. 
The people of Ceylon are commonly 
called Sinhalese (or Cingalese, etc.) and 
though most dictionaries give these 
names, the official and correct term is 
Ceylonese. The Burghers referred to 
are the descendants of the original 
Portuguese and Dutch settlers in 
Ceylon. 
Sir, 
After I received The Unesco COURIER 
(March 1956; U.S.-May), first I tried the 
“Asia Quiz” and I got 13 questions right 
out of 47, but now I have read all the 
issue and I can answer almost all the 
questions. 
Christiane Dazaud 
Brighton, England. 
Sir, 
I have just received and read with great 
interest the issue of The UNesco COURIER 
devoted to the learning of history by our 
children (March, 1956-U.S. May). Con- 
gratulations to UNEsco on producing a 
study which should undoubtedly attract the 
attention of all teachers and persons in- 
terested in Education. 
In the article “Asia Quiz” it is said that 
the Nobel Prize has been awarded to. Asian 
Scientists or Thinkers three times only. To 
the best of my knowledge I mention that 
Jagadis Chandra Bose (India) has also been 
awarded a Nobel Prize for his scientific 
research. He proved that the plant has 
also life and fecling like man. : 
B.P. Desai 
Dar es Salaam, 
East Africa, 
EpITOR’s NOTE! Sir Jagadis Chandra (or 
Chunder) Bose (1858-1937) was one of 
India’s great geniuses of science. For 
his important contributions to plant 
physiology and - physics he was 
knighted in 1917 and elected Fellow 
of the Royal Society in 1920. But he 
was never awarded the Nobel Prize. 
His work in animal and particularly 
plant physiology was much in advance 
of his time. He introduced new 
experimental methods and invented 
many delicate and sensitive instruments, 
such as the crescograph for recording 
plant growth, magnifying a tiny move- 
ment as much as 10 million times, 
He devised an apparatus which rang 
a bell with every bubble of oxygen 
produced by a plant, and others for 
demonstrating the effects of air, food, 
drugs, rest, etc., on plants. He proved 
there was a complete parallelism 
between the responses of plant and 
animal tissues. During tours of Eur- 
ope in the 1920's and ‘30's he 
astounded scientists by his original 
approach and great technical genius. 
Sir, 
I have just read the March 1956 (U.S.- 
May) issue of The UNesco CouURIER and in 
particular the article “How Biased Are Our 
History Textbooks?” by Herbert Abraham. 
Congratulations on an‘ excellent practical 
piece of work to aid understanding and in- 
ternational co-operation through the in- 
termediary of history teachers. 
Widely distributed in [Eastern and 
Western countries, this issue will undoubt- 
edly have a beneficial influence on the 
basic conception of history teaching pro- 
grammes and on the writing of textbooks. 
I hope it will also pursuade “National” 
Ministries of Education to give a greater 
place to international history in school pro- 
grammes. 
Louis Vernicrs 
Brussels, Belgium. 
WHERE TO SUBSCRIBE 
GERMANY, R. Oldenbourg K.G., JAMAICA. — Sangster's Book Room, 99, SWEDEN, — A/B C.E. Fritzes, 
whom the English, French and Spanish 
editions of the UNESCO COURIER 
can be obtained are listed below. 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 301, Flinders Street, Melbourne, 
Vicroria, 
AUSTRIA. — Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27 
Graben, Yienna I. 
BELGIUM. — Louis de Lannoy, Editeur- 
Libraire, 15, rue du Tilleul, Genval (Bra=~ 
banc). 80 Eelgian frerts. 
CANADA. — University of Toronto Press, 
Toronto 5. 
Periodica Inc., 5090, Avenue Papineau, 
Montreal 34. 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd., Lake House, P.O. Box 
244, Colombo |. 
CHINA. — World Book Co. Ltd., 99 
Chungking Seuth Rd., Section |, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CYPRUS. — M.E. Constantinides, P.O. 
Box 473, Nicosia. . 
DENMARK. — Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd, 
6, Nérregade, Copenhagen K, 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
FRANCE. — Unesco Sales Section, 
19, Avenue Kléber, Paris, 16°. 
C.C.P. 12598-48, Unesco Bookshop. 
Paris. 
34 
Unesco-Vertrieb fiir Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerstrasse 145, Munich 8. 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, 
rue du Stade, Athens. 
HONG-KONG, — Swindon Bock Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
INDIA. — Orient Longmans Ltd. Indian 
Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, Bom- 
bay 1; 17, Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 
13. 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2. 
Sub-Depots : Oxford Book & Stationery 
Co., Scindia House, New Delhi; Rajkamal 
Publications Led., Himalaya House, Hornby 
Road, Bombay | 
INDONESIA. — G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co, 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Posttrommel BS, 
Jakarta. 
IRAN. — Iranian National Commission for 
Unesco, Avenue du Musée, Teheran, 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein’s Bookstores Led, 
P.O. B, 4154, Tel-Aviv. 
ITALY. — Libreria Commissionaria Sane 
soni, Yia Gino Capponi 26, Casella Pos- 
tale 552, Florence. 
Harbour Street, Kingston. 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
JAPAN. — Maruzen Co. Ltd, 6, Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
KOREA. — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, Minisery of Education, Seoul, 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND SIN- 
GAPORE. — Peter Chong & Co., Post 
Office Box 135, Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s Library, 26, Kings- 
way, Valetta. 
NETHERLANDS. — N.Y. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100, Hacktherne Road, Christ 
church. 
NIGERIA. — C.M.S, Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos, 
NORWAY. — AS. Bokhjornet, Stortings- 
plass 7, Oslo. 
PAKISTAN. — Ferozsons : 60, The Mall, 
Lahore ; Bunder Read, Karachi and 
35, The Mall, Peshawar. 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. 
Ing, 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620, Manila. 
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgaten 2, Stockholm 
16. 
SWITZERLAND. — Europa Verlag, 5, 
Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. 
TANGIER, — Paul Fekete, 2, rue Cook, 
Tangier. 
THAILAND. — Suksapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
UNION OF BURMA. — Burma Educa- 
tional Bookshop, 551-3, Merchant Street, 
P.O. Box 222, Rangoon. 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA. — Van 
Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, Church 
Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
UNITED KINGDOM. — H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l. 
UNITED STATES, — Unesco Publications 
Center, 152 West 42nd St, New York, 
36, N.Y, 
Columbia University Press, 2960, Broad- 
way. New York, 27, N.Y. (except 
periodicals). 
U.S.S.R. — Mezhdunarodna Kniga, Moscow, 
YUGOSLAVIA, — Jugoslovenska Knjiga, 
Terazije 27/11, Belgrade. : - 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
P
A
R
I
S
.

## [Page 35](068778engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
‘Unesco Courier’ binders 
now available 
In response to widespread demand we now offer subscribers 
special binders for The UNESCO COURIER. These are hand-. 
somely produced in half-cloth with the spine in an attractive 
blue, and the title and UNESCO colophon embossed in gold. 
Each binder will hold 12 issues. Copies can be bound easily 
at home, and once in place are held securely. Issues can be 
removed at will, A series of stick-on gold embossed labels will 
accompany each order thus enabling readers to use binders for 
any year desired. 
PRICE : 52.50, 12/6, French fr. 600, Belgian fr. 100. Price 
includes special packaging and postage. Orders can be placed 
in other currencies through your local UNESCO agent, 
HOW TO ORDER BINDER 
I. — Remittances should be sent to UNESCO agent in your 
country, or direct to UNESCO (DPV), 19, avenue Kléber, 
Paris, 16° France. (For payments in French francs: CCP 
12598.48 Librairie Unesco, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16°.) 
2. — Remittances must be accompanied by wrapper of latest 
issue of UNESCO COURIER received. For CCP orders 
wrapper should be addressed separately. 
3. — Supplies are limited. Offer is reserved for subscribers only, 
If you are not a subscriber, your subscription must accom- 
pany order for binders. 
  
   
Coming in the 
 
September issue 
 
WONDERLAND OF 
MUSEUMS 
* A voyage of discovery into 
art, natural history, science 
and industry 
* Cemeteries’ of yesterday 
transformed 
Don't miss this issue 
Subscribe today to the 
"Unesco Courier’ 
Annual subscription rate 8/-, 
$2.50 or 400 French francs 
  
TO OUR SUBSCRIBERS 
For administrative reasons, this 36-page issue 
of THE UNESsco CourliErR has been dated July- 
August. Subscribers, however, should not regard 
it as a double number. All subscriptions will 
automatically run for an extra month. Thus, a 
reader whose subscription expires with the 
December 1956 issue will also receive the January 
1957 issue.     
 

## [Page 36](068778engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
d ee) 
§ & 
‘V
e 
33
 io
: 
i 
% 
| i. 
+. ; 
he activities of the primitive medicine m d away by the averag 
yerson as “hocus-pocus”. In reality they 
ion and magic, whether they take place i 
ch correspond largely 
    pe ) 
A —— a ————— ET Cr TT 
mg or - h Say 2 3 - . ow 8 
RE TT TL iF pm BH LAT gr AR Te TL Tr Cy ee 
 