# [066970](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 Cr 
  
 
 
 
  
0 
¥ 
  
  
 
 
: Py 5% Rl ve NTE FF hay 
Th 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
      
VRAIN WE ER 
    
 
 
  
> | Sams aaues 
 
 
 
 
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
(I0th year) 
Price : 2/- (U.K) 
Ot 
R
R
M
 SL 
A
 
100 francs (France) 
50 cents (VU. S.) 
 
 
tg 
* 
“,

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

pov sr EN Ran 
ANGELS OF THE LAST JUDG- 
MENT. Detail from 13th century Span- 
ish Romanesque mural at St. Pauls 
church, Casserres, northeast Spain, exe- 
cuted around 1200 A.D. by a painter 
known as the Master of Llugd, whose re- 
markably fine decorative work inspired 
many artists in this region of Spain. This 
mural is now in the Archaeological Mu- 
seum of the Diocese, Solsona. (Unesco 
Album: Spain) 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
   CmCourier-   
JANUARY 1957 10th YEAR 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
3 EDITORIAL 
4 MASACCIO THE FLORENTINE GENIUS 
He flashed through life like a meteor 
By Gabrielle Cabrini 
12 FLORENCE: CRADLE OF THE RENAISSANCE 
13 THE ART OF THE PILGRIMS’ WAY 
23 SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT 
Eight pages of full colour plates of 
masterpieces from Italy, Iran and Spain 
31 ISFAHAN IS HALF OF THE WORLD 
36 THE TREASURES OF IRAN’S IMPERIAL LIBRARY 
43 PERSEPOLIS: FABULOUS CAPITAL OF AN EMPIRE 
46 MAGIC ARTISAN OF MILAN 
49 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
50 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
The colour pages in this issue have been printed 
in Milan, Italy, by Amilcare Pizzi, with the co- 
operation of the New York Graphic Society. 
* 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, [9 Avenue Kleber, Paris 16, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Alexandre Leventis 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Carrera Andrade 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Circulation Manager 
Jean Groffier 
(M.C. 56.1.108 A)     
COVER PHOTOS 
One of world’s finest collections of Persian miniatures, preserved in 
the Gulistan Imperial Library, Teheran, was unknown to the public up to 
25 years ago, Perhaps the most famous of them al] is shown on front 
coverin full colour. Donein 1480itisone of the rare miniatures actually 
signed by its author (Bihzad). It represents the garden of an art-loving 
sultan, and is one side of a double page miniature in the Muraqqa Gulshan 
or Flower Garden Album, a remarkable collection of miniatures and 
calligraphy bound in a luxurious volume by the Moghul emperor Jahan- 
girin the 1 7th century. Back cover alsoin colour is from same volume, 
shows prince on horseback before a magnificently decorated pavilion. 
Unless otherwise stated, all colour plates in this issue are taken from Unesco 
Art Albums. All reproductions in these albums are copyright Unesco, 956. 
  
The Unesco Courier. — Jonuary 1957 
  
“green mosque” of Bursa, former capital of the 
Ottoman Empire south of Istanbul, or in the Hittite 
ruins of Central Anatolia—a three-man expedition is en- 
gaged in a treasure hunt which has already taken it 
100,000 miles across four continents during the past three 
years. The three men are Peter Bellew, Unesco visual art 
expert, Anton Schutz, director of the New York Graphic 
Society, and Mario Dolfi, chief colour photographer of the 
Italian printing firm of Amilcare Pizzi. Their mission: 
to study and photograph little known or inaccessible na- 
tional art treasures for Unesco’s World Art Series albums. 
Large numbers of extraordinary works of art have been 
reproduced in the past and made available in the form of 
albums. Superb reproductions in colour of the greatest 
masterpieces continue to come off the presses of the 
world’s best art publishers. Nevertheless there are obvious 
gaps. UNEesco launched its World Art Series when it 
took stock of the fact that it is the better known and more 
accessible masterpieces which are most frequently re- 
produced by private publishers. 
It is of course easier and less expensive to photograph 
‘works in the Louvre, the Prado or the Vatican than it is 
to scour the world in search of treasures buried in tombs, 
in caves or under desert sands. The technical and finan- 
cial resources needed are usually beyond the reach of all 
but a few private publishers or else the volumes are priced 
so high that they are beyond the reach of the average 
buyer, 
As an international organization, UNEsco has been able 
to mobilize such resources with the aid of its member 
states. Every expedition is carefully planned with 
the collaboration of government officials and national 
authorities who join up with the Unesco three-man team 
in the field. 
To collect their material, the Unesco team, though 
weighed down with some 300 pounds of equipment, have 
used rope ladders to reach caves dug into a cliff face, 
inched their way to the summit of a steep mountain rock 
in Ceylon, crawled into Egyptian tombs and driven a bul- 
lock team up the steep hills of old Serbia in Yugoslavia to 
photograph little known paintings in colour. Eight vol- 
umes have now been published. 
They include the mural paintings discovered in the 
“Stave” churches of Norway, of which only 25 still exist: 
the {rescoes found in the caves of Ajanta, India, painted 
by Buddhist monks centuries before the Christian era; 
the medieval frescoes recently discovered under several 
layers of plaster in Yugoslav monasteries; paintings from 
Egyptian tombs and temples; and bark paintings by 
Australian aborigines (1). 
This issue is devoted to the latest albums: Iran, Spain 
and Masaccio (the last of these is not part of the World 
Art Series). Forthcoming volumes will present the Icons 
of Russia. Japanese Buddhist art, early Buddhist wall 
paintings of Ceylon. The three-man UNEesco expedition 
is now preparing to visit Mexico, Peru, Burma and Greece 
to collect material for other albums. 
S OMEWHERE in Turkey today—it may be in the fabulous 
(1) See Unesco Courier, No. 11, 1954 (U.S. Feb. 1955).

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 66960: Masaccio; Florentine genius who flashed through life like a meteor

MASACCIO 
Florentine genius who flashed 
through life like a meteor 
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
painter who achieved so much in so short a time as 
the Florentine artist, Masaccio, who “flashed 
through life like a meteor.” 
The masterpieces which revealed his genius and powers 
to the world are the few frescoes he painted in 1427 and 
1428 in the Brancacci Chapel of the Carmelite Church at 
Florence—works which place him as one of the 
“fathers” of modern painting. 
It was as if Masaccio had been destined for a brief 
existence, for he only needed a few years to complete the 
cycle of his passage in the history of art. But though 
small in space and short in time his achievement was to 
blaze like a beacon down the centuries. 
In Masaccio’s 27th year his life and the soaring flight 
of his masterpieces were alike cut off by a death so 
sudden that many of his Florentine contemporaries 
believed he had been murdered by poisoning. 
To his creative life of six short years he brought such 
a thirst for research, so ardent a desire to excel all others, 
that after his death and for more than a century later, 
the “giants” of Italian painting came to study his work 
minutely. They came to marvel at his innovations, to 
analyse his discoveries and to learn from his composition 
and colour, What chiefly attracted them was what 
4 
T HE history of art up to the 15th century records no 
by 
Gabrielle 
Cabrini 
  
SCHOOLROOM OF 
THE RENAISSANCE. 
For nearly a century after 
1428, the Brancacci Chapel 
in the Church of St. Maria 
del Carmine, Florence, was 
the schoolroom of Florentine 
artists. Botticelli, Leonardo 
da Vinci, Michelangelo, Ra- 
phael and other giants of 
the Italian Renaissance went 
there to study and to copy 
the frescoes of the young 
painter Masaccio. The cha- 
pel was decorated on the 
order of the wealthy Floren- 
tine, Felice di Piuvichese 
Brancacci. The frescoes were 
damaged by the fire which 
gutted the church in 1771 
and by the treatment which 
they subsequently received. 
  
Masaccio strove most of all to accomplish: the painting 
of human forms which stand out in relief against 
background. One painter who lived long after him and 
who, like so many others, sought in his work fresh 
creative inspiration, has described them as “bodies 
pulsating with life”. 
Masaccio, or Tommaso, as he was baptized, was the son 
of a notary and was born at San Giovanni Valdarno, 
about 30 miles from Florence, on December 21, 1401. At 
that time, despite the civil wars which mark its entire 
history, Florence was experiencing an extraordinary 
flowering of talent in building and in the arts. 
Travellers from elsewhere in Italy and from other lands 
who passed through the country of Dante all wrote 
accounts of what they had seen to their rulers and their 
friends, describing the Florence of that time as one vast 
workshop. On every side buildings were going up, or 
being pulled down and rebuilt. The only thread of con- 
tinuity in a political life forever interrupted by changes 
of the parties in power and by their internecine feuds 
was a passionate love of the arts. 
So great was this affection that when Cont’d 
decadence had already set in and freedom oh 
was at an end in the 16th century, Giorgio 
Vasari, the remarkable author of “Lives of page 6

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 66960: Masaccio; Florentine genius who flashed through life like a meteor

The Unesco Courier, — January 1957 
  
TWO CARMELITES. A detail from The Enthroned St. Peter venerated by the 
Faithful. This fresco in the Brancacci Chapel, which also depicts St. Peter raising 
the son of Theophilus, was left unfinished by Masaccio in 1428 when he departed 
for Rome, where he died soon after, The work was completed in 1484 by Filippino 
Lippi. This reproduction and those on pages six to ten are taken from the Unesco 
Album, “Masaccio, Frescoes in Florence”, which is to be published shortly. 
5

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 66960: Masaccio; Florentine genius who flashed through life like a meteor

MASACCIO (Continued) 
the greatest painters, sculptors and architects” concocted 
for himself an entirely apocryphal grandfather who was 
supposed to have been a great artist at Arezzo. He did 
this simply to win the admiration and esteem of the 
Florentines, for whom ambition was so closely linked with 
artistic glory. Had Vasari lived elsewhere he would have 
invented distinguished soldiers, or men of noble birth as 
forebears. 
The sun of artistic glory shone generously on Florence. 
For centuries, Tuscany peopled the world of art from its 
nursery of studios and workshops. But though the work 
of creation went on, its masterpieces quickly failed to 
satisfy; people felt that there had once been something 
other than the so-called medieval art which had so far 
held sway, and above all that there could yet be something 
else awaiting discovery. 
Masaccio grew up at this moment of crisis and search 
in art. It is said that as a child, being dissatisfied with 
what surrounded him in 
his own" village, he wan- 
dered everywhere making 
drawings, though he was - 
as displeased with his own 
efforts as he was with what 
was done by others. Like 
all artists of his time, 
Masaccio was still living in 
the imposing shadow of 
Giotto, born a century and 
a half earlier. Yet he felt 
that painting not only 
could, but should be taken 
further than Giotto had 
carried it. 
Young Tommaso was SO 
absorbed and carried away 
by his problem that, at a 
time and in a country 
which prided itself on a 
refined elegance, he was 
completely blind to his own 
appearance. He was obli- 
vious to everything, Giorgio 
Vasari tells us, except to 
drawing and mixing colours 
which never satisfied him. 
His carelessness and his 
disregard for everything 
not connected with art 
were so great—to the end 
of his life he lent money to 
friends and never re- 
membered afterwards to 
whom, and would only try 
to remember when he 
himself was ‘without a 
penny piece—that his name 
“Tommaso” was soon 
changed to “Masaccio” (an 
abbreviation of Tomasac- 
cio), a rather disparaging 
diminutive often used for slipshod, muddle-headed and 
good-for-nothing children and youths. 
While Masaccio paid no attention to his immediate 
surroundings, he did rot lose sight of the contours of the 
Tuscan countryside, and the villages which seemed blurred 
in its luminosity, and he strove continuously to convey 
this sense of distance, which no one had yet been able to 
do before him, 
Masaccio, in his short life, had the great good fortune 
to meet and to become the intimate friend of two men, 
very much older than himself, whose names were 
synonymous with the artistic glory of their country. One 
was Brunelleschi, the architectural genius who sought to 
create an impression of infinite space in a building of 
modest proportions like his chapel of the Pazzi, which 
has not a single rectangular lire. The other was 
Donatello, the sculptor who dreamed of making people 
who looked at his statues afraid, less they emerge from 
their niches and advance towards them. 
Why, reasoned. Masaccio, should not this problem of 
perspective, which Brunelleschi and Donatello had solved 
in the case of architecture and sculpture, be overcome by 
him in painting? Why should he not break up the flat 
outline of surfaces by givirg them the semblance of 
relief? Suddenly the masterpiece took shape. After 
producing a number of works in his research, Masaccio 
6 
WOMAN AND 
aC 3 
Goods of the Community which illustrates the realistic humanism of 
Masaccio’s portraits. For a larger detail of the same fresco see page 29. 
knew at last that he had found the solution to the 
problem, that he would thenceforth be able to give depth, 
a natural depth to something as mundane as a wall. 
The opportunity (Florence was an inexhaustible mine of 
opportunities) was offered him, as might be expected in 
this great commercial city, by a wealthy merchant named 
Brancacci, who, wishing his name to go down in history, 
had chosen the most appropriate way of doing so at that 
time—through the arts. Having decided to offer his city 
a work of art, he engaged the successful artist Masolino 
to decorate a chapel of the Carmelite Church with 
a number of frescoes. 
Masolino undertook the work, a work full of charm, in 
the most classical Florentine style in 1424-25. Later, 
Masaccio took his place, and at last his teaching, his 
conversations with the architect ard sculptor of genius 
bore their fruit: Masaccio painted living beings. His 
Adam and Eve, driven out of the earthly paradise, have 
the ravaged expression of 
human beings unable to 
face the life that awaits 
them, and fills them with 
horror; they are indeed 
“bodies pulsating with life”. 
The scenes recounted in 
the Gospel or in the Acts 
of the Apostles, those first 
accounts of the life of 
Christ and his disciples that 
Masaccio depicts with his 
brush, are scenes of real 
life and no longer mere 
conventions, Masaccio 
adds a sense of reality to a 
dramatic genius like that 
of Giotto, depicting men 
who fit naturally into their 
. proper walks of life, who 
are truly made for the roles 
which destiny has reserved 
for them, 
The apostle Peter is a 
fisherman tanned by the 
sun, broad shouldered, who 
knows how to draw up nets 
and launch his boat into 
the sea. The sick and the 
beggars are wretched speci- 
mens of humanity, craven 
and downtrodden. Christ is 
not God triumphant; he 
has the dignity and sadness 
of one who will be betrayed 
and cannot forget it. 
Around them, behind them, 
in that chiaroscuro which 
was to be the admiration 
of future generations, the 
trees, the houses fade away, 
lose themselves in the dis- 
tance, as, for example, in 
the case of the extraordinary castle wrapped in the mist, 
in “St. Peter distributing the Goods of the Community”, 
‘which might have been painted by an Impressionist. 
Masaccio died leaving his work unfinished, but his 
renown was such that many painters, including those who 
were to become the most famous, while not knowing for 
generations how to follow the path he had so barely 
outlined, came to meditate in front of his work, trying to 
decipher its message. Today, as we contemplate Ma- 
saccio’s work, we may well ask ourselves, as did Vasari, to 
what heights would he not have attained had not death 
cut short his career? 
Peter distributing the 
LIFESPAN OF THE ‘GIANTS’ 
Masaccio, who died in his 27th. year, had the shortest life of 
any of the “giants” of the Italian Renaissance. Here are the 
ages to which other great Italian painters of this time lived. 
Caravaggio 37 Leonardo da Vinci 67 
Raphaél 37 Fra Angelico 68 
Correggio 40 Tintoretto 76 
Ghirlandaio 45 Donatello 80 
Veronese 60 Michelangelo 89 
Botticelli 66 Titian 99    

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 66960: Masaccio; Florentine genius who flashed through life like a meteor

The Unesco Courier, — Januory 1957 
       ' Ba 
"
 
4 
i
 Ix
 
a
 
y 
i =k
 } 
| 
Ta
ll
a : 
<
5
 
HIGHPOINT IN ART was reached by Masaccio in The Tribute Money whose majestic central group is reproduced above. The apostles in a 
in them, and the whole, a three-dimensional quality. The scene, in three episodes, tells the 
St. Peter appears three times in the fresco: (1) In the central group at 
right hand of Christ when he is told to find a piece of money in the first fish he will draw from the lake (2) catching a fish in which he finds a 
coin with which to pay the toll (below, right) and (3) paying the tax collector (below, left). For a detail of St. Peter's head, see page 28. 
  
BEEN I DR SRSA R RL ETI Sa SE US EERE Lh Bee LE NESS ae LE ih Loe BEd La SE Ck hs ban FM Sr dra oe

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 66960: Masaccio; Florentine genius who flashed through life like a meteor

MASACCIO (Continued)    
  
   
   
ST. PETER 
CURING 
THE SICK   
FLORENTINE STREET SCENE was painted by Masaccio 
as setting for St. Peter curing the Sick by his Shadow (left). As 
the Brancacci Chapel was dedicated to St. Peter, subjects prescrib- 
ed for its decoration were drawn from the “Acts of the Apostles” 
and “The Golden Legend” (a |3th century collection of bio- 
graphies of saints). Masaccio drew his scenes from real 
ha alt life and painted living beings, Details from the same fresco 
show (above) a sick man and (opposite page) two heads. 
 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 66960: Masaccio; Florentine genius who flashed through life like a meteor

 
 
: 
f
e
 
ot
 
P
N
 
B
h
i
 
 
 
The Unesco Courier. — January 1957

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 66960: Masaccio; Florentine genius who flashed through life like a meteor

MASACCIO (Continued) 
  
CASTLE IN THE MIST, detail from Masaccio's St. Peter distributing the Goods of the Commu- 
nity, (see page 29) might almost have been painted by one of the Impressionists. Through his 
treatment of light and shade, Masaccio’s trees and houses fade away, losing themselves in the 
distance. His street scenes were often inspired by the palaces and houses of Florence such 
as those on the XIVth century Ponte Vecchio (Old Bridge) over River Arno (right). Camera study 
of light and shadow recalls Masaccio’s art in which one form blends insensibly into another. 
Copyright UNESCO

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
- THANE 
    
a i a de 
     
PN iri od 
a 
The Unesco Courier. — Jonuary 1957 
 
5 . 
   
   
  
-3 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

    1 ! O00 RES 
f ' i, il Hl TT 
t ARCHWAY TO ART’ One of the richest palaces of art in Florence, a city 
phenomenally wealthy in artistic collections, is the l6th century Uffizi Palace 
{on either side of archway), housing the Uffizi Art Gallery, the National Library 
and the State Archives. ts collection includes about 4,000 paintings. Build- 
ing in- background with tall tower is early 14th century Palazzo Vecchio. 
| 
: 
: 
_.
 
—
_
 
i 
a
 
=
 
ec
 
      
  
{ GATES OF PARADISE'. Magnificent bronze doors of the Baptistry, 
facing Cathedral in Florence, were designed and created by Lorenzo Ghiberti. 
They took 27 years (1425-52) to complete. The ten scenes from the Old 
Testament were depicted so exquisitely that no less a sculptor than 
Michelangelo described these doors as worthy to be the Gates of Paradise. 
12 
  
     
    vis
 
   
        
    
  
    
  
  
- -" 
o 
ry - 
— 
-t 
- ho 
~ ¥ 
_ - 
a = 
- » A 
: Al % 
~~ » 
_ = 3 
r = 
~~ : ve - - 
a 
¥ » 
5 *3 
» Sh 4 
ROOFTOP VIEW of Florence with the Gothic church of Santa 
Croce outlined against the shadow of the Tuscan hills. Begun 
in 1294, this church was completed in 1442, with the exception 
of the fagade which was executed in the [9th century. Its decora- 
tions include many frescoes by Giotto and by his successors. 
CRADLE OF THE 
RENAISSANCE 
From the beauty of the city of Florence and its neighbouring 
hills comes its name in Italian, Firenze, meaning “the flower- 
ing”, and in the history of Florence the most prolific period of 
this flowering was during the XIVth and the XVth centuries 
when it became a centre of art and culture. Gifted architects, 
painters, sculptors and metal craftsmen joined to embellish Flor- 
ence with magnificent buildings and works of art, and the beauty, 
zest and daring of Florence and its people combined to make it the 
cradle of the Renaissance. Here Dante wrote his exquisite poetry 
and from here too came Petrarch’s sonnets and the brilliant poli- 
tical writings of Machiavelli. But above all it was a capital of art. 
Michelangelo created his immortal paintings and statues here. 
Leonardo da Vinci learned to paint in Florence, where 
Donatello, the sculptor, Raphael and Luca della Robbia were stu- 
dents. As their priceless works gathered through the centuries, 
Florence became one of the great treasure houses of the world. 
Art galleries, like the Uffizi and the Pitti, and churches and pala- 
ces are filled with masterpieces by Raphael, Botticelli, Masaccio, 
Uccello, the Lippi, Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Andrea del Sarto, 
Titian and many other Florentine, Umbrian, and Venetian artists. 
Treasures of sculpture, ivory, enamel and bronze ware, medieval 
and Renaissance antiquities, drawings, engravings and ancient 
books fill its museums and libraries. And the entire city with its 
churches, great stone palaces and halls is a fitting setting for this 
wealth of art and culture so carefully preserved down the centuries, 
Photos copyright Almasy 
  
A 
a
b
i
l

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

The Unesco Courier, — January 1957 
HEART 0 HE PLGRMS WAY 
vy WY 
Ne - 
. : Te a ( i Ne » : AWE 3 
4 wo & i d 
% Fi 
MODERN ART TEN CENTURIES OLD. Almost a thousand years ago, an unknown Spanish 
~ artist executed this pre-Romanesque painting in the church of the little town of Pedret, 
north of Barcelona. Paintings at Pedret are in black and red on a white background 
with human figures, animals and geometric or floral designs. They are typical of those 
done in other centres by local artists who, despite their limited media, obtained results 
reminiscent of some modern works. Fragment is now in Archaeological Museum of 
Solsona. (Unesco Album, “Spain: Romanesque Paintings”). 
al 

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

THE ART OF THE 
PILGRIMS’ WAY fe USA 
(Continued) By eM CE ps 
(STERRE DE ANIL A -* 
VALENCIA DY TNE ISIGENA Cal ‘BD 
a R : ar ~_ SORPL ANE 
\ S CLEMENTE STA. MARIA ~\ 
LSTEY —, / rant ih 
vA ’ | 
les / 
JACA Ss JUAN DE BOMI =      
  
§ JUAN DE LA PENA 
S MARTIN DEL VALLE DE HONSERA 
J ALQUEZAR 
é     
  
    
\ DURRO \ 
BETESA —e A 
one iN 
&/ jo 
a 
“ 
bd BENAVENT 
SIESO 
BARLUENGA —o | RODA 
Ne BIERGE 
LIESA IBIECA 
HUESCA 
Le
l7
% 
&
 
h
a
g
a
s
 
2%
 
r
o
a
n
b
o
y
 
x
 
af 
BARBASTRO A 
TAMARIT 
ZARAGOZA 
LERIDA 
        @ 
TORTOSA & 2 .     
  
   
     
   
   
    
  
    
   
   
   
  
    
    
   
   
  
ANDORRA 
A 
ol an po EYGOLTTERS al PERPIGNAN 
ANGUSTRINA CUXA MARCEVOL Ed S. gess 
J) N o A 
/ Vioa § SERRABONA 
   
   IS. 
S. MARTIN 
ESTERRI + BOLUIR 
DE 
~~ 
f ENCAME Seu SURIGUEROLA 
- = A -~ “ er pT 
CARDOS [Pi STA cOLOMA aus 7A Ye v 
= LEY re. ALE] 
CANOLIC 3 NM ARGOI AMO ~~ 
4 TAR 
cept =sT A VILANOVA DE LA MUGA 
Let SOLL 
INTAMARIL > 
S JUAN FUMAT v = — J 
aX or VALLTARGA MONTGRONY rT 
@ TAUCRNOLLS ol oS S JUAN PUIGPALTER Sa J Se DE LES ABADESSES a 
URGEL MATAPLANA ) J VINYOLES | atoll      
  
    
  
   
BELLCAIREgy 
v Te 
S. MIGUEL TOSES FRONTANYA 
DE LA SEU 
   
  
CRUILLES 
> CAPOLAT ROTOES fo 
BOADA 
on i ¢ SY es. M. SESCORTS 
Q PEDRET 4 LLUSSA S. PEDRO CASSERRES 
% - y SAGAS : av “L~GERONA 
S PABLO DE CASSERRLS $2 FOLGAROLES 
VICH 
S 
OLSONA OSORMORT 
ESPINELVAS 
BRULL 
SAN LORENZO 
POLINYA 
MONTSERRAT STA PERPETUA 
i Ss CEBRIA 
DE CABANYES 
a 
TARRASSA 
~y 
S. CUGAT 
S MARTIN SARROCA 
sarnars’ BARCELONA 
MARMELLA 7 
TARRAGONA 
SPAIN’S RICHEST TREASURES of Roman- 
esque art are concentrated in the region 
of Catalonia and Aragon, in the north-east 
corner of the country not far from the French 
frontier. On this map are shown some of 
the principal towns and villages which are 
famed for their churches and decorations. 
Map by Barcelona Museums’ Service.     
fear gripped Christian Europe. Though not offi- 
cially endorsed by the Church, the belief was 
widespread that the Millenium and Judgment Day were 
at hand and that the world was coming to an end. 
wave of religious fervour and mysticism swept Chris- 
tendom. Pilgrims, who in normal times flocked to the 
holy places, found their ranks swollen by thousands of 
new followers and new faithful. 
But with the passing of the year 1000 the religious 
fervour sparked by the “Great Fear” not only did not 
subside but was greatly increased. As never before, 
“monks, pilgrims, soldiers and merchants” set out for 
one of the great centres of pilgrimage in the far north- 
west corner of Spain where the tomb of the Apostle St 
James had been found about the year 800, and which, 
as an attraction for pilgrims, was soon second only to 
Rome and Jerusalem. 
A legend had sprung up that St. James had become the 
champion of the Christian kingdoms of northern Spain 
which were battling the Moors in an effort to regain the 
rest of the country still in Muslim hands. It was re- 
counted that St. James had appeared mounted on a 
white horse fighting against the Moors. 
To visit the saint’s tomb pilgrims from every part of 
Europe headed for the Pyrenees in their thousands, using 
the stars of the Milky Way to guide them. Both the land 
route and the Milky Way. itself became known as the 
“Road of St. James” and the centre of pilgrimage was 
named Compostela, in Latin, Campus Stellee—“the place 
marked by the stars” (Today, Santiago de Compostela). 
"Pilgrims passing through France, where the chief halt- 
ing places were Paris and Vezelay, entered Spain through 
Navarre, the central Pyrenees and, in the east, along the 
14 
We the approach of the year one thousand, a great Catalan coast. Monasteries with hostels for travellers 
and places of worship were built along the route. 
Thus the Christians of northern Spain were brought 
more than ever before into contact with their neighbours 
north of the Pyrenees, who brought with them fresh 
customs and ideas, images and manuscripts and a new 
form of art then developing in Europe—Romanesque art, 
later to develop its own distinctive style in Spain. 
There still exists an idea, though it is becoming more 
and more outmoded, that the Middle Ages represented no 
more than a dark interregnum between the Graeco- 
Roman age and the “Renaissance” (a term which itself 
supports this idea). Romanesque art, born of the new 
spirit of Christian enthusiasm, clearly refutes this belief. 
The spirit which fed this art was fostered by the mon- 
asteries which grew up all over Western Europe after 
St. Benedict founded the Benedictine Order of monks in 
526 A. D. With their communities planted in different 
countries, the monastic orders were probably the first 
international institutions. They were churches, schools, 
libraries and hospitals all in one, and the sculpture and 
architecture which they helped to develop were embodied 
in their abbey churches. 
The young and vigorous Romanesque art found expres- 
sion in many fields. The new forms it developed in 
architecture were those which finally gave birth to the 
Gothic style. Its sculpture was largely architectural in 
nature, and its painting and mural decorations, though 
at first owing much to Byzantine influence, later developed 
along other lines. 
Though having a basic unity of style, Romanesque art 
developed individual characteristics in different localities 
according to the tastes of the craftsmen and the tradi- 
tions they followed. The most important influence was

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

The Unesco Courier. — Jonuary 1957 
CATALONIAS ANONYMOUS MASTER PAINTERS 
still Roman art, closely followed by Byzantine. Another 
element came directly from the Near East through textiles 
whose ornamental forms were copied in stone carvings 
and on manuscripts. Northern influences—Lombard, 
Goth, Teuton and Celt—were also in evidence. 
In Spain, where the Romanesque art penetrated later 
than elsewhere, the presence of the Moors and the in- 
fluence of the Orient stamped the new style with Hispanic 
features of its own. Soon, Hispano-Romanesque archi- 
tecture flourished in Castile, Leon, Navarre, Asturias, 
Galicia and Aragon, though the style imported from 
France was modified by climatic conditions. : 
The proximity of the Moors and the exuberance of their 
ornament inspired the carvers to a richer expression. 
The capitals and cloisters of the great churches and 
cathedrals like those of Santo Domingo de Silos, San 
Isidoro at Leon and the “Old Cathedral” at Salamanca 
are notable examples of this fusion of two arts. Side 
by side with capitals on which biblical scenes are carved 
with striking realism are others with figures of Oriental 
character, Persian motifs or Egyptian ibises. These 
buildings and carvings are often the handiwork of Chris- 
tian and Moorish artists working side by side. Thus was 
Romanesque architecture and sculpture enriched and 
advanced in Spain. 
At the same time Catalan painters were making an 
important and until recently little known chapter in the 
history of medieval European art. In their cnurches, 
chiefly in tiny villages in the Pyrenees, they painted 
striking murals in the naves and apses. At first they drew 
inspiration from the form and colour of Byzantine 
mosaics and from the northern styles, coming from Poi- 
tiers and Toulouse, through the pilgrim routes to Com- 
postela, 
Then more and more prolific local adapters changed 
the styles and went on to complete church decorations by 
painting altarpieces. Under their skill and invention the 
painting ceased to be a mere decorative addition to 
architecture and sculpture and be- 
came an independent art with its 
  
4 = 
D
i
e
s
 
ta
nd
e 
 
own rules and standards. 
On most of these paintings the per- 
sonality of the artists, or the indivi- 
dual stamps of the schools, have left 
their distinctive marks, making it 
possible to fix the origins of the works 
and the identity of those artists who, 
in their local adaptations, worked 
with particular techniques and styles. 
Their names unfortunately have not 
come down to us, but they are iden- 
tified by the places in which they 
worked: The Master of Pedret, the 
Master of Lluca, the Master of Espi- 
nelves, the Master of Soriguerola, to 
mention a few of the most famous. 
All their works were painted between 
the 11th and 13th centuries, 
* 
or long years these Romanesque 
F masterpieces were hidden from 
the world in the churches and 
monasteries of Catalonia and it is 
only since the beginning of this cen- 
tury that study and expert assessment 
have revealed the full riches of a 
school of painting that was almost 
entirely unknown to most people, 
The Board of Museums of Bar- 
celona which had previously had 
reproductions made of the Catalan 
murals, decided after the First World 
War to remove the original works 
from their walls in many cases so as 
to save them from the progressive and 
irreparable damage they ‘would 
+ certainly have suffered (they were 
usually done in distemper, and are not 
true frescoes in the Italian manner). 
The region of Catalonia, especially 
the museums of Barcelona and Vich, 
boasts the richest concentration of 
Spanish Romanesque art, and the 
collections of altarpieces are probably 
the finest anywhere in the world. 
The grouping of these works in 
museums has alded their study in 
recent years and this has been useful 
_hot only from a local or regional 
point of view, but has also extended 
the horizon of our knowledge of 
4 » 
  
THE VIRGIN AND ST. JOHN. Two I3th century painted statuettes in wood. Though they 
are of the same period, there is a striking contrast between the primitive style of the St. Jstn and 
the masterly execution of the Virgin which suggests the style of sculpture of much later centuries. 
MAS Archives, Barcelona ral. 
mediceval European painting in gene- 
The reproduction of some of 
them in the Unesco World Art Series 
now brings an idea of their distinctive 
style and beauty within the reach of 
people in all countries. 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

THE DESCENT FROM THE CROSS. The 12th century marks 
the high point in the development of Romanesque art, particularly 
Spanish Romanesque sculpture, The remarkable examples on these 
pages show, above, a Descent from the Cross, in wood, now at the 
Episcopal Museum at Vich (detail of which is seen top right) and an 
ivory figure of Christ from the Museum of San Marcos at Leon. The 
similarity of technique used by Spanish Romanesque artists in working 
6 
  
  
ivory and wood is here particularly striking. The Descent from 
the Cross is generally considered one of the greatest examples of 
Romanesque carvings existing today. Its powerful message is obtained 
with a purity and simplicity only possible from the hand of a 
master artist craftsman. The Episcopal Museum of Vich is probably 
the richest museum in Spain from the point of view of Romanesque 
carvings and its collection of polychrome wooden virgins is unique.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

The Unesco Courier, — January 1957 
Lo N 
ay r 
‘ ¥ : 
’ 
\ . 
XR 9! 
a : L 
3 
E 3 
Es 
: 
La 
> = 
~ 
: 
= 
EE 9 
| YF 
 
 I
 
PE 
r
e
y
 
- 
T
a
 
R
R
R
 
a
s
 
i
s
 
S
R
E
 
5 
 
 
Photos MAS Archives, Barcelona 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
       
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

The Unesco Courier. — January 1957 
  
   
     
gb 
M
S
 
EL
 J
E
N
 
A 
. 
A
E
 
a
 
ae
 
F
A
 
rE 
ee
 
A
 
A
A
I
 
R
a
a
 
N
T
 
ER
 
—
_
 
J 
a
 
E
T
 
To
 
= 
x 
id
 
4, 
[S
r 
- «
2
 
 
   
  
% 
EX
 S
TA
 
er ty 
=i
 
THE HOLY SUPPER. Detail from a 13th century painted 
« wooden frontal dedicated to St. Michael, by an artist u 
now referred to as the Master of Soriguerola (the name of 
a Catalan village which is close to the French frontier), 
#5 
THE DOUBLE AXE, an international motif of medieval ) 
» times, figures in this detail of a decorative frieze of 12th | 
century murals from El Burgal, Catalonia. The work has 
been attributed to the school of the Master of Pedret. 
ST JULIET'S MARTYRDOM depicted by an unknown 
« Lith century artist. Detail from frontal panel of St. . 
Quirico and St. Juliet in church of Durro, northwest of Bar- 
| celona. The colouring is very bright with black outlines. i 
HOLY APOSTLE, detail from a [2th century mural in " 
« the church of Ginnestarre de Cardos, on the Franco- 3 
Spanish frontier. This painting and those described above " 
are now in the Art Museum of Catalonia, at Barcelona. 3 
 
B MARTYRDOM OF ST. MARGARET. An episode from a 
» twelfth century painting on a wood panel on the frontal 
dedicated to the Saint in church of Sescorts, Catalonia. This 5! 
work is now preserved in the Episcopal Museum at Vich. 4 
il
 
Unesco Album, "Spain: Romanesque Paintings’ ~         
>) 
Br re AR SL Bh eT a rir <3 ; Si ¥ re a " GS ERAT rT | Py i 
E A Nr OB a a A A a TR SN a ar rs ed a EE is A AN RE NE Orem: 
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

  
   
20 
CARVED IN EBONY, the “Black Virgin” 
of Montserrat, near Barcelona (left), is one of 
the finest existing examples of Catalonian 
Romanesque sculpture. Many legends have 
grown up around the extraordinary site of 
Montserrat which is said to have inspired 
Wagner to write his opera “Parsifal.” Newly- 
married couples in Catalonia traditionally 
go there on a pilgrimage to seek the Virgin's 
blessing, and have a saying: “Those who have 
not been to Montserrat are not properly 
married.” Of the same period as the “Black 
Virgin” ([2th century), but with an entirely 
different expression, is the painted wooden 
Virgin (below, left) in the Barcelona Museum). 
MOUNTED WARRIORS with flying banners 
in this detail of a 13th century fresco are 
believed to represent the armies raised by 
the Kings of Aragon and the Counts of Bar- 
celona to fight against the Moors in Spain. 
Formerly in the Royal Palace in Barcelona, 
this fresco was saved when the palace was 
destroyed by a fire in the [9th century.

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

The Unesco Courier. — January 1957 
  
     
THE CREATION OF ADAM and the temptation of Eve depicted by a Spanish medieval painter 
known today as the Master of Maderuelos. Originallyin Segovia, now in the Prado Museum, Madrid. 
: 
; \ 
Oa y 
y ’ 
. 
" 3’ ) ’ 
g 5 Nh 
Ret lL 3 . 
. ’ 
wi il 7 8pany 
= 
era E— i 
A Li oe - {5 Fy i p d 2 ; = 
CARPE EL dn NK Bl. le Bas 
    
!  MAS Archives, Barcelona 
CATALAN AND LOMBARD decorative elements are mingled in the sculpture of the main 
doorway to the Monastery of St. Mary at Ripoll, in the Province of Gerona. Ripoll, principal 
cultural centre of Catalonia in the Ith century, has some remarkable examples of Roma- 
nesque painting, sculpture and architecture. A distinctive school of painting flourished here. 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

   
             
  
" / ja We ris Te [- rad H. v 
rh », ae . vv, 1h AT NE RR dy SA
oR yl A _ -~ r g 
_ oy, sr 
A nik, ke 3-53 RL Td RN 4 
oe a ta 
  
    
 
_—— - 
PERCHED ON A MOUNTAIN TOP, the |Ith century Abbey of Silos near Burgos (north- 
central Spain) is one of the most famous sites of Romanesque history. On the ancient Pilgrims’ 
Road leading to Santiago de Compostela, it became celebrated throughout Europe during the 
I Ith century under the rule of St. Domingo. Itis today one of the rare places in the world where 
the Gregorian chant can still be heard in all its purity. Architecturally, its cloister is considered 
a wonder of Romanesque art, the result cf Spanish, Moorish and French artists. Above, left, 
the capital of a column adorned with ibises. Right, two griffins in the old cathedral of Salamanca. 
 . 2 ot A 
MAS Archives, Barcelona 
  
THE ‘OLD CATHEDRAL’ at Salamanca is a marvel of Romanesque architecture whose con- 
struction occupied mostofthe |2th century. Above, interior and exterior views of its famous 
“Cock Tower” crowned with an octagonal dome—one of the finest of its kind in Spain. Masses 
according to the ancient Mozarabic rite once practiced by Spanish Christians living in territories 
occupied by the Moors, are still celebrated several times a year in one of the Cathedral's chapels. 
22 
Candido Ansede, Salamanca and MAS archives, Barcelona

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

  
  
  
  
  
CATALONIAN ARTISTS working toward the end of the 12th 
century produced many masterpieces, hidden until recently in little- 
visited churches of the region. The names of few of these painters 
have come down to us. The author of this St. John the Evangelist 
and the Virgin is simply known as The Master of Valltarga, from 
the frontal dedicated to St. Andrew which he painted in the church 
of Valltarga, northeast Spain.

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 66963: The Art of the pilgrims' way

  
  
  
KING MELCHIOR. Detail (opposite page) of a 12th century 
mural from the church of St. Maria de Aneu, northeastern 
Spain, depicting adoration of The Infant Christ by the three 
Wise Men. This work, now in the Art Museum of Barcelona, 
is attributed to the School of The Master of Pedret, a painter 
whose style inspired many medieval artists of the region. 
Ci 4 g JESU 
  
ST. MICHAEL WEIGHING THE SOULS. This painting, 
a 13th century altar piece from a church in the Ribas Valley, 
100 miles north of Barcelona, is by an artist known as The 
Master of Soriguerola, one of the most prolific of medieval 
Romanesque painters in northeastern Spain. Painting is now 
in the Episcopal Museum at Vich, Catalonia. 
 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

  
2 
af
in
 
  
   
4 
i 
. 
Ss 
ad] 
3 
VE - R 
A 
\ ¥ 
[ 14 
- \ ho . o_o > a , 
¥ pa. Judd 
Ri Kiel 
. re 4 4 
  
) 
Co A 
a 
- - 
MASACCIO, considered the most representative Florentine artist 
ST. PETER and his apostolate was depicted by Masaccio in several 
of the first half of the 15th century, painted his foremost masterpieces 
of the Brancacci Chapel murals. Examples of two works are reproduced 
in the Brancacci Chapel, Florence. Here are details from Adam and 
on the two following pages. Left, Head of St. Peter, detail from the 
4 Eve driven out of Paradise (left), and (above) from St. Peter raising the 
Tribute Money. Right, detail of St. Peter distributing the Goods of 
Son of Theophilus. 
the Community to the Faithful.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

FA 
| 
= 
l
h
 
a
 
—
-
—
—
 
 

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

Fig 
3 
Be 
Ls 
win 
ob 
| : 
A 
I
T
N
 
a
s
 
1
-
 
W
R
 
T
E
R
 
: 
Y 
- 
: 
hd 
L
S
E
 
a
 
L
T
T
 
i : | 
 
 
  
bd 
S
a
s

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

     
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
IN A PERSIAN GARDEN. 
YWhen Isfahan became the ca- 
pital of Persia in the 16th 
century, the country’s artistic 
forces were concentrated there 
under Shah Abbas the Great. 
Paintings here are 17th cen- 
tury murals in the Chihil Su- 
tun Palace, They are not in- 
cluded in the Unesco Album on 
Iran but are taken from a 
Unesco Travelling Exhibition 
of Persian Miniatures, now 
on tour throughout the world. 
LION, FOX AND ASS, are three 
characters from **Kalila and Dimna’’, 
a Persian rendering of Indian fables 
translated from the Sanscrit. The manu- 
script containing 35 miniatures was 
completed in approximately 1410. 
  

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 66964: Isfahan is half of the world

  
SHAFTS OF SUNLIGHT PIERCE THE GLOOM 
 
OF THE COVERED BAZAAR IN THE ANCIENT 
The Unesco Courier. — January 1957 
UNESCO-Marc Riboud 
IRANIAN CITY OF ISFAHAN. 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 66964: Isfahan is half of the world

  
  
 

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier, — January 1957 


### 66964: Isfahan is half of the world

ISFAHAN | ———- 
IS HALF OF 
THE WORLD 
HE 16th century was a wonderful 
T epoch alike in Europe and Asia. It 
was an epoch of great rulers like 
Charles V, Elizabeth of England, Suleiman 
the Great of Turkey and the Great Moghul 
Akbar—a remarkable group in which an 
Iranian monarch, Shah Abbas I, can fit- 
tingly take his place. Shah Abbas came 
to the throne in 1587. Sir Anthony Sher- 
ley, an English soldier of fortune in his 
service, wrote of him: “His furniture of 
mind infinitely royal, wise, valiant, liberal, 
temperate, merciful, and an exceeding lover 
of Justice...” In 1598 he made his capital 
at Isfahan where, on almost the only river 
   
  
on a plateau over 5,300 feet above sea level, ry A 
a superb city grew up, approached by sta- SQL TE 
tely bridges which led past the luxurious 8 ry } 4 0 arm £33 
gardens of courtiers to the Royal Square, - AEE 3 NR et | ey 
the Maidan-i-Shah. Favoured with royal: fF y dn Br BE el fe 
concern, Isfahan soon hummed with acti- reese Cas SoG PAY Ca FE GT i 
vity in the arts and crafts and the new : ae 2 Ce 2, TNA A 4 
Imperial City was filled with the splendid = 4 
monuments which still exist in good condi- rt 
tion today. Early in the 17th century it po 
had a population of over 600,000 whence SiS ate 
the Iranian saying Isfahan nisf-i-jahan 1 of HRT r 
(Isfahan is half the world). Enclosed PHL PIRI " 
within mud brick walls the city had 162 iI a a Ny 
mosques, 48 religious colleges, 1,802 cara- ; TON + HE 
vanserais and 273 public baths. Isfahan’s . ) = y re A ART 
epoch of splendour lasted nearly a century oN. G Na 4] AN Hoo EES OLE IE 
and a half until it was partially destroyed : 8 “Sas PS ) & Ww ) i 
when Iran was invaded in the 18th century. : : 2 NN A Tl Phra JCal pe > 
In 1788 the capital was moved to Teheran. k oh x RY A 
pe 10 : : : 
vl ho    = 
UNESCO - Marc Riboud   
HALL OF FORTY COLUMNS, or Chehel Sutun 
(left and opposite page) is so named for its 20 real 
columns and their 20 reflections in the lake fronting it. 
Famous as the throne room of Shah Abbas in Isfahan, 
it is one of the courts and pavilions with which he 
filled the gardens of his palace in the early 17th 
century. Shah Abbas, who made Isfahan one of the 
architectural wonders of the world, built several 
magnificent palaces, planted gardens and avenues, and 
distributed amongst them the waters of the Zendeh- 
rud, on whose bank the city is built, in an endless series 
of reservoirs, fountains and cascadas, Above, the 
magnificently decorated dome of the Madrasseh 
Chahar-Bagh, one of the religious colleges of which 
there were once over 50 in the city. Enamelled 
tiles like those on archway make geometric and 
floral patterns on city walls, domes and minarets, 
   
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 66964: Isfahan is half of the world

ISFAHAN (Continued) 
it ey 
ha 
J 
gt ii Lg 
Pr i 
¥ 443 stairs Lain AN Le 
RTP Add JE 
INTERLACED DESIGNS in Intricate 
patterns sculptured in plaster decorate 
this prayer niche or mehrab at the Djuma 
Mosque, the oldest of Isfahan’s mosques. 
” - #3 . oe ; "Ld 
To oy ER SHE a 
34 
 
  
UNESCO-Marc Riboud. 
VEILED SILHOUETTES of women in black 
robes are a familiar sight in Isfahan. Those above 
are in the courtyard of the Masjid-Shah or 
Royal Mosque, which is completely covered with 
enamelled bricks of great brilliancy, Built by 
Shah Abbas | and completed in 1612, it is still 
one of the most beautiful buildings in the world. 
Left, one of the particular features of the landscape 
around Isfahan and elsewhere In Iran are the 
constructions used to collect rain water. Water 
drains through the ground into the domes and is 
cooled by air which enters shafts in the chimneys 
from whatever direction the wind may blow.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 66964: Isfahan is half of the world

The Unesco Courier, — January 1957 
  
EL
 
Te
  
UNESCQ-Marc Riboud 
HEART OF ISFAHAN and central point of interest in the city is the Maidan-i-Shah, the great Imperial Square (below), an immense and imposing 
space 560 yards long by 174 yards wide, bordered by buildings of recessed arches or arcades. On the far side of square is the Royal Mosque; at 
right, the ancient Mongol palace rebuilt by Shah Abbas. Viewed from the air, Isfahan presents an immense expanse of mingled buildings and gardens. 
Above, graceful tiled arches of Isfahan’s Royal Mosque reflect their colours In the clear waters of the basin where the faithful perform their ablutions. 
  
 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 66966: The Treasures of Iran's Imperial Library

aly 
EOGRAPHICALLY PERsia was situated in the centre of 
the ancient world. Historically, a distinctly Persian 
civilization goes back as much as twenty five cen- 
turies when the great Persian Empire stretched westward 
to the Danube and south to the Nile Valley. Culturally, it 
is one of the few countries which can still claim a contin- 
uous tradition in literature, art and philosophy going far 
back into the pre-Christian world. 
It is almost as a direct outcome of Persia's geographical 
situation that one of the chief characteristics of Persian 
art was its extraordinary power of assimilating foreign 
influences such as Greek, Egyptian, Islamic and Chinese, 
and of combining them with others to create an original 
and homogeneous style. This is especially true in 
painting. 
In the long history of Persia (the Iran of today) paint- 
ing developed at a comparatively late stage. Art under 
the Achaemenid kings enhanced and adorned the public 
life of the court from the 6th to the 4th centuries B.C. 
The twin capitals of Susa and Persepolis were unmis- 
takeably royal, with their friezes of attendants, guards 
and tribute bearers sharply cut in stone, or brightly 
coloured in the equally clear and hard tiled facings. This 
was the art proper to an open-air court ceremonial. 
The period of Hellenistic dominion, after the conquest 
of the Persian Empire by Alexander the Great, saw the 
introduction of a less priestly, more human art, followed 
by a return to national ideals and a deliberate revival of 
the monumental rock carving of earlier Achaemenid 
times. Only when a site was unsuitable for carving was 
there recourse to painting as a substitute. 
Then, in 639 A.D. came the invasion of Islam, changing 
the Persian mood and spirit. Islam had always had a 
great respect for calligraphy, since it was a ‘way of 
preserving the inspired words of the Prophet. Such was 
the prestige of calligraphy, that when painting was asso- 
ciated with it, it was only, so to speak, as a subordinate. 
* 
oLLOWERS Of Islam considered the countries which 
they conquered and ruled idolatrous, with their 
temples and their gods almost always represented in 
human form and therefore in conflict with the Semitic 
sentiment expressed in the Book of Exodus: “...Thou shalt 
not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of 
anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth 
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.” 
Well before the rise of Islam, however, the Persians had 
enjoyed depicting heroic scenes and pastimes of the nobles 
such as hunting and feasting. The new Islamic rulers, 
the Caliphs, revived the tradition, but for thiswork, which 
Islam regarded as unorthodox, they employed foreign 
artists. Such of these paintings as are known to us often 
represent huntsmen on horseback pursuing wild animals, 
36 
- v Fas J : 
-, Ne - . : . bo : r vA i i Fa FT s - 
‘ jp i - = = F Ioan 3 fi ¥. A i - 
. » Ry 3 A hor 
“4'9 w vy Ae - 
- : vp a! oy = A 8 ¥ oy . [[L . > 
| 4 ir J La i rola . i 
i) mw 3 ” itn i . Th er : i " A ’ a 
A > ¢ ge BO I Ce aan ERR i i oy < 
HE = t € X, : : v . : a 2 ae EA 3 " ». : \ 8 : xk b . 3 » & 
go 3 23) a y Re eo N 
w re 
: ¥ 
i 
Th Ay 
or the king on his throne surrounded by courtiers, guards 
and musicians. The decoration of religious works in this 
way ‘was forbidden, but nothing prevented rulers and 
other dignitaries from employing painters to illustrate the 
great works of Firdausi, Nizami, Jami and other authors. 
The Mongols, who invaded Persia at the beginning of 
the 13th century, paid no heed to the prohibitions of 
Islam—though they became Mohammedans later. 
Worshippers of the Heavens and the infinity of Space, 
they brought in their train painters and decorative artists 
from China, and the Far Eastern influence became the 
dominant one. 
* 
HE earliest illuminated Iranian manuscripts which 
T survive are from this time. The Chinese influence 
radically affected the whole conception. For the 
moment colour almost disappeared. The drawing became 
nervous and calligraphic; and above all, the attempt was 
made to set the figures in a landscape. But the figures 
of men or of animals still dominated these compositions, 
there was a vividness of presentation, a sense of action 
and drama which were the heritage of the old Iran. 
In the next generation this style seems to have been 
further absorbed into the Iranian tradition. In the great 
manuscript of the national epic, the Shahnameh or Book 
of Kings completed by the poet Firdausi in the early XIth 
century, copied about 1330 and now divided between many 
collections, figures and landscape are perfectly matched 
in memorable compositions of powerful drama, or 
romantic invention. 
At the end of the 14th century Iran ‘was once more 
ravaged by a conqueror from the Steppe, Timur-leng, 
“Timur the Lame”—the world conqueror Tamerlane, Yet 
despite these events, Iranian culture showed astonishing 
vitality. Poetry, philosophy and history flourished; 
architecture put on the most splendid robe of brilliant 
faience; and metalwork continued the great tradition of 
bronze casting which had been one of the glories of Iran, 
since the late 12th century. 
In the arts of the book, the later 14th century saw the 
birth of a new style that was to persist in its main charac- 
teristics for three hundred years, and is one of the great 
gifts of Iran to the world. Of this period, Basil Gray, 
Keeper of the Department of Oriental Antiquities at the 
British Museum, has written, “Craftsmanship went hand- 
in-hand ‘with invention. Craffsmanship supplied super- 
lative materials: paper, mineral pigments, gilding, and the 
skill to use them in calligraphy, illumination and painting. 
“The splendours of carpet and tile revetment ‘were 
transferred to the page in these glowing miniatures and 
in that setting stood the cyprus-like figures of lovers sung 
by the poets, while overhead moved the birds pouring out 
their song to the air scented by unfading blossoms. The

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 66966: The Treasures of Iran's Imperial Library

nearest that Western art has approached to this in feeling 
and richness is in French tapestry of the 14th century; 
and in pure colour in some Sienese panel-painting, nearly 
contemporary with them. : 
“It was a golden moment which could not be prolonged. 
But when it passed the art did not perish, but gave birth 
to more numerous progeny in the next generation. The 
conquests of Tamerlane uprooted this school of art from 
Tabriz and Baghdad (then a Persian city) and spread it 
all over the country. Shiraz in the south, the capital of 
Fars, the heart of ancient Iran; and Herat in the far east, 
capital of Khurasan, became the principal centres at the 
courts of Timur’s son and grandchildren.” 
Perhaps the most beautiful of Persia’s miniatures are 
in the remarkable collection preserved in the Gulistan 
Imperial Library at Teheran. These were almost comple- 
tely unknown to the world until the Library sent them 
for exhibition in London in 1931 and later in Leningrad. 
They include those from the manuscript of the Iranian 
epic, the Shahnameh, in which the romance of chivalry 
and the exploits of heroes are given expression in the 
setting of the Iranian Spring, when the bare hills are 
dotted with flowers for a few weeks and the foliage is 
  
Copyright Unesco Album, Iran 
THE IMPERIAL LIBRARY of the Gulistan (Rose Garden) Palace at Teheran, where a remarkable 
collection of Persian miniatures is preserved. This palace is used for official state receptions. It 
contains the fabulous Peacock Throne of the Shahs of Iran which is studded with precious stones. 
The Unesco Courier. — January 1957 
fresh. The Shahnameh contains 20 large miniatures and 
a double-page frontispiece, and the name of Prince 
Baysunqur, the greatest patron of art and poetry among 
Timur’s descendants, is found in various places throughout 
the manuscript. 
A second work from the Gulistan Library—also a prod- 
uct of Prince Baysunqur’s studio—is Kalila and Dimna, a 
collection of animal fables. These miniatures show a 
sensibility and intimacy with the natural world missing 
from the more formal epic scenes. These Indian fables 
were also partially translated into French in the 17th 
century, La Fontaine learned of them through Francois 
Bernier, a French doctor who came across them while in 
Asla, and used some of them in writing his own fables. 
In addition to these important manuscripts the Gulistan 
Library possesses an equally remarkable collection of 
calligraphy and miniatures of different dates and origins 
bound together in a luxurious volume by the Moghul 
Emperor Jehangir, in the early 17th century. The most 
famous miniature of this album, the Muragqga Gulshan, or 
Flower Garden Album, is by Bihzad, the foremost of the 
few Persian painters whose names are known today. It 
represents the garden of the art-loving Prince Husayn 
Bayqara, at whose court in Herat, 
Bihzad worked. This illustration, 
signed by the artist, who is believed 
to have been the first to have ever 
mentioned his own name on an illu- 
minated manuscript, probably dates 
from about 1480. 
Bihzad has been hailed as the 
greatest master of Persian painting. 
He was a reformer in the treatment 
of landscape, which appears more 
realistically in his pages than in 
those of his forerunners. Moreover 
he revolted against the dictation of 
the calligraphers and admitted, at 
best, only a few lines of text in the 
pages he illustrated. 
* 
T the end of the 16th century, all 
A the artistic forces in Persia were 
being concentrated at the new 
capital, Isfahan, under the impulse of 
Shah Abbas the Great (see page 31). 
Here arose a new and important 
centre for the art of book production. 
Parallel to this, a new development 
was taking place at the court of the 
Moghul emperors in India. One of 
them, Humayun, who visited Persia 
, half way through the 16th century, 
returned to India with two Iranian 
painters who became heads of the 
new painting workshop he established 
in his royal library. This patronage 
of the arts was continued by his 
successor, Akbar the Great, and a new 
style of painting was born, owing aca- 
demic discipline and technical know- 
ledge to the Iranian tradition, but in- 
formed with quite another spirit. 
This Moghul art jis at its most 
characteristic in depicting historical 
events and in portraiture. In their 
wish to record, Akbar and his son and 
successor, Jahangir, found the Euro- 
pean science of picture making with 
perspective and chiaroscuro, interest- 
ing, and for a time the influence of 
Flemish and German line engraving 
is clearly visible in Moghul painting. 
The Persian miniatures reproduced 
in Unesco’s Album are taken from 
manuscripts which were prepared in 
court workshops and which have 
remained to this day in royal posses- 
sion. Now, knowledge of these mas- 
-terpieces of Iranian and Moghul art 
is being made available to an im- 
mensely wider public than has enjoy- 
ed them in the four or five hundred 
years since they were produced. 
37

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 66966: The Treasures of Iran's Imperial Library

 
 
 

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 66966: The Treasures of Iran's Imperial Library

The Unesco Courier. — January 1957    
ti et tn ~ - - EEE————- 
"3 J a My — ~ 
he Le 2 - oe 
} F's . 
  
   
   
Flv VU. LIA 
"INET 
il At " AR 
Gd AS 
TH ' 
pr i 
     
  
THE SAD KING and the wonderful 
bird. A king, distressed at the dis- 
cord he sees everywhere around 
him, asks the bird if there is a place 
anywhere in the world where every- 
oneis good and harmony reigns, One 
of the most beautiful 15th century 
miniatures in Kalila and Dimna, the 
book of animal fables executed inthe 
studios of Prince Baysunqur Mirza. 
 
    
MIXED POLO MATCH. A scene 
frequently reproduced by Iranian 
painters: the game of polo, which 
originated in Persia. A 16th century 
illustration of one of the stories in 
the Khamseh of Nizami, a poet and 
one of the great thinkers of ancient 
Iran, Here, young men, led by Khus- 
rau, play against young women 
led by Khusrau’s beloved, Shirin. 
  
  
YOUNG NOBLEMAN carrying a 
falcon. A work attributed to Far- 
rukh Beg, a Kalmuk, and one of the 
most gifted and original artists who 
worked for the Great Moghul, Akbar, 
and later for his son the Emperor 
Jahangir, towards the end of the 16th 
century. Taken, as is our cover 
illustration, from the Muraqqa Gul- 
shan, or Flower Garden Album.    
39

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 66966: The Treasures of Iran's Imperial Library

    
    
    
    
    
  v tbs 
      SS SIE ES a STE Ee sd Rat Ls ni LIE OR 5S ait EAS La. 
THE BOOK OF KINGS. Prince Baysunqur Mirza, a 15th century illuminated manuscripts—a gem of painting, calligraphy and book- 
descendant of the Mongol conqueror, Tamerlane, was an enthusiastic binding. The calligraphist, Ja'far Baysunquiri, completed the copy in 
admirer of the Shahnameh, or “Book of Kings”, the epic history of 1430, but the work carries no other date and no painter's name. This 
Persia written by the 10th century poet, Firdausi. He ordered a copy illustration from the Shahnameh depicts King Kaikus receiving a bard, 
of it to be made and the result was one of the world’s most magnificent in reality a div (evil spirit of Persian mythology) come to deceive him. 
40

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 66966: The Treasures of Iran's Imperial Library

The Unesco Courier. — January 1957 
  
  
  
  
  
EXPLOITS OF HEROES and the romance of Chivalry are given expression 
in the Shahnameh in the setting of the lranian Spring, when the bare hills are 
dotted with flowers for a few weeks and the foliage is fresh. Here, one the 
heroes of the Shahnameh, isfandiyar, kills two wolves—one of a series of deeds 
which he, and a rival hero, Rustam, must perform to prove their courage. 
41

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 66966: The Treasures of Iran's Imperial Library

       
                              
     
     
       
       
     
    
        
  
   M # . : A » ’ 
: 4 : . ; . 5 - A. 
/ Vs = La Aon a ¥ IN aw E ad : : : ' 
- » ad at) zy A ne ATT Spa AS My Be 4.5 = IL ye E Tih pay . 4 ' 0 rah 4 Tia it a Eas p py 
a 
a 
  
3 - wi . : 
wp i ‘ Sei PENT PA RIT wa LLY Hep Cx, I. fo bul ir ef 
r * A A ) So) Cr PY f 3 Eady Ae N \ +4 Ve g - # 
at al DAK : LEELA ENN a 2, fh NX . ion            
                 |S 3 : a : Te Bd Te SI ay i pd J a aE ”- 
= 
a
,
 
w 
F
N
 
A
Y
 
wv. 
ox or
 
- 
= 
- 
~
Y
,
 
Wp
, 
C
U
 
24
5 
2 M
c
a
 
  
  
l
e
 
~ 
£ ~ 
T
I
T
Y
 
4 
J 
El
 
BE 
0
s
]
   
  
® 
1 wt ~~ 
2 : 
3} | ~ : : 'n “ 
Laas . 
y Ph : 
me a - . - 
5) - 3 
y 3 3 
AN Y 
Ma . 
. : 
y - > 
- 1 -_—— 
o | 
a. 
fd dd 
war do 
i 
Hr ¥ 
# 
a “ 
’ 1 
bo Sanban ys od ras . 
Co — * — 
oe
 
"
.
 
fo
 
w
l
l
 
ou 
     
    die 
A
E
E
 
executed in the studios of this Prince, a passionate book collector and a gifted calligraphist- 
42

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

Persepolis ; fabulous capi 
  
Splendour and magnificence of Persepolis, capital of the ancient Persian 
Empire, astounded Alexander the Great and the victorious Greeks 
who captured and burned it about 331 B.C. The rega! city with its 
portals, royal quarters and audience halls, was built some 40 miles 
north east of present-day Shiraz by Darius, third ruler of the Achaemenid 
dynasty, who came to the throne in 52| B.C., and by his son, Xerxes |, 
it was constructed on a great, rectangular terrace, jutting out from 
  
    
B   SF
 
in
ra
h   
  
The Unesco Courier, — January 1957 


### 66968: Persepolis: fabulous capital of an empire

| of an empire 
Copyright Cc. G. Troeller-C. Deffarge 
cliffs, on which remain the ruins of colossal buildings of dark grey marble 
from the nearby mountain, and hundreds of bas-reliefs executed for the 
Achaemenid kings and later dynasties. Above, bas-relief on cliff face 
north of Persepolis, showing a Sasanian ruler, King Shapur | (241-271 
A.D.), receiving homage of the Roman emperor Valerian, whom he 
captured in battle, Below, two bas-reliefs from Persepolis itself: 
King Darius enthroned, holding royal audience, and slaying a lion.

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 66968: Persepolis: fabulous capital of an empire

 
 
 
     
% t 
= 
 
 
.-
 
 
 
 
 
i 
A
R
 
KX
 N + 
- 
3 
» 
¢ 
SE
 
L
e
 
"w
e 
=
 
.
 
{ 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 66968: Persepolis: fabulous capital of an empire

w W
s
 
he
t 
AR 
N
N
S
T
T
E
T
Y
 
X 
N
R
 
C
A
T
R
 
I
V
R
 
8
 
. 
3 
a
i
i
 
{
S
h
 
* 
—
e
 
-
 
1
 1 
T
R
E
 
T
E
 
= 
\d
 
4
 
x
y
 
r
e
 
- 
XY » 
- 
=
 
v. 
~ 
~~
 -~
   
The Unesco Courier, — January 1957 
Processions in stone 
The Great Apadana, or audience hall, built by Xerxes | in Persepolis, 
is approached by a double stair whose sides are lined with two groups 
of figures cut in low relief on the stone masonry. One of them (below) 
shows a long procession of subject peoples of the empire bringing 
tribute offerings for the annual spring festival held at Persepolis. The 
other (left) depicts the Persian, Median and Susian members of the 
royal guard. The vast interior hall of the Apadana, about 200 feet 
on each side, contained six rows of six columns, 65 feet in height. The 
most striking of the audience halls at Persepolis was the famous “Hall 
ofa hundred columns”, several of which still remain standing. Workmen 
and materials were brought to the site of the new Persian capital from 
alt over the empire, and the style of the architectural details and the 
carved reliefs is 2 composite of the art of Egypt, Babyloniaand Asia Minor. 
ro 
T
R
)
 
. 
Ba
na
t 
+h 
2 
N 
o
a
 
  Copyright C.G. Troeller - C, Deffarge 
— t a : AR } ¥ 0 . \ \ x ! ; | 0 _ : 
N | 
; : A 
- 
MR 
Lad 
iii ®   LL   
          
3 
R 
-
 
. 
: 
. 
a
R
 
Jr
 
i 
, 
: 
A 
E 
E 
S
a
t
 
ie
 
A
d
e
 
S
V
 
-
 
Vo
 
      M
E
E
A
A
N
G
 
ha 4 a >a dl “7 "t £ 
RE IE ER 
       
. 
+ Lol 
‘ 
RE +t Ha IE ICE IRR La ETr - a : po - hud 
  
    
cr ROT 
   
5 4 » + 
ra rh ROR NE 
\ WI) h “Pe F  
    
The ghost city of Bam 
Until the latter part of the 8th century, the city of Bam, 
guarded by its citadel and secure within its 100 feet high 
walls, was a thriving centre of trade set in an oasis in the 
salt desert of southeast Iran. Then, Agha Muhammad Khan, 
leader of the Qajar tribes attacked the forces of the Shah 
of Iran. He besieged the city of Bam, and ordered the eyes 
of 10,000 people to be put out, The city was taken and 
destroyed and the remaining inhabitants made their homes in 
  
Vo     
“ach # 
  
the nearby oasis. Today, the streets of this ghost city are 
empty except for jackals and porcupines and occasional 
groups of nomads who camp in the ruins of former mosques. 
Copyright C.G. Troeller - C, Deffarge     
45

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 66969: Magic artisan of Milan

  
Magic artisan of Milan 
ARLY one afternoon a few weeks 
E ago a 65-year old printer in Milan 
bent over a huge proof sheet cover- 
ed with a series of delicate colour pla- 
tes. It was probably the hundredth time 
he had seen the same proofs. On each 
occasion before, he had peered intently at 
every detail of colour, at every shade 
and tone, had shaken his head and scrib-. 
bled a few rapid marks in one spot or 
another. To these, each time, he had 
added a comment such as “troppo rosso” 
(too much red) or “blu troppo debile” 
(not enough blue). This time, however, 
he looked up and nodded to a UNEsco 
expert. There was a twinkle in his eye 
as he smiled and said “perfetto.” 
The man was Amilcare Pizzi, the 
“magic artisan of Milan” and the word 
he uttered meant that another album in 
the Unesco World Series was now 
ready—or perhaps just about almost 
ready—to come off the presses. 
When in 1954 the New York Graphic 
Society decided to launch the UNEscO 
series of albums of little known national 
art treasures, each with 32 colout 
plates to be reproduced with the highest 
technical quality and fidelity, the firm of 
Amilcare Pizzi was the immediate and 
unanimous choice. 
Pizzi brought to UNeEsco almost half 
a century of exceptional craftsmanship 
and devotion to beauty which had earned 
for him the undisputed title as the finest 
colour printer of all Italy (“the wizard 
of Italian colour printing” his compa- 
triots call him) and undoubtedly one of 
the most meticulous colour printers 
anywhere in the world. 
Apart from the Unesco World Art 
Series, Pizzi's greatest pride is his monu- 
mental tour de force in publishing an 
exact replica of the famous Codex Resta, 
 
a 17th century bound collection of paint- 
ings and drawings preserved at the 
Ambrosiana Library, Milan. He and his 
staff of 300 worked for more than two 
years to finish the work in which every 
stain, every blotch and every shade of 
colour of the ancient paper was repro- 
duced along with one hundred plates 
reprinted with the same measurements 
and colours as the originals. When the 
Codex Resta was completed (2,000 copies 
were printed) it astounded book pub- 
lishers the world over and was hailed as 
the most perfect publishing achievement 
of the graphic arts. 
For one of his latest volumes on the 
Mosaics of Ravenna in the “Silvana Col- 
lection” he had bagfuls of the tiny 
mosaics shipped to Milan to be sure that 
his colour reproduction would be replicas 
of each stone. During the war he ma- 
naged to photograph all the frescoes of 
Mantegna at Padua just three days before 
they were destroyed by bombing. His 
colour reproductions are the only remain- 
ing testimony of these masterpieces. 
Curiously, Pizzi opened his first printing 
plant with savings from his exploits as a 
football champion (he was halfback on 
Italy’s national team in his youth). 
%* 
Photos show stages in colour printing of 
Unesco albums. (1) Films for Masaccio vol- 
ume are treated in retouching room. 
(2) Photo shop prepares negative for Spain 
album. (3) Amilcare Pizzi (white smock) and 
Anton Schutz, director of New York Graphic 
Society, check colour fidelity of sheet proofs. 
(4) Workman pulls colour hand proof from 
plate for Spain album. Photos UNESCO-Farabola 
   
46 
 

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 66969: Magic artisan of Milan

47 
          
 
 
: 
EN
 
R
h
 
a.
 
S
t
e
e
r
 
To
] 
: 
  
  
a 
he
 
wd
 
SE
E 
Lg
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
The Unesco Courier. — January 1957

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
      
  
< 
The UNESCO WORLD ART SERIES 
THE UNESCO WORLD ART SERIES is published by arrangement with 
UNESCO, by the New York Graphic Society, for more than a quarter of a 
century one of the world’s leading publishers of fine colour reproductions. 
The UNESCO WORLD ART SERIES is a unique 
publishing venture, jointly launched in 1954 by 
New York Graphic Society and UNESCO with the 
co-operation of the various governments. It has 
resulted to date in the publication of eight books 
considered by authorities as among the most faith- 
ful art reproductions ever issued. Published in a 
standard format, each book contains 32 high-fidelity 
extra-large colour plates, mostly 15 by 11 inches 
(38 by 28 cm), plus several black and white ijllus- 
trations in the text. The page size is 18} by 13 inches 
(14 by 33 cm). Each volume is published in five 
languages, and often a sixth—that of the country 
of origin. 
The price per volume is $16.50 (U.S.A.) Colour plates 
from any books may be purchased individually; des- 
criptive captions in several languages on each plate. 
Price, § 2.00 each, 
New additions to the series 
IRAN Early Persian Miniatures from the Imperial Li- 
brary of the Shah of Iran at the Gulistan Palace. Text 
by Basil Gray. Introductica by André Godard. 
SPAIN Romanesque Painting of the 10th, 11th, 12th 
and 13th centuries— an extraordinary chapter in art 
history, Text by Juan Ainaud. 
MASACCIO Frescoes in Florence from the Brancacci 
Chapel and Santa Maria Novella, Text for Latin 
languages by Mario Salmi; English and German by Sir 
Phillip Hendy. (Not part of the series) 
Previously published 
INDIA Paintings from the Ajanta Caves. Text by 
Mandanjeet Singh. Introduction by Jawaharlal Nehru. 
EGYPT Paintings from Tombs and Temples. Text by 
Jacques Vandier. Introduction by Mohamed Naguib. 
AUSTRALIA Aboriginal Paintings from Arnhem Land 
Introduction by Sir Herbert Read. 
YUGOSLAVIA Medieval Frescoes. Text by Svetozar 
Radojcic. Introduction by Talbot Rice. 
NORWAY Paintings from Stave Churches. The Gol- 
den Age of medieval painting in Norway. Text by Roar 
Hauglid. Introduction by Louis Grodecki. 
In preparation 
Further volumes on CEYLON, JAPAN, U.S.S.R, 
      
   
- 
/ J 
| 
MPERT
 11 LIBRE id 
rt 
    
gstiN wip ATURE     
  
    
   
   
  
N
S
 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA and TURKEY will continue to 
augment this valuable co-operative series of beautiful 
and unique books. 
If UNESCO WORLD ART SERIES books are not 
available at your local bookstore, they may be obtained 
by writing directly to New York Graphic Society. 
NEW YORK GRAPHIC SOCIETY 95, East Put- 
nam Ave., Greenwich, Connecticut U.S.A. 
UNESCO WORLD ART SERIES —International Agents: 
ARGENTINA : Carlos Hirsch, Buenos-Aires; AUSTRALIA ; 
Ure Smith, Ltd., Sydney; CaNaDA: Burns and Mac- 
Eachern, Toronto; DENMARK: G.E.C. Gap, Copenha- 
gen; ENGLAND: The Zwemmer Gallery, London ; Fin- 
LAND : Akademiska Bokhandeln, Helsinki ; FRANCE, BEL- 
GIUM, LUXEMBOURG : Etablissements Braun et Cie, 
Mulhouse-Dornach, Haut-Rhin, France; GERMANY: 
R. Piper & Co., Munich ; HoLLaND: Meulenhoff & Co., 
Amsterdam ; ItaLy : Silvana Editoriale d’arte, Milan; 
SPAIN : Sociedad General Espanola de Libreria, Madrid ; 
SWEDEN : Importbokhandeln, Stockholm ; SWITZERLAND : 
Office du Livre, S.A., Fribourg ; UruGuay : Ibana, Mon- 
tevideo. 
(DISCOUNTS FOR MEMBERS OF EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL 
ORGANIZATIONS AVAILABLE FROM NATIONAL DISTRIBUTORS) 
48 
     

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco’s national distributors from 
The Unesco Courier. — January 1957 
Letters to the Editor 
Sir, 
The task of uniting the peoples of this 
shrinking planet we call our “wide” 
world in mutual trust and co-operation 
is one confronted by opposition from 
some quarters, but it is, nevertheless, a 
task with an inevitable outcome: success. 
Successful accomplishment of the long 
needed era of peace and universal 
friendship is inevitable because it is the 
prime hope of that group that stands 
above nations and governments: the 
people of the world. Your publication 
is a great tool in furthering this task of 
international unity and trust. 
Gordon V, Carr 
Rhode Island, U.S. 
Sir, 
... I should like to make a suggestion for 
a future issue. 1 think that a well- 
illustrated study of national dishes 
would interest many readers, and it could 
perhaps be linked with the question 
of diet in relation to climate and even 
with the character of different peoples. 
It could also cover the cooking utensils 
used around the world... 
H. Vialafte 
Paris, France 
Sir, 
I think good quality is maintained 
throughout THE UNESCO COURIER—pho- 
tographs, articles, paper, printing and 
cover. But why do you send it to us 
in a wrapper—after folding it. As a 
result, an attractive magazine is dis- 
figured by a crease which spoils the 
cover photo and, in fact, every page. 
Your magazine deserves better treatment. 
I am convinced that you could find a 
solution not prohibitively expensive 
which would enable you to deliver it 
unmarked. 
M. Lebel 
Issy-les-Moulineaux, 
Seine, France 
Editor's note : Because of the exceptionally 
low subscription rates, it is not possible to 
mafl THE UNESco COURIER in envelopes. Our 
distribution service is, however, studying ways 
in which the problem raised by our reader 
might be overcome. 
Sir, 
I do appreciate your efforts to make 
people explain and understand each 
other. A German edition of TUE 
UNESCO COURIER would help to make 
friends between Germans and people of 
any nationality. 
Regine Ileller 
Wuppertal-Elberfeld, 
Germany (Fed. Rep.) 
Sir, 
I was glad you published the article 
“Better understanding through foreign 
languages” by Henri Kerst. We need 
more articles on this vital subject. 
School graduates should be encouraged 
to continue their studies of foreign 
languages through newspaper reading 
and conversation groups. Many people 
have a good knowledge of a foreign 
language on leaving school, but a few 
years of neglect cause a deplorable loss. 
Reading a newspaper once a week 
would have kept the knowledge alive... 
I would like to suggest a column in each 
issue of THE UNESCO COURICR on the 
correct pronunciation of foreign names 
used in the magazine . 
Sadie Stave 
New York, U.S. 
Sir, 
Hearty congratulations on the remark- 
able issue you devoted to Buddhist 
Art and Culture (June 1956; U.S. 
August). Would it be possible to devote 
other numbers to such subjects as Islam, 
medieval Christianity, symbolism, the 
world’s great cathedrals, Brahmanism 
and to the great epochs in world art: the 
century of Pericles, the century of 
Augustus, the 13th century, the Renais- 
sance, Baroque art, etc? By studying 
art, religions and techniques, THE 
UNESCO COURIER could thus provide a 
true summing up of the various civiliza- 
tions of which mankind may well be 
proud. 
R. Navailh 
Alencon, France 
Sir, 
I have enjoyed reading THE UNESCO 
COURIER, month after month, but your 
August, 1956 (Europcan, June 1956— 
2,500 Years of Buddhist Art and Cul- 
ture) is nothing short of superlative. 
What a relief to read a publication with 
a world-view. 1 must say it makes our 
U.S. magazines seem very provincial. 
Eugene Burns 
McClure Newspaper 
. Syndicate, New York, U.S. 
WHERE TO SUBSCRIBE 
GERMANY. R. Oldenbourg K.G., JAMAICA. — Sangster’s Book Room, 99 
whom the English, French and Spanish 
editions of the UNESCO COURIER 
can be obtained are listed below. 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 303 Flinders Street, Melbourne, 
C. |, Victoria. 
AUSTRIA. — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& C-., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V. 
BELGIUM. — Louis de Lannoy, Editeur- 
Libraire, 15 rue du Tilleul, Genval (Bra- 
bant). 60 Belgian francs. 
CANADA. — University of Toronto Press, 
Toronto 5. : 
Periodica Inc., 5090 Avenue Papineau, 
Montreal 34. 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd., Lake House, P.C. Box 
244, 100 Parsons Road Colombo |. 
CHINA, — World Book Co. Ltd, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section |, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA, — Llibreria Economica, Calle 
O"' Reilly 505, Havana. 
DENMARK, — Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd, 
6 Nérregade, Copenhagen K. 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
FRANCE. — Unesco Sales Section, 
19 Avenue Kléber, Paris, 16°. 
C.C.P. 12598-48, Unesco Bookshop, 
Paris. 
Unesco-Yertrieb fiir Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerstrasse [45, Munich 8. 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28 
rue du Stade, Achens. 
HONG-KONG, — Swindon Book Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
INDIA. — Orient Longmans Private Ltd, 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay I; §7 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2. 
Sub-Depots : Oxford Book & Stationery 
Co., Scindia House, New Delhi; Rajkamal 
Publications Ltd., Himalaya House, Hornby 
Road, Bombay 1. 
INDONESIA. — G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co., 
Djalan MNusantara 22, Posttrommel 85, 
DJakarta, 
IRAN. — Iranian National Commission for 
Unesco, Avenue du Musée, Teheran. 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd., 
P.O. B. 4154, Tel-Aviv. 
ITALY. — Libreria Commissionaria Sana 
soni, Yia Gino Capponi 26, Casella Pos- 
tale 552, Florence. 
Harbour Street, Kingston, 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
JAPAN, — Maruzen Co. Led., 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
KOREA. — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, Ministry of Education, Seoul. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND SIN- 
GAPORE. — Peter Chong & Co., Post 
Office Box |35, Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kings- 
way, Valerta. 
NETHERLANDS. — N.V., Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, [00 Hackchorne Road, CThrist- 
church. 
NIGERIA. — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.C. Box 
174, Lagos. 
NORWAY. — A.S. Bokhjornet, Stortings- 
plass 7, Oslo. 
PAKISTAN. — Ferozsons : 60 The Mall, 
Lahore ; Bunder Road, Karachi and 
35 The Mall, Pashawar. 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. 
Inc., [104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620, Manila. 
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND. — The 
National Press, 16 South Frederick St., 
Dublin. 
SWEDEN. — A/B C.E. Fritzes, Kungl 
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgaten 2, Stockholm 
16. 
SWITZERLAND. ~— Europa Verlag, 5 
Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40 rue du Marché, Geneva, 
5.20 Swiss francs. 
TANGIER. — Paul Fekete,” 2 rue Cook, 
Tangier, 
THAILAND, — Suksapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
UNION OF BURMA. — Burma Educa- 
tional Bookshop, 551-3 Merchant Street, 
P.O. Box 222, Rangoon. 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA. — Van 
Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, Church 
Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
UNITED KINGDOM. — H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O, Box 569, London, S.E.I, 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 152 West 42nd St, New York, 
36, N.Y, 
U. S. S. R. — Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA. — Jugoslovenska Knjiga 
Terazije 27/11, Belgrade, 
49

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Newsroom... 
A ustrALIAN ART AFLOAT. — 
An original travelling exhibition of con- 
temporary Australian art recently went on 
a six weeks’ tour of the Pacific. Believed 
to be the first floating art exhibition ever 
to cross an ocean, the show visited New 
Zealand, Hawaii, the United States and 
Canada in the course of a 15,000 mile 
voyage from Sydney. It included 88 con- 
temporary Australian works loaned by 
state galleries and private owners, which 
made the trip in the S.S. Orcades. 
Showings on board ship were arranged in 
Auckland, New Zealand, Honolulu, San 
Francisco and Vancouver. : 
H TELECLUBS IN TOWN. — Tele- 
clubs, first started in rural areas of 
France to provide community TV 
viewing and thus overcome some rural 
isolation problems, are now springing 
up with UNESCO assistance in country 
districts of Southern Italy and Japan. 
But teleclubs can also play a useful role 
in towns, in the opinion of Belgian adult 
education specialists who recently held 
a seminar on this question in co-opera- 
tion with UNEsco TV representatives. 
Teachers, youth leaders, trade union 
representatives, ministers of religion and 
TV producers all agreed that collective 
viewing was of value to schools, youth 
groups, social and church clubs, sana- 
roria and similar groups in an indus- 
trialized community. 
I keene KNOWLEDGE. — Just 
about 500 million people now enjoy the 
benefits of the UNEsco-sponsored Agree- 
ment which exempts books, newspapers, 
magazines, works of art, music scores and 
articles for the blind from import duties. 
Also exempt are newsreels, educational 
films, sound recordings and scientific 
equipment, if consigned to approved 
institutions, Twenty-three countries apply 
the Unesco Agreement and one of them, 
the United Kingdom, has extended its pro- 
vision to almost all of its overseas territo- 
ries, as, more recently, has Belgium in the 
case of the Belgian Congo and Ruanda- 
Urundi. 
P AST VERSUS PRESENT. — How 
to reconcile the demands of modern town 
planning with the desire to preserve histori- 
cal monuments which are “in the way”, 
is a problem which plagues many countries. 
it is now being tackled in Syria which 
boasts some of the world’s most beautiful 
vestiges of ancient architecture and monu- 
ments, and where new office buildings, 
offices and factories and hotels are spring- 
ing up on the sites of ancient cities. In 
1953 a survey of the problem, greatest in 
the old towns with their ancient bazaars, 
caravanserais, and mosques, was made by 
a three-man UNEsco team. On the basis 
of its report, Unesco is sending a French 
specialist in architecture and archaeology 
to Syria to carry the work forward a step 
further under its programme of aid to 
Member States. 
® SHAPELY, SPEEDIER SHIPS. — 
The first ship-model testing tank in 
South-East Asia, installed with the co- 
operation of UNEscoO is now in opera- 
tion at the Central Water and Power 
Station, in Poona, India. Tests already 
made in the 500 feet long tank with 
models of fishing boats used near 
Bombay have proved that the speed of 
these boats could be increased by 10 per 
cent—without any additional power— 
simply by changing the design. The 
tests climax a three years co-operation 
between UNESCO and the Poona research 
station. 
A CUMULATIVE INDEX OF THE 
“UNESCO COURIER” FOR THE TWO 
YEARS 1955-1956 WILL BE PUBLISH- 
ED SHORTLY. 
SUBSCRIPTION 
 
  
  
Coming in February 
Special UNESCO COURIER 
report on world book 
publishing and translations 
SPOTLIGHT ON 
THE WORLD 
OF BOOKS 
% 5,000 million books are pub- 
lished annually, three quarters 
of them in 10 countries. 
Y 22,000 translations were pub- 
lishedin 1954, Seventy per cent 
were in four languages (English, 
Russian, French, German). 
+% When is a book not a book ? 
There is still no standard inter- 
national definition.   
Subscribe to THE UNESCO COURIER today - $ 2.50; 8/; 400 francs per year (12 issues) 
Fill in this subscription blank and mail it with your cheque or money order 
to our local agent in your country listed at bottom of previous page. 
Please enter my subscription for THE UNESCO COURIER 
(3 One year $2.50; 8/-; 400 French francs 
0 Cheque [Money Order enclosed 
50 
EP FPR TTT TEI ETRE EERIE TY 
J Please bill me 
0 Two years $4.50; 16/-; 800 French francs 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
THE ANNUNCIATION TO THE SHEPHERDS. Detail from Spain. Ledn conserves the most important surviving paintings which 
12th century mural—one of the vast compositions on the life of Christ mark the road followed by medieval pilgrims from Limoges in France 
decorating vaults of Collegiate Church of St. Isidore, Ledn, northwest to the shrine of St. James at Compostela. (Unesco Album: Spain) 
PRINTED IN ITALY « A, PI12Z| = MILAN

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066970engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
T
T
 
a
 
A
 
A
t
 
  
F
R
E
D
 
a
 
T
p
 
I
 
S
T
 
T
U
T
 
T
T
 
i
i
d
 
G
n
.
 
a
 
S
p
 
(| 
S
T
 
WS
 
—
—
—
 
T
T
 
a 
a
 
S
e
s
 
—
 
—
—
 
-
—
 
 
 
E
T
 
—
—
 
 
 
 