# [061386](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
r
y
 
} 
a 
4 
+ 
F
a
 
Leo 
. 
W
E
 
yi 
} 
-~ 
©
 
oy 
Sh Toul 
\ 
: 
A
 
o 
or 
A
L
T
.
 
ir 
. 
P
N
 
- 
. 
YJ 
p 
        
             
  
‘ 
.J0F (FRANCE) 
i 
“ 
d 
At 
-g 
7A 
2% 
“AN 
v 
a 
- 
I 
- 
5 
Br A 
~ a 
. 
i 
x 
£ 
Ff 
7 
” 
i 
ve 
» » - 
Py pl = 
a © ; 
- | x. > ~ 
* 
” 
pA 
T 
i 
¥ 
£ 
a 
& 
- 
< 7 oh 
« 
> 
a 
NH 
ty 
4 
¥ 
~ 
, : 
> 
3 
» 
dl 
Pr 
“4 
Jig 
“ 
a» 
mm 
’r 
       
       
. 
 , 
A 
# 
d 
A 
- 
2% 
J - 
7 
4 
~ 
a 
ol 
1 
JF 
i= 
H 
. 4 
r 
a 
x 
y 0 FF A 
- ~ 1) ad 
yy Jd 
ww AY J 
5 
” 
HKbo, 
A BN PF dra 
3 
or 
f 
- 
ed 
; Vib 
E 
d h 
’ 
F 
/ 
[-STG. (U.K.) - 30 CENTS (CANADA) 
Ih 
JF | 3 
1. . 'g $Y J Be vy 
Ly i 
4 
4 
1 
[Q) 
YEAR) - PRICE 
wv 
Lg 
"id 
(7TH 
  
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
wl 
> 
  NESE   
       
of 
- JY 
kK 
: 
. u “ea eH 
“- ald po 
m 
“gf 
Fi 
4 
*e 
/ 
S
L
 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
CHILDREN 
IN THE 
PALM TREE 
This painting, which 
might have come from 
a book of children’s 
stories, is a detail of 
“Entry into Jerusalem” 
a 13th-century Byzan- 
tine fresco in one of 
the monastery chur- 
ches of Cyprus. Wear- 
ing black gloves, the 
children are climbing 
the palm tree to gather 
dates. The painting is 
reproduced in full col- 
our in a new Unesco 
World Art Series al- 
bum, “Cyprus: Byzan- 
tine Mosaics and 
Frescoes” (See p. 30). 
© Unesco

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Th C meen Te FEBRUARY 1964 
Ouricr 17TH YEAR 
Contents 
No, 2 
Tf] ——
—————tee 
  l
e
 
Page 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 4 WORLD COMMUNICATIONS 
English A special Unesco report on today's trends 
French 
opanish 12 NEW SIGHTS AND SOUNDS IN THE CLASSROOM 
German By Anne Darnborough 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 15 THE FANTASTIC LASER 
Japanese 100 million messages on a beam of light 
Italian 
By Bruno Friedman 
20 3,000 YEARS OF GLASS-MAKING 
Tracking down a mystery of antiquity 
By Anita Engle 
28 AMAZING PROPERTIES OF MODERN GLASS 
30 FRESCOES FROM ANCIENT CYPRUS 
A new Unesco art album 
  
COVER PHOTO 33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
To drill a hole through a steel 
plate with a single flash of 
light, as this laser is doing, is 
already an impressiva feat. But 34 FROM TH E UN ESCO N EWSROOM 
the special qualities of laser 
light open the way to far more 
striking possibilities in com- 
munications, radar, surgery and 
many other fields. (See p. 15). 
Laboratoire Central de Télécom- 
munications, Paris - A, Papillon. 
(M.C. 64.1, 188 A) 
Published monthly by Dr stg nr Te . , . i - glish, . nh, Rusnian, Gernian, 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Arabic, Japanese, and italian, In the United Kingdom itn distributed by H.M, 
Organization Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S. E, I 
Editorial Offices . Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
: in-Chi of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor, Signed articles re- 
Editor-in-Chief printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
Sandy Koffler unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
. articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
Assistant Editor the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
n a 
Associate Editors The Uneaco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo’ Despouey Annual subscription rates : 10/-stg. ; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) French Francs or equivalent. Single copies |/-stg. 30 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) cents ; 0.70 F. 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) Sales & Distribution Offices 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, 
Layout & Design ] 
Robert Jacquemin All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief,

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

A special Unesco report 
TODAY'S TRENDS 
IN WORLD 
COMMUNICATIONS 
VERY day, some 300 million copies of daily 
newspapers, 400 million radio receivers and 
130 million television sets bring news and information to 
the people of the world. Over 212,000 fixed cinemas and 
many thousands of mobile units provide them with 
entertainment and information. 
These facts emerge from a 380-page report, World 
Communications (1), just published by Unesco, which 
glves the latest information on press, radio, film and 
television facilities throughout the globe. It also 
highlights trends in these media during the past decade. 
Slgnificantly, all the mass media, except the daily press, 
expanded more rapidly during this period than world 
population, which increased by 26 per cent. The world’s 
total of radio receivers advanced by 60 per cent; the 
number of fixed cinemas doubled and the total of TV 
(1) Published In Parls 1964; price 47/stg., $9.50, 33 F. (cloth bound); 
also published In the U.S.A. as a co-editlon with the Unesco Publl- 
cations Center, New York. 
  
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
sets tripled. Daily newspaper circulation rose by no more 
than 20 per cent. 
Many gains in press, radio and film were scored in the 
developing countries. Television, almost unknown in 
1953 in Africa, Asia and Latin America, has spread 
swiftly to all parts of the world. Nevertheless, the 
cinema has maintained a leading role in the world of 
entertainment, its weekly total of spectators equalling 
one-eighth of the world’s population. 
There has been a world-wide growth in the news agency 
field. As many as 155 agencies are now operating in 
80 countries, compared to 96 agencies in 54 countries a 
decade ago. 
Another striking trend has been the growing use of the 
mass media for education in both developed and 
developing countries (see article page 12). 
World Communications emphasizes, however, that the 
information media are very unequally shared between 
nations and points out that some 70 per cent of the

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

Mad a 
world’s peoples, living in over 100 countries of Africa, 
Asia and Latin America, still lack adequate communication 
facilitles: in terms of dally newspapers there should be 
at least 10 copies for every 100 people. 
Europeans buy 38 per cent of ‘world dally papers, and 
North Americans 23 per cent, while Africans, Aslans and 
South Americans together buy only 26 per cent. In the 
United Kingdom there are 51 coples of daily papers for 
every 100 people—the world’s highest level—compared to 
only one paper for every hundred Africans or Indians. 
In most countries throughout the world, daily news- 
papers have increased in circulation since 1950. Some of 
the larger countries have registered significant advances. 
The general Interest daily press of the United States, 
with a total of 59 million copies, claims a rise of four 
million since 1954. In the same period, dally circulation 
has expanded by five million copies in Japan and nine 
milllon in the U.S.S.R. to reach a level of 39 million in 
each country. 
 
tt 
a - 
Rl SNC SEEN " wile nel wu | 
Unesco’s latest global report on press, radio, films and TV shows that though information media are outpacing population 
growth, they are still very unequally shared, 70%, of the world lacking adequate facilities. Europeans, for example, buy 
38% of world daily papers and North Americans 23%, while Africans, Asians and South Americans together only buy 264%. 
Above, study in intent readership offered by youngsters around a street-corner magazine vendor's pitch in Lima, Peru. 
- flat Alfa 
It seems clear that newspaper publishing now stands 
on the verge of the most important technical revolution 
in its 400-year history. 
In the field of printing itself, electronics and automation 
have solved many problems in production control, espe- 
cially on high-speed rotary presses, as well as in actual 
production. This Is a feat which few believed possible 
as little as 15 years ago. 
There has been a vast Improvement in rotary offset 
printing, due largely to the use of photocomposition, 
better Inking, faster etching methods, the electronic 
engraving of plates and electronic control of registers. 
Indeed, the days of conventional printing in raised type, 
used since the time of Gutenberg and Caxton, appear to 
be numbered. Its place will probably be taken by various 
forms of photocomposition or filmsetting, that is, of 
printing plates prepared from photograph negatives, 
Including both text and illustrations in the same process, 5 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

    
WORLD COMMUNICATIONS (Cont'd) 
Unesco-Paul Almasy. Paris 
From carrier pigeons to satellites 
with a great gain in speed, versatility and economy. 
A major result of these advances is that the need for 
skilled technicians will be minimized. 
Within a decade or two, It seems, only the mass 
circulation newspapers and magazines will be printed as 
they are today, though they will doubtless be able to 
convert to the new processes eventually. The fact that, 
for the time being, these techniques are particularly 
sulted to small circulation dailles, to weeklies and other 
periodicals Is of special interest to the developing 
countries. 
Newspaper publishing has also benefited from the 
application of new telecommunication techniques, In 
association with news agency development. These 
advances have been made more particularly In the 
developed countries. In Japan, newspaper and news 
agency interests undertook post-war research on the 
facsimile transmission of ideographs, as well as on 
Monotype and Teletypesetting, as a means of raising 
efficiency and conserving manpower. This culminated, 
in 1959, in the simultaneous publication of newspaper 
editions In Japanese cities hundreds of miles apart. 
In 1962 a New York daily went a stage further with the 
simultaneous publication, by high-speed facsimile and 
Teletypesetting, of editions in Paris and Los Angeles, the 
rate of transmitting material being 16 times the normal 
speed by cable and radio. Later in the year, the same 
newspaper transmitted several articles, by photo- 
facsimile, to its Paris edition through the first commu- 
nications satellite, as well as seven pages to and from the 
satelllte. 
These developments, it was foreseen, pointed the way to 
the simultaneous production of newspaper editions 
throughout whole regions and, ultimately, of “global 
A 
La
e.
 
F
o
 
I
R
L
 
A
E
N
 
A

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

FIRST TRANSATLANTIC 
LIVE TV VIA TELSTAR 
Television experienced a spectacular development in 1962 when 
the first live programmes were relayed across the Atlantic by 
means of Telstar, a communications satellite. Eighteen countries 
in the Eurovision network participated with the United States 
in these exchanges, viewed by an audience of over 200 million 
in Europe and North America. The first image across the Atlantic 
was a shot of engineers at the Bell Telephone Laboratories in the 
- United States (below). This transmission, relayed by Telstar 
as it circled the globe, was picked up by the giant horn antenna 
at Pleumeur-Bodou in western France (left) and by a British 
station at Goonhilly Downs, from where, a few days later, the 
first transmissions of colour TV via satellite went to the U.S.A. 
  
C.N.E.T,, Paris 
newspapers.” The subscriber would dial a telephone 
number and the front page of his “paper” would appear 
on his television screen, remaining there until he pressed 
a button, when it would be replaced by the second page 
and so on. He would, In fact, be able to view not only 
his local newspaper but papers in all countries In this 
way. 
Recent advances in telecommunications culminated on 
July 19, 1962 in one of the most dramatic events in news 
agency history. On that day the world news agencles 
entered the space age by using the first communications 
satellite to relay dispatches by telephone and teleprinter 
between continents. London and New York newspapers 
also exchanged dispatches through the satellite. 
It was foreseen that three “stationary” satellites, each 
orbiting over the equator at a speed synchronized with 
the rotation of the earth, could provide any type of 
telecommunication service over the whole globe. Pro- 
fessional organizations of the press, such as the Inter- 
national Federation of Newspaper Publishers and the 
Commonwealth Press Union, prepared for further develop- 
ments in the expectation that facilities of this kind would 
be available to press and other users by 1968. 
Ironically, the conditions of modern life have at times 
forced a return to “new-old” techniques of com- 
munications, A somewhat fanciful example Is reported 
by Reuters, which transmitted news dispatches by carrier 
pigeon In 1850 and by communications satellite In the 
historic experiment of 1962. The agency states that 
pigeons have come back as carriers of newsfilm Items 
across metropolitan areas. Pigeons are not worried, as 
dispatch riders can be, by traffic jams. 
Many of the problems encountered in the fleld of the 
press do not arise, or are less acute, in radio broadcasting, 
and the developing countries in particular are giving 
priority to this medlum In expanding thelr Information 
facllitles. Since 1950, the number of radio receivers for 
every 100 people in all regions has increased much more 
rapidly than the ratio of dally newspapers. Only two 
regions, Africa and Asia, now average fewer than five sets 
per 100 people, suggested as a minimum of adequacy by 
Unesco. The Americas, Europe, Oceania and the USS.R. 
exceeded this level by from 10 to 73 scts on a regional 
basis. 
To has been a parallel increase In the 
number of transmitters. Africa had 140 
transmitters In 1950 and 370 in 1962. The number In 
Europe rose during the same period from 566 to 2,700. 
The total more than doubled in South America, almost 
tripled In Asia and almost quadrupled in the USSR. 
It is evident that, despite the world-wide challenge of 
television, radio has a long and active future before It as 
a medium unsurpassed in speed, range and economy. 
Like the press, radio in the developed regions is a 
well-established medium. But, again like the press, it 
has experienced many technical changes since 1950 and 
Is on the threshold of new developments. 
In recent years the transistor has brought “pocket 
radlo” within the reach of millions of people in all 
reglons. But the transistor recelver is no longer a 
toy—an object of Interest only because of its diminutive 
size. It Is now a high-grade instrument capable of giving 
both the volume and quality of sound usually assoclated 
only with sets having four or five valves and working 
from power malns. 
  
|] the trend towards “minlaturl- 
zation”, spurred by the revolution In elee- 
tronics and the development of space satellites, Is making 
for still smaller receivers and other radio cquipment, 
Even now, the transistor Is being superseded by mlicro- 
components such as the tunnel dlode, which is alrcady 
In mass production. Within a decade, it is expected by 
some technical observers, the wrist-watch radio, powered 
by the heat of the listener's body, will be gencrally 
available. Such developments are giving further stimulus 
to the mass production of low-cost recelvers for use in 
the developing countries. These developments are 
moving so swiftly as to anticipate the day when there 
will be one recelver for every family In the world—a 
target which would at present require over 400 million 
additional sets. 
The past decade has witnessed the Increasing adoption 
of frequency modulation (FM) broadcasting, which 
provides the listener with a high quality signal relatively 
free from interference and, moreover, employs hitherto 
unused very high frequencies in the overcrowded radio 
spectrum. The experience of a number of developing 
countrles, particularly in Europe and North America, has 
shown that FM broadcasting for local services is capable 
of expansion in a way which would relieve much of the 
present burden in the low, medium- and high-frequency 
bands and thus Improve conditions for national, regional 
and International transmissions. The introduction of FM 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

WORLD COMMUNICATIONS (Contd) 
120 million more TV 
sets in ten years 
broadcasting Is therefore of special interest to the 
developing countries, and particularly to tropical areas 
affected by solar interference. 
Meanwhile, the high quality of FM transmlssions has 
stimulated a whole Industry catering to the radio-de- 
veloped taste for high fidelity musical recordings. 
Coupled with thls has been the development of stereo- 
phonic broadcasting which, by using two matched sources 
of sound, gives breadth, depth and movement to musical, 
theatrical and other programmes. 
FIER only 27 years since its initlal direction to 
a mass audience, television has established 
itself as a potent medium of information, education and 
entertainment throughout the world. It was in 1936 that 
the British Broadcasting Corporation inaugurated the 
first public telecasts. The second world war halted tele- 
vision development. But, with the coming of peace, the 
developed countries began to turn their eiectronics 
industries to peaceful purposes. 
Television is now expanding with fantastic speed. In 
1950, Africa, South America, Asia and Oceania had no 
television receivers at all. Today, countries in every 
  
A mountain of pulp 
wood framing the 
Parliament buildings 
in Ottawa symbolizes 
Canada’s role as the 
world’s largest producer 
of newsprint. Publishers 
in the U,S.A. and Cana- 
da consume more than 
half the world’s news- 
print production. De- 
mand for newsprint and 
other printing paper in 
many of the developing 
countries is slowly in- 
creasing, but still reflects 
the serious shortage 
of newspapers and 
other kinds of printed 
information in most 
parts of the world. 
© Malak Studio, Ottawa 
AN 
Deberny et Peignot, Paris - J. Pellerin 
  
A NEW ERA 
IN PRINTING 
A technical revolution is taking place 
in printing today through the increas- 
ed adoption of photocomposition or 
filmsetting in place of the use of 
raised type. Left, a glass type-wheel 
in the photographic unit of an 
ultra-modern electronic photosetting 
machine. This rotating disc, only 
8 inches in diameter replaces three 
tons of normal lead matrixes. It has 
1,440 characters. In operation a stro- 
boscopic light passes through the se- 
lected character on the disc into an 
optical system which projects the light 
in the form of a type character on to 
sensitized film. As the light lasts only 
a few microseconds, the image is 
“stopped” on the film without halting 
the rotating disc. The machine is ope- 
rated from a main keyboard similar to 
that of a standard typewriter with 
additional keys for various type com- 
posing functions. A second keyboard 
controls sizes and kinds of type.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

  
  
region maintain services. The world total of sets has 
risen from a mere 11 million in 1950 to 130 million In 1963. 
The number of transmitters has also Increased 
spectacularly during the same period, from 130 to 2,380. 
For the first time more than half the world total of TV 
recelvers is to be found outside the U.S.A. Europe has 
registered the greatest increase of all reglons—from 
15 to 1,160. 
Jimena programme co-operation has 
become a regular feature of television develop- 
ment. Most exchanges so far have been made through 
telerecordings. The direct transmission of programmes 
across frontiers has progressed rather slowly because of 
the need for link stations, coaxlal cables and converters 
to permit transmissions on one line definition (number 
of lines and band-widths) to be received by another 
system. 
However, 18 Western European countries now exchange 
programmes through Eurovision, sponsored by the 
European Broadcasting Union, and with the United 
States. Six Eastern European countries and the USSR. 
exchange programmes through Intervision, and also 
co-operate with Eurovision in programme exchanges. 
Nordvislon links the Scandinavian countries. Bilateral 
exchanges make avallable a wide range of other 
programmes. 
Many Asian, African and South American countries are 
unable to meet production costs for independent pro- 
grammes, or even the costs of betier quality imported 
programmes. As a result, their television screens often 
reflect the less Impressive cultural standards of “popular” 
commercial television In the developed countries. Never- 
theless, some of the developing countries are boldly 
Imaginative in thelr use of television facilities for 
education. 
In the fleld of reception, both small and “full size” 
transistor sets, which work by battery or off the mains 
and can thus be used indoors or outdoors, have been 
developed. 1t is expected that, as In the case of radlo, 
the transistor will before long be superseded by even 
smaller components which will make possible the 
production of diminutlve “handbag” sets, operating in 
colour. Also foreseen is the manufacture of home sets 
with the picture tube separated from the receiver. These 
sets would be built Into a wall for better viewing. 
In the fleld of transmission, colour television is being 
actively developed in the United States, Japan, the 
U.S.S.R. and a number of European countries. Advances 
are also being made In stercophonic television. Other 
innovations are the use of video tape—the recording of 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

WORLD COMMUNICATIONS (Cont'd) 
Film shows from outer space 
both sound and picture on magnetic tape—rather than 
slowly-processed film; more “miniaturization” of cameras 
and, hence, more “live” coverage of news; and the de- 
velopment of the transistorized tape recorder, by which 
a picture can be seen as soon as it is recorded and thus 
can be edited on the spot. 
A new dimension has meanwhile been glven to an 
old medium through “theatre-vision”, described as “a 
marriage between the living theatre and closed-circuit 
television”. By this means audiences in out-of-town 
theatres can see plays or operas transmitted hundreds of 
miles by telephone from a city theatre and projected on 
large cinema screens, 
T= most spectacular development in television 
history was the relaying, in 1962, of live pro- 
grammes across the Atlantic by means of the first com- 
munications satellite. Eighteen countries in the Euro- 
vislon network participated with the United States in 
these exchanges, viewed by an audience of over 200 mil- 
lion in Europe and North America. 
During the first four months of the satellite's operation, 
47 intercontinental transmissions were conducted, in- 
cluding five in colour of remarkable clarity. This 
inspiring co-operative effort pointed to the coming of 
  
  
  
world television, with all the diversity and enrichment it 
will hold for the viewer of the future. 
Apart from a few countries, mainly in North America 
and Europe, where television has developed most exten- 
sively, the cinema has continued to expand both in terms 
of film production and exhibition and has retained its 
pre-eminent role in the world of entertainment. Since 
1954, an increasing number of countries have entered 
into film production and, at the same time, the total 
number of fixed cinemas has doubled—from over 100,000 
to 212,000. Their present weekly audience of 376 million 
equals one-eighth of the ‘world population. 
The principal gains were scored by the U.S.S.R. and 
the developing countries, where mobile units further 
expanded the cinema audience. Throughout most of 
Africa and Asia, however, the number of cinema seats 
still fell below the level of two per 100 persons, suggested 
as a minimum of adequacy by UNEsco. 
For several decades the United States, which still 
maintains a predominant role in world markets, was the 
largest producer of feature films. Since the mid-1950's, 
however, American output has trailed behind that of 
Japan, India and Hong Kong. In 1960, there were 26 
countries which produced 20 or more features annually. 
They included 12 in Europe, 8 in Asia, 2 in North America, 
2 in South America and 1 in Africa, plus the U.S.S.R. 
In the production field, there have been significant 
                
    
    
  
    
  
  

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 61384: Today's trends in world communications; a special UNESCO report

    
  
  
 
            
 
 
    
 
  
  
  
 
Forest of TV aerials 
sprouting on the urban 
skyline in Great Britain 
(left) reflects the fan- 
tastic expansion of tele- 
vision since 1950—the 
world total of receivers 
has risen from 11 million 
to 130 million. Apart 
from a few countries, 
mainly in North America 
and Europe, where TV 
has developed most ex- 
tensively, the cinema has 
also continued to expand 
both in terms of pro- 
duction and exhibition. 
Significant advances in 
the techniques of film 
production (above) 
have also been made 
and are helping the 
cinema to retain its pre- 
eminent role in the 
world of entertainment, 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
© Jan Lukas, Prague 
advances in camera design, with the accent on 70 mm. 
cameras for “wilde screen” films which put the viewer 
completely Into the environment of the picture. Of 
special Interest to amateurs, research workers and other 
speclalists has been the contrasting development of 8 mm. 
cameras with sound. Advances have also been made 
in the production of colour films for screening both In 
cinemas and on television, as well as in sterecophonic 
sound and optical systems which assure better Images 
for both of the media. 
Aone development, of particular Interest to 
tropical and semli-tropical countries, is the 
production of projectors which use the sun as thelr 
source of light and can be employed {o screen fllmstrips 
in remote, non electrified areas. 
New types of cinemas, such as “drive-ins” for motorists 
and “theatroramas,” are making a fresh appeal to 
potentlal cinemagoers and, as in the United States for 
example, are helping the industry to regain part of the 
audlence lately lost to television. Some of these units, 
located in new suburban shopping and recreation centres 
with adequate car-parking space, have been more speci- 
fically classified as “drive-to” cinemas. 
The development of closed-circuit television, which 
Inks groups of cinemas for the screening of special 
events, presages the time when the projection booth for 
hundreds of halls will be located In a single television 
station. These and other advances point the way to the 
gradual integration of the cinema with television. 
This is, in fact, already being realized in the realm of 
space technology, where narrow- and wide-angle tele- 
vision cameras are being increasingly employed in 
communications, metereological and astronomical satel- 
lites, as well as in space exploration vehicles. The screen- 
ing of film images transmitted directly to the earth 
from outer space may be expected to give further stimulus 
to what has been described as “the renalssance of the 
cinema’. 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
Above, young programme producers at work in the radio studio 
of the Tamagawa Primary School, Tokyo, Japan. Nowadays 
tape recorders, microphones, TV, films and other audio-visual 
aids are familiar classroom items in all parts of the world, giving 
new scope and interest to education. Right, children from the 
same Japanese school listen to language lessons on tape. 
  
    IN THE 
CLASSROOM 
by Anne Darnborough 
T= sights and sounds of radio, television, 
newspapers and flim are today becoming as 
familiar in classrooms around the world as blackboards 
and chalk—in some cases even more so. 
Increasingly, the dual role of the mass media in 
information and education is being recognized through- 
out the globe. The developing countries, where the 
lack of communication and educatlonal facilities Is 
greatest, realize that the new audio-visual alds can 
revolutionize the teaching of subjects as varied as 
languages, geography and science. 
World Communications a recent UNEsco report (see 
page 4) shows how these media are being used today: by 
some countrles to enrich already adequate schooling, by 
others to supplement inadequate teaching resources and 
elsewhere to bypass the barriers of illiteracy, or to combat 
it directly. 
Rural areas of less developed countries, the poorest 
in means of communication, are also generally those with 
12 the fewest schools. 
This fact underlines the crucial role of the mass media 


### 61385: New sights and sounds in the classroom

NEW SIGHTS 
AND SOUNDS   
Photos : Unesco-Tamagawa Gakuen, Tokyo 
in promoting education as well as economic and social 
advancement generally, Unsurpassed in speed, range and 
impact, the mass media offer unlimited possibilities for 
providing both technical as well as general education on 
a broad scale. 
This is why many African governments are encouraging 
the development of a rural press to reinforce their 
literacy programmes. Ghana and Nigeria, for example, 
print weeklies for country areas, mostly In vernacular 
languages. 
Radio's possibilities in educatlon are being widely 
explored. The developing countries are giving priority to 
this medium and the more developed countries are 
extending its scope. 
Almost every South American country now uses radio 
as an educational aid. Radio “schools” in Colombia 
reach 170,000 elementary school listening groups each day. 
The Peruvian government stations as well as 14 inde- 
pendent stations regularly transmit educational pro- 
grammes. Private stations in Chile are required to 
broadcast the Ministry of Education’s school and popular 
educational programmes which are compulsory listening

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 61385: New sights and sounds in the classroom

  
     
a oN 
2 
a 
for all schools. The Argentine Education Ministry uses 
the national radio system to broadcast to more than 300 
schools daily. In Central American countries, commercial 
stations must provide free time for educational broad- 
casts to schools and for public interest, cultural and new 
programmes. 
Educational programming is a major feature of Asian 
broadcasting. Two recently established “radio and TV 
universities” in mainland China have enrolled 19,000 
college students. All-India Radio has established 2,000 
radio farm forums throughout the country and broad- 
casts special programmes to some 18,500 schools. Radio 
Pakistan transmits special educational programmes for 
adults in local languages from all stations. 
Nearly all European countries broadcast to schools and 
lay varying emphasis on educational and language pro- 
grammes for the general public. Poland’s University of 
the Air enrolls some 200,000 student listeners. Denmark 
conducts an “Evening High School” and a “Sunday 
University”. The BBC’s London and Far Eastern services 
transmit 150 “English by Radio” lessons a week, in the 
world’s biggest language-teaching operation. 
In the United States there are 187 non-commercial 
educatlonal stations operated by universities and state 
and municipal authorities. 
Educational programmes are broadcast on a regional 
basis In the U.SS.R.,, and In Australia are received by 94 
per cent of schools. 
Television 1s not yet widespread in the developing 
countries but those using it give an important place to 
educational programmes. Western Nigeria, for example, 
broadcasts three hours dally for schools and finds that 
these programmes are widely viewed by the general public 
as well. Educational programmes form one-sixth of 
Kenya's service. Northern and Eastern Nigeria also 
concentrate on educational broadeasts. The Rhodesian 
service is under contract to provide school programmes 
regularly. 
In Chile, all stations are educational and. operated by 
universities. Venezuela's one government-owned station 
broadcasts educational and cultural programmes for about 
six hours a day. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 61385: New sights and sounds in the classroom

NEW SIGHTS & SOUNDS (Cont'd) 
TV lessons in 24,000 Japanese schools 
All-India Radio broadcasts courses In science, English 
and Hindi for secondary schools from its experimental 
transmitter. Japan, In contrast to most Aslan countries, 
has a highly-developed TV network and its educational 
programme, which covers 42 per cent of the population 
{s received In 24,000 schools. In Oceania, an extensive 
educational service is being organized for American 
Samoa. 
In the United States, more than 60 educational stations 
are run non-commercially by schools, universities and 
toundations. TV instruction beamed from transmitters 
in high-flying aircraft and covering 78,000 square miles 
has been developed, indicating what communication 
satellites might do on a much larger scale for educational 
broadcasting. 
Television for schools is recelving increasing attention 
in Europe and has been particularly well-developed In 
Italy and the United Kingdom. In the US.S.R., a high 
percentage of viewing time is devoted to educatlonal 
programmes for children and adults. The “People’s 
University” programme offers courses In science and 
technology, arts and English. 
D ocuMENTARY and educational films have spread 
throughout the world and are being produced 
in Increasing numbers by feature film producers, govern- 
ment agencies, Industrial concerns, foundations and 
various non-profit organizations of a cultural, sclentific 
or educational character. In many countries, the film has 
become an accepted part of the school curriculum, some- 
times being used to enrich an already adequate course of 
Instruction, sometimes to supplement Instruction where 
there is a deficiency of textbooks, equipment and qualified 
teaching staff. With the aid of mobile units, educational 
and documentary fllms reach audiences previously un- 
influenced by the cinema. Throughout Africa, Asia and 
Latin America, these units find thelr way to remote 
villages whose inhabitants can often neither read nor 
write. Particular use of these mobile units is belng made 
in Africa. 
In South America the employment of films for educa- 
tion in rural areas is malnly in the planning stages. In 
Asia, the cinema is regarded mainly as an entertainment 
medium. However, Japan, India and Israel all have 
outstanding information film services. 
While many European countries use the film for 
educational purposes to a limited extent, only a few 
countries, such as Finland and the Netherlands have made 
it an integral part of school curricula. 
Canada has one of the world’s most highly-developed 
educational film services and widespread use is also made 
of such films In the United States. Cuba, Australia and 
New Zealand, among other countries, maintain units for 
the production of short information: films. 
The U.S.S.R. produces several hundred Instructional 
films yearly and 23,400 mobile units screen them 
throughout the region. 
In a foreword, World Communications draws attention 
to the programme UNEsco has undertaken at the request 
of the United Nations to help the developing countries 
bulld up their mass media. The United Nations 
emphasized that the information media have an im- 
portant pdrt to play in education and in economic and 
social progress generally and that new communication 
techniques offer special opportunities for spreading 
education swiftly. 
A TV history lesson for Italian schools makes a greater impact because of its 
authentic classroom atmosphere. Cameras switch from teacher and blackboard to 
a live class in the studio. These lessons are part of a three-year course of voca- 
tional education for boys and girls who have completed their primary schooling. 
Unesco-Eric Schwab 
  
  
  
  
 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

Bell Telephone Laboratories, New York 
LLION MESSAGES  
Lasers produce a visible light beam one million times more intense than the light of the same colour emitted 
by the sun and offer great promise in many fields. Here a scientist checks a helium-ncon gascous laser. 
0 15 modern technology, all aspects of our 
highly technical civilization, may be poised for 
a forward surge that is unimaginable ln scope. All this 
Is based on the re-stimulation of an old science, the 
science of light, by a new device, the “optical maser” or 
“laser”. So new is this device that is first prototype 
was put into operation less than three years ago. 
A laser does this: it produces a narrow beam of light, 
which is “monochromatic” —of a single, sharply defined 
colour or wave length—and “coherent”, that is, with all 
the light waves marching in regular order, like the waves 
of a smoothly running sea. Light with these characteris- 
tics has never before been available to man. Being avall- 
able now, 1t opens the way to major developments in com- 
munications, radar, surgery, power transmission without 
lines, and so on. All the possibilities have not even yet 
been imagined. 
These possibilities are particularly amazing in the field 
of communications. A single laser-produced light beam 
has inherently the ability to carry all the information 
transmitted by all the television stations, radio stations, 
teletypewriters, and telephone lines in the world, op- 
erating at the same time. Developing the technical means 
to use this amazing message-carrying ability Is a major 
problem facing scientists; but the first steps have already 
been taken. Television pletures and voice messages have 
already been experimentally carried on light beams. 
Light for communications will come just in time. The 
entire radio spectrum is already vastly crowded. More- 
over, the demand for additional communlcations channels 
will multiply many times during the next decades. 
Lasers were theoretically predicted in the United States 
in late 1958 by Dr. C. H. Townes of Columbia University 
and Dr. A. L. Schalow of Bell Telephone Laboratories. The 
first operating laser, bullt in 1960 by Dr. T.l. Maiman of 
the Hughes Alrcraft Corporation, was followed rapidly 
by others. 
The essentials of a laser are simplicity itself. The first 
and best-known one, the ruby laser, consists of a synthetic 
ruby rod. less than a centimetre in dlameter and 10-40 em. 
long. This is surrounded by a tubular lamp, wound around 
it in the form of a spiral. Lighting up the tubular lamp 
causes a narrow pencil of bright red light to emerge from 
one end of the rod. This Is the laser beam and it Is a 
million times more intense than light of the same colour 
emitted by the sun. It is visible to the naked eye 40 kilo- 
metres away. 
But what happens to the atoms ‘within the ruby rod is 
even more significant. In the planetary model of the atom 
electrons revolve in orbits around the atom's central 
nucleus. These orbiting electrons can shift to higher- 
CONT'D ON PAGE 17 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

Right, sparks fly as red 
light from a ruby laser 
drills a tiny hole clean 
through a steel plate 3 mm. 
or 1/8 inch thick. (Enlarg- 
ed detail is shown on 
front cover). Laser beams 
have also been used to 
drill holes in diamonds 
which are the hardest 
substances known to 
man. Left, a vital part of 
an early model of the 
helium-neon gaseous la- 
ser. Laser beams may one 
day be used to carry vast 
numbers of simultaneous 
telephone conversations 
and also TV programmes.     
Photos : Bell Telephone Laboratories. New York 
  
Above, a cutaway drawing 
shows the “heart” of a ruby 
laser—a synthetic ruby rod 
surrounded by a spiral lamp. 
Light from the lamp stimu- 
lates the atoms of the ruby. 
These store up light and 
"then suddenly release it, pro- 
ducing “coherent” light, that 
is, of waves that are all 
synchronized and travel in al- 
most perfectly parallel beams. 
Left, a newly-made synthetic crys- 
tal being withdrawn from an elec- 
tric furnace, It will be used in the 
place of a synthetic ruby in laser 
experiments. Most laser light is 
deep red, but scientists hope to 
produce other colours such as 
blue-green which could be used, 
for example, to throw probing 
beams into the sea’s depths. Ex- 
periments are now being carried 
out with a laser using a fluor- 
escent liquid instead of a ruby.   
Laboratoire Central de Téldcommunications. Paris = A. Papillon

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

LASERS (Cont'd} 
  
Laboratoire Central de Télécommunications, Paris = A. Papillon 
A revolution in communications 
energy orbits, farther away from the nucleus, by absorbing 
light. They can also shift back again to their original 
orbits, in this case emitting light. The light they absorb 
and the light they emit are both of a very specific colour, 
though not the same colour. 
The ruby is composed of aluminium oxide (alumina) plus 
a very small sprinkling of chromium atoms. It is the elec- 
trons in the chromium atoms which do the shifting of 
orbits. From the light of mixed colours produced by the 
tubular lamp they absorb green light and go to hlgher- 
energy orbits. Some of these higher energy electrons now 
spontaneously drop back to their original orbits, emitting 
red light. This released red light stimulates other elec- 
trons, which are still in their higher-energy orbits, to fall 
back to their original orbits, also emitting red light. 
It is this stimulated release of light which gives the 
laser its name, made up of the first letters of the words 
“light amplification by stimulated emission of radlation.” 
The laser-produced light has the very important charac- 
teristic of “coherence.” This means that the waves com- 
posing the light flow in completely regular sequence, like 
smoothly running ocean waves. Radio waves have this 
coherence. Such regular waves can serve as information 
or message carriers. Thus, at the transmitter, the com- 
plete regularity of the carrier waves can be varied electro- 
nically, the variations representing a television picture 
or a voice. At the receiver, the variations from complete 
regularity of the carrier waves are noted. These varia- 
tions are then transformed back into reproductions of the 
original voice or picture. 
Coherent light has inherently such great message- 
carrying capacity that theoretically millions of messages, 
such as television pictures or telephone conversations, 
could be imposed on it, rather than merely one message. 
This follows from a simple rule: the information capacity 
of a carrier Is proportional to its vibration frequency. 
Since the frequency of light is something like a hundred 
million times as great as that of radio waves, its capacity 
for carrying information is correspondingly great. 
A laser beam, already extremely narrow, can be con- 
verged even more by lenses. In 1962, scientists of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Raytheon 
Corporation sent a beam through a telescope—so that it 
emerged through the small end—to the moon. Here it 
made a spot of light only 3 km. in diameter. Laser beams 
have also been converged to a fine, hot point by micro- 
scope lenses, making an ultra-fine scalpel to painlessly 
remove a tumour from the retina of a human eye. 
The original ruby laser emits light in very brief pulses. 
For communications purposes a continuous beam will be 
required. Such laser beams have already been produced 
from gases and from various solid materials. These pro- 
duce light of various frequencles, in the infra-red as well 
as in the visible range. 
Opening one’s imagination to to-morrow can suggest 
remarkable things from laser light. For example, imagine 
a system of communications satellites orbiting the earth. 
Properly distributed, just a few such satellites could relay 
all the messages—radlo, television, cable, telephone— 
passing between all the continents of the globe, trans- 
mitted on very few light beams. 
This fine plcture has flaws. For one thing, the extreme 
narrowness of the light beams creates problems in alming 
at and hitting a small target. However, clectronle com- 
puters will doubtless be able to handle this problem. 
More difficult to handle is the Interference of clouds, 
mist, fog, and smoke. This difficulty may be met to some 
degree by using infra-red light, which penetrates clouds 
and mist more readily than visible light; also, by locating 
light-projecting stations in arid regions, with good year- 
round weather conditions; and by having aux!llary stand- 
by stations for times when the main stations are closed 
due to bad weather. 
Another possibility Is to send the laser beams along the 
ground through wave guldes, which are simply pipes 
enclosing a vacuum. Repeater statlons located on the 
wave guldes at Intervals, say, every 100 km., will amplify 
the partially faded light beam and re-transmit it to the 
next repeater station. 
It is easy to imagine such wave guides running across 
continents, with a single beam In the guide serving as the 
equivalent to hundreds of thousands of telephone cables. 
Laser light may be used for communications with colo- 
nies on the moon or on planets or with men in spacceraft 
—or between spacecraft. But the problems of aiming and 
getting sufficient power output from a laser must be met, 
for adequately powerful continuous-beam lasers do not yet 
exist. It may also be noted that the tightness of the laser 
beam has certain other characteristics. It will be impossi- 
ble, for example, either to intercept messages or to jam 
transmissions. 
BRUNO FRIEDMAN is an American science writer. A former 
research chemist, he is now editor of “Technological Digest”, 
published by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, in Paris, 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

These remarkable pictures show how light 
from a ruby laser helps scientists at France's 
study body cells. Right, the equipment they 
use: a closed-circuit TV installation, a ruby 
laser and a powerful microscope. Photos 
below show the amazing precision they 
obtain from the “coherent” light which can 
(1) Red blood Scorpusoles placed’ under the ” 
microscope are photographed by the TV 
camera and their image is relayed to the 
’ sen shown on right. A spot of normal light 
is used to “zero in” on one of the corpuscles. 
(2) A flash of laser light lasting about one- 
thousandth of a second then scores a bulls- 
~ eye on the corpuscle. (3) As soon as it is hit 
the corpuscie changes colour and begins to 
~ dissolve. EYE patch is the point of impact 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

   
    
   
"In a workshop in El Khalil (formerly Hebron), a master crafts- 
LE CE ER CTU CR LR GER GI CLR I EEE LR TERE RTT] 4 
brick furnace. Today as in past centuries, this city of western 
 
“Jordan is famed throughout the Middle East for its glass ; 
[IC MACOS R EL TIL TERT TC ERT EL RVR EA ERE EF 
“men make a jewellery of translucent glass with a predo- 
~ minantly blue-green tint. Ancient Hebron ranks among 
those of the world’s oldest cities that are still inhabited. 
ai ANE w= 2 HEE = oa Th Ral SM Ls i em 
 
Vet 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Craftsmen of the 
Phenician coast 
= HR eel Feast rie fell 


### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

3,000 YEARS 
3 
GLASS-MAKING 
or a id ) pe 
discovered vase 
HE period covered in this article extenas rrom 
the first recorded references to glass-making 
on the Pheenician coast in the 15th century B.C., until the 
ancient industry was brought to an end in the 15th cen- 
tury A.D. by the Mongol invasion which destroyed the 
ancient patterns of life all over the Middle East. 
No matter to what sources one turns for enlightenment 
on the origins of glass-making, whether legend, mythology 
or history, one is invariably brought back to the Pheeni- 
cian coast. Archaeology too corroborates that the area, 
which in ancient times extended south of the bay of 
Acco (Acre) and north of Byblus, was active in the manu- 
facture of glass from a very early period. 
This is not surprising, when one realises that the ori- 
gins of glass-making are tied up with the beginnings of 
metallurgy. From 2,600 B.C. onwards, the narrow strip of 
Canaan known as Pheenicla was acting as a long bridge 
between Mesopotamia, the cradle of technology, and 
Egypt, the ever-open market for goods, ideas and crafts- 
men. It was no one-way traffic. The glass industry, like 
that of the bronze, ivory, dyeing and textile Industries, 
was subject to a constant interplay of influences and 
stimull between Mesopotamia and Egypt, as sometimes 
one country was in the ascendency, and sometimes the 
other. 
It may never be possible to ascertain whether or not the 
craft of glass-making actually originated at the mouth of 
the Belus. Nevertheless, It remains a fact that the oldest 
traditions of glass-making that have come down to us 
are centered on this mysterious little river, today called 
the Naaman, in Western Galilee. 
The classic association of the River Belus with glass- 
making Is to be found in Pliny's Natural History. Pliny 
has been so maligned—and so misquoted—that it is 
worth giving his perfectly reasonable statement in full. 
It has been taken from the 1962 translation by Eichholtz 
In the Loeb Classical Library, Book XXXVI.190. 
“That part of Syria which is known as Phenicia and 
borders on Judea contains a swamp called Candebia on 
the lower slopes of Mt. Carmel. This is believed to be the 
source of the River Belus, which, after traversing a dis- 
tance of five milles, flows into the sea near the colony of 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

Soe I eud ' — LN 
vi , . os . 
IOP Sp 5 Te 
BY he eat 
< a Clini i » » 
Ve -— g ¢ v 
oF : E .s J 
2 
* 
§ 


### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

GLASS-MAKING (Cont'd) 
 
The “molten stone’ of the Pharaohs 
Ptolemais (Acco). Its current is sluggish and lts waters 
are unwholesome to drink, although they are regarded as 
holy for ritual purposes. 
“The river is muddy and flows in a deep channel, reveal- 
ing its sands only when the tide ebbs. For it is not until 
they have been tossed by the waves and cleansed of 
impurities that they glisten. Moreover, it is only at that 
moment, when they are thought to be affected by the 
sharp, astringent properties of the brine, that they become 
fit for use. The beach stretches for not more than half a 
mile, and yet for many centuries the production of glass 
depended on this area alone. 
“There Is a story that once a ship belonging to some 
traders in natural soda (natron, an Egyptian product) put 
In here and that they scattered along the shore to pre- 
pare a meal. Since, however, no stones suitable for 
Grape-cluster glass ves- 
sel from Sidon, dating 
from the 3rd Cent. A.D. 
© Frederic Neuburg   
supporting their cauldrons were forthcoming, they rested 
them on lumps of soda from their cargo. When these 
became heated and were completely mingled with the 
sand on the beach a strange translucent liquid flowed 
forth in streams; and this, it is said, was the origin of 
glass.” 
Pliny takes no responsibility for the story about the 
origins of glass-making. He is merely repeating what was 
“common knowledge” among the Greeks for centuries 
before his time. This story may well be one of the many 
travellers’ tales circulated after the Greeks began their 
contact with Egypt in the 7th century B.C. For it is from 
Egyptian sources that we have the first documented in- 
dications of glass-making on the Pheeniclan coast. 
They were not writing about glass as such, unfortun- 
ately. Glass merely makes its appearance incidentally, as 
part of the vast booty which the Pharaohs of the 18th 
Dynasty began to bring back from Syria and the Lebanon 
after Tuthmoses III's dramatic capture of Megiddo in the 
15th century B.C. The lists of items, and their places of 
origin were engraved on the walls of the temple of Amen- 
Re, at Karnak, where Tuthmoses deposited his booty. 
From the Phcenician coast came “green stone, every 
costly stone of the country, and many stones of ‘sparkle’...” 
The latter is a mysterious hieroglyph referring to a costly 
stone, and having a fire determinative. In other words, 
a “molten stone.” 
This sparkling molten stone must have been a translu- 
cent glass, and of a type peculiar to Pheenicia, for we 
have other references to glass as it was known in those 
days; namely, the blocks and pieces of “artificial lapis 
lazuli from Babylon” which the chiefs of Assur and Shi- 
nar sent to Tuthmoses III as Indications of their good will. 
The earliest vessels of glass known to us, the beautifully-

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

TREASURES 
IN THE SAND 
The oldest traditions of 
glass-making seem to be 
linked with the banks of 
the Belus, a little river today 
called the Naaman, in wes- 
tern Galilee. Pliny, the Ro- 
man naturalist, relates that 
some merchants encamped 
on the sands of the River 
Belus placed their cooking 
pots on blocks of soda and 
that the heat from the fires 
fused the sand and the soda 
to form glass. What is 
known for a fact is that 
the ancient Syrian glass- 
makers found the sands in 
this area ideal for their 
work. Left, the former 
course of the Belus before 
it was diverted 20 years 
ago during the draining of 
nearby swamps, the home 
of water buffaloes (right). 
Photos © Keren Hayesod, 
Jerusalem 
Mae Sag ol $7 % J . OARS fre ais ii adn LER 
Teri; 
. 
1 
& x ; 
    
BA 
4 
» woh uh 
a a : 
TE Coil 
Tom 
M4 Tw   
 
coloured little cosmetic jars of Egypt, only begin to make 
their appearance after Tuthmoses III conquered Pheenicia 
and Syria. They reached their highest development and 
eventually declined within the 200 years that the Egyp- 
tians used the Pheenician harbours as bases from which 
to keep the annual tributes of precious commodities, arti- 
ficers and slaves flowing from the merchant princes of 
Canaan. 
Both to honour the peoples of the conquered territory, 
as well as to proviae a record of their own magnificence, 
Roman vase in green- 
tinted transparent glass. 
Haaretz-Museum, Tel-Aviv 
  
the Pharaohs set up shrines to thelr own gods and monu- 
ments to themselves alongside the local sacred sites. The 
closeness of Egyptian contacts with the River Belus is 
seen In the Memnon monument, a statue in honour of 
Amenophis ITI, which was still standing at the mouth of 
the Belus in the 1st Century A.D., when Josephus men- 
tions it. Perhaps it resembled the two colossal statues of 
this self-aggrandizing monarch which can be seen today 
on the plain West of Thebes. 
The Egyptians did further honour to the sacred, glass- 
sand-producing river of the Canaanites by giving it the 
same name as their holy Nile. “Sehor” they called it, 
  
which means the water of Horus. 
Livnat which we find cited in the Bible as the border 
between the tribes of Asher and Zebulun. 
This is the Shlhor 
Glass to the anclents had a deeply mystic significance. 
The glass paste, therefore, the objects made from them. 
and the beautiful but limited range of colours introduced 
into them, were so highly valued because of thelr reli- 
glous significance. The place where the item was made, 
or even where the sand came from, would be part of its 
mystic value. It Is not necessary to go into the Osliris- 
Adonis cults which were associated with the River Belus 
to understand how the processes of glass-making would 
be taken to symbolize the soul's transformation into beau- 
tiful, imperishable life, after the dross of the body had 
been purified by the flames. Nor why the superstitious 
would feel that a jar of this magically-tinted glass in the 
tomb with them was an assurance of immortality. 
The formative period in glass-making In Egypt was 
under Amenophis II, who followed up hls father's cam- 
paigns In the Lebanon, returning with more treasures and 
slaves. Supplies from the Phceniclan coast were vastly 
augmented by grandson Amenophis III, from whose 
reign, and that of his son, Akhenaten of Tel Amarna fame. 
we have the most plentiful supplies of anclent Egyptian 
glass. 
Like the other Imported treasures, the glass, in whatever 
form It came, and the enslaved artificers, would be sent to 
the temple of the god, or to the mortuary temple of the 
Pharaoh himself. There would be small workshops 
attached to the temples, for we find the high priest of 
Memphis bearing the title “director of the glass factory.” 
It is interesting to speculate whether among the slaves 
who escaped from Egypt with the Children of Israel were 
descendants of those craftsmen which the illustrious 18th 
Dynasty records having brought in such quantities from 
Pheenicia over a period of 200 years. 
If so, the ex-slaves may well have rejolned their kins- 
men on the Pheenlelan coast, for it is here, in the area of 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

24 
GLASS-MAKING (Cont'd) 
Fiery furnaces of Babylon 
the River Belus, that we find the first reference to glass- 
making in the Bible. 
This is in Deuteronomy 33, which records the blessing 
which Moses bestowed on each of the tribes before his 
death. In Verse 19 the seafaring tribe of Zebulun, here 
linked with that of Issachar, Is assured that “they shall 
suck of the abundance of the sea, and of treasures hid 
in the sand.” 
The Midrash, which is a collection of oral legends, 
derived from many sources and going back to remotest 
antiquity, elaborates on this. Zebulun, it is related, once 
complained to the Holy One: “Lord of the Universe, to 
my brethren you gave beautiful land, and to me you gave 
the sea. To my brethren you gave flelds and vineyards, 
and to me you gave sand.” To which He answered: “Yes, 
but did I not give you the snail (the purple murex) ? Did 
I not glve you glass?” 
Although traditions older than recorded history “are 
embodied in the Blessings of Moses, it 1s, nevertheless, 
possible to extract certain facts. The noted Biblical exe- 
gete, the late Prof. Robert Pfeiffer, has ascertained that 
the blessings in Deut. 33 were recorded during the time 
that the Northern Kingdom was at the height of its power 
and prosperity under Jeroboam II (785-746). Archeology 
reveals that industries of various kinds—among them the 
dyeing industry which, from later Hebrew writings, appears 
to have been associated with glass-making as a village 
craft—flourished exceedingly at this period. This would 
suggest that glass-making was one of the industries of the 
prosperous Israelites at the time when the Northern King- 
dom ‘was finally absorbed by the Assyrians in 721 B.C. 
Glass-makers, then, would be among the varieties of 
craftsmen taken into exile to enhance the splendour of the 
Assyrian capitals. 
Were any of these captive glass-makers from the King- 
dom of Israel, or thelr descendants, among the craftsmen 
who produced the highly developed recipes collected in 
Assurbanipal’s library at Nineveh, on the banks of the 
Tigris, some 50 years later? For the time being, one 
cannot say. 
Assurbanipal (668-626), one of the last of the great 
Assyrian kings, caused to be collected in his capital copies 
and translations of every important book (clay tablet) to 
be found In the temple citles of Mesopotamia. These 
tablets Included magical spells for every occasion, treatises 
= 
—~ 
          
Egyptian mask of “glass 
paste”, made in a mould 
of carved stone and 
dating from 1500 B.C. 
Victoria and Albert Museum, 
London 
  
on medicine, chemistry, geology, etc. Among them were 
recipes for making varieties of coloured, gold, and clear 
glass. There were also instructions to the glass-makers 
regarding the type of fuel to use, and the manipulation of 
the furnace. 
The Assurbanipal tablets are the earliest literary record 
of the plant and processes of glass-making. As they are 
copies, they probably date back much earlier. They reveal 
a highly developed and unsuspected glass industry in 
Mesopotamia in the 7th century B.C., some four hundred 
years after Egypt had faded out of glass history. There 
is another aspect which is very important for our know- 
ledge of how this industry developed in antiquity. 
The tablets reveal, relate Prof. R.J. Forbes, in “Studies 
in Ancient Technologies” that “by the 7th century 
glass furnaces had developed considerably In Mesopotamia, 
and the glass-workers had gone a long way in the battle 
for sustained and intense heat. Here in Mesopotamia 
we must see the origin of the reverbatory furnace which 
is the pre-condition of glass-blowing.” 
In other words, when they learned how to make a 
Model of a Phoenician 
vessel (1300 B.C.) 
Maritime Museum, Haifa 
  
furnace that could maintain a high enough temperature, 
the glass-inakers were able to bring their glass batch to a 
state of liquifaction where it could be blown into a variety 
of shapes, instead of merely being wound round a core, 
or pressed into a mould as previously. 
The final development of the Babylonian glass furnaces 
must have taken place somewhere on the Pheenician coast, 
for it is here, some 500 years later, that the history of 
glass-blowing begins. The time lag fits in well with the 
fact that in the pre-scientific age, the average time-span 
for new technological developments was ahout 500 years. 
A clue as to how these techniques came from Babylonia 
to the Pheenician coast can be found in the Bible. 
When the Persians, under Cyrus and Darius, became 
the conquerors of the Middle East, they “turned again the 
Captivity of Zion” (Psalms 126). The returning exiles 
brought with them new ideas, new methods of writing (the 
Hebrew script used today), new art forms, and new techni- 
ques acquired during their sojourn in the great cultural 
centres of the ancient world. Some of these exiles must 
have been glass-makers who returned to the traditional 
centres along the Pheenician coast. 
The Bible does not refer to the return of these Northern 
exiles, because the books of Nehemia and Ezra ‘were 
written by and are concerned almost solely ‘with the doings 
of the priestly caste centred in Jerusalem. But one can 
find references to them, the simple people, the craftsmen, 
in later Hebrew writings, such as the Mishnah and the 
Talmud, ‘which deal with the laws pertaining to the 
everyday life of the people, not only within the confines 
of the Holy Land, but also in the neighbouring areas, such 
as Tyre and Sidon, or wherever there was a community 
large enough to maintain a synagogue. 
The return of craftsmen to the Phcenician coast may 
have begun during the time of Darius (5621-485). The 
Bible reports that he encouraged a further return of Baby- 
lonian exiles. And it was he who began to co-ordinate 
the great Perslan Empire by establishing new trades, 
industries and methods of commerce. He aimed at de- 
veloping the economic structure of his own country, up to 
then a backwater, and to create means of exchange for 
the Greek products which the Persians ‘wanted. 
Certainly the harbours along the Pheenician coast took

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

on new life after the Persian conquest and so did glass- 
making. The majority of the pre-blown vessels to be seen 
in museum collections belong to this period—from the 
6th to the 4th centuries B.C. While similar in many 
respects to the beautiful cosmetic jars of Egypt's 18th 
Dynasty, they are in reality quite different from them 
(and often inferior in colour and form to those made 
almost 1,000 years earlier). 
Achziv, a point on the Pheenician coast some 35 km. 
south of Tyre and some 16 km. north of the great natural 
harbour of Acco, must have been one of the centres of 
glass-making at this time. Although recorded references 
to it are sketchy, since it was always overshadowed by 
Acco on the one side, and Tyre on the other, nevertheless 
Achziv was an important town from early history, and the 
remains of an ancient harbour are still to be seen there, 
Was this one of the old glass-making centres to which 
the Babylonian exiles returned? There is some evidence 
to support this belief. The Mishnah refers to Achzib 
(Chezib) as that part “which they that came up from 
Babylon in the time of Ezra occupied.” And archeological 
finds indicate glass-making in that area from the Persian 
period, through the Hellenistic, early Roman, Byzantine 
and Islamic periods. Apart from the glass fragments 
scattered everywhere in the area, and some glass slag, 
complete vessels from Achziv can be found in museums 
and private collections in Israel, and elsewhere. (In par- 
ticular, the Haifa Museum of Ancient Art has a collection 
of B.C. 6th-4th century sand-core vessels all very similar        
   
   
y 's 
I * ; 
Pilon Nl 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
A rare example of the carly 
glass-maker's art, this 2nd or 3rd 
century miniature portrait is en- 
graved or stippled through gold- 
leal and backed by blue glass. 
AT TRA 
> 
- — 
Remains of 3a Roman colonnade 
at Byblos, the Phoenician port 
which established trade links 
with Egypt in early times. Ships 
leaving Byblos carried wood 
from Lebanon and glassware 
from Pheenician workshops.   © Paul Almasy. Paris

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

26 
GLASS-MAKING (Cont'd) 
Products renowned from Gaul to China 
to each other. One of them Is labelled “found at Achzib,” 
the others “from the Pheenician Coast”). 
Tyre would certainly have been a centre of glass-making 
during the period of 400 years or so that it took for the 
imported Babylonian furnace techniques to develop into 
the glass-blowing stage which ushered in the first golden 
age of glass at the beginning of the Christlan Era. 
However, until Crusader times, records mention only Sidon. 
This may be due to the fact that during the Persian 
period, from which time we begin to get direct references 
to glass-making on the Pheenician coast, Sidon superseded 
Tyre as the leading city of Pheenicia. The type of many- 
coloured unguentaria or perfume bottle which is charac- 
teristic of the Persian period was widely distributed by 
Greek traders together with their Attic pottery. Later, 
they distributed the mould-pressed and lathe-turned 
vessels which were found in the most far-flung areas of 
the ancient world during the Hellenistic period. Sidon 
was probably their chief port of call along the Pheenician 
coast, and it 1s indeed the Greeks who made Sidon syno- 
nymous with glass-making, with the Pheenicians, and with 
Pheeniela in general. 
By the time the Romans came to the Middle East— 
that is, around 63 B.C., Phaenicia was widely famed far its 
glass and glass-makers. That is not to say that they were 
making the most beautiful glass in the ancient world. 
The Alexandrian glass-makers were doing that. From 
Alexandria came the rich gem-like pastes, the vessels 
carved like rock crystal, and the millefioris. This profit- 
able trade in imitation of the fabulous precious and semi- 
precious stones of India and the nearer East which reach- 
ed the Roman market via Alexandria, kept the Egyptian 
glass-makers tied to their static cutting and moulding 
processes. This left the Pheeniclan glass-makers iree, in 
fact eager, to experiment with competitive techniques. 
This brings us to the greatest single advancement in the 
history of glass-making: the blowing iron, which has been 
rated one of the great discoveries of mankind. 
It has been put with admirable conciseness by Mr. W.A. 
Thorpe, author of “English Glass”: “Inflation was de- 
veloped in Syria, probably at Sidon, about the third to 
first centuries B.C. It was a commercial development by 
a commercial people, who wished to enlarge the usefulness 
of their wares. The Pax Romana gave them their chance, 
and they took it, and they kept it. When they first made 
sale for the new wares, the industrial world was still 
clinging to Greek routine. For a time Sldon manufac- 
turers were tied to shapes and patterns which did not 
emerge from Syrian glass processes or from the Syrian 
mind . .. When they blew free, glass became a new art.” 
B: “Greek routine” Mr. Thorpe refers to the 
vessels made by blowing glass into moulds 
imitating the shapes and decoration popular in vessels 
of other materials. For the flrst time mass production 
of decorated glass became possible as this new process 
replaced the tedious work of the older artists. 
“Hallmarks” were introduced by these enterprising 
master craftsmen of the Pheaenician coast. Vessels 
stamped with names like Ariston, Artas, Jason, and Ennion 
of Sidon became known all over the Roman world. The 
names were Greek, because Greek names and language 
had been fashionable since Alexander’s conquest 300 years 
earlier, 
Ennion is one of those who is believed to have migrated 
to Italy, or possibly to have set up a branch there. He is 
the most famous of the glass-makers, and each of the 
handful of pitchers and vessels signed with his name {fetch 
several thousand dollars today. Their appeal is only to 
the connoisseur. The static pressed designs in rather 
lifeless blue or amber glass look much like our cheaper 
type of machine-moulded glass, which, fundamentally, is 
only a sophisticated modification of the ancient process 
invented in Sidon. 
Strabo, who actually visited the area in 25 B.C., verified 
Sidon’s early importance as a glass-making centre by 
adding that the sand of the Belus was taken there to be 
“cast” into glass. Twenty-five years after the latest date 
for the discovery of glass-blowing, Strabo does not appear 
to know that a revolution had taken place in the art of 
glass-making. 
Sidon would probably have had a large-scale factory- 
type of production. But not all the glass would have been 
produced under such circumstances. Home industries must 
have been the order of the day rather than the exception, 
and many of the vessels exported from Tyre and Sidon 
would have been collected by itinerant merchants going 
from house to house. There is a charming picture in 
Proverbs XXXI. 2412 of the woman of worth who “maketh 
fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles unto the 
merchant.” In the original Hebrew, the word “Ca- 
naanite” is used, not “merchant”. “Canaanite” has a dual 
use in Biblical times, meaning both the inhabitants of 
Canaan (which included the Phoenicians), and those who 
dealt in trade. 
I: is the cottage type of industry which Is so 
vividly illuminated in the Hebrew laws and 
regulations compiled in Galilee during the first centuries 
of the Christian Era. They-cover almost every aspect 
of the industry, from the different types of ovens and 
furnaces, to the sale of the finished items. There must 
have been a phenomenal production of glass in Palestine 
at that perlod, judging from the fragments which one 
finds in every ploughed fleld, with endless variations on 
the theme of the glass-thread decoration. Slag from glass 
furnaces of the Mishnaic period (from the 2nd to the 5th 
centuries A.D.) are comparatively plentiful as well. The 
writer, without making any particular effort, has collected 
specimens of glass slag from eight sites, six of them in 
the area of the Phenician coast. 
Among the items made out of glass weye plates, bowls, 
wine and water flasks, trays, pickle and preserve jars, cups, 
pitchers, vases, perfume bottles, cosmetic Jars, milk 
funnels, urinals, feeding bottles, glass spoons, mirrors, 
funerary urns, coffins, trays, architectural decorations, 
including pillars; bracelets, beads, rings. 
Like the earlier vessels, the hlown glass travelled to 
Gaul, South Russia, India and China. Presumably it was 
in the Inevitable clay jar that this fragile cargo was 
transported by ship. by donkey, or by camel caravan. AS 
Mr, Thorpe traces in the introduction and early chapters 
of “English Glass,” the glass-makers of the Phcenician 
coast followed their markets to Italy and Gaul, laying the 
foundation of a European glass industry which bore the 
marks of their anclent origins right into the 16th century. 
These glass-makers spread throughout Asia as well. All 
traditions associated with glass-making in the countries 
of the East, including India and China, claim “Syrian” 
origins. 
In spite of the changes which took place in Palestine 
and Syria after the Moslem conquest in the 7th century, 
there appears to have been no cessation of glass-making 
on the Pheenician coast. 
Tyre regained its supremacy. Willlam of Tyre in the 
12th century refers both to the fine sand and the many

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 61387: 3,000 years of glass-making: craft workers of the Phoenician coast

  
(©. Keren Hayesod, Jerusalem 
  
I 
aR 
Gr a a" 
RJ - 
Roman glass vases from burial caves on Mount Carmel, dating from between the 1st and 3rd 
centuries A.D., reveal graceful forms and decorative styles already achieved by Near East craftsmen. 
beautiful vessels famous for their transparency which 
were “carried to far distant places and easily surpass all 
products of the kind...” 
Benjamin of Tudela also writes about Tyre in the 12th 
century. He describes it as having a magnificent port, 
frequented by traders “from all parts,” adding: “About 
400 Jews reside in this excellent place . . . (they) are 
shipowners and manufacturers of the far-renowned 
Tyrian glass...” In Sidon he found some 20 Jewish inha- 
bitants, who were glass-makers, and in Antioch about 10. 
By this time Damascus had become the centre of a new 
development in the Eastern glass industry, the richly 
enamelled Saracen glass beakers and mosque lamps. But 
the Belus was still an important source of sand, Sir J. 
Mandeville recording, during a trip to Palestine in 1322, 
that “Men comen fro fer watre be shippes and be londe 
with cartes, to fetchen of that gravelle.” 
The Venetians provided shipping, services and supplies 
for the Crusades. In return they secured special privi- 
leges and quarters on the East Mediterranean coast. By 
1124, at the height of Crusading success, they were firmly 
established In Jerusalem, Acre, Sidon, and particularly 
In Tyre. Raw materials together with craftsmen were 
exported to Venice, and as early as 1224 there was 4 glass- 
blowers’ guild there. 
When Tamerlane took Damascus in 1401 and virtually 
extinguished the Syrlan glass Industry by deporting its 
craftsmen to Samarkand, Venice replaced the East as the 
world’s centre of fine glass-making, although it was some 
two centuries before Venice could begin to rival the wares 
of Syria. 
 
ANITA ENGLE is a Canadian-born writer now living in 
Israel. The above article is a summary of the independent 
research she has been doing for the past ten years on the 
history and origins of ancient glass, which is to be 
incorporated into a forthcoming book tentatively entitled 
“Cracked About Glass.” This will be a Mediterranean- 
wide survey of ancient centres of glass-making, particu- 
larly those areas whese glass-making is still carried on in 
the ancient manner, 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

  
versatility. Thanks to modern 
~~ 
\ 
If any of us have tended to take 
glass for granted the photos on 
this page should help to set us 
straight about its amazing 
research glass is now not only 
- shatter-proof and heat-resistant but 
can be made as soft and smooth 
~ os silk or as hard as steel. Right, - 
a glass tube so tough it can 
hammer a nail into a block of wood. 
    
          
Here are some other unexpected 
~ properties of modern glass: (1) 
Though traditionally an insulating 
~ material, this sheet of glass actually 
LOE LET TE CRIT 1) I Co 4-0 +171 |< TO 
\ [IT VIT TN TI TT: [Ys IW £11 J) 
“metallic oxide 20 millionths of 
“an inch thick is bonded to the glass 
and conducts current as easily as a 
Bole T oT T-TT VET = 3 NN We ToT oT=To IFT Ue BOTT 4 
ed, glass has all the qualities of 
EI: 1 I 11 ToT, DR fc ) J © ETT 1 I T- 
“spun” into a fibre as soft as silk 
BE: LiLo BER [7] AVA TSR VIVEC Yo] FS J WY | ETT 
coil as hard and springy as steel. 
. 
_
 
E
a
 
l
h
c
 
c
c
 
c
i
v
 
 

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

into fragments if molten metal were 
poured into it. With this new type 
of glass it is the block of ice that 
melts as the glass transmits about 
90 9 of the heat from the liquid 
metal. The glass can resist intense 
heat because it expands only a tiny 
fraction under sudden changes of 
temperature: no more than eight 
millionths of an inch for every 10 
degrees C. increase in temperature. 
  

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 61388: Cyprus: Byzantine frescoes and mosaics: a new UNESCO art album

© Unesco 
from the same group. 
of Asinou, Cyprus. Left, 
St Andrew, 
artist in the little church 
a detail 
unknown 12th-century 
Virgin”, painted by an 
is a detail from a fresco: 
“The Dormition of the  
 
Group of 
Apostles (top of page) 
mourning

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
“The Donors”, from the 
church of St. Mamas at 
Louveras, dates from 
1465, at which time 
there was an extensive 
revival in Cyprus of 
painting in the Byzan- 
tine tradition, though 
with a local character. 
© Unesco 


### 61388: Cyprus: Byzantine frescoes and mosaics: a new UNESCO art album

A new Unesco art album 
ME BARREN 
 
CYPRUS
 or inthe frescoes 
  
 
     CYPRUS 
Mediterranean     
The Island of Cyprus has been an inde- 
pendent republic since August 16, 1960. 
One hundred and forty miles long by sixty 
miles wide, it has nearly 600,000 inhabitants, 
of whom 100,000 live in Nicosia, the capital, 
The majority of its population comprises two 
main groups: people of Greek and Turk- 
ish descent. Although chiefty agricultural, 
Cyprus has important mining deposits, parti- 
cularly of gypsum and copper. Situated at 
a Mediterranean cross-roads used by many 
great civilizations of antiquity, Cyprus 
became a melting pot in which artistic tra- 
ditions from Mesopotamia, Pheenicia, Greece 
and Rome flowed and mingled. Cyprus is 
the only United Nations member state 
whose own outline—an island silhouette in 
gold—appears as an emblem on its flag.     
| T was not until 1931 that a systematic survey of paintings 
and mosaics in Cyprus revealed the full extent of the 
Island's artistic heritage. Carrled out under the direction of the 
Byzantine Museum in Athens, it paved the ‘way for a restoration and 
preservation campaign that is still In progress. 
The mosalcs and frescoes in the churches of Cyprus are not merely 
works of great beauty; they are the record of an artistic development 
closely Ilnked with historical events on the island. 
Down the centurles Cyprus has known many rulers and been subject- 
ed to many Influences. On the division of the Roman Empire it 
became a Byzantine province. From the 7th century onwards it 
experienced Arab Invasions, and Byzantine authority was not restored 
until 965 A.D. From the 13th to the early 16th century the island 
was ruled first by the French dynasty of the Lusignans and, from 
1489, by the Republic of Venice. It fell to the Ottoman Empfre in 
1571. Soclal upheavals and new cultural patterns all left some 
imprint on the art of Cyprus, but never managed to efface its original 
Byzantine characteristics. 
The Island was slow to recover from the effects of the Arab inva- 
sions. Mosalc decoration, in fact, never revived, but the art of 
fresco painting came to life once more and developed vigorously 
throughout medieval times. One of the Island's medizval monu- 
ments is the Hermitage of St Neophytus. Here, near Paphos, this 
cave-dwelling Cypriot recluse lived for half a century from 1159 A.D. 31 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 61388: Cyprus: Byzantine frescoes and mosaics: a new UNESCO art album

32 
    
  
  
 
    
   
Little-known 
masterpieces of art 
Among the frescoes on the walls of his cell is one signed by Theo- 
dore Apseudes, one of the earllest Byzantine painters known by 
name. 
As long as Cyprus, under Lusignan rule, remalned linked to the 
Latin ‘Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Cypriot painters were subjected 
to the influence of their Latin overlords. Later, with the Venetian 
regime, orthodox church decoration increasingly absorbed Renais- 
sance elements. But the Cypriot fresco painters always preserved 
much of the Byzantine style of which, In its purest form, Cyprus 
possesses such fine examples. 
A new album in the Unesco World Art Series, “Cyprus: Byzantine 
Mosales and Frescoes” has been devoted to these still little-known 
masterpieces of art; 32 full-page colour reproductions present works 
executed between the 6th and the 15th centuries. This album, the 
20th In the Serles, Is published by the New York Graphic Society by 
arrangement with Unesco. Printed in Italy by Amilcare Pizzi, Mi- 
lan, the album is priced at $18.00 or equivalent. 
CYPRUS 
(Contd) 
Citizens of Jerusalem (left) 
greet Jesus as he rides 
into the city, detail of one 
of a series of 13th-century 
paintings in the Church of 
St.Heracleidius at Kalopa- 
nagiotis, Cyprus. Below, 
the Archangel Michael, 
detail of a 12th century 
work, “The Anastasis”, a 
fresco painted in the 
monastery of St. Neophy- 
tus, near Paphos, Cyprus. 
© Unesco 

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Letters to the Editor 
STANLEY MONUMENT 
Sir, 
On the back cover of your Nov- 
ember 1963 issue you published a 
photo of one of the three statues 
composing the monument to Henry 
M. Stanley at Leopoldville. As the 
sculptor of these three statues I was 
delighted to see this photograph but, 
as I am sure you will appreciate, 1 
would have liked some mention to 
have been made of their author in 
the caption. 
Ianchelevici 
Maisons-Laffitte, France 
EAST-WEST CONTACTS 
 
Sir, 
Congratulations on the excellent 
articles, “Orient-Occident: A Study in 
Ignorance” (April 1963 issue). 
1 always find THE UNEsco COURIER 
interesting and instructive. Your pub- 
lication is certainly playing a vital 
role by giving its readers a wealth of 
enlightening information. East-West 
understanding is very important for 
world peace. In this regard, I believe 
correspondence helps us a great deal. 
I suggest people in the West write 
more to those in the East and vice 
versa. 
Yoshitatsu Kimura 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan 
THE MITTENWALD TRADITION 
Sir, 
The article by Claude Marly, “Mus- 
ic on a String” (Sept. 1962) provided 
a glimpse of the nature and history 
of stringed-instrument making, but 
omitted a number of facts which 
should be stated. For example, the 
wood for the resonant box (Picea 
excelsa) is found not only in Switzer- 
land, but all over the Upper Alps, the 
most prized being the spruce fir of 
Upper Bavaria. This was an import- 
ant factor in the development of ins- 
trument-making at Mittenwald. 
Much has been written about violin 
varnish and in particular about its so- 
called secret composition which has 
no doubt greatly impressed authors 
and readers alike. However, I would 
say that it is not the nature of the 
composition of the ancient Italian 
varnish that has been lost, but under- 
standing and knowledge concerning 
the organic, natural varnish and its 
ageing. This has been lost little by 
little as the craft became more com- 
mercialized, to the detriment of the 
creative spirit of instrument-making. 
Your article also omitted to mention 
stringed instrument-making in Ger- 
many, its impact in 14th-century 
Europe and its most flourishing period 
in the 15th century. From Fiissen 
it spread far and wide and led to 
instrument-making in Mittenwald— 
“The Cremona of Bavaria” as it has 
often been called. 
 
In the time of the great Jacobus 
Steiner and the master instrument 
makers of the Klotz family, the achie- 
vements of Mittenwald represented, 
both in Germany and neighbouring 
countries, the acme of instrument- 
making. The sonority of Mitten- 
wald’s violins corresponded exactly to 
the tastes and ideals of that period. 
In a historical context, German string- 
ed instrument-making is thus placed 
between the Italian and the French. 
There was no reference to Mitten- 
wald in your article, which, to give 
the complete picture, should also have 
mentioned Markneukirchen in Saxony, 
the Czech production centres, and the 
new German centre of Bubenrcuth. 
Austria, the Netherlands and Switzer- 
land have had individual master-crafts- 
men, but no recognized centres of 
stringed instrument production. 
Today, Mittenwald is no longer a 
great production centre but its school 
of instrument-making, which has 
existed for over a century, maintains 
the tradition and draws young student 
  
Completed instruments hung to 
dry at the Mittenwald School. 
craftsmen from all parts of the world. 
The teaching is based on international 
experience and knowledge in instru- 
ment-making, and is constantly adapt- 
ed and modernized. The school aims 
to restore to instrument-making the 
brilliance and perfection conceived by 
the great masters of the past. 
K. Leonhardt, 
Director, Mittenwald School 
of Stringed Instrument-Making, 
Bavaria, German Federal Republic 
HOW MANY ESPERANTISTS ? 
Sir, 
In “One Language for the World” 
(Nov. 1963 issue) Professor Mario Pei 
says that something like eight million 
people speak Esperanto. This is far 
more than the most optimistic estima- 
tes. In a report submitted to Unisco 
in 1951, the Universala Esperanto 
Asocio quoted the already greatly 
exaggerated figure of 380,000 Espe- 
rantists. Allowing for the fact that 
this association, which includes every 
kind of Esperantist, from the most 
skilled exponents to the merely inte- 
rested, had 32,660 members on 
January 31, 1962, it scems likely that 
the world total of people who actually 
speak Dr. Zamenhof's language to a 
greater or lesser degree can hardly 
be more than 55,000 or 60,000, 
F. L. 
Villejuif, France 
Ep. Note: Professor Mario Pei 
writes: The estimate of eight million 
people who, in one fashion or another, 
speak Esperanto, was supplied to me 
by the former Secretary of the Espe- 
ranto League of North America. 
He stated at the time that this was 
frankly a very rough estimate, possibly 
a little on the optimistic side, based 
on unofficial figures from Esperanto 
groups all over the world. To my 
knowledge, there is no precise census 
of Esperanto speakers. The figure, 
according to this official, was intended 
to include not only registered members 
of official Esperanto groups, hui also 
those not so registered, and those who, 
at one time or another, had studied 
Esperanto and taken an interest in the 
language, even if not in the movement, 
On this basis, the figure does not 
seem exaggerated. In the United 
States, a nation that is certainly not 
among those most interested in either 
Esperanto or the international language 
problem, I have been amazed in the 
course of my travels to find Esperanto 
groups in all the major cities. In 
countries where the movement is much 
stronger than it is here (Brazil, Japan, 
Holland, the Scandinavian countries, 
to mention a few), it stands to reason 
that the number of people interested 
must be much larger. How else to 
explain the very flourishing Esperanto 
literature, and the numerous perio- 
dicals? 
In the case of a constructed lan- 
guage like Esperanto, one cannot 
speak of “speakers” in the same sense 
that one speaks of speakers of national 
languages like English or French. 1 
have devoted considerable attention 
and study to Esperanto, hut | must 
admit that I do not handle it with 
anything like the fluency with which 
I handle the national languages I 
know best (English, French, Spanish, 
Italian). At the same time, I feel that 
my description applies to me, Really 
fluent speakers, who handle Esperanto 
with the same facility with which they 
handle their own native tongues, 
probably come closer to the figures 
cited by your correspondent. 
At any rate, it must be admitted 
that the hypothetical figure of eight 
million is only a rough estimate, and 
that an actual census of speakers of 
the language, even on a limited scale, 
has never been taken. 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco New 
RONGIIORNS ON THE INCREASE: 
Forty years ago the pronghorn, North 
America's only native antelope, was almost 
extinct in the state of North Dakota. Only 
five herds totalling about 225 animals 
| remained. ‘Today, thanks to careful con- 
servation, there are about 10,000 head of 
| antelope in the state. 
UNISIA’S EXPANDING EDUCA- 
TION: Last year over 520,000 children 
were enrolled in Tunisia’s elementary 
schools—an increase of nearly 10% over 
the enrolment for 1962. A branch for 
teacher training has been set up in every 
secondary school to help train the additional 
teachers needed for Tunisia’s expanding 
educational programme which aims to bring 
every child of primary school age into the 
classroom by 1968-69. 
OR AFRICA’S JOURNALISTS: An 
eight-months’ regional training course 
for journalists in the French-speaking coun- 
tries of Africa, organized by the government 
of Senegal and UNEsco is now being held in 
Dakar. Senegal and UNesco are also co- 
operating in the setting up of an institute for 
the study of the science and techniques of 
information and journalism in Dakar. 
ATIONAL PARK FOR FRANCE: 
France now has its first national park, 
La Vanoise, which is in the Savoy Alps and 
adjacent to the Italian National Park of 
the Gran Paradiso. In the newly-named 
French park, which covers 55,000 acres, 
shooting, except to destroy harmful animals, 
is forbidden. France's second national 
park is expected to be the island of Port- 
Cros off the Mediterranean seaport of 
Hyéres. 
J OpIAS SCIENCE CLUBS: Nearly 200 
schools in southern India have started 
' science clubs under a scheme sponsored by 
the All India Council of Secondary Educa- 
tion. The idea for the clubs came from a 
ymeeting held in Paris under UNEsco 
auspices. In Madura, where Indian teach- 
ers have also started a club with the aim 
iof improving aids for science teaching, 
400 different aids have been designed and 
{ distributed to six pilot schools. 
URGERY BY MAGNETISM: Hospital 
patients of the future may have tiny 
metal pods creeping about in their bodies 
under remote control. This development 
is foreshadowed in research recently an- 
nounced by the Weizmann Institute of 
Science, in Israel. The little pods will be 
propelléd and guided by magnetic fields in 
blood vessels and other tubes and ducts 
of the body, delivering drugs where they 
are most needed and even performing 
operations. In experiments on dogs, a 
pod has been manceuvred through the 
heart very easily. 
D IALING THE WORLD: Telephone 
. experts of the International Telecom- 
munications Union opened the way recently 
to a world-wide direct dialing system. Meet- 
ing in Rome, they agreed on dialing codes 
to cover the next 40 years, which will 
~~ 
f   
accomodate a global telephone system with 
600 million subscribers (compared to 
141 million in 1961), A substantial step 
will come this year when much of Europe 
will be linked up by a direct dialing 
system. 
¢'IELLING THE U.N. STORY: A 
comprehensive yet compact hand- 
book for all who wish teach or learn 
about the United Nations has just been 
published by Unesco under the title “Tell- 
ing the U.N, Story” (In Eng. and Fr. edi- 
tions, price 6/-stg.; $2.00: 4,50 Frs). Its 
author, Leonard S. Kenworthy, Professor of 
Education at Brooklyn College, City 
University of New York, reviews teaching 
about the U.N. and its related agencies, 
discusses the aims and themes of this teach- 
ing and ways to improve it. He also 
offers suggestions on setting up a com- 
prehensive teaching programme. 
ELEPHONE FOR THE DEAF 
AND MUTE. Scientists at the Israel 
Institute of Technology in Haifa have been 
experimenting ‘with a “telephone” which 
would enable deaf-and-mute persons to 
communicate, The speaker “plays” on 
sensitive vibration keys as he would on a 
piano, while the listener places his fingers 
on a vibration-receiving diaphragm. A 
duplicate reversed system enables the 
“speaker” to become the “listener”. The 
language is based on coding the tactile 
vibrations, on either a single or multiple 
frequency. A. three-frequency code, for 
instance, makes possible the development 
of a language of nearly 5,000. words. 
JAIPONESIA’S NEW RESEARCH SHIP: 
A new 700-ton oceanographic research 
ship has brought the flag of Indonesia into 
the fleet of scientific vessels from 14 coun- 
tries which are now participating in the 
International Indian Ocean Expedition. Co- 
ordinator of the expedition is the Interna- 
tional Oceanographic Commission. 
ELTIC STATUE TROVE: A hundred 
and forty wooden sculptures dating 
from the 2nd century A.D. have been 
discovered by French archaologists work- 
  
9 
EN 
ing near the source of the Seine not far 
from Dijon. Excavations revealed about 
20 complete statues of human figures, 
collections of limbs and heads of animals 
all carved in oak. The finds throw a new 
light on Celtic art, particularly on wood 
carving of which few examples exist in 
museums. 
N USIC MISSION TO ETHIOPIA: 
George Byrd, -an American musician, 
has recently been on a UNESCO mission in 
Ethiopia, helping to develop a school of 
music, building up a national orchestra 
and, using a new accelerated teaching 
method, training future teachers of music 
for Ethiopia's schools, 
NESCO CLUBS LINK HANDS: A 
 UNesco club formed by children at 
the Léon Mba Lycée in Libreville, Gabon, 
has concluded a “twin” partnership with a 
similar club in Nantes, France, creating the 
first link of this kind between two UNESCO 
clubs. The two groups will exchange let- 
ters, news bulletins, tape recordings and, 
like all Unesco clubs, will make special 
efforts to promote the aims of UNESCO in 
their areas. Four other African countries 
are now forming UNEsco clubs for boys and 
girls. 
  
Flashes... 
MW Of the one million children who die 
every year in Latin America, one in every 
seven is under the age of five, WHO 
reports. Malnutrition, mainly lack of 
proteins, and diarrhoeal diseases are the 
two major causes of death in this age 
group. 
BW In Africa, only 16% of the children of 
primary and secondary school age are 
enrolled in schools and a hundred million 
men and women cannot read or write. 
In Asia, with nearly 400 million children 
aged between 4 and 15, only 165 million 
are enrolled in school. 
Wl Argentina and Albania have become the 
19th and 20th countries to ratify the 
Convention against Discrimination in 
ducation sponsored by Unesco. 
BW More than 500,000 pages of valuable 
manuscripts and books have been micro- 
filmed by the Unesco Mobile Microfilm 
Unit during a 6-month visit to Morocco. 
All the material microfilmed is taken from 
the Moroccan National Library and 
Archives, in Rabat. 
FOR SAFETY AT SEA 
   
MARITIME CONSULTATIVE ORGANIZATION 
Eh 
ED NATIONS IMCO un I
N
T
E
R
-
G
O
V
E
R
N
M
E
N
T
A
L
 
HE Inter-Governmental Maritime Con- 
sultative Organization (IMCQO) a Spe- 
cialized Agency of the United Nations, 
works to further international co-operation 
with regard to shipping, and with special 
concern for efficient navigation and safety 
of life at sea (See The Unesco Courier, 
May 1963). IMCO has now been honou- 
red by the first U.N. commemorative stamp 
for 1964. Issued in 5c. and 11c. denomina- 
tions, it depicts two ships at sea under the 
protection of the IMCO emblem. As agent 
in France of the U.N. Postal Administration, Unesco's Philatelic Service stocks 
all UN. stamps and first day covers currently on sale, and those issued by 
Unesco member states to commemorate important events in the history * of 
Unesco and the U.N. For prices and further details, write to the Unesco 
Philatelic Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris (7¢). 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S,
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

     
PRICE PER VOLUME 6/-stg.; $ 0.95 
in each volume 28 colour reproductions. 
The series is published in seven languages (English, 
French, Spanish, German, Italian, Danish, Dutch). 
FONTANA-UNESCO ART BOOKS : 
Collins Publishers, London 
MENTOR-UNESCO ART BOOKS : 
The New American Library, New York 
Previous titles at same price as above : Russian 
Icons from the 12th to the 15th Century — 
Persian Miniatures from Ancient Manuscripts 
— Spanish Frescoes of the Romanesque Period — 
Egyptian Wall Paintings from Tombs and Temples. 
LeOosLAY CMY 
RCHES 
UNESCO ART PAPER-BACKS 
4 new titles 
THE AJANTA CAVES 
EARLY BUDDHIST PAINTINGS FROM INDIA 
BYZANTINE FRESCOES 
FROM YUGOSLAV CHURCHES 
JAPANESE PAINTINGS 
FROM BUDDHIST SHRINES AND TEMPLES 
MEXICAN WALL-PAINTINGS 
OF THE MAYA AND AZTEC PERIODS 
Obtainable through local booksellers 
 
'H 
FONTANA 
r a he dis —_— . 
UNESCO ART BOOKS 6). 
4 
  
  
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency ; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzal, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA, 
Tradco Agencies, 109 Swanston Street, G. P. O. 
Box 2324 V, Melbourne C., I (Victoria) ; United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
8th Floor, McEwan House, 343 Little Collins St., 
Melbourne C. I. (Victoria). (A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C=, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.). — BELGIUM. Editions ** Labor ", 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Scandaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgiélei $151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis De Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels, CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA. Burma Transfation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($3 3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, 100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 
2. (Rs. 9). — CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Fore 
mosa), — CUBA. Cubartimpex, Apartado 6540, La Ha- 
vana. — (2.25 pesos). — CYPRUS. Cyprus National 
Youth Council, P.O. Box 539, Nicosia. — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA. ArtiaLtd.. 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 
2. — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard, Prags Boulevard 
47 Copenhagen § (O.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA. Interna- 
tional Press Agency. P.O. Box 120. Addis Ababa. -- 
FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu. 
Helsinki. (Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7°. C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.). — 
GERMANY, R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich. 8, For the Unesco Kurier (German ed 
only) Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, 
C.C.P. 276650 (DM B). — GHANA Methodist Book 
Depot Ltd, Atlantis House, Commercial St., POB 100, 
Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United King- 
dom, — GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du 
Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon, — HUNGARY. Kultura, P. O. 
Box 149, Budapest, 62. — ICELAND. Snaebjcrn Jonsson 
& Co. H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik — INDIA, Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Nicol Road,, Bellard Estate, Bombay 1; 
17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, 
Hyderabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 
1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O.Box 386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 Park Street, Calcutta 
16, Scindia House, New Delhi. Indian National Commission 
Co-operation with Unesco, Ministry ol Education, for 
New Delhi 3. (Rs. 7). — INDONESIA, P. N, Fadjar Bhakri 
Dijalan, Nusantara 22, Djakarta. -= IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin, (10/-}). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein’s Bookstores 35, Allenby Road 
and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1g 5.50). 
— JAMAICA, Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston, Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., é Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.C. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co, 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B, 66, Amman. — 
KENYA, E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O, Box 30167, Nairobi. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul, — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYSIA Federal Publications Lud, 
Times House, River Valley Rd., Singapore (M, $ 500) — 
MALTA. Sapienza's Library 26 Kingsway, Valletta, (10/-). 
— MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO, British Library, 30 Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague, 
(fl. 6). ~ NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G.C.T. Van 
Oorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Curacao. N.A. 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 20, 
Molesworth Street {Private Bag) Wellington, C. 1 Govern- 
ment Bookshops,: Auckland (P.O. Box 5344), Christ. 
church (P.O. Box 1721), Dunedin (P.O. Box 1104 (10/-). 
NIGERIA, C.M.S. Bookihops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos, 
(10/-), — NORWAY, AS. Bokhjornet, Lilla Grense. 
7 Oslo For the Unesco Courier only; AS. Narveiens 
Litteratur Tjenestes, Storuingsgt. 2 Oslo, Postboks 11S 
(kr 13.20) — PAKISTAN. The Weit-Pak Publithing Co, 
Led, Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374 S5é-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamefia, Avenida 7a, No. TI-49, Apartado de 
Correos 2018, Panama, {D.F. Balboas 3-). —- PHILLIPI- 
NES. Tha Modern Book Co. 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manila, — POLAND. "RUCH" ul. Wiloza Nr. 46x 
Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50}, — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carma 70, Lisbon, — 
PUERTO RICO, Spanish English Publications, Eleanor 
Roosevelt 115, Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. ~~ RHODESIA 
& NYASALAND. The Book Centre. Gordon Avenua, Sa- 
lisbury, Southern Rhodesia. — SUDAN. Al Bashir Book- 
shop, P. O,Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl, Hovbokhandel Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16. 
— For The Unesco Courier: Svenska Unescorddet, Yasaga- 
tan 15-17, Stockholm, C (Kr. 10); SWITZERLAND. 
Europa Verlag, 5S Rimistrassea Zurich, Payot, 40, rue du 
Marché, Geneva C.C.P, 1.236. *' Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1.4814, (Fr. S. 8). = TANGANYIKA. Dar.et-5alaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B, 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
(35 ticals). — TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 469 Ilstiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala, — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri Building, 
Church Street, P.O. Box 724 Pretoria. For the Unesco 
Courier (single copies) only : Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg, (10/.). — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.I, (10/.), — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
317 East 34¢h St, New York, N.Y. 10016, ($5.00) 
and (except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27, N.Y. — U.5.5.R. Me1- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow. G-200.— YUGOSLAVIA 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazija 27, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/061386engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

TIMELESS 
BEAUTY 
  
RC CECE CRUE CCE RL RL CRVET ERG] 
the temple of Amen-Re at Karnak 
where the Pharaoh Thutmoses Ill 
deposited the treasures he 
brought from Syria in the 15th 
~ century B.C. Archaeology has 
nowbeenabletoconfirmthelong- 
held belief that glass was 
manufactured on the Phcenician 
coast in far-off times. With a 
beauty rivalling that of precious 
~ gems and an infinity of shapes 
and colours, glass has given 
BC CUTEY CET (EI (IR TE ERR GEE] 
"the most everyday objects. 
~ Above, a 14th century Mosque 
lamp from Damascus. Right, a 
decorated Roman glass vessel. 
Far right, from top: a marble 
‘glass vase; an Islamic period 
~ bottle decorated with inscrip- 
“tions; a blue jug by Ennion, 
a Phoenician master glass-maker 
~ whose works, prized throughout 
the Roman world, are still sought 
y modern collectors. See p. 20. 
i + 