# [109841](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
    
Rt
 A
R
 
a 
  
1 ad 7, 
2 RT IN 
i : i 
1 " 
i } 
i 
  
2" 
mS LA aime 
  | 
aworld apart 
   
      l 
  
INTERVIEW WITH RENE DEPESTRE 
ENVIRONMENT: CLIMATE CHANGE—THE GREAT DEBATE 
HERITAGE: POTOSI (BOLIVIA) 
  
          
i 1 re

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
TEShRRES Nikon 
international photo competition 
The international jury for the competition on the theme of Peace in everyday life met at Unesco Headquarters 
on 29 October 1997. It awarded the Unesco Courier - Nikon Prize to: 
Eric Lesdema 
for “War games” 
It also awarded a Special Jury Prize to: 
Jordis Antonia Schlosser 
for “Havana” 
and honourable mentions to: 
Florian Haerdter 
for “The Goutte d'Or quarter, Paris” 
and 
Didier Lefévre 
for “Kabul” 
The members of the jury were: 
Chairman: 
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN, 
writer 
Laurent Abadjian, 
photo editor, Libération newspaper 
Manoucher Deghati, 
correspondent, AFP 
| Colin Jacobson, 
photo editor, senior research fellow, University of Wales Cardiff 
Marloes Krijnen, 
Managing Director, World Press Photo Foundation 
Simon Njami, 
Editor-in-Chief of the Revue Noire 
Adel Rifaat, 
Director of the Unesco Courier 
Mark Sealy, 
Director of Autograph, the Association of Black Photographers 
Keiichi Tahara, 
artist/photographer 
The prize-winning photos and those that particularly attracted the juries” attention during 
the shortlisting process and the final selection will be published in forthcoming issues of the 
Unesco Courier.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO ((OURIER 
    
© 
UI
f 
An
de
rs
en
/G
am
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
[HH 
HE LA 
HIS MONTH'S INTERVIEW 
417 
René Depestre 
A noted Franco-Haitian writer looks back 
over his nomadic life. 
  
© 
Pa
sc
al
e 
Ab
st
 
Pa
ns
 
HERITAGE 
36 
THE TREASURE OF THE CERRO RICO 
by Pascale Absi 
An original folk culture in the mining city of 
Potosi (Bolivia), whose fabulous silver 
deposits once made it a byword for riches. 
  
Cover: 
Bora Bora in the Society Islands (French Polynesia). 
© Yann Arthus Bertrand/Erath from Above /Unesco 
contents 
DECEMBER 1997 
ISLANDS 
A WORLD APART 
Month by month by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
Islands of the imagination.......................................... 
by Robert Baudry 
Iceland’s hidden fire ..................o 
by Thor Vilhjalmsson 
The Pacific: the coming of the ancestors............................ 
by Antonio Guerreiro 
Solstice islands... 
by Edouard J. Maunick 
The trials of Ulysses... 
by Jacques Lacarriére 
What, my brother, isanisland?....................................... 
by Lokenath Bhattacharya 
Easter Island's lastsecret.................o ii, 
by Luis Mizon 
Cuba's gold. ....... 
by Eduardo Manet 
Fact file... 
Consultant: Luis Mizén 
Commentary Federico Mayor 
GREENWATCH Climate change: the great debate by France Bequette 
LISTENING Isabelle Leymarie talks to Steve Turre 
REFLECTIONS Funding a new home for Egypt's ancient treasures bySamir Gharib 
AUTHORS 
UNESCO COURIER INDEX 1997 
the unesco ((DuriERmDECEMBER 1997 
a 22 
50 
4

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

TH&UNESCO 
OURIER 
50th YEAR 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization. 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France 
Fax: (33) (0) 1 45 68.57 45 
e mall unesco couner@unesco org 
Internet: http //www unesco org 
Director: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition Roy Malkin 
French edition, Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Anane Bailey (Tel. (33) {0} 1 45 68 46 90) 
Documentation: José Banaag 
{Tel (33)(0)1 45 68, 46 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. (33} (0) 1 45 68 46 87) 
Film duplication: Daniel Meister 
Secretariat Annie Brachet 
{Tel (33}(0)1 45 68.47.15), 
. Administrative Assistant Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: (Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 45 69) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS Ls 
Russian, Inna Utkina (Moscow) ‘ 
German Dominique Anderes (Berne) ur 
Arabic: Fawzi Abdel Zaher {Cairo} 
Italian Gianluca Formichi (Rome} 
Hindi, Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi} 
Tamil M Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran} 
Dutch, Bart Christiaens (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Alzira Alves de Abreu (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Mirza Muhammad Mushir {Islamabad} 
Catalan: Joan Carreras 1 Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur} 
Swahili Leonard J Shuma {Dar-es-Salaam} 
Slovene, Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese Feng Mingxia {Beijing} 
Bulgarian’ Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala; Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finmish Rutta Saarinen {Helsinki} 
Basque" Juxto Egana {Donostia) 
Thai Duangt:p Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese Ho Tien Nghi (Hanoi) 
Pashto Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa’ Aliyu Muhammad Bunza (Sokoto) 
Ukrainian Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician, Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax. (33) (0) 1.45 68.57.45 
Subscriptions: Mane-Thérése Hardy 
{Tel (33)(0)1 45 68 45 65}, Jacqueline Louise-Julie, 
Manichan Ngonekeo, Mohamed Salah EI Din 
(Tel (33)(0) 1.45 68.49.19) 
Customer service Michel Ravassard, 
(Tel. {33)(0) 1.45 68 45 91) 
Accounts (Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 68 45 65) 
Shipping Daniel Meister (Tel, {33) (0} 1.45 68 47 50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel.: (33){0)1 45.68.45 65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years 396 FF 
Students’ 1 year 132 French francs 
Binder for one year’s issues. 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year, 132 French francs 2 years: 211 FF, 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
Individual arucles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted 
providing the credit ine reads “Reprinted from the Unesco Couner”, plus 
date of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor Signed 
articles reprinted must bear author's name Non-copyright photos wall 
be supplied on request Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not nec- 
essarily represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of 
the Unesco Couner Photo captions and headlines are written by the 
Unesco Couner staff The boundanes on maps published in the maga 
2ine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the 
Unied Nations The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- 
film and/or microfiche} by (1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 
Panis, (2) University Microfilms {Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100 
USA, (3})NCR Microcard Edition, Indian Head Inc , 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, US A; (4) Bell and Howell Co , 01d Mansfield Road, 
Wooster, Chio 44691, US A 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1- DECEMBER 1997 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LES 
NMP.P 
Photocomposition, photogravure; 
Le Courrier de I'UNESCO 
Impression: MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z 1. Route d'Etampes, 45331 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041 5278 N° 12-1997-0P1-07-565 A 
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert 
between pages 2-3 and 50 51 
4 THE UNESCO Courier W DECEMBER 1997 
. 8: 2 a 205 - 
RL yeh Ng he 
a A 
 
   
    
. 
a 
. . 2 Ra a) r 
[9 Seg a A aaa. 
wt * iy » : ’ : : | 
LES | 0 RE + 
  
   

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

a
 
a
e
 
-
 
  
] 
7 
3 3 
Li 
= 
} 
S
a
b
 
  ® 
Y
a
n
n
 
A
r
t
h
u
s
-
B
e
r
t
r
a
n
d
/
E
a
r
t
h
 
fr
om
 
A
b
o
v
e
/
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
month by month 
by Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat 
Britain and Japan are island nations, 
economically powerful and highly 
influential in world affairs. But as islands they 
do not haunt our dreams. Jules Verne’s 
mysterious island, Robert Louis Stevenson's 
Treasure Island and the island of Sindbad the 
Sailor on the other hand—though they do not 
exist—linger on in our dreams into adult life. 
This issue is mainly concerned with real islands 
thatare also dream islands, with the myths that 
have been woven around them and with the 
interplay they generate between the imaginary 
and the real. 
Islands are not the only things that inspire 
dreams. Deserts, mountains and twilight can also 
take us out of humdrum reality and Lift us high 
above our everyday selves. But some islands 
inspire dreams with a very special quality of their 
own, the quality of evoking wonder. While the 
Sahara may be propitious to meditation, it does 
not fill us with wonder, as do Easter Island and 
Ithaka. 
Why do such places have this very special, 
very elusive feet to them? Perhaps because it is 
possible to live on an island and feel one is 
living in another world, because the istand- 
dweller's existence will never be an ordinary one. 
Islanders experience a sense of apartness, an 
awareness of the unreal within the real, of the 
permanent presence of the unexpected, a strange 
destiny in which every moment is an adventure. 
Jacques Lacarriére puts it very well when he 
suggests that deep within this experience of a 
duality there may be a voyage into the deepest 
recesses of our own being, a tong quest, starting 
out from what we believe ourselves to be, to 
discover what we really are, a winding odyssey 
that begins by taking us faraway from ourselves 
and ends by bringing us face to face with the 
ultimate truth about ourselves. 
Is our nostalgia for the wonderful istand 
perhaps a metaphor for our yearning for the 
absolute? This is one of the avenues for 
exploration presented—with the compliments of 
the season—in this December issue. || 
THE UNESCO Gourier B® DECEMBER 1997 5

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 109873: Islands of the imagination

[slands of the imagination 
A guided tour of some of world literature’s many 
fictional islands 
~ Islands occupy a special place in our 
* mythologies, often as the scene of mys- 
terious or extraordinary occurrences. Being 
cut off from the rest of the world, they are 
depicted as sanctuaries where human contact 
can be fled and danger escaped, or as places of 
reclusion where atonement may be sought. 
Clustered together, they offer many a bay and 
inlet where boats can land. They may be the 
abodes of monsters. Upon their shores tem- 
ples may be erected for the performance of 
bloody sacrifices; there, pirates may alight, 
bearing stolen treasures. Or they may be the 
last gateway to paradise. 
Because of all these associations islands have 
always enjoyed special favour in the eyes of 
storytellers, particularly those who write of 
the supernatural, 
But what is the supernatural? It may be 
defined as that which arouses in us a sense of 
mystery, a fascination before the revelation of 
Another World. This is the first theme of 
interest to us here—the division between our 
world and another world. But this other 
world 1s itself ambiguous: like Janus, it has 
two faces, one magical, the other monstrous. 
Two different worlds 
Detached from the mainland, islands mark a 
separation from the everyday world. By their 
very nature, they suggest an individual iden- 
tity, standing in opposition to a collective 
destiny. Representing in each case a world apart, 
turned in on themselves, islands are governed 
by laws different from those that hold sway 
in other lands. 
Already in the thirteenth-century parody of 
Romance epic Aucassin et Nicolette, the place 
chosen to represent the very opposite of our 
world was an island, the island of Torelore, 
where women make war, where men give birth, 
and so on. 
The mainland is the place of ordinary life; 
islands are where extraordinary things hap- 
pen. They are the theatre of fabulous dreams, 
far removed from reality. Then again, where the 
mainland is represented in secular terms, 
islands embody the sacred, being the site of 
temples where sacrifices are performed—with 
good or evil intent. And in contradistinction 
™ 
THE UNESCO Gourier WDECEMBER 1997 
© 
Gi
sé
le
 
Na
mu
r/
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Mu
se
e 
Co
nd
e,
 
Ch
an
ti
ll
y 
pis NN 22 
 
BY ROBERT BAUDRY 
with our world of the living, islands often 
symbolize the inaccessible realm of the dead. 
The solitude of islands 
The word “island” comes from the Latin in- 
sula and carries a sense of solitude, isolation, 
loneliness. A patch of land surrounded by the 
sea, amotionless boat washed by the waves, it 
is the perfect symbol of man, at once pro- 
tected from his fellows and unhappily separate 
from them. Ambivalence again! 
One thinks of course of all the Robinsons 
shipwrecked on a lonely shore, confined 
within a universe closed in upon itself. But, 
tellingly enough, the supreme example may 
be said to be Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Ill at ease 
in company, a lover of solitude, he sought 
refuge on the island of Saint-Pierre in the mid- 
dle of Lake Biel in Switzerland, but found 
that the spot still was not isolated enough for 
his taste. So, having dispatched his lunch, he 
cast off in a boat which he left to drift upon 
the current. And there, in this floating island, 
lulled by the lapping of the waves, he gave 
himself up to daydreams that gradually devel- 
oped into a trance of ecstasy (Réveries du 
promeneur solitaire, 1782). 
A place of refuge 
Small wonder then that this place of solitude 
has so often been seen as a refuge for those who 
wish to flee human society and all its trials. 
What better illustration of this could be 
“The embarkation of Tristan 
and Iseult”, a miniature from a 
15th-century manuscript of the 
Tristan romance. 
Fy
 
  
A longer version of this 
article has appeared in Ile des 
merveilles, Mirage, miroir, 
mythe, Actes du Collogue 
organisé a Cerisy-la-Salle 
parle CERMEIL (Centre 
de Recherches sur le 
Merveillenx), I’Harmattan 
publishers, Paris, 1997.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 109873: Islands of the imagination

  
  
A detail from L'ile 
heureuse (“The Happy ie 
Isle”} by the French &—7I( cals 
artist Paul Albert WN ——i 
Besnard (1849-2934). LF % ir} - 4 
found than that offered by the French writer 
Henri Bosco in L’ Enfant et la riviére (1945). 
Borne away by the current to an island on the 
Durance river while asleep in a boat, the young 
hero discovers a quarry where cruel nomads are 
torturing a boy of his age. He sets him free and, 
stealing a boat, escapes with him to an oxbow 
lake off the river. There they shake off the fears 
aroused in them by their sinister pursuers. They 
thus find themselves doubly on an island: in 
stagnant waters protected by a wall of brush- 
wood amidst hostile lands; and in a boat 
moored in those waters, forming so to speak an 
 
   
island within an island. What surer refuge from 
the fury of those who would do them harm? 
The island as a stepping-stone 
Such places can be reached only at the end of a 
long journey. This embodies a process of initi- 
ation which often leads the hero from one island 
to another, cach representing a different experi- 
ence, until he reaches the ultimate island, the 
ultima Thule, a fabulous land that the early 
European geographers regarded as the further- 
most northern limit of the known world. 
THE UNESCO Gourier @ DECEMBER 1997 . 
@ 
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ni
s 
Mu
se
e 
de
s 
Ar
ts
 
dé
co
ra
ti
fs
, 
AD
AG
P,
 
Pa
ni
s,
 
1
9
9
7

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

> Everyone knows Homer’s Odyssey and 


### 109873: Islands of the imagination

Sindbad the Sailor, one of the episodes in the 
famous collection of Arabian tales known as 
The Thousand and One Nights. Fewer people 
know the early Irish epic known as The Voyage 
of Brendan, which recounts the maritime expe- 
dition of the ancient Celtic god Brendan, 
threading his way through a labyrinth of fab- 
ulous islands, each more extraordinary than 
the last, or the later Voyage de Maélduin. Sur- 
prisingly, The Voyage of Brendan was to be 
adapted into Latin in the ninth century under 
the title of the Navigatio sancti Brandini, with 
the Celtic god becoming a Christian saint; and 
then, around 1121, into Anglo-Norman, by 
anarchdeacon of Rouen, Bendit, before being 
widely translated and circulated in Europe. 
4 
A place of atonement 
But islands are not always shelters, refuges, 
havens of grace; nor momentary halts on the 
way to some other destiny. Enclosed by the sea, 
they can naturally serve as places of atonement. 
What better example is there of this than 
Robinson Crusoe (1719)? It tells the story of a 
young man who, instead of minding his own 
business in England and earning a living like 
his parents, takes it into his head to follow a 
perverse bent for adventure. Providence there- 
fore punishes him for the crime of scorning 
the pursuit of honest trade at home by casting 
him upon an inhospitable desert island, unin- 
habited by man or beast, without food or 
tools. Such is the real meaning that Daniel Defoe 
wished to give to his story. However, the old 
myth of the blessed isle exercised so powerful 
Right, detail showing Iceland 
(top left) and marine monsters 
from a map of Scandinavia by 
Olaus Magnus (1490-1557), a 
Swedish ecclesiastic and 
scholar whose history of the 
northern peoples appeared in 
many editions and 
translations. 
® THE UNESCO Courier BW DECEMBER 1997 
a hold on his readers’ imaginations that before 
long this place of purgatory came to be seen as 
a paradise and inspired a score of imitations, 
known generically as “Robinsonnades”. 
The home of monsters 
Offering as they do a setting different from 
that of the ordinary world, remote islands 
naturally lend themselves to visions of mon- 
sters who are assumed to be their denizens. 
Thus 1t was that Ulysses was at one 
moment exposed to the danger of being 
turned into a swine by the perfidious but 
enticing enchantress Circe and, at another, 
shipwrecked on the island of the Cyclops 
where he ran a serious risk of ending up like his 
companions as the one-eyed giant’s breakfast. 
But perhaps the most fabulous catalogue of 
island monsters created by the fertile Celtic 
imagination as embodied in the visions of sea- 
farers is to be found in The Voyage of Bren- 
dan and, in particular, in Le voyage de Maél- 
duin, which speaks of one island inhabited 
by starving ants as big as ponies and another 
by a fearsome horse with razor-sharp hooves 
bristling with blue claws. 
Following this tradition of island monsters, 
later writers added their own: the creatures 
devised by a mad scientistin The Island of Doc- 
tor Moreau (1896) by H. G. Wells; the charming 
cannibals in Typee (1846) by Herman Melville on 
Nuku-Hiva in the Marquesas Islands; the loath- 
some figure of the sadist Vorski sacrificing and 
crucifying his victims on the sinister island of 
Sarck at the far end of the carth in L’ile aux 
trente cercueils (1920) by Maurice Leblanc. 
 © 
Je
an
 
Lo
up
 
Ch
ar
me
t,
 
Pa
ns
 
In
st
it
ul
 
Te
ss
in
, 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

And in our own time, was it not on an 


### 109873: Islands of the imagination

island that the safari hunters discovered the 
abominable King Kong, the giant ape in the 
famous American film (1933) directed by Mer- 
ian Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack? 
The home of fairies 
But just as, in the world of the imagination, 
islands may be depicted as being the abodes 
of monsters, so they may also be regarded as 
the home of fairies. The bewitching, terrifying 
Circe in the Odyssey finds a counterpoint in 
the friendly and helpful Calypso. The dan- 
gers and horrors encountered during Le voy- 
age de Maélduin alternate with wondrous 
experiences. On oneisland grow magical apples 
whose sweet juices provoke an cestasy akin to 
death. On another there is a palace reached by 
a crystal bridge where a fairy woman dwells. 
She offers the companions a cheese in which, 
as in the legend of the Graal, each one finds the 
taste he most prefers in the world. For them, 
the three months they spend in the palace last 
three years and end only with the appearance 
of a fantastic bird, the bird of their regained 
youth. ... 
And what fabulous figures have been imag- 
ined by storytellers and writers: the fair Iseult, 
worker of miracles in Ireland, towards whom 
Tristan lets his coracle drift at the will of wind 
and waves; or the Fair Queen ruling over 
Andersen’s The Garden of Paradise who per- 
fumes with flowers the Island of Bliss, a 
delightful place where death 1s unknown and 
where the hero is carried by the cast wind; or 
again, the charming female Robinson por- 
trayed by Jean Giraudoux in Suzanne et le 
Pacifigue (1921). 
Treasure Island 
The secret wonders so readily associated with 
islands may thus be embodied in places of 
enchantment or fairy figures, but they may 
also take the form of fabulous treasures. The 
most perfect examples of islands containing 
such treasures are of course depicted in The 
Count of Monte-Cristo (1845) by Alexandre 
Dumas and Treasure Island (1883), by Robert 
Louis Stevenson. 
This powerful myth still exercises its full 
fascination today. Pierre Mac Orlanin Le chant 
de Péquipage (1918) sends his hero to the 
West Indies in seach of pirates’ treasure, which 
he finally discovers much nearer home—an 
adventure similar to that which befalls the 
protagonist of Jean-Marie Gustave Le Clézio’s 
recent novel Le chercheur d’or (1985). And 
why not also mention Red Rackham’s Trea- 
sure, the strip cartoon adventure featuring 
Tintin drawn by Hergé, ever keen to revive 
the old legends that haunt us? 
      
  
3 OL m 
BLE 
Aa ASNT 
       
po» » Dy 7 We fn | 
AZADI HT 
lo . TA) 
Hp) BASE, 
Fr oe) 
Lp 
  
  
 
A 17th-century Persian 
miniature depicting a voyage 
by Sindbad the Sailor, a hero 
of The Thousand and One 
Nights. 
The last stage in an initiatory 
journey 
So numerous are the horrors and obstacles 
bestrewing the path of the hero, so many 
exploits must he perform in order to reach 
his goal, that his progress towards his island 
destination often resembles an initiatory jour- 
ney which culminates in a revelation. 
Ulysses, embarked upon his circuitous 
journcy that leads from one island to another, 
finally returns home where he is able at last 
to address the shade of his dead mother. 
Gilliat, by surmounting all the tribulations of 
cold, water, hunger, thirst and fear, achieves 
merit, only to be disappointed before finding 
0 
THE UNESCO Gourier BW OECEMBER 1997 A 
    
© 
Ro
la
nd
 
an
d 
S
a
b
n
n
a
 
M
i
c
h
a
u
d
 
/
R
a
p
h
o
 
Pa
ns
 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
Ca
ir
o 
(E
gy
pt
) 
>

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

» a consummation in his fatal union with the 
sea, as related by Victor Hugo in Les Tra- 
vaillenrs de la Mer (1866). 
Elsa Morante’s L’Isola di Arturo (1957) 
also ends with an initiation which includes 
the ultimate ordeal, the revelation of the last 
and cruellest mystery of life. And in his alle- 
gorical tale Al Hayy ibn Yaqzan, the twelfth- 
century Moorish philosopher Ibn Tufayl 
describes a kind of Muslim Robinson Crusoe 
who, after being abandoned as a child on an 
island close to India, is able by himself, in this 
place conducive to meditation, to discover the 
laws of nature and to penetrate intuitively to 
the mystic truths. 
The other side 
We now come to the very edge of the world, 
where the other face of reality is revealed. 
In Homer’s Odyssey, the island of the 
Phaecacians, skilled seafarers accustomed to 
rowing from one world to another, embodies 
this idea of passing over, of moving from one 
reality ro another. In Le voyage de Maélduin, 
what the hero perceives is also an island, but a 
strange island divided by a wall. On one side 
of the wall are black sheep, on the other, white 
sheep. When a white sheep is moved to the 
other side, it at once turns black. When a black 


### 109873: Islands of the imagination

sheep joins the white sheep, it immediately 
becomes white. The wall 1s clearly a bound- 
ary separating two worlds. 
Paradise 
All these islands are but ports of call, last out- 
posts, places of initiation, gateways to the 
island of the Other World, final goal of the 
Adventure and of the Quest, crowning point 
of this labyrinthine journey. Islands of the 
Blessed in the Hesperidean gardens of Greek 
  
mythology; Emain Ablach, the Faery Isle of 
the Celts, the Island of the Dead, from Pro- 
copius to Maurice Leblanc—such are some of 
the myriad guises assumed by the same theme. 
It is always an ideal island, the island of 
another world. Where else indeed does Gil- 
gamesh, the earliest Babylonian epic, place the 
terrestrial paradise, other than on a remote 
and inaccessible island, at the furthermost lim- 
its of the Earth, beyond the waters of death? 
Why, from Plato to Aldous Huxley, from 
Thomas More to Tommaso Campanella, have 
the perfect cities of so many Utopias been 
located on islands? Surely for no reason other 
than a desire to leave behind the paltry routines 
of everyday life and recreate elsewhere the ideal 
city to which we aspire 
Journey's end 
We have been able to do no more here than 
touch on some of the huge number of works 
centred on islands. 
It is none the less clear from the few exam- 
ples cited that the myth of a wondrous isle has 
enjoyed such exceptional favour because it nat- 
urally lends itself to the traditional themes of 
the narrative art, particularly adventure stories 
and tales of the supernatural: escape away from 
and out of the world, sea and mountain, soli- 
tude and shelter, treasure, fairies and monsters, 
paradise and ecstasy, and many others. 
All these themes form a kind of constella- 
tion with the island at the centre, around 
which they gravitate as though by magnet- 
ism, like so many planets around the sun. And 
these planets may in turn suggest other themes 
which, by association, cause us to envelop in 
mystery any island at all, no matter how ordi- 
nary in itself, and to identify it with the fab- 
ulous realm of myth. | 
 
A print by the Japanese 
artist Ando Hiroshige 
(1797-1858). It is one of a 
series entitled Tokaidd 
gojiisan tsugi (“Fifty-three 
Stages of the Tokaido"), 
published in 1833-1834. 
2 Nn 
— THE LINESCO Courier # DECEMBER 1997 
 
  
© 
Pe
rn
o-
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ns
. 
SAN | 
: of 41 : ve | 
& | 
: 
-r 
  
For, tot ALL Ae gl J 
~ A —" 
A ~~ EN —d 
2 f— ound 
: "pe EN 
ty 
yy

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
Iceland’s 
  
idden fire 
BY THOR VILHJALMSSON 
  
: 
: . “ 
ww wi ~ 
| a 7a IEE Br 
: 
N -~ > 
Ny ex i - EE ease 
x 3 
- - ee i 
Ja SR 
#£ 
-a 
2 
i . - 
I KA 
y 
! tH 
i. 
¥ wet 
; 
- 
x 
: 
T 
od os - " - ind a Be ~ "au oN a 2 ie oe val - ss Wm Ci Sg? w o— a ol _— (tn) Nee TH Ton : -l he Pe AL AIL. - . ‘s -~ Et - Seg rte - — Pr Ne pommen’ 5H Lp - - 
. - » 
» ro 2 
~— ~ re » - ! po mmm 3 - — ar BT Tr—_— gt A em - « a a — .; ———— RI wh—— re 
TW cum ——— NL ——— A — HA —_——— — 
R RR TE ra 
 
The modern- 
minded 
traditionalists 
and hard-headed 
dreamers who 
live on an island 
of extremes 
Iceland, an island in the North 
Atlantic ocean, is a land of 
glaciers, volcanoes and 
geysers. The capital, Reykjavik, 
top, is located on Faxa Bay in 
the southwest of the island. 
pr ith RK ; 
A Comal J —, = SONNET = 
: " ES ma “ 
— 
Iceland. Nota very inviting name for the 
prospective tourist turning the atlas 
round with an indolent finger while looking for 
somewhere to relax. What can people make of 
it, especially since another country that reaches 
all the way to the North Pole and is little more 
than snow and ice is called Greenland? 
But unalluring though its name may 
sound, Iceland is a country that invites and 
welcomes people who possess the gift of 
curiosity, are ready to use their eyes and ears, 
and let their sense of fantasy revel in the unique 
scenery that awaits them. People of the kind 
described in the Bible as “seeing they do not 
see and hearing they do not hear” would be 
well advised to go elsewhere. 
People who live surrounded by sea have a 
particular way of perceiving themselves and the 
world. For Icelanders, the ocean has always been 
both an invitation and a deterrent—and in spite 
of modern technology it still is. Through the 
centuries young seafarers who braved its perils 
to reach other countries and other people passed 
a rite of initiation into adulthood. They 
— PAD snr 
El 
© Ragnar Axelsson/Liaison Int/Hoa Qui, Paris 


### 109874: Iceland's hidden fire

returned matured by their experience, accepted 
as people worth listening to, people with a tale 
to tell. Homecomers were ready to feel and 
understand more profoundly their own 
scenery, the magic of their own island. 
For centuries the people of Iceland looked 
out at the sea and the sky from shore, cliff or 
mountain, their backs itching where wings 
tried to sprout. In the blue opening of the 
clouds on a overcast day they saw golden tow- 
ers beaming at them, princesses winking from 
balconies, and crowd-packed streets. All the 
wonders of diversity lay before them. The 
courts of kings waited to be immortalized by 
the gift of poetry that ripens in solitude and 
grows in silence. 
Loneliness and silence 
Behind them lay a vast country whose land- 
scapes—by turns wild and protective, mild and 
fierce, hostile and gentle—are constantly being 
shaped by warring extremes. Fire lurks beneath 
the glacier’s shining white shield where it meets 
the cloudless sky. You feel that nothing is 
‘ 
THE UNESCO (ourir mw pecemir 1997 ’ i 
e
w

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 109874: Iceland's hidden fire

© 
Ro
se
 
Ga
bn
el
le
/V
is
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
> remote and that you can see all the way to the 
end of the world. You see the lava-fields ruffled 
into contorted figures imprisoning eerie beings, 
monsters sacralized in stone, anguished souls 
waiting to be released from the purifying tor- 
tures of Purgatory. For centuries they have 
moaned in the wind as they watched the soli- 
tary traveller go about his business. 
These travellers were richly endowed by 
the storytelling of their people—of their 
grandmothers, of the taciturn, reluctantly elo- 
quent farmer-fishermen who were their fathers 
and grandfathers. They grew up in a demand- 
ing land which offered the senses food for 
observation and thought. They benefited from 
having to learn very early how to survive the 
sudden whims of unpredictable nature, and 
bear the burden of loneliness and silence 
amidst the wind’s roar. The distance between 
one farm and the next may be so great that 
you have time, while crossing a mountain or 
finding your way through a blizzard, to com- 
pose in your mind a yarn to tell the people on 
the farm you are making for and satisfy their 
hunger for news, for words, for sagas. 
Telling stories has carried the Icelanders 
through the centuries, through good times and 
bad. It was in Iceland that the Sagas, that body 
of universal literature, were written in the thir- 
teenth and fourteenth centuries, mainly in a 
language that could be easily understood in all 
1 2 THE UNESCO Courier B DECEMBER 1697 
Svartsengl geothermal 
plant, above, provides 
Reykjavik with hot water. The 
diversion of its surplus 
production into a lava field 
has given rise to the Blue 
Lagoon (foreground), whose 
mineral-rich waters have a 
temperature varying from 
25 to 35°C. 
  
the countries of the north, as well as in Viking 
settlements in Ireland, Yorkshire and other 
parts of the British Isles, and in Normandy. 
It has actually been said that Icelanders do not 
take any fact entirely seriously unless it can be 
used in a story or a poem. On a superficial 
acquaintance, this may not seem true of modern 
Icelanders who seem to be absorbed in the super- 
fluities of fashion, technological gadgetry and 
other wonders of modernity. But it is part of 
our nature, aresult of the fact that we lead dou- 
ble lives, being at the same time ultra-modem 
and ancient, natural and supernatural, surrealis- 
tic dreamers and super-realistic technicians. 
The Viking spirit 
It 1s often said that Icelanders can trace their 
ancestry back to the Viking seafarers who came 
from rocky northern countries and learned 
how to build boats that elegantly resisted the 
fury of the raging Atlantic. The Vikings had 
already sailed southwards and eastwards before 
settling in Iceland. They had penetrated into 
the vastness of Russia, voyaged up the Seine to 
Paris, and journeyed to Sicily and Rome. Then, 
with only the stars to guide them, they found 
this strange island and settled there. Before that 
they had made landfall in Ireland and took 
slaves from this civilized nation with a rich lit- 
erary tradition.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 109874: Iceland's hidden fire

In 930 the settlers in Iceland established 
the Althing, today the world’s oldest parlia- 
ment. In the year 1000 paganism was officially 
renounced and Christianity was accepted. The 
slaves brought from Ireland merged with the 
Viking people, losing their language but fer- 
tilizing their masters’ creativity. Civilization 
develops as the vanquished enrich their rulers’ 
souls and become the ultimate victors. 
In 1262 we lost our independence to the 
Norwegian king and later to the Danish king- 
dom, under which we remained as a kind of 
colony. Our situation gradually deteriorated 
and a chapter in our history ended in 1550 
with the downfall of the Catholic church, 
which had been the only effective bulwark 
against foreign royal power and colonization. 
With Protestantism we moved into the dark 
ages of our existence. “Everyone died who 
could”, says a character in a book by our 
Nobel prize-winning writer Halldér Laxness. 
Our risorgimento was partly due to an explo- 
sion of poetry and romanticism in the last 
century led by realistic leaders who gained first 
autonomy in internal affairs, then home rule 
at the turn of the century, virtual indepen- 
finally the re-establishment of a completely 
independent republic in 1944. 
After independence Icelandic society was 
jerked out of its medieval pattern of life and 
work. Until then life had been limited to herd- 
ing and cultivating barely fertile ground, 
rounding up sheep in autumn and bringing 
them home from their summer mountain pas- 
tures. As the men of the farm cut the grass, 
they would recite epic poems whose words 
were carried away by the wind. Serious con- 
versation was rare with anyone except your 
dog and, on Sundays, your horse. On the rare 
occasions when a foreigner appeared in your 
farmstead he was led into your lowly grass- 
thatched abode and then you sent for the cler- 
gyman to converse with him in Latin. For 
centuries, fishing was done by small crews in 
rowing boats. 
This may be all behind us, but it is still 
within us. Our isolation has been definitely 
broken. Now we go up into the mountains to 
seek anew its ancient privileges, and recharge 
our spirit in the wilderness beside a rushing 
brook while torrents roar in canyons in the 
background and the colours explode into our 
Rugged moorland dence by the end of the First World War, and eyes. | 
landscape of Manalaugard in 
the south of Iceland. 
ES TT it 
  
THE UNESCO Courier B DLCEMBER 1997 1 3 
© 
Bo
ur
se
rl
le
r/
Du
ne
ux
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

© 
An
to
ni
o 
Gu
er
re
ir
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 109875: The Pacific: the coming of the ancestors

The Pacific: the coming of 
the ancestors 
1 4 THL UNLSCO Courier WM DECEMBER 1997 
BY ANTONIO GUERREIRO 
 
- The world of islands that is the Pacific 
Ocean embraces very many different 
cultures. But from the Ryukyus of Japan, to 
Samoa and Tahiti, local mythology largely 
agrees on how the islands came into being. 
In the Japanese archipelago of Yaeyama, 
rituals and oral tradition recall the customs 
of Oceania. A myth current in one of these 
islands, Ishigaki-jima, tells how the gods and 
the ancestors created them. 
Once upon a time, it goes, the sun god 
Creation myths 
and ancestor 
worship are 
widespread in the 
Pacific islands 
A ritual canoe race on Iriomote 
in Japan's Ryukyu Islands. It 
takes place during Shichi, a 
festival held to obtain a new 
year blessing from gods and 
ancestors. 
ordered another god, Amang, to come down 
from the sky to create an island on earth. 
Amang did so and mixed sand and earth with 
the end of his spear. From this mixture, the 
first island sprang. Then, in the pandanus palm 
forest which grew up on the island, he created 
the hermit crab, amang-cha. Next he gave the 
crab human seed, and a pair of human beings, 
aman and a woman, eventually emerged from 
the crab’s hole in the sand. 
On the west coast of the neighbouring

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Br
un
o 
Ba
rb
ie
r 
/H
ém
is
ph
ér
es
, 
Pa
ni
s 


### 109875: The Pacific: the coming of the ancestors

island of Iriomote-jima, the inhabitants use 
annual events, such as the year-end sabani canoe 
races, to invoke the blessing of the gods and 
the ancestors for the coming year. Such bene- 
diction is in the form of the yuu, which brings 
prosperity and plant growth from beyond 
the horizon, from the sky or from the deep— 
vague places where the gods and the ancestors 
also live. 
At the festival of Soru (in the seventh lunar 
month), the dead and the ancestors are invited 
back to the village, to the houses where they 
were born. There they receive offerings, and cel- 
ebrations in their honour go on for three 
nights. A group of masked young people, the 
Anggama, conjure up through dance the com- 
munity of the dead and the ancestors. 
From nature to culture 
The man and the woman from the story of the 
creation are the ancestors of those who set- 
tled in the Yaeyama islands. Many variants of 
this myth are to be found in the islands of 
Hateruma, Taketomi and Miyako. Among the 
Austronesians of Belau, Samoa and Tahiti, the 
creation is seen in a similar way—out of chaos, 
with life descending from the sky to the earth 
  
A modem wooden figurehead 
from an Asmat dugout canoe. 
The Asmats are a fishing people 
of New Guinea. 
© Charles Lénars, Pans Jayapura University museum 
A canoe race held during a folk 
festival in Papeete harbour, 
Tahiti (French Polynesia). 
or the sea. In the stories, small sea creatures 
such as fish, crabs, worms or shellfish give 
birth to a child or to the first human couple. 
Often the couple consists of a brother and 
a sister, whose incest becomes the foundation 
of human society. The couple’s first child is 
usually an aquatic creature or an incomplete 
human being. 
In the Ryukyu Islands as in Polynesia, these 
myths go along with stories about floating 
islands or floating lands that the gods have 
immobilized through various stratagems to cre- 
ate the world of islands which humans gradu- 
ally settled. The creation myths usually present 
this settlement as a transition from nature to 
— SY 
~ 
atl OL 
Eps ER 
THE UNESCO Gouriern DECEMBER 1997 1 5

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

© 
An
to
ni
o 
Gu
er
re
ir
o,
 
Pa
ns
 


### 109875: The Pacific: the coming of the ancestors

» culture. They hark back to the way of life of 
ancient maritime communities in Southeast Asia 
.and on the edges of the East China Sea, based on 
fishing and gathering seaweed and shellfish. 
The original link 
For the Pacific peoples, genealogy, traced from 
a founding ancestor, establishes an order of 
precedence among all the clans and descendants 
or “houses” which make up an island society. 
Such genealogy is part of the “framework of 
origins” which brings together the status of 
  
® 
C 
Es
th
er
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
THE UNESCO Courier HB DECEMBER 1997  
communities, social ranks and individual titles 
according to criteria legitimized by myths and 
ancient stories about settlement of the islands. 
The Polynesians “remember” the ancestral 
migrations which brought them to the islands 
where they now live. Oral history preserves 
the names of major ancestors who came from 
the other side of the ocean and are revered as 
gods. All the details of these voyages (the 
names of canoes, the chiefs, priests and the 
famous artists, as well as the objects, plants 
and animals they brought with them) are 
familiar to the descendants of the founders. 
In the minds of the indigenous peoples, 
the origins of the islands and their settlement 
are connected. This link is ritually reaffirmed 
at great annual festivals. Veneration for ances- 
tors permeates all social life. Once upon a time 
they came from the sky and the sea, and now 
they turn up in the islanders’ dreams, enabling 
the living to communicate with the spiritual 
world of gods and impersonal natural forces. 
These relationships with the ancestors take 
many forms. Some prestigious goods, like cer- 
emonial objects or those used in rites such as 
births, marriages and funerals, have a collective 
value, becausc they make the link between the 
ancestors and the living—the transmission of 
spiritual power (mana), the ancestors’ bless- 
ing of the living. 
Depictions of ancestors, whether full-face, 
sitting or standing, are among the most pow- 
erful works of art in Oceania. In wood, stone 
or ivory, they arc found from eastern Indone- 
sia to Polynesia. The finest and most dramatic 
examples are on the eastern edge of the Pacific, 
on Easter Island, where the huge moai erected 
on dry-stone terraces by the shore recall the 
mana of the divine ancestors to which the 
inhabitants of the island once gave sacrifice. 
The long-eared moai look out across the sea 
whence the spirits of the ancestors came, sen- 
tinels of the route they took. | 
© 
An
to
ni
o 
Gu
er
re
ir
o,
 
Pa
rs
 
Ritual offerings are made to 
the tutelary god on the island 
of Iriomote (Ryukyu Islands, 
Japan). Far left, the offerings 
being prepared by the 
priestess. Left, the “divine 
family”"—the priestess, her 
brother and two assistants— 
during the prayer ceremony. 
Below left, a stone tikion 
Huahine in the Society Islands 
(French Polynesia). The tiki, a 
highly schematic engraved or 
sculpted portrait of a man, is a 
widespread feature of 
Oceanian art. 
Opposite page, the shores of 
Whitsunday Island, 
Queensland (Australia). 
© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/ Earth from Above/UNESCO

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

—
—
 
Jo
o.
 
SO
S 
Reed 
pM
 
R
R
 
E
a
 
Ja
 
nn
 
. 
5 > 
>. : 
i Ee 
Eo oe SE 
oi Ld | 
Solstice islands 
BY EDOUARD J. MAUNICK 
Departing sun darting into abysses 
who know that lands to lands are joined 
that beneath the vast ocean vestments 
roots advance from islands to peninsulas 
from archipelagos to continents from here all 
around 
that everything and everyone come together 
from east to west from pole to pole 
in a singular place of transient flesh. . .. 
what can be seen other than the trace 
of a long immemorial journey 
with the equator as unique compass 
and You and me and Us and the Others 
sailing between life and death 
thinking we know it all and knowing nothing 
betrayed by the witch of History 
with her deep draughts of fake solitude. . . . 
(Two stanzas from “Les iles solstices”, a poem 
published in Désert-Archipel [1983] by 
Edouard J. Maunick. Translated from French by Michael 
Nk 2 eee 
a ‘ 
Ba a al 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
Br
id
ge
ma
n/
Gi
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ns
 
Br
it
is
h 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
Lo
nd
on
 


### 109876: The Trials of Ulysses

The trials of Ulysses 
BY JACQUES LACARRIERE 
- 
THE UNESCO Courier WB DECEMBER 1997 
~ Thereare more than 1,360 Greek islands. 
* Many are just bare rocks, home to afew 
seagulls. Others are a little bigger but have no 
water or other resources. They too are unin- 
habited, except by wild goats and seals. I’ve 
been to many of these small islands and always 
come away with the same feeling of having 
lived for a few hours like one of my great 
childhood heroes, Robinson Crusoe. I feel 
like that even if I know lots of other people 
have been there before me. 
I would sit on an outcrop a few metres 
above the sea, amid bushes of thyme and 
oregano buzzing with bees, and watch fish- 
ing boats and yachts pass in the distance. They 
couldn’t see me. Mocking, crabby-sounding 
gulls wheeled above me, staring and shrieking 
atme, even louder when I went near their nests. 
Their agonized cries always sound like the 
laments and entreaties of desperate people, 
which explains the old Greek belief that these 
creatures were actually people changed into 
gulls as a result of a curse. 
There is nothing imaginary about these lit- 
tle islands, but their unusual, unexpected or 
odd appearance and the danger they represent 
for sailors must have won them an aura of 
uncertainty and mystery from the earliest 
times. People also wonder why some more 
than others among the hundreds of islands 
in the Aegean Sea have given rise to enduring 
legends of Greek folklore. 
Take Anaphi, a small volcanic islet between 
Crete and Santorini whose name, already 
known in ancient times, means “island of rev- 
elation”. It has practically no vegetation and 
just a port and a village and a single spring. 
The island reputedly rose up out of the sea 
on the orders of Apollo to give refuge to the 
Argonauts caught in a night-time tempest. 
Legend says the Argonauts saw the island 
when a huge flash suddenly lit up the whole

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
sky and revealed it to them. The same kind of 
thing is said about many islands in the 
Mediterranean and in all seas in volcanic areas 
of the world—islands that suddenly rise up 
and then disappear as quickly as they came, 
but are never forgotten. 
To the ancient Greeks, islands were not the 
product of natural phenomena but were usu- 
ally the result of a god’s wish. Hence the idea 
of their uncertain destiny, that even the biggest 
and apparently most solid of them could sud- 
denly slip beneath the waves like Atlantis. 
They are shifting universes, unstable and 
threatened, at the mercy of the elements and 
the whims of the gods. Zeus himself couldn’t 
make a whole continent disappear at once, but 
an island he could. 
And so the Greeks’ dream island is also a 
utopia from which danger and uncertainty have 
been banished, islands of tranquillity in a 
chaotic world, isolated but also protected, places 
where you can live off your own resources. In 
short, a paradise where nothing is forbidden, 
where there is no serpent and above all no sur- 
veillance or interference by the gods. 
World history is full of imaginary islands. 
They include Alcina (in Ariosto’s Orlando 
Furioso), Altruria (in William Dean Howells’ 
novel A Traveller from Altruria), Antangil 
A modern 
poet’s fresh 
interpretation of 
the meaning of 
the Homeric 
hero’s epic voyage 
“Ulysses and His Companions 
Embarking after the Trojan 
War", a 14th-century Italian 
miniature. 
Polyphemus the Cyclops 
has his eye put out by 
his prisoner, Ulysses. 
Detail from a 7th-century-B.C. 
Greek amphora. 
(in Joachim du Moulin’s History of the Great 
and Admirable Kingdom of Antangil), 
Atlantis (described by Plato in the Critias), 
Balnibarbi, Laputa and Glubdubdrib (in 
Jonathan Swift's Gulliver’s Travels), Barataria 
(dreamed up by Cervantes), Bensalem (in 
Francis Bacon’s Nova Atlantis), the Island of 
the Blest (described by Lucian of Samosata in 
his True History), the Island at the End of the 
Earth (Edgar Allan Poe), Edgar Rice Bur- 
roughs” Caspak, Circe’s island and Calypso’s 
island in the Odyssey, Ikaria (in Etienne 
Cabct’s Icarie) and the island of the Immor- 
tals (Jorge Luis Borges). 
I will stop the list here, at the letter I, 
because it will take too long to get to U and 
the distant lands of Utopia and anyway the 
letter I is especially interesting when talking 
about Greek islands. 
An epic homeward journey 
Only three of them start with I—Ios, the sup- 
posed birthplace of Homer, Ikaria, where 
Icarus is said to have fallen to carth on his 
flight from Crete, and Ithaka, the birthplace of 


### 109876: The Trials of Ulysses

Ulysses. Of the three, Ithaka has played a key 
part in Greek dreams about their islands. 
Ulysses’ wife Penelope was also from there, as 
was his son Telemachus. It was where the voy- 
age to Troy began and where it ended. In 
Homer’s epic, it was the ideal island—a place to 
settle, but also a place you left and returned to, 
a place apart from the world but living from 
its links with it. 
Ulysses is an excellent example of an inhab- 
itant of such a place—somecone often away from 
the island, sometimes exiled, someone who felt 
intensely homesick. This was cven the first 
 
THE UNESCO Courier BW DECEMBIR 1997 
» 
© 
Da
gl
i 
Or
ly
, 
Pa
rs
 
El
eu
si
s 
Mu
se
um
 
(G
re
ec
e)

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 109876: The Trials of Ulysses

» meaning of nostalgia, a Greek word which 
means pain or longing (algos) to return home 
(nostos), To be or feel nostalgic is to want to 
return to your native land, which time or dis- 
tance separate you from and which becomes, in 
the hearts and dreams of faraway sailors, what 
was later, in the songs of the troubadours, the 
dream and the desire for the distant princess. 
So what about Ulysses the nostalgic? At 
the end of the Trojan War, after ten years away, 
Ulysses wanted only one thing—to return to 
Ithaka, his island, and get back his throne and 
his Penelope. But the pride, the touchiness, 
even hatred of the gods got in the way. Posei- 
don, god of the oceans, did not forgive 
Ulysses for causing the defeat of the Trojans 
through his invention and use of the Trojan 
Horse, and did all he could to stop him 
returning to Ithaka. 
With a fair wind and fine weather, a good 
boat would take a month and a half to get 
from Troy to Ithaka. It took Ulysses ten years, 
during which he lost all his companions one 
after another and endured a whole string of 
mishaps which are still an epic catalogue of 
the monsters and marvels of the sea. 
But the point about this eventful home- 
ward voyage is that it was precisely when he 
reached Greek waters, where everything should 
have been perfectly familiar to him, that he 
encountered al] the monsters and marvels inan 
entirely imaginary context. 
Don’t look for the Laistrygonian islands, 
the land of the Cyclopes, the rocks of the 
Sirens, the palace of Circe or Calypso’s cave. 
They’re everywhere and nowhere. Each rock, 
creek, gully, cove, gulf or bay, every mountain, 
cave, ravine or gorge can conjure them up. Even 
the land of the dead where Ulysses ventured 
after visiting the palace of Circe can be identi- 
fied as several places in Greece and Italy. 
A voyage of self-revelation 
But the striking misfortunes which befell 
Ulysses turned what was to have been, or 
should have been a routine journey into a voy- 
age of personal initiation and self-revelation. 
He did not, like other sailors, just have to face 
the sea, the wind, the waves and the tempests, 
or just human or natural enemies. He came face 
to face with the inhuman, the horrific, even the 
hellish. 
Navigation has never involved such chal- 
lenges and excesses and only Ulysses and his 
mythical cousin Jason had to confront these 
extraordinary things, running into and grap- 
pling with the creatures of imaginary worlds. 
At some points in the Odyssey, you get the 
feeling that Ulysses, like Lewis Carroll’s Alice 
in Wonderland, is passing through the look- 
ing-glass of reality to find himself on the other 
side of time and space. 
2 0 THE UNESCO Courier @ DECEMBER 1997 
@ 
Gr
ra
ud
on
, 
Pa
ns
 
Ch
at
ea
u 
d'
Ec
ou
en
, 
Fr
an
ce
 
 
  
Every journey should have a purpose and 
every dream a goal. For a long time, perhaps 
since the beginning, the trials of Ulysses— 
whether instigated by Poseidon or due to the 
negligence or foolhardiness of Ulysses’ com- 
panions—have been regarded as obstacles, 
delays and arduous detours on his return jour- 
ney. As time wasted fighting monsters, avoid- 
ing the Sirens, consulting the dead and even 
falling into the lily-white arms of Calypso. 
Everything in fact—weather, companions, 
monsters and gods—seemingly conspired to 
stop the islander from returning to his island. 
Ulysses” hopes and strength were worn down 
by these struggles. After so many years, what 
1s the value of a king without subjects, a hus- 
band without a wife, an islander without an 
island? Without Ithaka, Ulysses was like 
someone with a vital organ missing. He lacked 
all that he needed—homeland, subjects, wife 
and palace—in order to become again what he 
had always been: a ruler. 
But heaven and earth conspired against him 
and a relentless god brought storms. All the 
challenges posed to Ulysses by monsters and 
phantoms, the illusions and the shadows that 
he had either to outwit or fight head on and 
that are seen as so many perhaps inevitable 
delays on his journey home were also, when 
the story of the voyage was told, so many 
songs, expectations and hopes in the hearts of 
listeners and later, of readers. 
An inner journey 
There is another possible interpretation—a 
stronger and more solid one, I think—of these 
tragic and turbulent travels, with the con- 
stantly-delayed return and the endless ordeals. 
It was made at the beginning of this century 
by a Greek Alexandrian poet, Constantine 
Cavaly, in a poem called Ithaka, which lays 
bare the hidden meaning of the myth by shin- 
ing an unexpected new light on the trials of

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 109876: The Trials of Ulysses

  
Ulysses the islander. Cavafy said the real mean- 
ing of the Odyssey was that the things sent 
to try Ulysses were not obstacles to his home- 
coming but vitally enriching detours so that 
he would return to Ithaka matured by his vic- 
tories and the things he had learned. 
Ulysses left Troy as a soldier, a sailorand a 
war hero and finally reached Ithaka after learn- 
ing the secrets of life, death, strength and wis- 
dom. He left as a man and returned as Man. The 
trials not only hardened him but changed his 
spirit. He triumphed over brute force (the 
Laistrygonians), over monsters (the Cyclopes), 
over magic spells and having his men turned 
into animals (Circe), over feigned seduction 
(the Sirens) and even the irresistible charms 
of love with the nymph Calypso. So to his 
warrior feats at the gates of Troy, he added 
the triple crown of wisdom, truth and love. 
Through his trials, he had a complete experi- 
ence of body, heart and mind. 
Cavafy said the real purpose of the voyage 
was not to arrive but simply for it to take 
place. For Ulysses, it was as much a return to 
Ithaka as along, vast and fertile return to him- 
self. Cavafy obliges us to re-read the Odyssey, 
the greatest poem of discovery to be written 
about the sea, in this completely different 
light. Ithaka is the opposite of a promised 
land. It is a conquered land, conquered from 
the elements and from worldly illusions. A 
land conquered through the slow, difficult 
but inspiring lessons learned from encoun- 
ters with monsters, women and islands. 
You who dream of being Ulysses, remem- 
ber that if you meet a Circe, a Calypso or a 
Nausicaa, you will one day have to leave them 
if you want to find your Penelope again. And 
when the trials are over, the sea will murmur to 
the Islander on the shores of the rediscovered 
Ithaka the names of those he had to vanquish 
or love before he could become aman. Like the 
Nereids of the foaming sea and memory, like 
the spray of the waves, healers at last. 
3 © — — 
. Jf + 
¥ Ls ; 
OT a 
fy 8 
> a 
§ 3 
. 3 od 
Wy - 
oy ; ge # 
“The Return of Ulysses”, a 
15th-century painting (Sienese 
school) on a large Italian 
wooden coffer or cassone. 
  
Here 1s this magic poem: 
When you set out for Ithaka 
ask that your way be long, 
full of adventure, full of instruction. 
The Laistrygonians and the Cyclops, 
angry Poseidon—do not fear them: 
such as these you will never find 
as long as your thought is lofty, as long as a rare 
emotion touch your spirit and your body. 
The Laistrygonians and the Cyclops, 
angry Poseidon—you will not meet them 
unless you carry them in your soul, 
unless your soul raise them up before you. 
Ask that your way be long. 
At many a summer dawn to enter 
—with what gratitude, what joy— 
ports seen for the first time; 
to stop at Phoenician trading centres, 
and to buy good merchandise, 
mother of pearl and coral, amber and ebony, 
and sensuous perfumes of every kind, 
sensuous perfumes as lavishly as you can; 
to visit many Egyptian cities, 
to gather stores of knowledge from the learnéd. 
Have Ithaka always in your mind. 
Your arrival there is what you are destined for. 
But do not in the least hurry the journey. 
Better that it last for years, 
so that when you reach the island you are old, 
rich with all you have gained on the way, 
not expecting Ithaka to give you wealth. 
Ithaka gave you the splendid journey. 
Without her you would not have set out. 
She hasn’t anything else to give you. 
And if you find her poor, Ithaka bas not 
deceived you. 
So wise have you become, of such experience, 
that already you will have understood what 
these Ithakas mean. | 
(From Six Poets of Modern Greece. Chosen, translated 
and introduced by Edmund Keeley and Philip 
Sherrard. Published by Thames and Hudson, London, 
1960 © Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard 1960) 
” | 
THE UNESCO (Gurier moecemser 1997 R. -

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ma
mi
gu
e 
Pi
et
n,
 
Pa
ns
 
79
 


### 109877: What, my brother, is an island?

What, my brother, is an island? 
Where the waters 
of the Ganges 
meet the ocean 
Pilgrims sailing to the island 
of Sagar in the Ganges delta. 
 
. 
» 
» 
tf
 
THE UNESCO Gourier HN DECEMBER 1997 
~ The memory of a folk-song heard in 
"childhood, in a dialect of Bengali, comes 
back to me: 
What, my brother, is an island once you've 
left it? 
It’s nothing, nothing, nothing. 
What, my brother, is an island if it’s not 
yourself? 
In our ancient texts, too, insularity is the 
self, covering and surpassing the universe. They 
describe Jambudvipa (island of Jambu) as one 
of the seven immense insular land masses, all 
symbols of fertility and abundance and each 
surrounded by one of the seven seas of salt 
water, sugar-cane juice, wine, clarified butter, 
curds, milk and fresh water. Jambudvipa is 
ER I —— 
BY LOKENATH BHATTACHARYA 
India itself, marked at its centre by the golden 
mountain Meru, on which stands an enor- 
mous jambu (rose-apple) tree. 
Another tale almost as old as eternity 
describes the meeting of the Ganges with the 
ocean. The Sanskrit epic, the Mahibharata, 
tells how the sage Kapila, lost in meditation in 
the nether world, burned to ashes all the 16,000 
sons of Sagara, a king of the Solar race. 
Another sage, Bhagiratha, through long 
asceticism and persistent prayers, made the 
river Ganges descend from heaven to sanctify 
the victims’ ashes, thereby creating the ocean, 
one of the Sanskrit words for which is sdgara, 
from the name of the king, Sagara. 
To celebrate that sacred event, a three-day 
 
  
W
A
S
 
i 
Fo
o 
F
a
 
T
E
 
F
U
R
 
ax
 - Pa) 
—_— om TT.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 109877: What, my brother, is an island?

  
  
A sandbank in the Ganges near 
the Indian city of Kanpur. 
bathing festival and fair are held each year on 
the Indian island of Sagar near Calcutta in the 
Ganges Delta, a huge, low-lying, densely pop- 
ulated, fertile areca belonging partly to India 
but mostly to Bangladesh. 
The delta’s westernmost island, Sagar is 
awesome and mysterious in appearance, and 
regularly swept by cyclones. Itis here that the 
Ganges once met the ocean, and although 
strictly speaking the ocean is now further 
away, sky and water remain the island’s all- 
pervasive backdrop. 
The festival is attended by many millions 
of people—devotees, saints, frauds, cheats, 
tourists, all combined—representing all Hindu 
sects and all the states of India. Some of the 
sadhus (holy men) who make the pilgrimage 
to Sigar are ascetics who stay naked all the year 
round and practise the most rigorous physi- 
cal disciplines. They live as hermits, and this 
pilgrimage is the only occasion when they 
leave the isolation of their caves in the 
Himalayas, where the descent of the Ganges 
originally took place. 
The island and the pilgrimage also feature 
in Kapilakundali, a love story set against a 
background of gruesome rites published in 
1866 by the pioneering Bengali novelist 
Bankim Chandra Chatterjee. Kapalakundali is 
a vivid account of how a young man return- 
ing from the Sagar Island pilgrimage rescues an 
innocent maiden from the clutches of a prac- 
titioner of human sacrifice, a hermit-priest 
whose body is smeared with ashes from a 
funeral pile and who holds, as a cup, a skull in 
his left hand. The maiden and the young hero 
are destined to be his victims, a fate from 
which they narrowly escape. 
Such esoteric practices were once a part of life 
in this region. The very shape of the Ganges 
Delta, with the vast tract of forest and swamp 
forming its lower part and known as the Sun- 
derbans, evokes the human female organ (yoni), 
and the cults and images associated with it: 
womb, vulva, origin, source, nest, home. 
And thus it is that the cycle becomes com- 
plete and we return to our starting point: 
what, my brother, is an island? | 
: % 
» 
THE UNESCO Courier MW DECEMBER 1997 _- 
© 
Ra
gh
ub
ir
 
Si
ng
h/
AN
A,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

rte Ar 
Cor ra po 
  
© Frank Lechenet/Hérmisphéres, Pans 


### 109878: Easter Island's last secret

Easter Island’s last secret 
The only Polynesian island where traces of 
an indigenous script have been discovered 
Top, a sanctuary of giant 
statues or moainear the shore 
of Easter Island. Some moai 
wear a kind of headpiece of red 
volcanic tuff. 
| 4 
fe THE UNESCO Courier ® DECEMBER 1997 
~The azure waves which break on the 
© shores of Easter Island have come all the 
way from the far edge of the Pacific Ocean—a 
thought which makes the place seem even more 
isolated than it looks. In the night sky, the 
bright stars of the southern hemisphere seem 
to be far-off sister isles exchanging winked 
messages with the huge stone statues that dot 
the island like a tribe of dozing giants. 
Easter Island has many faces—obscure, 
extraordinary and mysterious. There’s the 
island you see, as described by explorers, and 
BY LUIS MIZON 
then the hidden one, of caves and tunnels and 
thesecret lore its inhabitants share. There’s the 
island whose history is lost in the mists of 
time and the island depicted by scientists, 
artists and travellers. All these dimensions 
overlap, interlace and whisper to the others, 
like so many primal echoes. Works of art and 
tourist trinkets apart, Easter Island is a place 
the West has invented to fantasize about. 
From the air, it looks like a boomerang 
hurled from another planet slap into the mid- 
dle of the ocean. A 118 sq. km triangle of rock 
with its high point to the northeast, facing 
towards the islets of Polynesia, and its flat 
part in the southwest, looking towards the 
 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 109878: Easter Island's last secret

© 
Yv
es
 
Ge
ll
ie
/I
cd
ne
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
rs
  
far distant coast of Chile. At each corner of 
the triangle is a volcano. In the left-hand cor- 
ner is the almost-perfect cone of Rano Kau. In 
the right-hand one, Rano Rarako, on whose 
slopes are the biggest group of giant stone 
statues (moat). In the northern corner is Rano 
Aroi, next to Mount Terevaka. Nearly all the 
islanders live in the village of Hanga Roa, near 
Rano Kau. 
The nearest inhabited land is 3,500 km 
away. 
A mysterious script 
Easter Island is the only Polynesian island 
where ancient writing has been found. Its 
meaning 1s an impenetrable secret. 
Even though it was confined to such a small 
geographical area and used by the tiny handful 
of people who lived there, the writing shows 
evidence of a sophisticated civilization. Who 
were these people? When did they get there and 
where did they come from? Did they bring 
their civilization and writing with them? What 
feelings, thoughts and values did these incom- 
prehensible markings once convey? 
Landing on this remote spot in the middle 
of the Pacific vastness can only have been a 
mistake or the result of a mishap or piece of 
good fortune. The discovery of the island in 
1722 by Europeans, in the person of the 
Dutch Admiral Jacob Roggeveen, was a bad 
ed I 
Cae EO 
hd g w 
aw, l= 
¥ A ia 
a 
oe 
Ii) AA fil 
ol) 
Detail of a2 rongo-rongo or 
“talking wood” tablet from 
Easter Island. 
 
A rock painting depicting the 
Bird-Man, the focus of an 
Easter Island cult. 
Rel 
ER) OREHER: a
“Sf a a Ci ti 
A) 0 (pp Ny. RN 
RA 
id oh VINK 
Re 
omen. The island’s population then was 4,000; 
it had been reduced to 1,800 by 1863, 600 by 
1870, a mere 200 five years after that, and only 
a few more in 1911. The nineteenth century 
was ruthless with non-European cultures. 
Easter Island’s only resource was its manpower 
and a few patches of farmland. But its poverty 
hardly protected it against colonial rapacity. 
In 1862, a fleet of pirate slavers from Peru 
came looking for workers for the guano indus- 
try and made off with more than 1,000 of the 
islanders, including their king, Kaimokau, his 
son Maurata and the elders who could read 
the writing on the stone tablets known as 
rongo-rongo. 
The French consul in Lima eventually man- 
aged to get a hundred-odd of the deported 
islanders repatriated, but by then they were 
infected with smallpox and on their return they 
contaminated the rest of the population. The 
secret of the Easter Island script probably died 
with the victims of this catastrophic epidemic. 
The earliest research on the inscriptions was 
done between 1864 and 1886, when an attempt 
was made to categorize the markings or compare 
them with other undeciphered scripts—from 
ancient India, for example. There were three 
stages in these attempts at decipherment, each 
linked with a figure symbolizing a period of the 
island’s history and a specific tablet. 
The bishop of Tabiti’s tablet 
Easter Island had about 1,000 inhabitants when 
the French merchant ship Tampico, captained by 
Jean-Baptiste Dutrou-Bomier and carrying the 
missionary Father Gaspar Zumbohm, anchored 
THE UNESCO Gouricra DECEMBER 1997 2 5 
@© 
Yv
es
 
Ge
ll
ie
/l
cd
ne
/H
oa
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

In the 19th century Westerners 
demolished the last moai still 
standing upright. Right, 
sailors from the French frigate 
Flaresurrounded by angry 
islanders in 1872. 
» offshore in 1866. Two years later, Dutrou- 
Bomnier settled on the island, marrying, or rather 
kidnapping, Koreto Kuapurunga, who claimed 
to be queen of the island, and joining forces 


### 109878: Easter Island's last secret

with an Anglo-Tahitian called John Brander. 
That same year, 1868, Fr Zumbohm decided 
to return to Valparaiso. Since he would pass 
through Tahiti, the Easter Islanders asked him 
to take a gift to its bishop, Mgr Tepano Jaussen, 
as a mark of respect. When the offering, a huge 
ball of plaited hair 100 metres long, was unrav- 
elled in front of the bishop, a wooden tablet 
bearing strange markings was found inside. 
An elderly islander in the missionary party, 
Urupano Hinapote, explained that it was a 
rongo-rongo, one of the revered tablets which 
recorded the island’s most ancient traditions 
but which nobody could decipher since the 
elders who knew the secrets of the script had 
died. The bishop wrote to the missionary who 
had stayed behind on the island, Fr Hyp- 
polyte Roussel, and asked him to send him as 
many of the tablets as he could find. Roussel 
sent him six, noting that the markings on 
them probably meant nothing, that the 
islanders did not know what they meant and 
that those who said they did were liars. 
But the bishop was convinced the discov- 
ery was important and he eventually found, on 
a Tahitian plantation, an interpreter called 
Metoro Tau Aure. As soon as he gave him one 
of these tablets covered with geometric, 
THE UNESCO Courier BW DECEMBER 1997 
TX 2 
anthropomorphic and zoomorphic signs, he 
began a religious chant, apparently reading the 
signs from bottom to top and left to right, 
and turning the tablet upside down at the end 
of cach line to read the next one. This is a vari- 
ant of a form of writing known as “boustro- 
phedon” (literally 
ploughing”) and is similar to certain ancient 
“turning like oxen in 
Greek inscriptions where alternate lines are 
written in opposite directions. Unfortunately, 
the bishop’s interpreter chanted the same thing 
whichever tablet he was given to “read.” 
Captain Dutrou-Bornier’s stick 
When Ignacio Gana, captain of a Chilean 
corvette, the O’Higgins, landed at Easter 
Island in 1870, Dutrou-Bornier gave him a 
chieftain’s stick covered with markings which 
experts consider the finest example of rongo- 
Yon go In existence. 
Gana gave the stick, along with two tablets 
with markings on them, to a scholar at the 
Santiago Natural History Museum, Rodulfo 
Philippi, explaining that the Easter Islanders 
had such reverence for the markings that they 
were obviously sacred to them. 
Philippi at once sent plaster casts of the 
tablets to various experts around the world, 
notably an English scholar, Pack Harrison, 
who was mystified by what he took to be a 
kind of cartoon strip. Not one of the experts 
5 
Sa, 
0 RT Rs 
» Pr » AN ne A fe SA 8 
a A 0H Me rid it 
(23 
Sy 
LI%) 
A 
an ER: 
i} 
5 
a 
le] 
o 
Q 
= 
1] 
$ 
= 
@ 
2 
i) 
[-+] 
2 
3 
[~*} 
@ 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

Giant heads carved out of soft 
volcanic tuff may represent 
important figures in the 
history of Easter Island. 


### 109878: Easter Island's last secret

consulted could find the key to the mysteri- 
ous markings. 
Thomson's attempts at 
translation 
William Thomson was the purser on the Amer- 
ican ship Mohican which stopped at Easter 
Island in 1886. Three years later, the U.S. 
National Museum published his history of the 
island, the most detailed written until then. 
Before reaching the island, the Mohican 
had stopped in Tahiti, where Thomson pho- 
tographed the tablets in the bishop’s posses- 
sion. Once on Easter Island, he searched for an 
islander who could translate the inscriptions. 
He came across an old man, Ure Vaeike, who 
was very reluctant to help him but was even- 
tually persuaded by money. The old man 
seemed to regard translating the markings as 
something dangerous for his soul. 
As soon as he saw the photos of the tablets 
he began to chant quickly. But, just as with 
Metoro Tau Aure, he did not seem to be read- 
ing the text. He too recited the same things 
whichever one he was shown. 
In the end, he confessed to Thomson that 
nobody on the island could read the mark- 
ings but that they were definitely important, 
like a book written in a foreign language one 
did not understand. According to Thomson, 
Ure Vaeike’s “poetic translation” of the mark- 
ings was as follows: 
“My daughter’s canoe which has never been 
beaten by enemy tribes. My daughter’s canoe 
has notbeen destroyed by the plot of Honiti. 
It’s always victorious in all battles. Nothing 
could force my daughter to drink the poison 
from the obsidian cup. How can I console 
myself when powerful seas separate us? Oh 
my daughter! My daughter! The great liquid 
path stretches to the horizon. My daughter, oh 
my daughter. I shall swim through deep waters 
to find you, my daughter, oh my daughter!” 
Experts now think some of the Easter 
Island markings are perhaps words, though 
they may not be full sentences or at all gram- 
matical. They may just be notes to help the 
passing-down of oral traditions, especially 
genealogical records. 
Maybe these mysterious inscriptions have 
the same message for us as the island itself. 
Perhaps they simply invite us to ponder on the 
fragility of all human endeavour. For the 
moment they remain poems dedicated to 
silence. [| 
  
THE UNLSCO Gourier WB DECEMBER 1997 2 [| 
@ 
Fr
an
k 
Le
ch
en
et
/H
ém
is
ph
ér
es
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

© 
G 
Da
gl
h 
Or
ti
, 
Pa
ns
/N
at
io
na
l 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
Ma
dr
id
 
{S
pa
in
) 
    
  
Once upon a time 
there was a 
beautiful island... 
Engraving above shows 
Havana, capital of Cuba, as it 
was in 1851, a time when 
Cuba’s sugar industry was 
expanding and its population 
was growing. 
28 © THE unEsco Courts mpecemsir 1907 
~ [like to imagine the first encounter 
© between the Spaniards and the Indians 
of Cuba. The Spaniards disembark as con- 
quistadors with drums and trumpets. Hel- 
meted and booted, they carry halberds and 
muskets, and wield sabres and swords. The 
Cuban Indians savour earthly delights. They 
lie naked—or almost—in their hammocks and 
smoke the rolled-up tobacco leaves they are 
so fond of. 
A monk who sailed with Christopher 
Columbus remarked on the splendour of 
Cuba’s plant and animal life and its magnificent 
sunsets. In the glowing sky a festival of colours 
would modulate from blue to pink, then to 
orange, green and purple before melting into 
a deeper, denser blue just before nightfall, 
But the Spaniards had other priorities than 
contemplating the beauty of sunsets. Discov- 
ering, conquering and colonizing the New 
World cost the Spanish crown dear. Colum- 
bus, who had left Europe to search for the 
fastest and most cconomical silk and spice 


### 109879: Cuba's gold

route, was eventually relieved of his command. 
An army of battle-hardened soldiers and war- 
like adventurers began hunting throughout 
Cuba’s gold 
BY EDUARDO MANET 
the region for gold, fighting among them- 
sclves to the death and terrorizing, corrupting 
and enslaving the indigenous population. 
The feverish search for El Dorado (“the 
land of gold”), a mythical land honeycombed 
with gold mines, fuelled legend and inspired 
perilous expeditions. Looking for gold, find- 
ing gold and sending galleons-full of it back to 
Spain grew into an obsession. 
The Indian population of Cuba, the “pearl 
of the West Indies”, was mobilized to strip 
the island of its gold, but the conquistadors 
were cruelly disappointed; they did not find 
a single nugget. Exhausted by forced labour 
and decimated by disease brought by the 
Europeans, the island’s inhabitants were 
almost completely wiped out. 
The triumph of sugar 
The colonists soon found consolation else- 
where. The island abounded in other forms 
of wealth. The sybaritic society of the Old 
World discovered that sugar of rare quality 
could be grown in Cuba. What could be more 
delicious after a copious meal than a sweet 
dessert, a cup of beautiful, anthracite-black

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

coffee along with a glass of Cuban rum and 
one of the cigars that would become world 
famous as Havanas? 
This was the Cuban “gold” found by the 
first colonists. Not precious metal but tobacco, 
rum, coffee and especially sugar. And because the 
sugar cane on the island proved to be of such 
exceptional quality, there was no point in tak- 
ing the trouble to develop other, less reliable 
crops. Growing sugar as a single crop was offi- 
cially encouraged. Fields of sugar cane would 
soon stretch as far as the eye could see, and 
monoculture would turn into monomania. 
With the rise of Cuban patriotism in the 
nineteenth century, voices were raised against 
the risk that a single crop might eventually 
strangle the country’s economy. But even after 
the Cuban people had achieved a hard-won 
independence, the cultivation of sugar cane as 
asingle crop continued its triumphant march. 
A good many of the hectares of sugar-cane 
fields that had belonged to the Spanish or the 
Creoles were transferred to Cuban business- 
men and American companies. The produc- 
tion rhythm imposed its law on the island’s 
economy. When the price of sugar rose, the 
Cubans profited; when it went down, the cane- 
cutters and the needy fell into dire poverty. 
All Cuban patriots wanted to do some- 
thing about this. In the schools it was taught 
that the country’s future lay in crop diversi- 
fication, in an economic blend that would 
strike a balance between the different sources 
of wealth—tobacco, coffee, minerals and fruit. 


### 109879: Cuba's gold

It is hardly surprising then that after the 
revolution of 1958 the new leaders launched a 
massive programme of industrialization and 
diversification of the Cuban economy. Farm- 
ing went from strength to strength as Cuba 
began a new chapter in its history that was 
designed to put an end to the dominance of 
sugar cane, a symbol of the past. 
Golden sands 
But realism soon led the country’s leaders to 
change their minds. Cuban sugar became a 
force on the world market and brought in 
foreign currency. At the same time, Cuba 
broke off relations with the United States, 
and came to rely on sugar as a basis for trade 
with the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc 
countries. Tobacco, rum, coffee, fruit, zinc 
and nickel mines and fish were part of the 
island’s resources, but sugar cane, as always, 
dominated the economy. It was as much a part 
 
Harvesting sugar cane in 
Vinales (Cuba). 
of Cuban reality as the island’s beaches and 
palm trees, its Havanas, its torrential rains, its 
music and its climate. 
Today the situation has changed consider- 
ably. Since the seismic shocks that transformed 
the world political scene in the 1980s with the 
implosion of the Soviet Union and the fall of 
the Berlin wall, sugar has become one of the 
A contemporary engraving of a OSE unstable products on the international 
Cuban sugar plantation in the 
late 17th century. 
  
  
    
   
   
Hy 
STS es
     
TLERG, ™ — 
NTE 
     
  
RL rl fo s ald | I) iN wills 
Algae Re Ell) 
  
  
  
THE UNESCO Gourir MW DECEMBER 1997 
© 
St
ep
ha
ne
 
Fr
an
ce
s/
Hé
mi
sp
hé
re
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
© 
G 
Da
gh
 
Or
t,
 
Pa
ns
/ 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
Ma
dn
d 
(S
pa
in
)

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

» market. The well fed and health-conscious West 
has banished it from the table. Sugar substi- 
tutes and other sweeteners have taken over. The 
following comparison saysitall: in 1914 Lidia 
Quatania, star of Cabiria, an Italian film that 
became an international hit, was the embodi- 


### 109879: Cuba's gold

ment of female pulchritude. She and her volup- 
tuous curves made the perfect advertising image 
for the sugar Cuba then sold in massive quan- 
tities. In 1997 one need only look at the fash- 
ion shows on Western television and the fili- 
form silhouettes of the top models—today’s 
dream creatures—to understand the uncertain- 
ties of the sugar market. 
But to return to Christopher Columbus. 
“The first tourist to set foot on Cuban soil, 
he exclaimed that the island was “the most 
beautiful land in the world”. The library in 
Seville which houses the archives of the colo- 
nization of the Americas contains thousands 
of pages on the early days of colonization that 
corroborate this description and constitute a 
collection of tourist brochures before their 
ume. 
Cuba has kept its beautiful beaches and 
St
ép
ha
ne
 
Fr
an
ce
s/
Hé
mi
sp
he
re
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
THE UNESCO Gourier EH DECEMBER 1997 
palm trees intact. Why not profit from this 
bounty? All that had to be done was to set up 
a tourist development strategy, a hotel infra- 
structure and to adapt to today’s joint-venture 
system. Tourism is the most hybrid of indus- 
tries. Tourists from all over the world—Ger- 
mans, Mexicans, Spanish, Swiss, Belgians, 
French, Italians and many other nationali- 
ties—now relax on Cuba’s soft sands. 
Let me conclude by describing an imagi- 
nary scene. A Cuban beach. A beautiful glow- 
ing sunset. A hammock is stretched between 
two coconut trees. Lounging in itis an Indian 
chief smoking tobacco leaves. Two beautiful 
Indian women are fanning him with palm 
leaves. Diego Velizquez, a Spanish conquista- 
dor, surrounded by cuirassed soldiers armed 
to the teeth, impatiently addresses the reclin- 
ing chief. “We want gold!” he demands in a 
strong castilian accent. 
“Gold?” queries the Chief gently, “but...” 
His hand sweeps nonchalantly, politely and 
elegantly towards the beach, the sea, the sky 
and the sun. “Gold, sefior? You have it before 
you. This is our gold.” || 
A floor show in a Havana 
nightclub. 

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=31) 2

### 109899: Fact file: twenty key issues in island development

### 109880: UNESCO's island agenda

~ LAND, SEA AND PEOPLE 
In 1996 Unesco launched an Environment and Development in Coastal 
Regions and Small Islands (CS!) initiative in order to help Member 
UN ESCO’S ISLAND AGEN DA States achieve environmentally sound, socially equitable and culturally 
CL appropriate development of their coastal areas. These areas contain 
In 1990 Unesco created a unit to act as a focal point many of the world’s richest ecosystems, and their resources make a 
within Its Secretariat for those of its small Member sizeable contribution to world food security. About 60% of the world's 
population lives within 60 km of the sea. To co-ordinate planning and 
action on behalf of the sound development of coastal regions, the CSI 
supports an integrated approach drawing on the experience accumu- 
lated by Unesco's natural science and social science sectors. Key 
themes include freshwater management, sustaining biological diver- 
sity, migration from inland areas to coastal urban centres, the social 
States—mainly islands in the developing world—that 
do not have permanent delegations at Unesco Head- 
quarters. The unit's task is to ensure that these small 
states participate fully in Unesco activities and that 
UNESCO is responsive to their needs. 
The states {of which there are 28, plus 3 Asso- 
impacts of coastal erosion and sea-level rise. [| 
ciate Members) have been selected according to the fol For further information: 
lowing criteria, which were flexibly applied: a surface Environment and Development in Coastal Regions and in Small islands 
area less than 10,000 km2; a population of less than 1 (CsI) 
, \ UNESCO, 1, rue Miollis 
million, and a per capita gros on GNP ry 
d a per capita gross national product (GNP) 75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
of about $2,000. The countries belong to the following Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 58 08 
regions: Africa (Cape Verde, Comoros, Lesotho, Sao E-mail: csi@unesco.org 
Tome and Principe, Seychelles and Swaziland); Website: http://www.unesco.org/csi 
Asia/Pacific (Cook Islands, Fiji, Kinbati, Maldives, Mar- 
shall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Samoa, Solomon Islands, 
Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu); Caribbean (Antigua and Bar- INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF THE REEF 
buda, Bahamas, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts @——————--+ - « — -- -- 
and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, 1997 has been declared the international Year of the Reef (IYOR). This 
worldwide campaign is designed to encourage the conservation and 
sustainable use of coral reefs and associated seagrass and man- 
Suriname), plus the three Associate Members (Aruba, 
the British Virgin Islands and the Netherlands Antilles). 
grove ecosystems. [| 
They face particularly acute environmental and For further information: 
development problems because of their ecologically Website: http://www.coral.org/IYOR 
fragile and vulnerable natural heritage, small size, geo- 
graphical isolation, geological formation, scarcity of 
natural resources, and the natural hazards to which THE INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC COUNCIL 
they are exposed {earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, FOR ISLAND DEVELOPMENT (INSULA) 
tsunamis, cyclones, typhoons, floods, landslides and EE EEE 
droughts). These problems are worsened by soil ero- INSULA 1s an international non-governmental organization created in 
1989 at the instigation of Unesco’s Man and the Biosphere Pro- 
gramme (MAB) In order to bring together and mobilize the skills of 
national, regional and international authorities concerned with the sus- 
tainable development of islands and small island states. It encourages 
  
sion, groundwater contamination, deforestation in 
upland areas, over-use of herbicides and the pollution 
of rivers and coastal waters. 
Places of cultural and biological blending, these technical co-operation, especially In culture and in training personnel, 
small countries have nurtured societies that are In In the exchange of information and experience through its publications 
many cases multiracial and multilingual and gifted and the organization of national and international conferences and 
with a remarkable capacity for adaptation. They are seminars. 
A recently launched campaign entitled “Let's Adopt an Atoll” 
has begun to raise funds to help the 1,000-0dd inhabitants of the 
Micronesian islet of Falalop start up or develop activities to com- 
pensate for the loss in the year 2000 of the financial aid they have been 
an original source of inspiration for the exploration of 
new paradigms and partnerships on local, regional 
and worldwide levels. 
AMINA OSMAN receving since 1986 from the United States. [| 
For further information: For further information: 
Unit for Relations with Small Member States INSULA 
c/o Unesco, Division of Ecological Sciences 
1, rue Miollis 
75732 Paris Cedex 15, France 
Bureau for External Relations 
UNEsco, 7, Place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP France Tel: (33) (0)1 45 68 40 56 
Tel: (33) (0)1 456818 61 Fax: (33) (0)1 45 68 58 04 
Fax: (33) (0)1 4568 5539 E-mail: insula@speedy.grolier.fr 
E-mail; a.kramp@unesco.org Website: http://www.insula.org 
THE UNESCO Gourier BW DECEMBER 1997

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 109899: Fact file: twenty key issues in island development

FACT FILE 
TWENTY KEY ISSUES 
IN ISLAND DEVELOPMENT 
19 
» 
1. Sustainable development: Islands are less able to absorb environ- 
mental effects than larger areas. Understanding and implementing strate- 
gies of sustainable develcpment are major challenges for island com- 
munities. 
2. Diversity. Islands vary considerably in size and population. The problems 
they confront derive in varying degrees from their smallness, a limited 
resource base and their susceptibility to storm damage and drought. 
3. Open, specialized economies: Often dependent for foreign exchange 
on the export of one or two specialist crops, small islands may be obliged 
to import many consumer goeds, including food. 
4, Private sector involvement, The private sector has much to contribute 
to development policy. Transnational and local companies have a major 
responsibility with regard to waste management, toxic materials control 
and energy conservation. 
5. Distortions in island economies: Social transfer payments can lead 
to distortions of the economy whose effects have not always been fully rec- 
ognized. 
6. Transport: Transport services between small islands and the outside 
world are often difficult to establish and costly. 
7. Demographic issues: Small islands are subject to cycles of rapid demo- 
graphic change that go far beyond those related to the balance between 
natural birth- and death-rates. 
8. Employment. Small population size and migration mean that the fine 
balance between supply and demand of human resources is easily upset. 
9. Decision-making. Integration of scientific concepts into managing 
island environments is often given low political priority. 
10. Natural resources: Natural resources, on which sustainable devel 
opment ultimately depends, are among the most vulnerable sectors of an 
island's assets. 
11. Forestry. Conservation of forest cover is vital for small islands to pro- 
tect their watersheds and guard against soil erosion. 
12. Land management. Land-use problems on islands largely result from 
the conflict between change and development and traditional systems, 
resulting in the fragmentation of landholdings. 
13. Water. Only the largest and wettest high islands have ample water 
resources, and even on some of these there are seasonal shortages. 
14. Energy. Many islands depend almost totally on imported fossil fuels, 
although use of wood and charcoal continues. Solar energy is already 
important on some islands and biogas digesters are in use in a few areas. 
15. Conservation: Small islands are often sites of rare but fragile ecosys- 
tems, many of which are in danger of disappearing through lack of con- 
servation policies. 
16. Coastal and marine ecosystems: Unregulated industrial and tourist 
development projects can cause permanent damage. 
17. Fisheries: Island fisheries in the tropics and the Mediterranean are 
mainly small-scale and conducted on artisanal lines. Fishing for export is 
hampered by poor catching, storing and marketing capacities. 
18. Agriculture: Island agricultural systems range from subsistence farm- 
ing to the production of export cash crops. The fall in demand for sugar- 
cane and copra has been a serious blow to certain island economies. 
19. Industry. The smallness of islands is a severe constraint on indus- 
trial development. There is, however, some scope for value-adding semi- 
manufacture. 
20. Tourism and allied services: tourism means heavy investment in infra- 
structure. n 
© THE UNESCO Courier B DECEMBER 1997 
© 
Ma
rc
el
lo
 
Be
rt
in
et
ti
/R
ap
ho
, 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Je
an
 
R
e
y
/
A
N
A
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Island World 
 
 

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 109899: Fact file: twenty key issues in island development

Heritage Sites 
  
  
Australia: Fraser Island (1992), 
Lord Howe Island (1982) 
Canada: Anthony Island (1981) 
Chile: Rapa Nui National Park, Easter 
Island (1995) 
Ecuador: Galapagos Islands (1978) 
Indonesia: Komodo National Park 
(Komodo Islands) (1991) 
Japan: Yakushima (Yaku Island) 
(1993) 
Mozambique: Island of Mozambique 
(1991) 
United Kingdom: St. Kilda Island 
(1986); Henderson Island (1988); 
Gough Island Wildlife Reserve 
(1995) 
Senegal: Island of Gorée (1978) 
Seychelles: Aldabra Atoll (1982) 
Viet Nam: Ha Long Bay (1994) 
Left, Komodo National Park 
(Indonesia). Below, Fraser Island 
(Australia), the world’s largest sand 
island. Below left, Ha Long Bay, in the 
Gulf of Tonkin (Viet Nam). 
 © 
Ya
nn
 
Ar
th
us
 
Be
rt
ra
nd
/E
ar
th
 
fr
om
 
Ab
ov
e 
/U
NE
SC
O 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Publications on sale at: 
Unesco Publishing, 1 rue Miollis, 75732 
Pars Cedex 15, France. 
Tel: (33) (0)1 4568 43 00 
Fax: (33) (0)1 4568 57 41 
Website: 
http://www.unesco.org/pubhshing 
« [ducational strategies for small 
island states 
(Fundamentals of educational planning 
44), by D. Atchoarena, 1993 
« Small Countries, a wealth of 
cultures, Unesco Courier, October 1986 
« [slands’ culture and development 
(Future-oriented studies), 1991 
« fducation in small states 
(Prospects, quarterly review of 
education no. 80), 1991 
«Asia Pacific Arts Directory, T. Dolling, 
3vols., 1996 
« Scientific diving: a general code of 
practice, N. Flemming (ed.), 2nd ed., 
1996 
«Hydrology and water resources of 
small islands: a practical guide (Studies 
and reports in hydrology 49), A. Falkland 
(ed.), 1991 
« Sustainable development and 
environmental management of small 
islands (Man and the Biosphere Series 
5), W. Beller, P. d’Ayala and P. Hein 
(eds.), 1920 
DISCOGRAPHY 
Compact discs in the Unesco Collection 
of Traditional Music of the World on sale 
at the Unesco Bookshop, 
1, Place de Fontenoy, 
75352 Pans O7 SP, France, 
Tel. (33) (0)1 4568 22 22 
Bali. Folk music 
Bali. Court music and Banjar music 
Corsica. Religious music of oral 
tradition 
Cuba. Folk music 
Greece. Vocal monedies 
Greece. Traditional music 
Hong Kong. Instrumental music 
Indonesia. Music from West Java 
Ireland. Traditional music of today 
Japan. Ainu songs 
Java. Vocal art 
Java. Sundanese folk music 
Sicily. Music for Holy Week 
Solomon Islands. Fataleka and Baegu 
music from Malaita 
y 
) p 
THE UNESCO Courier HW DECEMBER 1997

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

COMMENTARY Federico Mayor 
a 
UNESCO AT WORK: 
IG
A 
Ja
cq
ue
s,
 
Mo
nt
ré
a  


### 109881: UNESCO at work: peace, development and democracy

Through its work in education, science, culture and 
communication, UNESCO seeks to free the individual. It 
combats poverty, exclusion and violence, promotes 
tolerance and multicultural dialogue and helps to pro- 
tect human diversity. 
Convinced that it is only through freeing the indi- 
vidual that the political participation essential for 
democratic coexistence can develop, UNESCO defends 
human rights and the “personal sovereignty” of each 
and every one. Democratic values give strength and 
cohesion to the unlimited diversity of the human species 
and promote its unity. UNESCO does not represent a 
particular civilization but all countries without excep- 
tion: it represents humanity as a whole. 
Its mission is to build peace in people’s minds by con- 
tributing to human development within a framework of 
justice and freedom, for the right to peace is a premise 
on which all other human rights are based. With this 
in mind, UNESCO encourages all citizens to learn about 
and respect the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. These rights are neither given nor received; 
they are put into practice on a day-to-day basis. They 
are indivisible. Exercise of and respect for human 
| rights underpin the three great principles that inspired 
the founders of the United Nations system: peace, jus- 
| tice and freedom. While states and other entities or 
institutions cannot grant these rights they must ensure 
that they are respected. 
UNESCO maintains contact with all peoples and all 
sections of society in order to encourage the general 
mobilization that is needed to bring about the transition 
from the law of the strong to the law of reason, from a 
culture of war based on coercion and power to a cul-   
  
Ce 
3 4 THE UNESCO Courier WB DECEMBER 1997 
ture of peace based on dialogue and persuasion. 

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
Discouraging war and strengthening peace are two 
sides of the same coin. Democracies do not have to be vul- 
nerable. Citizens must feel that they are protected by the 
rule of law and take pride in its enforcement. For these 
reasons we need a new concept of security and of the role 
of the armed forces. Astronomical sums are today ear- 
marked by states to protect their territory from potential 
international enemies. Civil society is left completely 
exposed, and watches with dismay the establishment of 
regimes which fill daily life with terror and suffering, 
while intensive and profitable trading in weapons of 
mass destruction continues all over the world. 
A shared reponsibility 
The seeds of non-violence, tolerance and solidarity must 
be sown very early. This is the only way in which peace 
can become cultural, i.e. inherent in the organization of 
lifein society. We must plant the seeds today if they are 
to bear fruit tomorrow. This germination will take place 
in the schools. This is why education is the key to the dif- 
ferent future that we desire for our children. 
Education frees individuals and empowers them to 
shape their future, to accept or reject according to 
their own judgement, to act always “by their own 
lights”. The prime beneficiaries of this education are, 
of course, the excluded, but lifelong education is of 
concern to all, rich and poor, scholars and the wider 


### 109881: UNESCO at work: peace, development and democracy

public, heads of government and ordinary citizens. 
For living together in a spirit of good understanding is 
a collective and shared responsibility. 
This is UNESCO’s field of action. It promotes the 
transfer of knowledge and the access of all to the com- 
munications media, without which reforming ideas do 
not circulate. Freedom of expression is a prerequisite 
of justice. And laws are only just if all citizens have the 
right to express their views. 
This is why UNESCO is constantly reminding gov- 
ernments that education is a fundamental right for all 
and as such must be accorded political and budgetary 
priority by states. A country’s development depends on 
improving the level of education of its people. There 
is a direct link between reorganizing budgetary prior- 
ities in this way and the achievement of sustainable 
socio-economic development. Subsidies and loans from 
outside sources can make a valuable contribution for 
a time, but external aid can never replace a nation’s 
political commitment to the education of all its citizens 
as a matter of top priority. 
The conscience of humanity 
Education is a priority mission for UNESCO, but not its 
only task. These tasks are many, and all are linked to 
the promotion of the ideal of peace set forth in the Pre- 
amble to its Constitution. 
UNESCO works to safeguard the heritage—natural, 
cultural (tangible and intangible), genetic and ethi- 
cal—and fosters creativity in an endeavour to build the 
cultural heritage of the future. Through far-reaching 
programmes on the environment (Man and the Bios- 
phere, oceanography, hydrology and geology) and in 
the social sciences (MOST), UNESCO encourages sci- 
entific rigour in research and fosters the establishment 
of exchange networks for reflection and training capa- 
ble of providing rapid and sound solutions to many of 
the questions facing humanity. The World Science 
Conference to be held in 1999 will present a retro- 
spective of the major scientific achievements of the 
century. 
The Universal Declaration on the Human Genome, 
based on the excellent work carried out over the past 
five years by the International Bioethics Committee, is 
the first ethical and legal framework of worldwide 
scope on a subject that is profoundly scientific and 
human, as well as being a major standard-setting con- 
tribution made to humanity by UNESCO. 
It must never be forgotten, however, that at the end 
of the day it is up to nations to put all these ideals into 
practice by ineorporating guidelines into their laws and 
striving to reach the goals that they, with others, have 
set at international conferences. In accordance with its 
mandate UNESCO is required to denounce any situations 
or actions that are contrary to the standards and ethical 
values so clearly laid down in its Constitution. For 
UNESCO is also a conscience of humanity. [| 
THE UNESCO Gourier HW DECEMBER 1997 3 5

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 109882: The Treasure of the Cerro Rico

HERITAGE 
The treasure of the 
  
ERRO RICO 
 
Bolivia 
Brazil 
   by Pascale Absi 
Indigenous miners who work the ore-rich mountain of Potosi 
(Bolivia) believe it to be the incarnation of Pachamama, an Andean 
god. The city has featured on the World Heritage List since 1987. 
The history of the Bolivian 
city of Potosi began in 
1545 when the Spanish began 
mining silver deposits in a moun- 
tain which became known as the 
Cerro Rico. Within a few years a 
been built with the ore extracted 
from the mountain by the Indians 
during the colonial period. 
But first and foremost Potost 
was a mining camp whose fortunes 
were closely linked to its veins of 
Sucre 
rich settlement studded with opu- ore and to the vicissitudes of inter- 
POTOSI sil 
~ LA Paraguay and the mansions of the eolonial of great wealth, decline set in, and 
: \ in the mid-1980s plummeting bourgeoisie had grown up at th 
Argentina geoisie had grown up at e 
foot of this 4,000-metre-high prices brought an end to the tin 
cycle that had begun at the turn 
  
peak, and soon Potosi had a bigger 
population than that of London, of the century. The state-run 
Paris or Amsterdam. Fabulous ines closed, and Potosi was 
plunged deep in crisis. 
Today it is the capital of the 
poorest department in the Bolivian 
Andes. Of its 120,000 or so inhab- 
itants, more than 7,000 miners— 
fiestas were organized by the 
wealthy mine-owners. It is said 
The Royal Mint (Casa Real de Moneda), below, was completely 
rebuilt between 1759 and 1773 by Salvador Villa and Luis Cabello. 
It is one of the finest examples of Potosi’s colonial architecture. 
that a silver bridge stretching 
from Potosito Madrid could have 
men, women and children—orga- 
nized in co-operatives still work 
night and day deep within the 
mountain. Mining methods have 
barely changed since colonial 
times, and because of the com- 
  
ile . 
SA RARRRRARNARY Ba 
i sis, poor diet and lack of medical 
bined effect of accidents, silico- 
         
  
care, the average life expectancy of 
workers 1s no more than fifty. 
GIVE THAT YOU MAY RECEIVE 
One August day in 1996 more than 
a hundred women from Potosi’s 
mining co-operatives dceided to 
occupy the summit of Cerro Rico 
to protest against their working 
conditions and the policy of priva-  @ Frangois Gohier/Explorer, Pans tizing ore deposits for the benefit 
36 THE UNESCO Gourer ®DOLCLMBER 1D97

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 109882: The Treasure of the Cerro Rico

ia 
§ ( fily 
IHS HA 
The mining city of 
Potosi. In 
background, the 
baroque cathedral 
designed by Manuel 
de Sanahuja. It was 
not completed until 
1838. 
 
: 
ER ILA er 2 lh GER Vi 
 
of multinational companies. Their 
aetion also had a cultural aim: to 
protect the Cerro Rico from the 
intrusion of the modern technolo- 
gies used by the big companies 
that would threaten its geologi- 
eal stability, One side of the sum- 
mit had already caved in, partly 
destroying the mountain’s elar- 
aeteristie conical shape. 
The city’s entire population 
rallied behind the mining women, 
whose struggle is far more than a 
mere defence of Potosi as a his- 
torie symbol. For everyone, miners 
and farmers alike, the Cerro Rico 
is the incarnation of Pachamama, 
an Andean divinity assoeiated with 
the earth’s fertility. 
Sky 
The mine workers, who belong 
to the 
Quechua-speaking communities, 
region’s indigenous, 
still have plots of land in the places 
from whicli they came. They often 
return to the countryside to do 
farm work, attend festivals, or 
assume some kind of political 
office. Townsfolk and miners they 
may be, hut they are not cut off 
from the rural world. The mining 
culture has heen built around a 
conception of the world rooted in 
rural life: you must give in order 
to receive; people are not the rulers 
of the world, but must negotiate 
eontinually with the forces of 
nature in order to gain access to 
its wealth. The Potosi miners 
© 
Fr
an
go
is
 
Go
tu
er
/E
xp
lo
re
r,
 
Pa
ns
 
believe that the Spirit of the moun- 
tain is the real owner of the mineral 
deposits that people ave allowed to 
mine (but only in exchange for 
offerings). 
THE GODS OF THE MOUNTAIN 
The present equilibrium between 
the workers and their mountain is 
the culmination of a long process 
of taming the vital forees of the 
Cerro, which was intact in 1545 
when the Spanish discovered the 
existence of fabulous deposits of 
silver within it. The Cerro Rico is a 
sacred mountain on whose summit 
stands a place of worship. The min- 
ers say that it has exacted a toll of 
human lives in exeliange for being 
exploited. The earliest sacrifice 
wasnade by the Indians who came 
to Potosi to do compulsory service 
for the Spanish erown and died in 
their thousands in the bowels of 
the mountain. It is their blood, so it 
is said, that gives the mountain its 
singular red colour. Nowadays, 
sated at long last, the Cerro Rico 
lets people live in exchange for more 
modest offerings. 
The Europeans appropriated 
the souls of the indigenous popu- 
lation as well as the riches of 
South America. The Spanish soon 
replaced the divinity of the moun- 
tain by the Madonna de la Cande- 
laria (Our Lady of Candlemas). 
They built chapels along the 
mountain roads, and placed a 
cross on the summit. Pagan ele- 
ments that eould not be assimi- 
lated by the Catholie missionaries 
(ancestor worship, for example) 
were considered to be devil-wor- 
ship and condemned. 
Today the miners divide their 
loyalties between two divinities, 
Pachamama and Tio. Pachamama 
is associated with the mountain and 
is personified at the entrance to 
each mine by an effigy of the Vir- 
gin Mary, whose protection the min- 
ers solieit. She is also the wife of 
Tio, the god of mine shafts and the 
lord of mining and inineral deposits. » 
n, m= 
J THE UNESCO Courier B DECEMBER 1997

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 109882: The Treasure of the Cerro Rico

> 
@ 
Pa
sc
al
e 
Ab
s)
, 
Pa
ns
 
Represented by mud stat- 
uettes placed here and there 
along the mine galleries, Tio has 
inherited horns, hooves, forked 
tail and the nickname diablo from 
the European image of the devil. 
Yet the moral idea of the devil 
and the Manicliean division into 
good and evil propounded by the 
Catholic Church have never heen 
totally integrated into Andean con- 
cepts of the vital forces of Nature. 
The devil of the mine punishes 
workers who fail to make offer- 
ngs to him not beeause he is evil 
but because he is hungry. Ile is 
held responsible for most of the 
mortal accidents due to roof-falls 
or suflocation—on these occasions 
he is said to have eaten his vic- 
tims. Propitiatory rites therefore 
consist largely of feeding the mine 
divinities in order to solicit their 
wealth and win protection from 
their gargantuan appetites. Every 
Friday miners gather around one 
of Tio’s statuettes, pour a spot of 
alcohol at his feet, lay a few eoca 
leaves on his outstretched hands 
and place a Lighted cigarette 
between his lips. During the dry 
season, the miners improve his 
rations by sacrificing llamas. 
Tio is a strangely anthropo- 
morphic figure, sitting amongst 
the men as if he were one of their 
number and being included in 
We 0 “mie unesco (Qurier m pEcEmBER 1997 
~ 
n 
, 
A miner examines a 
shard of ore he has 
just hacked from the 
shaft wall. 
their conversations. He is a work- 
mate, almost a friend. He ean even 
be heard of an evening in the 
silence of the abandoned mine, 
emptying a wheelbarrow or hack- 
ing away at the rock. Some miners 
tell how, when they arrive at their 
posts in the morning, they find 
their work already partly done. 
Sometimes dressed as a miner, 
with helmet, lamp and cloven 
hooves, jewels, blond hair and out- 
sized sex, Tio has been known to 
appear to a miner working alone in 
the galleries and guide him to a 
particularly rich seam or suggest 
they make some kind of pact. In 
return for greater wealth, he will 
ask the miner for exceptional 
offerings, such as his soul or a 
human sacrifice. 
A WORKMATE AND A GOD 
The capture of a miner’s soul 
through a pact with Tio is only the 
extreme manifestation of the influ- 
ence of diabolical forces on human 
beings. According to Potosi min- 
ers, going down the mine turns you 
into something of a devil yourself. 
When they first start work, the 
men of the Cerro fall victim to an 
initiatory disease corresponding to 
the temporary seizure of their soul 
hy Tio. This event, regarded as a 
baptism, marks their entrance into 
the circle of devils, an essential 
qualification for work underground 
and a guarantee of the quality of 
their output. 
There is a tenuous dividing line 
between the devil who becomes a 
miner and the miner who becomes 
a devil. In the mine their roles are 
interchangeable; the man becomes 
Pachamama’s lover. Mining is 
described as a fertile sexual rcla- 
tionship: the miners talk about lift- 
ing the skirts and using their crow- 
bar to deflower thc woman- 
mountain whom they fertilize with 
their offerings and deliver each 
day of her minerals. 
The same energy circulates 
between the miners and the spirits 
 
of the mountain. They say in the 
Cerro that men give life to the mine 
with their breath, just as the mine 
gives life to men. Just as mines cave 
in when they are no longer 
exploited, miners fall ill and die 
when they no longer go to work. 
One August morning in 1996 
the women members of the co- 
operatives came to defend this 
fragile balance which is threat- 
ened by large-scale mining of the 
Cerro Rico. In the evening of the 
fourth day of their occupation, as 
they were preparing to pour a liba- 
tion to Pachamama from a bottle 
of spirits they had brought with 
them to fight the bitter cold, one 
of them told me, “You know, all 
these machines will spell the end of 
the Cerro. It might even collapse, 
and that would make Pachamama 
very angry. ...” |

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 109882: The Treasure of the Cerro Rico

The Cerro Rico. 
In Potosi it is said 
that the mountain 
owes its reddish 
colour to the blood of 
the thousands of 
miners who have 
perished working 
deep within it. 
  
 
THE SPANISH KING'S SILVER 
The great days of Potosi were in the early 17th century when it 
was the biggest mining and industrial complex in South Amer- 
ica. Twenty-two successive fagunas or reservoirs equipped with 
locks fed water to an artificial watercourse (La Rivera) which 
powered 140 ingenios or mills where the silver ore was ground, 
mixed with mercury and melted into bars in fireclay kilns known 
as huayras or guayras before being stamped with the official 
mark of the Spanish Royal Mint. This was known as the patio 
mining technique. 
Potosi had a population of 160,000 at that time. Each year 
some 13,000 Indians, bound under the mita system of forced 
labour, came to the city with their families, about 60,000 peo- 
ple in all. Drawn from all over the high Andean plateau, these 
peoples of diverse ethnic origins played a big hand in shaping 
the city as it is today. The indigenous people's district is still 
divided into 17 parishes, an echo of the 17 Andean provinces sub- 
jected to the mita, 
Even today, five of the 22 reservoirs still provide about 80,000 
people with water. The entire chain of production has been pre- 
served intact—mines to dams, aqueducts, refineries and kilns. 
Many other traces of Potosi’s past glory and prosperity have 
also survived. There are some 22 parish or monastic churches, 
some dating from the 16th century, numerous mansions in the 
Spanish town centre. Above all, there is the Royal Mint, which was 
rebuilt between 1759 and 1773. About 2,000 colonial buildings 
have been identified, the oldest being the Casa Vicaria (1615). The 
blend of baroque and local (Mestizo) architectural styles that 
began to appear in the second half of the 17th century can be seen 
in the churches of La Compania {1700-1707), Santa Teresa 
(1685), San Lorenzo (1728-1744) and San Martin, 
In 1630 a fracture in an embankment wall caused a lot of 
damage in the indigenous district. Rebuilding work went on 
into the 18th century. Mining activity continued until Bolivian 
independence in 1825, after which its decline, which had already 
begun—production methods had remained unchanged for a 
century and a half—became steeper. | 
THE UNESCO Gourier BW DECEMBER 1997 3 - 
@ 
En
c 
Fr
og
, 
Pa
ns
 
 

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

© 
UK
 
Me
te
or
ol
og
ic
al
 
Of
fi
ce
 
/S
PL
/C
os
mo
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
GREENWATCH 
Climate change: 
BY FRANCE BEQUETTE 
Some people see the Third 
Conference of the States Par- 
ties to the Framework Convention 
on Climate Change, which is being 
held in Kyoto (Japan) this month, as 
the last chance to fight global warm- 
ing by taking urgent mandatory 
steps. Others see it as a chance to 
argue with the pessimistic predic- 
tions of most scientists. 
One might ask why, just for 
safety’s sake, every country doesn’t 
immediately agree to curb green- 
house gas cmissions. The answer is 
that the necessary steps would be 
unpopular, would lose votes and cost 
a great decal. Governments handle 
energy and transport matters with 
kid gloves. 
IS IT GETTING WARMER OR NOT? 
In the past, people either adjusted 
to the climate or migrated. These 
days, humanity seems capable of 
influencing climate itself. Accord- 
ing to the World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO) we have 
altered, and are eontinuing to alter, 
the balance of gases in the atmos- 
phere. This is especially true of the 
 
4 0 THE UNESCO Gourier B DECEMBER 1997 
greenhouse gases—carbon dioxide 
(CO,), methane (CH,) and nitrous 
oxide (N,0)—as well as water 
vapour, which is the largest con- 
tributor to the natural greenhouse 
effect, but whose presence in the 
atmosphere is not directly affected 
by human activity. 
These gases make up only 0.1% 
of the earth’s atmosphere, which is 
78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen. 
Without the greenhouse effect 
caused Dy the presence of an enve- 
lope of these gases, the earth would 
be 30°C colder than itis. Since the 
beginning of the industrial era, we 
have produced enormous (uantities 
of CO, by burning fossil fuels, and 
by cutting down forests we have 
reduced the planet’s natural capac- 
ity to absorb it. Stock breeding and 
agriculture produce mostly methane 
and nitrous oxide. If gas emissions 
continue to grow at the present rate, 
the amount of CO, in the atmos- 
phere will have doubled between 
1750 and the beginning of the 21st 
century, and will perhaps even triple 
between now and the year 2100. 


### 109883: Climate change: the great debate

the great debate 
Painter Erik 
Victor's fanciful 
depiction of 
Cologne 
(Germany) and its 
cathedral in the 
year 2050, after 
the polar ice caps 
have melted 
because of global 
warming. 
A computer- 
generated world 
map (1993) 
showing rise in 
surface air 
temperatures if 
carbon dioxide 
emissions double. 
The model predicts 
dramatic warming 
of northern 
hemisphere 
winters. 
Temperature 
increases are 
colour-coded from 
pale yellow (0-2° 
C) to red (8-12°C). 
  
i 
J) 
ql 
  
                
Admittedly the situation is wor- 
rying, but some aspects of it are still 
a matter of debate. Respected scien- 
tists at the University of Virginia and 
the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
nology (MIT) argue that if the earth 
has got warmer over the past 20 years, 
the atmosphere has cooled because of 
aerosols (ash from volcanic eruptions 
or combustion, for example), and that 
logically, the more industrialized 
northern hemisphere should be warm- 
ing more than the southern, whereas 
the opposite is happening. They also 
say that modelling of the earth’s cli- 
mate does not take into account the 
clouds which can cool the lower 
reaches of the atmosphere. 
But the {acts are stubborn. The 
planet has become between 0.3°C 
and 0.6°C warmer in the past cen- 
tury, the hottest for 600 years. In 
the sane period, the sea level has 
risen by between 10 and 25 cen- 
timetres. 
Facing the doubters is a formi- 
dable adversary: the Intergovern- 
mental Panel on Climat Change, 
which was set up in 1988 jointly by 
WMO and the United Nations Envi- 
ronment Programme (UNEP) and 
involves 2,000 scientists around the 
world. The Group was mandated to 
assess the state of existing knowl- 
edge abont climate change; the envi- 
socio-economic ronmental and

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 109883: Climate change: the great debate

impacts of such change; and possible 
response strategies. Its First Assess- 
ment report, published in 1990, pro- 
vided the scientific and technical 
basis for the United Nations Frame- 
work Convention on Climate Change, 
whose ratification procedure was 
opened at the Earth Summit held 
in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. By May 
1997, 166 countries had ratified the 
Convention. 
GOOD AND BAD PERFORMERS 
Some countries have fulfilled their 
commitments and taken steps to 
limit CO, emissions. Early in 1997 
the World Wide Fund For Nature 
(WWF) published a list of good and 
bad performers. Germany, for exam- 
ple, is set to meet its commitments to 
cut its CO, emissions (800 million 
tonnes a year) by the year 2000. The 
Germans are expected to push at 
Kyoto for further emission reduc- 
tions by 2005. 
New Zealand, however, which 
produces less than 300 million tonnes 
annually, has no plans to reduce its 
emissions and does not accept the 
need to act urgently. Russia, with 
more than 800 million tonnes (10.2% 
of world CO, emissions in 1996), has 
the same attitude. Next comes China 
(13.5%), then Europe (19.6%), and 
finally the leading polluter, the 
United States (25%). Japan, the 
 
A 3-dimensional 
model of 
temperature and 
soil-moisture 
differences 
assuming twice 
the 1993 levels of 
atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. 
Blue band at top 
indicates 
stratospheric 
levels where the 
alr has cooled by 
more than 2°C, 
while the lower red 
band indicates a 
rise of more than 
5°C in low-level air. 
In green: increased 
soil-moisture 
levels; in yellow, 
decreased soil- 
moisture levels. 
© 
Er
k 
Vi
kt
or
/S
PL
/C
os
mo
s,
 
Pa
ns
 
world’s fifth major polluter (5.6%), 
does not intend to reduce emissions 
by more than 5%. But it is in the 
United States that the situation 
seemed to be most inflexible when 
the U.S. Senate unanimously passed 
a resolution on 25 July stating it 
would not ratify any climate agree- 
ment that did not require the par- 
ticipation of the developing world. 
Since then things have changed 
and President Bill Clinton announced 
at a press conference on 22 October 
1997 that he will propose at Kyoto to 
reduee U.S. greenhouse gas emissions 
to the 1990 level between 2008 and 
2012, and to reduce them even fur- 
ther in the following five years. A $5- 
billion budget will be earmarked for 
the development of clean technolo- 
gies and industrialists will have nine 
months to prepare pollution redue- 
tion plans. President Clinton also reaf- 
firmed the need for participation by 
developing countries. He noted that 
a tonne of carbon emitted in 
Argentina has the same effect as a 
tonnc of carbon emitted in the United 
States. In principle developing eoun- 
tries would only have to accept tar- 
gets beyond 2010. 
The U.S. Information Agency’s 
Jim Fuller has said that his country 
will present a dralt treaty on world 
climate change to the Kyoto con- 
ference. “The commitment to reach 
legally binding targets and timeta- 
bles has sparked eontroversy in the 
United States,” he writes. “Envi- 
ronmentalists and scientists who sup- 
port curbs on greenhouse gases say 
they are crucial to preventing future 
disaster. But some scientists and 
industry representatives dispute the 
accuracy of future warming predic- 
tions and oppose limits on energy 
consumption they say will cause 
irreparable harm to the U.S. econ- 
omy.” Ile went on to say that “Most 
studies suggest that reducing green- 
house gas emissions 20% below 
1990 levels by the year 2010. . 
would reduce the gross domestic 
product of the United States by 1% 
to 2% and cost nearly $100,000 mil- 
lion per year.” 
WE'RE ALL IN THE SAME BOAT 
But why, it may be asked, should 
poor eountries limit their emissions 
when the rich countries of the North 
are mainly responsible for global 
warming? 
Robert Wolcott, of the U.S. Envi- 
ronmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
believes it 1s not a question of past 
but future responsibility. “Emissions 
of developing eountries are and will 
he inereasing at a far more rapid rate 
as they move through what you could 
think of alinost as a eorridor of tech- 
nologies,” he notes. “They will be 
adopting technologies that are more 
or less currently in place or have 
recently been in place in the devel- 
oped world.” This ts why the EPA 
advocates “a climate technology 
transfer program in which we will join 
with our developed-world partners 
to supply the most advanced and 
appropriate technology to emergent 
economies to facilitate their sus- 
tained growth economicaily, but in 
the least greenhouse-gas intensive 
fashion.” 
The EPA is also considering a 
greenhouse gas emissions trading sys- 
tem. This would involve fixing an 
  
 
THE UNESCO Gourrer MW DECEMBER 1997 4 1 
I 4 
© 
NC
AR
/S
PL
/C
os
mo
s,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 109883: Climate change: the great debate

» annual worldwide maximum emis- The effects on 
Ponderosa Pine 
seedlings of an 
atmosphere 
sion level. Then a maximum level 
would be worked out for each coun- 
try, taking into account various fac- 
as much carbon tors, and ensuring that all the indi- 
’ © dioxide than 
vidual country levels, when added 
up, did not exceed the fixed world- being tested in 
this special, 
bubble-like 
laboratory. 
wide level. Each country would then 
grant greenhouse gas emission 
allowances to companies within the 
limit assigned to it. The trading 
mechanism would work in the fol- 
lowing way: a country or a company 
emitting less greenhouse gases than 
its authorized total would be enti- 
tled to sell to another country or 
SOURCES 
v Climate Change Information Kit, co-produced by the UN, UNEP, 
UNDP, WMO, UNITAR and the Convention on Climate Change. 
(Fax: [(41) 22] 733 28 29, e-mail: <gorre-daleE@gateway.wmo.ch>, 
Internet: <http ://www.wmo.ch>) 
v Understanding Climate Change: A Beginner's Guide to the UN 
Framework Convention, United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP), 
(Fax: [(41) 22] 797 34 64, e-mail: <iuc@unep.ch>, Internet: 
<http://www.unep.ch> 
v IPCC Second Assessment: Climate Change 1995, 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
v An introduction to Simple Climate Models used in the IPCC 
Second Assessment Report (Technical Paper Il), WMO, UNEP. 
v Stabilization of Atmospheric Greenhouse Gases: Physical, 
Biological and Socio-Economic Implications (Technical Paper II), 
WMO, UNEP. 
v Explaining Climate Change, World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF). 
(Fax: [(41) 22] 364 42 38; e-mail: <climate.campaign@wwfus.org>) 
42 THE UNESCO Courier WB DECEMBER 1997 
containing twice 
today’s level are 
company a “pollution allowance” 
corresponding to the gap between 
its real and authorized emission rate. 
Wolcott recognizes though that 
these ideas are causing concern in 
some countries which view them “as 
a form of carbon colonialism. . . and 
feel that this puts them under the 
influence of, and even control of, 
investors from the developed world.” 
ALL OR NOTHING 
A preparatory meeting for the Kyoto 
conference was held in Bonn (Ger- 
many), the headquarters of the UN 
Convention on Climatic Change, in 
August 1997. The Convention’s 
Executive Secretary, Michael Zam- 
mit Cutajar, has admitted the con- 
ference was a failure. “We are all 
worried about the slow progress at 
the Bonn meeting,” he said. “There’s 
only a short time now to build up 
the necessary political will to pro- 
duce a solid agreement at Kyoto.” 
Such lack of political will, which 
was also evident at the June 1997 
Earth Summit in New York, is dis- 
turbing and bodes ill for the Kyoto 
conference. The oil and coal indus- 
tries, as well as the most unenlight- 
ened industrialists, fear for their 
profits, since they might well be 
heavily taxed. 
On the other hand, Kyoto will be 
a special opportunity to promote 
clean energy sources which, when 
developed, could at last be gener- 
ally affordable. | 
© 
Ro
ge
r 
Re
ss
me
ye
r/
St
ar
li
gh
t/
Co
sm
os
 
CM a i 
ENERGY RETURNS 
TO MOZAMBIQUE 
After 12 years of silence, the Cabora 
Bassa hydroelectric dam in north- 
western Mozambique is humming 
again. Built on the Zambezi River in 
the early 1970s, Africa's biggest 
power plant came under constant 
attack during a decade of civil war. 
Lines were cut, pylons blown up and 
service pathways mined. The return 
of peace meant that repairs could 
beginin 1995. From the end of 1997, 
It should be producing 2,000 ° 
megawatts a year for neighbouring 
South Africa. About 200 MW of that 
will be fed back through the South 
African grid to supply Mozambique's 
capital, Maputo, which is close to the 
South African border. Mozambique will 
no longer have to buy power from its 
big neighbour but just pay a transit fee, 
which will save about $10 million a 
year. a 
eC LE CE TEER Ds 
WORLD FRESHWATER 
RESOURCES 
The United Nations system and the 
World Bank have published a joint Com- 
prehensive Assessment of the Fresh- 
water Resources of the World. The 33- 
page brochure, including maps and 
explanatory diagrams, provides a sit- 
uation report combined with specific 
suggestions and a strategy for fair dis- 
tribution and efficient use of water. 
The document is available from 
Unesco's International Hydrological 
Programme. . 
HP, Division of Water Sciences, 1 Rue 
Miollis, 75732 Pans Cedex 15, France. Fax: 
(33)(0)145685811 
e-mail; thp@unesca.org 
Website: 
http: /www.pangea.org/orgs /unesco 
i i] 
MINERAL EXPLORERS TURN 
TO AFRICA 
Until recently the trend for interna 
tional mining companies has been to 
explore in Latin America, but with back- 
ing from the Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA), a World 
Bank affiliate, investors are now turn- 
ing to Africa, with its abundance of 
gold, precious stones and almost every 
imaginable mineral. The MIGA encour- 
ages foreign investment in developing 
countries by providing them with guar- 
antees against political and non-com-

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ma
rc
o/
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
rs
 
mercial risks. The mineral deposits 
are in remote areas, and their extrac- 
tion creates jobs and helps to allevi- 
ate poverty. African ministers attend- 
ing a MIGA-sponsored symposium 
stressed the need to involve local com- 
munities and safeguard the environ- 
ment. This is going to be an uphill job 
since mining usually causes consider 
able pollution. & 
THE ELEPHANTS 
OF ALGIERS 
At Algiers’ Ben Aknoun Zoo, two baby 
elephants were born four months apart 
in the winter of 1996-97, one of an 
Asian, the other of an African mother. 
This happy event was particularly 
remarkable because African elephants 
are not known to breed in captivity. The 
304-hectare park has 814 animals and 
the 12 elephants there drink 300 litres 
of water and eat 300 kg of fodder per 
day. The zoo is short of money, how- 
ever, and its future is in doubt. ue 
Tr ai 9 ; 
MEDICINAL PLANTS COULD 
FACE EXTINCTION 
A recent World Bank report warns 
about a probable over-harvesting of 
medicinal plants in the developing 
world, where some 4 billion people 
depend heavily on natural medicines 
for their daily health. Global trade in 
medicinal plants now exceeds $1 trit 
lien. They are harvested without any 
kind of regulation and do not benefit 
from research support, unlike other 
cash crops. “Unless you watch how 
you cultivate and harvest your medic: 
inal plants,” says John Lambert, one of 
the report's authors, “you're not going 
to have them much longer.” £ 
Ogi | 
 
KENYA 
BECOMES WORLD'S LEADING 
TEA EXPORTER 
World tea production reached a record 
2,691,000 tonnes in 1996. Export 
earnings from tea increased food secu- 
rity in producing countries and for 
farming families. According to the UN 
Food and Agnculture Organization 
{FAQ}, in 1994-85 tea represented 55% 
of agricultural export earnings in Sri 
Lanka and 33% in Kenya. Kenya 
became the world’s leading tea 
exporter in 1996, with 244,200 
tonnes, with Sri Lanka a close second 
with 244,000 tonnes. The leading 
importer was the United Kingdom 
(148,500 tonnes). » 
CONTAMINATED 
CHILDREN 
For 30 years, small-scale smelters 
around the Bolivian town of El Alto have 
spewed out toxic waste and fumes con- 
taining lead, arsenic, zinc and 
chromium. Soil and air analysis has 
shown abnormally high concentrations 
of lead and arsenic, which are extremely 
harmful to the nervous system. A recent 
study showed younger children were 
most vulnerable, with more lead 
detected in their blood and more arsenic 
in their urine. Health officials hope the 
study will lead to a regional programme 
to moniter the environment around the 
smelters. a 
A CAR 
OR A HOUSE? 
YOU CHOOSE 
The Scottish city of Edinburgh has 
come up with an imaginative scheme 
to make life pleasanter. An old railway 
goods yard near the city centre is to 
be replaced by about 100 homes sur- 
rounded by a landscaped garden. But 
If you want one of the homes, you're 
not allowed to be a car-owner. Free 
heating will come from steam gener- 
ated by nearby factories, and energy 
for lighting will be drawn from rooftop 
solar panels. Waste water will be recy- 
cled for use in cleaning and bathrooms 
© 
St
ép
ha
ne
 
Fr
an
ce
s/
Hé
mi
sp
hé
re
s 
Pa
ns
 
will use rainwater. As for those cars, 
you can hire one from a council-run 
“pool.” = 
KENYA'S ENERGY-SAVING 
COOKERS 
Three billion people in the world cook 
their food on simple wood fires in metal 
containers. The loss of energy is enor- 
mous. A solution has been found in 
Kenya in the form of the jiko, a cheap 
oven shaped like an hourglass. The 
charcoal goes in the bottom part, and 
the top part, which is for the food, has 
a ceramic lining. The first rough mod- 
els have been redesigned and craft- 
workers are now turning out some 
20,000 jikos a month. Over a million 
are in use throughout the country. = 
IVORY 
TRADE RESUMES 
After a seven-year worldwide ban on 
ivory trading, Botswana, Namibia and 
Zimbabwe were authonzed to resume 
trading (with a single country, Japan), 
at this summer's meeting of States 
Parties to the International Conven- 
tion on Trade in Threatened Fauna and 
Flora Species, held in Harare (Zim- 
babwe). The reason for the decision is 
to use up the 3 countries’ ivory stocks, 
estimated at more than 50 tonnes, 
according to the World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF). With this in view, ele- 
phants will be transferred from Appen- 
dix | to Appendix II of the Convention. 
But sales will be closely monitored and 
measures taken to prevent a resur- 
gence of elephant poaching in coun- 
tries not covered by the decision. It is 
agreed that proceeds from sales will 
go towards nature conservation. © 
 
THE UNESCO Gourier ® DECEMBER 1997 
© 
Be
al
nc
e 
Pe
li
, 
Br
us
se
ls
 
{B
el
gi
um
)

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

LISTENING 
American trombonist and composer 
Steve Turre combines respect for tradition 
with openness to all types of music. 
HM How did you first get interested in jazz? 
Steve Turre: Coming from a musically gifted 
family—especially my mother, who is a 
pianist and flamenco dancer—I always knew 
I'd be a musician. It’s my vocation in life, 
At home we listened to all kinds of nusie— 
jazz, boogie-woogie, classical, Latino, blues, 
gospel, rock, whatever. In my parents’ day— 
they met at a Count Basie dance—you 
danced to jazz. But it’s hecome less rhyth- 
mical now, which explains why it’s lost some 
ofits public. Latino musie ont the other hand 
has a great heat and has a considerable fol- 
lowing today. Tlove a good beat. Everything 
in nature is rhythmical. Music without a 
beat lacks vitality. 
When I was about nine or ten, I began 
playing the trombone in the school band. 
Two or three years later I joined a hand 
where my older brother played the sax. In 
1972 T went on a European tonr with Ray 
Charles (my younger brother, Pete, is now 
his drummer). The following year I took 
part in a jam-session at the Keystone Cor- 
ner in San Francisco, and Art Blakey asked 
me to play with his band. 
BM You are sometimes called a Chicano musician. 
Are you happy with that label? 
S. T.: Absolutely not. The word “Chicano” 
mainly applies to Los Angeles where it 
means people of Mexican descent who nsu- 
ally belong to the nnderprivileged social 
classes. Whereas I grew np in the Bay Arca 
near San Francisco (northern California). 
I have Mexican roots, hut I am American, 
and like any American, I'm a blend of var- 
ious nationalities. I don’t want to be 
restricted by my roots or get locked into 
clichés for the rest of my life. I want to be 
myself with my individuality intact. 
HM Some Latin American jazz musicians often 
complain that the critics respect them more 
when they play “pure” jazz rather than Latin 
Jazz, music which is, however, just as interesting 
and hard to play. Have you run into any such 
prejudices in your career? 
S. T.: Yes. The problem often comes from 
record companies or promoters. Some 
labels, for example, make a distinction 
between white jazz and black jazz. If you 
A A 
£3 AS 
THE UNESCO Courier H DLCEMBER 1997 


### 109884: Isabelle Leymarie talks to Steve Turre

Isabelle Leymarie talks to 
© 
St
ev
e 
Tu
rr
e/
Mu
si
qu
es
 
de
 
nu
it
, 
Bo
rd
ea
ux
 
have a Latin American background and you 
run a hand, they tend to consider yon exelu- 
sively as a player of Latin jazz. And even 
thongh I love Latin rhythms, I'm a jazz 
musician, and I stand by my jazz records. 
I don’t like having labels stuck on me. I'in 
interested in all sorts of music. 
BW Besides your work as a trombonist, for the 
past few years you've become especially well 
known for playing conches and seashells, from 
which you coax haunting sounds. Your seashell 
solos with Dizzy Gillespie's United Nations 
Orchestra were one of the highlights of his 
concerts. How did you discover these unorthodox 
instruments? 
S.T.: Rahsaan Roland Kirk had a seashell 
he Tet me play. I loved to blow into it. 
Conehes and seashells were the predeces- 
sors of brass instruments, but it was only in 
1978 while on tour in Mexico with the 
Woody Shaw sextet that T had my eyes 
opened to seashells. I'd never been to Mex- 
ico. We were going to perform in several 
towns, and my mother gave me the phone 
number of some of her relatives. invited 
them to the concert, and that evening, 
Woody decided to play a piece in which 
we nsed seashells. The andience loved it, 
and after the concert my family asked me 
if I knew that the Aztecs used to blow into 
seashells. I didn’t in fact. Next I went to 
Mexico City’s Anthropological Musenni and 
saw some wonderful seashells, and then to 
Teotihnacin, where I found bas-relief 
showing men blowing into seashells or 
conches. Up till then IT didn’t feel confi- 
dent enough to use them. But after that I 
felt something elick inside and began play- 
 
Steve Turre 
ing without worrying about what people 
might think. 
BM Aztec priests used sacred conches. In the 
Caribbean the Maroons—escaped slaves—and 
Haitian country folk also used conches to 
communicate. Conches are both a sacred symbol - 
and a symbol of freedom. Do you do anything to 
the conches and seashells before playing them? 
S.T.: Yes. I taught myself by trial and error. 
I file and trim them. I’ve got them in all 
sizes and compose according to the ones 
I’ve got at hand. Small seashells produce 
high notes; big ones produce lower notes. 
For the past five or six years I've also been 
collecting animal horns, which are still nsed 
in certain forms of traditional African 
music. Fitted with a special mouthpiece, 
they produce interesting sonnds and 
rhythms. I’ve created something new with 
my seashells, but I nse them for the dif- 
ferent tonal colours they give. They fill out 
my instrumental palette. The “Shell 
Choir”, my set of seashells, are part of my 
musical luggage just like other experi- 
ments. But I’m a trombonist most of all. 
The trombone is my main instriment, and 
I can change timbre and colours by using all 
sorts of mutes. 
HM Do you get as much pleasure from composing 
as you do from playing? 
S. T.: If you lead a band, it’s to play your 
own music. I’ve already played the whole 
traditional repertoire of jazz {or the trom- 
bone, and I want to do something differ- 
ent. At school I studied harmonics and 
basic musical theory, but I mostly learned 
to compose from the great arrangers and by 
watching how music is made. I had the 
opportunity to compose the score for a 
film, Anna Oz, directed by a young French 
filmmaker, Eric Rochant. You can hear my 
scashellsinit with a few additions. I’d like 
to do more films, but I prefer playing. I’ve 
found a way of expressing myself and a 
style I [eel comfortable with, and I get 
enormous satisfaction from it, | 
Discography: 
Steve Turre, Verve 314 537 133-2 (1997) 
    

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 109885: Funding a new home for Egypt's ancient treasures

REFLECTIONS 
Funding 
a new home 
for Egypt's 
ancient 
treasures 
by Samir Gharib 
Cairo Museum possesses what is regarded 
as the world’s richest collection of Egypt- 
tan antiquities, comprising sonte 176,000 items, 
Only 40,000 of them are on display, however. 
The rest are stacked in the museum’s basement 
areas. 
The museum has never been enlarged since it 
was built at the beginning of the century. Some 
renovation and modernization work has been car- 
ried out, partieularly on the electrieal installa- 
tions and the surveillance and alarm systems, 
and a new room for the royal mummies ts now 
open to the public, after being closed for many 
years for reasons eonnccted with Islamic law. 
The main achievement in recent years has prob- 
ably been the recording of over 135,000 items on 
CD-ROM—Dut these are merely drops in the 
ocean. 
On average, a new archaeologieal site is dis- 
covered every month in Egypt. As there are no 
regional musenms, the rooms and corridors of 
the Cairo Musewn are bursting at the seams with 
more and more artefacts, and it is impossible to 
observe scientific standards of display. The base- 
ment areas are so crammed that it is almost 
impossible to get into them. Valuable objects 
are piling up and mouldering down there, doomed 
to slow degeneration. Seeurity problems and 
management difficulties further aggravate the 
situation, while the museum’s loeation on Al 
Tahrir Square, one of the world’s most congested 
thoroughfares, means that it is threatened by 
pollution and by vibration from the underground 
railway that passes beneath it. 
The only solution would be to build a spa- 
An exhibition hall of the Cairo 
Museum. In centre, a statue of 
Ramses Il. 
  
 
® Grandadam/Hoa Qui Pans 
cious new museum, in compliance with modern 
scientific standards, on a protected site. This 
would make Egypt the world eentre for the study 
of Egyptian eivilizations, would greatly increase 
tourist revenue, contribute to the development 
of research and enable management of all the 
country’s museums and sites to he centralized. 
For archaeology, it wonld contribute to the devel- 
opment of reliable conservation methods, edu- 
cation and the media would also benefit and, last 
but not least, it would help in the creation of 
new jobs and the training of specialists. 
In 1992, a plot of land of 117 feddans (about 
THE UNESCO Gourizs B DECEMBER 1907

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 109885: Funding a new home for Egypt's ancient treasures

2 
REFLECTIONS 
08 hectares) near Giza and the Saqqara site was 
allotted to the new museum by presidential 
decree, but in its five-year budget adopted at 
the same time the government set aside only 75 
million Egyptian pounds (about $20 million) for 
the project, a sum incommensurate with the 
total construction cost, then estimated at $700 
million. 
The 1talian government made available two 
billion lire to finance a feasibility stndy. An Ttalo- 
Egyptian commission of experts was set up and 
began work in Jannary 1993. 1ts conclusions were 
‘made public three years later: the building of the 
© 
Gr
an
da
da
m/
Ho
a-
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ns
 
new museum should proceed in tandem with the 
restructuring of the present museum; the eol- 
Iectious shonld be divided between the two 
  
L) 
48 
4 0 THE UNESCO Courier W DECEMBER 1997 
The upraised arms on this 
statue adorning the tomb of 
the Pharoah Awibr'hor 
symbolize the ruler’s ka, the 
energy principle that inhabits 
gods and humans. 
museums, and the new one should also house a 
large specialized library, restoration laborato- 
ries, a data bank, an information ageney, rooms 
for young visitors, separate rooms for permanent 
and temporary exhibitions, an auditorium, a pub- 
lications bureau, photographie laboratories, and 
so forth, 
No decision has as yet been taken about the 
distribution of the collections. Various propos- 
als are being studied, the main aim being to avoid 
duplication. 
But the real problem is a financial one. The 
Egyptian government is not in a position to make 
available the two billion pounds needed to carry 
out the project, and the present scale of its foreign 
debtis such that it cannot contract any new loans. 
On the other hand the governments of the rich 
countries, all of which have their own problems, 
are unable to help with the project’s financing. 
There is no doubt, however, that the project 
is economically viable. The museum has every 
ehance of becoming a major attraction for the 
world’s Egyptologists and providing a windfall 
for national and international tourism. It will very 
likely double the number of tourists visiting 
Egypt, which now stands at one and a half million 
a year. Successfully managed, it should thus be 
able to draw three million visitors, representing 
a revenue of $30 million from admission fees 
alone, not counting other sources of income, 
which should double this sum again. The 
museum could therefore cover its construction 
costs in less than a dozen years. 
Egyptian banks alone could put together the 
capital needed for the building of the museum 
and then entrust its management to an interna- 
tional company. The Egyptian government could 
take the initiative in setting up a company in 
which it would itself be a small stakeholder and 
put shares on sale on the Egyptian and interna- 
tional markets. Such a solution, which isin line 
with the government’s present privatization pol- 
icy, would furthermore enable it to control the 
movement of objects of artistic worth: neither 
private enterprises nor individuals would be able 
to take any such object out of the country with- 
out the agreement of the authorities. The Egypt- 
ian law-enforcement agency responsible for the 
protection of the heritage would obviously be 
in charge of security for the new museum, as it 
is for the present one. 
If the public sector does not have the 
resources to finance the project, let the private 
scctor step in! ||

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 109887: Interview with René Depestre: between utopia and reality

THIS MONTH'S INTERVIEW 
Between utopia 
and reality 
  
HB Your life as an adult and as a poet began with 
what you later called “a triple badge of rebellion”— 
proud negritude, impassioned surrealism, and the 
idea of revolution. Today only the surrealism part 
seems to have survived. 
R.D.: It’s along story. When André Breton came 
to Haiti at the end of 1945, his visit coincided 
with an exhibition of the Cuban painter Wifredo 
Lam’s paintings and a series of leetures given by 
the Martinique poet Aimé Césaire. This really 
fired the imagination of us young Ilaitian artists 
and writers. At that time we knew nothing about 
what was happening in the surrealist movement 
in France. For young people combatting Presi- 
dent Elie Lescot’s dreadful dictatorship, surre- 
alism was the lifeblood of revolt. Contact with 
Breton had a contagious eflect on us. After his 
first lecture in a Port-au-Prinee cinema, we 
brought out a special issue of our new magazine 
La Rucle as a tribute to him. We went to prison 
for our pains and the magazine was banned. 
What Breton discovered in Ilaiti, and made 
us discover too, was that surrealism wasn’t just 
an aesthetic doctrine but something that could 
be part of a people’s way of looking at the world; 
that there was a kind of grassroots surrealism, 
This restored our self-confidence. We saw that 
this sense of wonder we had seeretly been a bit 
ashamed of and associated with a kind of under- 
development was actually our weapon. Breton 
told us that in France “we lannched surrealism 
as a movement based on intellectual foundations, 
you in Ilaiti learned all about it in the cradle.” 
In other words, surrealism was something inher- 
ent in the Caribbean. Voodoo, a product of 
Franco-African syncretism, is an example of reli- 
A Franco-Haitian poet, 
essayist and award- 
winning novelist looks 
back on his nomadic life, 
speaks out against 
totalitarian ideologies 
and reaffirms his 
attachment to public 
spiritedness based on 
planet-wide solidarity 
and mutual respect. 
Interview by 
Jasmina Sopova 
René Depestre 
 
sious surrealism, The behaviour of the voodoo 
gods is supremely surrealist. 
HB So surrealism for you is much more than a 
literary movement. 
R.D.: Much more. Many European writers, start- 
img with the German Romantics and even before 
that, had a surrealist approach. I'm sure if you 
looked closely at Egyptian, Japanese or Chinese 
culture, you'd find surrcalist clemnents there too. 
For me, surrealism is a way of injecting the super- 
naturalinto everyday life. You find it everywhere. 
But some people, like Ilaitians or Brazilians, 
display it more boldly than others. 
HB How do you explain the emergence of the 
Duvaliers in a society imbued with a sense of the 
magical? 
R.D.: The magical has even marked Ilaitian pol- 
itics. Our history has thrown up dictators who 
practised a kind of tragie perversion of magic. 
This is how the “tonton macoute”—which is a 
folk conecpt, an incarnation of evil, a kind of 
Nazi, a Haitian SS-man—came to exist. Ilaitian 
folklore is a tng-of-war between good and evil. 
The elder Duvalier, “Papa Doc,” used the forces 
of black magie to plumge the country into a total- 
itarian surrealism. 
But there’s more to it than this demoniacal 
aspect. I'rom the December morning in 1492 
when Christoplier Columbus discovered Ilaiti 
and was transfixed by what he saw, the historic, 
baroque tale of Iaiti cannot be separated from 
American wondrous realism. A sense of the won- 
drous (South American magic realism) has 
become part and parcel of Ilaitians’ view of the 
world and the sustenanee of their third of the » 
~y 5 
THE UNESCO Gounier HM DECEMBER 1997 
© 
Ul
f 
A
n
d
e
r
s
e
n
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 109887: Interview with René Depestre: between utopia and reality

» island of Hispaniola, where the best and the 
worst rub shoulders hike the dearest of friends, 
when they are not locked in terrible combat. 
HM You have celebrated the communist utopia in 
your poems. 
R.D.: The Marxist utopia, with all its lies and 
repressive nightmares, took over my work and 
my life as a poet until the moment I broke with 
Stalinism. After living in places which had a huge 
“strategic” importance in the turmoil of our een- 
tury—Moscow, Prague, Beijing, Hanoi and 
Havana—I realized that what was meant by 
“socialist revolution” in those places was not the 
opposite of the llaitian terror regime, hut 
another form of the same perversion. Instead of 
promoting the heritage of the rights of man and 
the citizen, “the revolution” defiled the auton- 
omy of women and men and earried out, at their 
expense, the most amazing hijaek of ideals and 
dreams in all human history. 
HB What has become of the “revolutionary ideal” 
which drew you from Haiti to Europe and then on to 
Cuba? 
R.D.: ardently believed in revolution. For me it 
beeame a kind of natural state, like breathing, 
walking or swimming. And it nearly destroyed 
my integrity as a citizen and a writer. The ideal 
of revolution seriously impoverished my personal 
store of poetry and tenderness which, when 1 
was twenty, made me think of my future work as 
a state of wonder and oneness with the world. It 
made my literary career that of a writer who 
performed psychological and intellectual som- 
ersaults and sudden existential about-turns—a 
kind of carnival of uncertainties and ineonsis- 
teneies, adrift in the furious eurrents of the cen- 
tury’s passions and ideals, The treasure islands 
invented Dy the utopias and mythologies of rev- 
olution went up in smoke with the great dreams 
of our youth—uniting the idea of transforming 
the world (Karl Marx) with that of changing life 
(Arthur Rimbaud). 
BM The word “utopia” as used by Marxists has a 
pejorative meaning for you. But doesn’t the world 
need utopias? 
R.D.: Octavio Paz has defined utopias as “the 
dreams of reason.” We're just emerging from a 
terrible nightmare of reason. The nineteenth 
century, a critical age if ever there was one, gave 
birth to the idea of a revolutionary utopia. But 
the totally legitimate dream of earlier philoso- 
phers did not turninto the major transformation 
of human lives they had hoped for, nor into 
unprecedented progress for humankind. The 
generous aspirations of eritical thought imposed 
onus, under the bogus label of “real socialisin,” 
: 
w 
© THE UNESCO Counter H DECEMBER 1997   
In place of the notion 
of realpolitik, which is 
at the root of most of 
the woes of people 
and societies—and 
which still flourishes 
to an extraordinary 
degree in 
government—I offer 
the notion of 
realutopia. 
© 
Ul
f 
An
de
rs
en
/G
am
ma
 
Pa
ns
 
an absolutism the like of which we had never 
seen before. 
In saying this I do not wish to denigrate the 
idea of utopia as such. Old age reminds me these 
days that I don’t have much time left and that I 
must hasten to express things Pve kept to myself 
all my life. And hopefully express them with 
grace and maturity. So, in a way, I'm summing up 
my life’s nomadic journey. And all self-eriticism 
leads one to utopia. But hardened observer that 
Lam, I deeply distrust a historical concept that 
this century’s revolutions have debased. In place 
of the notion of realpolitik, which is at the root 
of most of the woes of people and societies and 
which still flourishes to an extraordinary degree 
in government, I offer tlie notion of realutopia. | 
HM Could you explain what you mean by realutopia? 
R.D.: It’s an aesthetic concept which enables 
me to unite the various parts of my Franco-1lait- 
ian ereole-ness as a writer. Doetors and physiol- 
ogists call synergy the links between several ele- 
ments which combine in a single function and a 
eommon effeet. The idea of realutopic leads me 
to a kind of aesthetic and literary synergy which 
points in a single direction the multitude of expe- 
riences that I owe to magical reality, to negri- 
tude, to sun-kissed eroticism and to the ereole 
fantasizing of Ilaitians, which is the surrealism 
of the humbled and the hurt. 
HM So you haven't entirely turned your back on 
negritude? 
R.D.: I’ve always mistrusted the idea of negritude 
because I did not think it was possible to eon- 
stitute an anthropology which is the exaet oppo- 
site of the one which devalued us and down- 
eraded us as “Blacks”. You can’t just transfer to 
a Blaek context what is said and done in terms of 
Whites. Aimé Césaire referred to this phenom- 
enon as turning Gobineau upside down. I realized 
we had to create our own acsthetic and ideol- 
ogy without falling into “anti-racist racism.” 
That’s why I said goodbye to negritude at the 
same time as I dropped Marxism. I've only stuck 
with surrcalism, which is still one of my working 
tools. I use both ends of the tool—the scholarly 
and the popular. Bnt I mistrust surrealism too. 
Breton leaned towards the oeeult, trying to kink 
surrealism with certain cabbalistic and Talmudic 
traditions—a shadowy area in the history of 
thought hut no less interesting {or that—which 
are the equivalent of looking for the philoso- 
pher’s stone. I don’t go along with that at all. 
I’verejected the ideals of my youth and today 
I work with the tragic experiences whieh in my 
case they led to.

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 109887: Interview with René Depestre: between utopia and reality

BH How do you see the world these days? 
R.D.: The idea of revolution has been buried 
and history marches on, with its media-fed pro- 
cession of horrors and marvels. The myth of a 
great consummation of the body and the mind 
died of natural causes in a big Soviet-style bed, 
The corpse is still warm and already the spark of 
totalitarianism has reappeared in the shape of 
religious fundamentalism. All kinds of ethno- and writers at the 
nationalist savagery, supposedly under the han- ~~ forefront of the values 
er of a campaign to renew faithless societies, are ne of p ign to re ew faithle » e eties, ar shared by the world's 
building monuments to obscurantism, terrorism 
cultures. and new banditry by the state. On the borders of 
the West, the idea of a fundamentalist utopia has 
taken the place of a revolutionary one. 
HM How can literature inspire people to embark on 
the adventure of a new renaissance? 
R.D.: The answer to that is shaped by a context 
of fundamentalist horrors, inter-ethnic massacres 
and racist and nationalist violence. It’s one of a 
planet eompletely ruled by market forces. 
Thanks to the rational instruments of the 
rule of law and democracy, the institution of the 
market ras survived all attacks on it. But most 
people now think the democracy of the mar- 
het—its basis and the way it works—needs to 
be overhauled. Or else life in society is going to 
hecome a great planet-wide casino, So it’s in the 
interests of the victorious marketplace to do 
something abont the chaotic and aggressive con- 
ditions in whieh the globalization of human 
affairs is taking place. 
Bold steps should he taken to make good use 
I see the bold 
imagination of poets 
ence, the rich store of rules of citizenship and the 
art of living together which is to be found in 
Western civil societies, the most developed and 
experienced in terms of law, liberties, justice 
and solidarity, We should be able to turn the 
current haphazard process of globalization into 
an unprecedented humanization of relations 
between individuals and nation-states. The inter- 
national civil society which is growing up amid 
disorder and uncertainty needs the oxygen of 
world-wide publie-spiritedness and the idea of 
solidarity that will he conducive to fair distrib- 
ution of the values and principles which are now 
the shared property of the global village. 
EH Who could promote this global public- 
spiritedness? 
R.D.: [sce the bold imagination of poets and writ- 
ers at the forefront of the values shared by the 
world’s cultures. Our works, each with its own 
strictly aesthetic identity, should help seientists 
and politicians to revamp our old ideas abont good 
and evil, to revive a sense of the sacred whieh is 
being lost and to devise a more balanced rela- 
tionship between North and South, and East and 
West. This would be in a new world order where 
the necessary rules of commerce, tempered by a 
new sense of meaning and new ideals, conld express 
a fresh balanee between nature and history, To 
advance [nrther without risking disaster, the spirit 
of the market should now be endowed with cer- 
tain ethical features, such as meaning, laws of 
citizenship and an art of living together based on 
mutual respect and sympathy between the world’s 
of the world’s heritaze of demoeratic experi- 
o 
peoples and societies. 
  
AUTHORS 
REE i 
ROBERT BAUDRY, of Belgium, is professor ementus at the University of Katanga 
{Democratic Republic of Congo) and president of the Centre for Study and Research 
on the wonderful, the strange and the unusual in literature. He is currently preparing 
for publication a book on the guest for the Grail In medern times. 
THOR VILHJALMSSON, of Iceland, 1s a writer, a painter and co-founder of the 
Icelandic cultural review Birtingur. His novels published in English include Quick, 
Quick, said the bird (1968), The Beatles Cry (1970) and Moonsicle (1976). He is 
also the author of a book of poetry composed in English, The Deep Blue Sea, 
Pardon the Ocean (Loonbooks, Northeast Harbour, U.S.A.). His novel The Grey 
Moss Glows, which won the Nordic Council Prize for iterature in 1988, will be 
published shortly in English. 
ANTONIO GUERREIRO, a French ethnologist and film-maker, is associate 
researcher at the Southeast Asian Research Institute in Aix-en-Provence (France). 
He co-edited a special issue of the French magazine Autrement (no. 11, 1991) 
devoted to the Indonesian island of Borneo. 
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK 1s a Mauritian poet and writer. Notable among his 
published works are Ensolenlé vif (which won the Apollinaire Prize in 1976), 
Anthologie personnelle (1984) and Paroles pour solder la mer (1989). 
JACQUES LACARRIERE, a French writer, has published a vast body of work 
including {in English translation) The God Possessed (Dutton, New York, 1964), 
and The Gnostics (Peter Owen, London, 1977/City Lights, San Francisco, 1989). 
LOKENATH BHATTACHARYA, an Indian poet and essayist, has published some 
ve I 
thirty works in India, including The Virgin Fish of Babughat (1975), The Prose 
Poems of Lokenath Bhattacharya (1871) and The Drum of the Gury (1973). 
LUIS MIZON, a Chilean poet and essayist, Is the author of many books, Including 
a novel, El hombre del cerro plomo (1991) and a collection of poems, Jardin de 
runas (1992). 
EDUARDO MANET ts a French novelist and playwright of Cuban ong. Among his 
recent published works 1n French are L'ile du lézard vert (1994) and Rhapsodie 
cubaine (1996). The script of his play The Nuns was published by Calder (London) 
In 1970. 
PASCALE ABSI of France, is the author of an anthropological study on the 
miners of Potosi. 
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a Franco-American journalist specializing in environmental 
questions. 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco-Amencan musicologist, has recently published La 
musique sud-américaine, Rythmes et danses d'un continent (“South American 
Mustc, a Continent’s Rhythms and Dances”, Gallimard, Pans, 1997). 
SAMIR GHAR!B 1s an Egyptian journalist and art critic. 
CORRECTION 
Page 27 of our October 1997 issue (“Natural Disasters, Be Prepared!"} contains an error. 
The phrase “Most of the 100,000 people who died in the 1891 Bangladesh cyclone. ,.." 
should begin: “Most of the 200,000 people who died. ...” 
THE UNESCO Courier MW DECEMBER 1997 
 

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 
 
JANUARY HM MICROFINANCE 
Interview with Johan Galtung (N. Batic). 
Reaching the unreached (S. Rahman). A new 
weapon in the war on poverty (J. Garson). 
Three golden rules (M. Otero). Where credit 
is due... (R.P. Christen). A bank for the poor 
(M. Yunus). Microfinance in Indonesia (M. 
S. Robinson). Latin America: ACCION 
speaks louder than words (M. Otero). Enter- 
prise in Africa (K. Mutua). Village banking: a 
report from 5 countries (R. Scofield). Three 
microcredit schemes in Europe (M. Nowak). 
Commentary: Education, scedbed of the 
future (IE Mayor). Greenwatch: People and 
plants (F. Bequette). Heritage: Colonia del 
Sacramento (E. Bailby). Listening: Interview 
with David Sanchez (I. Lcymarie). 
  
FEBRUARY HH RADIO, 
A FUTURE FOR SOUND 
Interview with Alain de Libera (R. Sabbaghi). 
On the crest of the waves (H. Bourges). The 
first half century, 1895-1945 (B. Blin). The 
second half century, 1945-1995 (G. Price). A 
public service (K. Ebbesen). From short wave 
to satellite (R. Gallon and D. Seligsohn). By 
the people, for the people (C. A. Arnaldo). 
Villages find their voice (W. Jayaweera and LL. 
Tabing). All power to the microphone! (A. 
Oganessian). Commentary: Energy for all (F. 
Mayor). Heritage: Mr. Jefferson’s dream house 
(F. Leary). Greenwatch: Earthwatching satel- 
lites (E. Bequette). 
 
MARCH HM PLURAL CITIES 
Interview with Predrag Matvejevic and 
Vidosav Stevanovic (J. Sopova). Tangier: 
myths and memories (T. Ben Jelloun). New 
York blues (J. Charyn). Bombay: one and 
many (L. R. Jagga). Marseilles: port of call 
and recall (E. Temime). La Paz: a tale of two 
cities (L. Pacheco). Vancouver, or the spirit 
of place (H. Ditmars). The spirit of diversity 
(A. Barrak). Commentary: Science and society 
(1) (FE Mayor). Heritage: Notre-Dame 
d’Amiens (C. Romane). Greenwatch: Large 
dams (F. Bequette). Reflections: The world is 
a sanctuary (H. Skolimowski). Listening: 
Rediscovering Lili Boulanger (I. Leymarie). 
 
APRIL THE BODY AND THE SELF 
Interview with Mario Luzi (M. Rosi). Face val- 
ues (D. Le Breton). An invisible river (S. 
Nagatomo). The body and the book (D. Biale). 
A language of its own {M. B. Priso). From self- 
hood to salvation (R. Maitra). The garden of 
delights (A. Meddcb). Commentary: Science 
and society (2) (F. Mayor). Heritage: Te Wahi- 
pounamu, New Zealands’s pristine wilderness 
(A.-M. Johnson). Greenwatch: Gardens: a cul- 
tural flowering (E Bequette). Listening: Inter- 
view with Rido Bayonne (I. Leymarie). 
THE UNESCO Gouin HM OECEMBER 1997 
MAY HM LANDSCAPE WITH FIGURES 
Interview with Aimé Césaire (A. T. Melsan). 
Reading the landscape (Y. Bergeret). Thresh- 
olds of divinity (M. Ninomiya). Sicilian flights 
(J.-E Patricola). Colourful language (G. Pifia- 
Contreras). Say it with flowers (Y. E. Ioan- 
nou). What’s in a name? (L. Mizén). Fact file: 
The world network of biosphere reserves. 
Commentary: Science and Society (3) (F 
Mayor). Heritage: The Island of Mozambique 
(DP. Lages). Greenwatch: Gardens of the Far 
East (F. Bequette). Listening: Ethiopia’s azmari 
minstrels (I. Leymarie). Anniversary: Alcko 
Konstantinov (1863-1897) (G. Danailov). 
  
JUNEN HOW IDEAS TRAVEL 
On the road (E-B. Huyghe). Manuscripts on 
the move (G. Messadié). Best-sellers and gos- 
sip-mongers in 18th-century France (R. Darn- 
ton). “Words have no legs, yet they walk’ (Y. 
Tata Cissé). The mixed signals of globaliza- 
tion (S. Guemriche). Cyberspace: a planetary 
network of people and ideas (J. C. Nyiri). The 
test of time (L. Merzeau). Fact file: Safe- 
guarding the documentary heritage; Routes of 
dialogue, Commentary: From ideal to action 
(E. Mayor). Greenwatch: Save our soils! (E 
Bequette). Heritage: Palmyra, faces that belong 
to eternity {M. Zibawi). Ancient and modern 
Egypt come face to face (S. Gharib). Inter- 
view with Viviane Forrester (E. Reichmann). 
  
JULY-AUGUST lM PORTRAITS 
OF WOMEN 
IN YOUNG PEOPLE’S LITERATURE 
and 
UNESCO'S SECRET. 
Japan: Breaking the stereotype (A. Sueyoshi). 
East Africa: Silent partners (E. Ledi Barongo). 
Former USSR: From ideology to love (J. 
Prosalkova). North America: Mothers and 
daughters (E. Licbs). UNESCO's secret, an 
LBRZ and ZKRR adventure {Alteau and C. 
Doxuan). Declaration: The human right to 
peace (I. Mayor). Sarajevo’s battered soul (P. 
d’Erm). Albania’s threatened heritage (Y. 
Aligka). Greenwatch: Forests: a breathing 
space for the planet (F. Bequette). Heritage: 
the divine faces of Teothihuacin (C. Romane). 
UNESCO in action: adult education for tomor- 
row {C. McIntosh). Reflections: letters from 
Asia (D. Sinor). Interview with Mstislav Ros- 
tropovich (I. Leymarie). 
 
SEPTEMBER HM THE STATE 
OF THE WORLD HERITAGE 
What is the world heritage? (Dossier). The 
World Heritage Convention, 25 years on (B. 
von Droste). Vive la différence! (C. Fabrizio). 
An idea whose time has come (P. Nora). Cul- 
tural landscapes (D. Lowenthal). Past and pre- 
sent: a creative dialogue (J. Rigaud). The Mod- 
crn Movement (M. Kuipers). In youthful 
hands (I. Kvisteroy). Words and deeds (G. 
Zouain). The North-South gap (L. Rajk). A 
vigilant eye (M. Bjornstad). Sacred mountains 
(E.Bernbaum). A canal in southern France (F. 
Bordry). Three highland villages in Japan (H. 
Saito and N. Inaba). Commentary: The her- 
itage, memory of the future (F. Mayor). 
Greenwatch: A waste-free farm (FE Bequette). 
Interview with Youssef Chahine (M. Fargeon). 
OCTOBER MNATURAL DISASTERS, 
BE PREPARED! 
Safety first! (B. Rouhban). A decade for inter- 
national action (E Press). Nature on the ram- 
page (W. W. Hays). Making cities safer (M. 
Erdik). The do’s and don’ts of risk reduc- 
tion (B. Carby). Sounding the alarm (E Fer- 
rucci). Women in the front line (D. Guha- 
Sapir). Insurance: halting an ominous trend 
(G. Berz). Commentary: Water and civiliza- 
tion (FE Mayor). Greenwatch: New Caledonia: 
threats to biodiversity (E Bequette). Her- 
itage: Taxila, the cradle of Gandhara art (L. 
Gourret). Reflections: Spreading the word 
(O. Vallet). Interview with Manuel Elkin 
Patarroyo (FE Romero). 
NOVEMBER MM THEATRE’S CHANGING 
SCENE 
Theatre for tomorrow (R. Schechner). Rules 
made to be broken (J.-P. Guingané). Anart in 
search of its roots (R. Maitra). Shingeki’s rest- 
less century (O. Yoshio). A common home 
(A. Smeliansky). The birth of modern Arab 
theatre (G. Maleh). The theatre of the 
oppressed (A. Boal). Fact file: The Interna- 
tional Theatre Institute. Commentary: Sci- 
ence education and sustainable development 
(E Mayor). Greenwatch: Seaweed at your ser- 
vice (F. Bequette). Heritage: Ironbridge Gorge 
(N. Cossons). Interview with Andrée Che- 
did (M. Leca). 
 
DECEMBER MISLANDS 
A WORLD APART 
Islands of the imagination (R. Baudry). Ice- 
land’s hidden fire (T. Vilhjilmsson). The 
Pacific: the coming of the ancestors (A Guer- 
reiro). Solstice islands (E. Maunick). The tri- 
als of Ulysses (J. Lacarriere). What, my 
brother, is an island? (L. Bhattacharya). Easter 
Island’s last secret (L. Mizdn). Cuba’s gold 
(E. Manet). Commentary: Peace, development 
and democracy: UNESCO at work (FE. Mayor). 
Heritage: The treasure of the Cerro Rico (P. 
Absi). Greenwatch: Climate change (F. 
Bequette). Reflections: A new home for 
Egypt’s ancient treasures (S. Gharib). Listen- 
ing: Interview with Steve Turre (I. Leymarie). 
Interview with René Depestre (J. Sopova).

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
  TCD: / / WWY 
ae Rd | 4 | A AA") 1 al 2Y« \ f JIESLU.0IC 
hd 
    
 
  
  
2 - LF ve ee 
. 
p= | 
kof ng’ Tl 4 
Li 
oni] Fg iF 
- A splendid ¢ | on pRitiy “work to serve as a lasting 
9 x or. reminder 
of ho 
. "3 al 
’ a 
cil
 and pose, 
\ ras o 
b 
3 
7, J #0 
R
E
S
 
1 WL 
  
a won, wn tome
 "
hrc bpd 
  SARAJEVO PHILHARMONIC 
ORCHESTRA 
id JARRE - BRETON - HOR
OZIC - SLAVENSKI - Ko
nsovic - GIOVANNI 
: 
\9 AFL 
J si ce oF 
Ref. 
; 
. oT . dr ering y K BRETON 
,. 
' 0-1
oo Ty a
rh 
IN, JUS  § 1 - r : of 
41/18 
pli a 
ila pa  - 
: 
A am 
wr J — 
n . hn 
{ 
«. Ir" a” 
 

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/109841engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

= Fr 3 ( a al Lm 8 i ¥ ) ’ . ¥ Fy Sehr rs V NEE 
        
    
  
   
     
 
pl wr a a oe 
7 . Py. 
ae arid pa al 
Ail 
INP arm n 
Papas, 
: = dw 
 
INTERVIEW WITH 
LUIS SEPULVEDA 
HERITAGE 
MOUNT ATHOS (GREECE) 
ENVIRONMENT 
CITIES: RESIDENTS TO THE RESCUE