# [074823](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

urier 
A window open on 
.B0 French francs il 1976 (29th year) 2.80 
NESEY 
  
    
The _~ 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

=H le (AH, 
TU SIE he A 
oft Pha 
Fake EA 
(ULE Sy AA 
A 
a 
TREASURES ~~ Man with a skin of clay 
OF ~The civilization of Tolita, which flourished between 500 B.C. and the fifth century A.D., owes its name to the small island off the northern coast of present-day Ecuador where it originated. WORLD ART The artists of the Tolita civilization, whose influence spread to the mainland, shaped remarkable pottery figures such as the statuette shown here. Their works depict a wide variety of different physical types, and may be portrayals of persons who visited the island of Tolita for important religious ceremonies that took place there. Tolita artists also worked in gold and copper, and were pioneer craftsmen in platinum, a material not used by artists in Europe until the 18th century. ECUADOR 
Photo ©" Vautier-De Nanxe, Paris 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

‘WCourier 
APRIL 1976 29TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 15 LANGUAGES 
English Arabic Hebrew 
French Japanese Persian 
Spanish Italian Dutch 
Russian Hindi Portuguese 
German Tamil Turkish 
 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Annual subscription rate 28 French francs 
Binder for a year's issues: 24 French francs 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year). For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER.” plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name, Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier staff. 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- 
film and/or microfiche) by: (1) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A. ; (2) N.C.R. 
Microcard Edition, Indian Head, Inc.., 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, U.S.A.; (3) Bell and Howell Ce, 
Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the 
Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- 
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editors-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Olga Radel 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition : Werner Merkii (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : N. K. Sundaram (Delhi) 
Tamit Edition : M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition : Mefra Telci (istanbul) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Roy Malkin 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Hllustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard ¥ 
Research: Christiane Boucher 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to 
the Editor-in-Chief in Paris IS
SN
 
00
41
-5
27
8 
N°
 
4
.
1
9
7
6
 
M
C
 
7
6
-
3
-
3
2
0
 
Page 
 
5 THE IMPORTANCE 
OF NOT BEING EARNEST 
Humour across frontiers: make laugh(ter) not war 
By George Mikes 
  
THE GIFT OF THE GABROVO 
How Bulgaria became famous for good humour as well as yoghurt 
By Bogomil Gerasimov 
12 WORM-BREEDING WITH TONGUE IN CHEEK 
Confessions of a scientist hoist hy his own petard 
By James V. McConnell 
16 NASRUDIN HODJA, THE MAN WHO RODE 
HIS ASS BACKWARDS 
Comic folk hero whose jokes delight the world 
By Ivan Sop 
22 THE WORLD WILL NEVER DIE 
IF IT DIES LAUGHING 
By Yuri B. Boryev 
25 THE POLITICAL AND SATIRICAL CARTOON 
Stepping in where angels dread to fear 
By Ivan Tubau 
28 THE CHINESE HAVE A WORD 
FOR (W)IT 
By Kristofer M. Schipper 
33 UNESCO NEWSROOM 
34 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Deadpan man with a skin of clay (Ecuador) 
    
Cover 
This issue of the “Unesco Courier” is devo- 
ted to “World Humour — and the Importance of 
NOT Being Earnest”. The intriguing figure on 
our cover, opening his patched robe to reveal 
a decor of startling magnificence, is one of 
history's great pranksters, Nasrudin Hodja, 
comic folk hero of the Muslim world since 
early medieval times. To the question very 
often posed: Is humour international? Nasru- 
din has supplied the answer. His anecdotes 
have girdled the earth with people holding 
their sides or rolling in the aisles all the way 
from China to Europe and from America to 
Africa and the Middle East. 
Drawing by Richard Williams and Errol le Cain, 
from “The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasru- 
din” by ldries Shah © 1968 Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises 
Ltd., published by Jonathan Cape Ltd., London. 
Back cover: photo Maltete © Rapho, Paris 
J

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 49499: The Importance of not being earnest; humour across frontiers: make laugh(ter) not war

   
ic ap E04 
  
  
Photo © Assoclated Press 
Bh ¢ ; 
a Ro eo . . 
 
 
    
Tru ate WEIS PALA Yr 
: 
a 
 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

\ 
THE IMPORTANCE 
  


### 49499: The Importance of not being earnest; humour across frontiers: make laugh(ter) not war

OF NOT BEING EARNEST 
i am classified by most of my 
enemies and even by some of 
my friends as a humorist. Make no 
mistake: to call a man a humorist is 
no compliment. No one calls himself 
a humorist because there is some- 
thing pejorative and dismissive in the 
phrase. But | accept the classification 
not with pride (! am not a very proud 
man), not with resignation (I am not 
- given to melancholy) but with a shrug. 
Very well, | am a humorist if you 
insist on it. But here | must sound a 
~ warning against myself. A humorist is - 
no more an expert on humour than 
a man suffering from diabetes is an 
“expert” on diabetes. The humorist 
.—like the diabetic—has got it but he 
has no idea how he got it and still 
less how to get rid of it. 
* Humour is a problem of philosophy 
but philosophers do not fare much 
better than humorists or diabetics. 
A philosopher with a sense of humour 
will laugh at a joke instead of per- 
forming a post mortem on it; and a 
philosopher will not be able—however 
competent he may be otherwise—to . 
teach us a lot about the sense of 
humour if he himself lacks one. 
The issue is further plagued by 
another complication—unique to this 
subject. A man reading an essay on 
humour has no more right or reason 
to expect to laugh or to be entertained. 
than someone reading an essay on 
Nicomachean Ethics; yet he does 
‘expect to be vastly amused. A woman 
reading a cookery book does not 
expect to have her hunger quenched 
but a person reading an essay on 
humour expects to be entertained. 
And the fact that more dull books 
have been written on humour than on 
any other subject seems to make no 
difference. 
ro 
 
‘GEORGE MIKES, author of How to be an 
Alien (1946) and Switzerland for Beginners 
(1862) has sent us the following biographical 
note: “1 was born in 1912 in Siklos (Hungary) 
but moved to Budapest when | was ten. | 
wanted to become a journalist and writer but 
my family insisted on my becoming a gentleman, 
i.e. a lawyer, following in my father’s and grand- 
father’s footsteps. So | studied Jaw but got a fob 
for myself as a journalist too. By the time! got my 
doctorate, | was too far gone in journalism and 
my family had to give up all hopes of my becom- 
ing a gentleman. [| was sent to London for a 
fortnight and have stayed ever since. During the | 
war | worked in the BBC's Hungarian Section, 
after that as a freelance writer. | have also 
. written more than 30 books and | am told 
. they have sold several million copies in 21 
languages.” 
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
©
 
Fe
rr
uh
 
D
o
g
a
n
,
 
Is
ta
nb
ul
 
by George Mikes 
 
“humour 
across frontiers 
  
Mg 
re 
has 
  
= 
        
—_—_———— 
= 
  
make laugh (ter) 
not war! 
Let us then have a very quick survey 
of what other people said about 
humour and how they tried to define it. 
The Old Testament already noticed the 
sadness of laughter: “Even in laughter 
the heart is sorrowful”; and “the 
end of mirth is heaviness.” Accord- 
ing to Plato we laugh at the misfortune 
of our friends and our feeling is mixed 
pleasure and pain. Aristotle also 
recognized the essentially cruel nature 
of humour and said that to make a 
"joke of a man is to vilify him. Cicero, 
too, thought that the ridiculous had its 
grounds in baseness and deformity. 
A very long jump takes us to John 
Harington, Elizabethan courtier and 
wit, who says that comedies “may 
make men see the shame of their own 
fault". The English philosopher Tho- 
mas Hobbes’ definition is the most 
famous of all: “Laughter is nothing 
else but sudden glory arising from 
a sudden conception of some emi- 
nency in ourselves, by comparison 
with the infirmity of others, or with our 
own formerly.” 
| could go on for 24 volumes to 
| old and blind. 
. things about humour. 
quote the great sages and philos- 
ophers through Hegel and Schopen- 
hauer but | shall quote only three: 
Bergson, Koestler and myself. 
Bergson knew that laughter was 
always corrective, He was also fully 
aware (and Freud later agreed with 
him) of the aggressive and cruel. 
nature of laughter. “In laughter we 
always find an unavowed intention to 
humiliate and consequently to correct 
our neighbour.” 
Koestler wrote a great deal about 
humour, including an essay for Encyc- 
lopaedia Britannica. His definition is 
more pragmatic: the aim of humour 
is to provoke laughter, He goes on, 
explaining that laughter is the one 
“luxury reflex” of humanity: a reflex 
which—unlike sneezing or closing our 
eyes in fright—serves no useful 
purpose. 
Finally myself. | quote an old Jewish 
joke, one of those which, | find, are . 
often more illuminating than a bunch 
of philosophers. 
An old, blind lew asked a young girl ’ 
what milk was like. 
“Milk?” asked the girl, astonished. 
“Yes, milk, You see, I'm blind and 
I just cannot imagine what milk" is 
like.” 
“Well, milk is white.” 
“White...” said the old man. “I'm 
| just don’t know what 
white means.” 
“It's easy to explain,” said the girl 
brightly. “A swan is white.” 
“But I've never seen a swan.” 
“It has a curved neck.” 
. “Curved?” sighed the old | man. 
“What is curved?” 
The girl lifted her right arm, bent 
her wrist forward like a swan’'s neck.” 
“Feel it,” she said. “That's curved.” 
The old man felt the girl's arm, 
touched the curved wrist several times 
and then exclaimed with satisfaction: 
“Thank God! Now at last | know 
what milk is like.” 
Philosophers, ‘like that helpful little 
girl, keep telling us clever and true 
She was right 
and everything she said helped: milk 
is white, and a swan is white and: . 
the swan has a curved neck. But in 
the end, having read a whole library 
about humour, we know as much about 
J 
“ 
>

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 49499: The Importance of not being earnest; humour across frontiers: make laugh(ter) not war

p humour as ‘the old man knew, in the 
end, about milk. In other words: many 
important -and helpful details, except 
one basic thing: what humour really is. 
I should like to add just a few 
observations to our knowledge of 
important details before proceeding 
to other subjects, 
It is usually the grotesque, the 
paradoxical, the funny which strikes 
me in a situation—where others per- 
haps see darkness and 
About 15 years ago | was writing my 
first novel and Arthur Koestler—whom 
| have already mentioned—asked me 
what it was about. | told him it was 
about a man who ate too much, whose 
mortal passion was eating, who ate like 
some others drink. “A good subject,” 
he nodded. “A better one for Kafka 
than for you but a good subject.” He 
only saw the tragic element in it. 
I, while | hope | do not lack com- 
passion and understanding and while 
| liked my hero and felt sympathy for 
him, saw him as an essentially comic 
character. After all, to eat yourself 
to death is less tragic than dying, say, 
a heroic death on the battlefield. Yes, 
| often see the humour and fun where 
others look at me quizzically and with 
suspicion: what the hell is he laughing 
about? 
My sister had a bit of a great Slav 
soul. 1 had a very happy childhood 
and she had a tormented and unhappy 
childhood but we both had the same 
childhood. | had loving, devoted and 
understanding parents while she had 
harsh, strict and not devoted parents. 
But we both had the same parents. 
And this fact—that humour is not 
in the situation but in the beholder's 
eye—is the answer to the question 
every humorous writer is often asked. 
“How is it,” people ask you, “that 
all the funny things always happen to 
you?” A humorist's life seems to be 
an endless chain of hilarity while, they 
add with dismay, nothing ever happens 
to them. 
- Life is, of course, a long, happy Joke; 
it is also a dark, horrible tragedy; or . 
tragedy. 
endless boredom. it depenas on you. 
The only difference between the 
humorist—or rather between the man 
with a strong sense of humour—and 
one utterly without it is that the former 
notices the humour in all situations 
while the other misses it. 
It was G.K. Chesterton who gave 
the perfect answer to this question 
when he remarked, speaking to 
humanity at large: 
“You make the jokes; | see them.” 
Telling endless jokes without any 
apropos can be an awful bore. Lis- 
tening to endless jokes is a pro- 
fessional hazard for a humorist. 
Wherever | go, people keep telling me 
jokes. It was Frederic Karinthy, the 
great Hungarian humorist, who com- 
plained: “| cannot explain to people 
that the humorist is the man who 
is supposed to tell jokes and not the 
man to whom you are supposed to 
be telling jokes.” : 
The joke is a minor art, with no 
only literary but also with political 
significance. A joke which has a point 
- —not only the point of a joke but some 
point of telling it in the circumstances 
—can be more revealing than many a 
fong lecture. 
Jokes have special significance In 
tyrannies. They are brief; they can be 
whispered from ear to ear in a few 
seconds; and by making fun of the 
tyrant they bring him down to a human 
level, showing that the great man is 
" nothing more than an erring, frightened 
and stupid human being, like the rest 
of us, and that's the one thing no 
tyrant's reputation can bear for long. 
The joke has never received its 
proper due. It has been analysed by. 
Freud and others as a psychological 
phenomenon but never as a literary 
one. It would deserve some attention 
but it must, inevitably, remain a minor 
art. Why minor? For three main 
reasons. 
1. Humour must always take second 
place behind tragedy. This does not 
mean that great humorous writers, like 
Mark Twain, lag behind silly serious 
writers. Of course not; they are much 
greater. But if you take Shakespeare 
himself, his great tragedies—King 
Lear or Hamlet—are greater. master- - 
pieces than his excellent comedies, 
NAN 
| A ls 
   © 
Pa
ve
l 
Ra
k,
 
C
z
e
c
h
o
s
l
o
v
a
k
i
a
;
 
fr
om
 
a 
ca
rt
oo
n 
co
ll
ec
ti
on
 
pu
bl
is
he
d 
by
 
th
e 
Ho
us
e 
of
 
Hu
mo
ur
 
an
d 
Sa
ti
re
, 
Ga
br
ov
o,
 
Bu
lg
ar
ia
, 
19
75
 
  
      
Drawing © Saul Stelnberg: Soclété Nouvelle 
des Editlons du Chéne, P arls 
Bb 
Drawing © Danllo Aqulstl, Italy; from a cartoon “collection published by 
The House of Humour and Satire, Gabrovo, Bulgarla, 1975

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 49499: The Importance of not being earnest; humour across frontiers: make laugh(ter) not war

"P
ho
to
 
fr
om
 
th
e 
Un
es
co
 
fi
lm
 
“A
ll
o!
 
Ha
ll
ol
 
Al
o!
” 
      
     
From the days when the ancient Egyptians 
used hieroglyphic typewriters to caption 
their obelisks, words have always caused 
problems. Some people just drop their 
aitches instead of minding their p’s and g's; 
as for others whole words escape them. 
The Merchant of Venice or the Taming 
of the Shrew. 
2. The joke.is one dimensional, while 
life is complex and multifarious—so it 
just cannot cope. 
3. There may be beauty in a short 
* piece of art—say, in a Japanese poem 
—but there can be no development, 
no construction. 
It was Ferenc Molnar, the olaywright. 
. who encouraged his friend, the Aus- 
trian, Alfred Polgar, to write longer 
pieces and not to stick to his excellent 
epigrams, paradoxes, very short obser- 
vations. Polgar thought this advice 
over and rejected it. 
it. Molnar shrugged his shoulders. 
“Very well”, he said, “then you will 
remain the world champion of the one- 
yard sprint.” 
Yes, the joke as a form of art is 
the one-yard sprint. 
Is there such a thing as a national 
humour? Of course there is. The 
speciality of the English, for example, 
is understatement. A man is swept 
into the water from a Channel boat. A 
lashing moun-: tremendous gale is 
tainous seas. The man's head emerges 
just once from the water, He-—being 
“a proper Englishman—shouts at the 
people on the boat, not excitedly of 
That's the form. . 
which suited him, he would stick to .- 
course, just loud enough to be heard: 
“Rather windy, isn't it?" That's 
understatement. 
Or take this scrap of dialogue from 
the pen of the English writer and 
humorist, P.G. Wodehouse: 
“Have you seen Mr. Fink-Nottle, 
Jeeves?” 
“No, sir.” 
“I am going to murder him.” 
“Very good, sir.” 
Understatement is not simply a 
manner of making jokes; in England it 
is also a way of life. When the 
Englishman leaves his house in pouring 
rain, all he will say, passing his neigh- 
bour, is: “It's not so nice, is it?" The 
whole rhythm of life in England is 
understatement. The underreaction to 
everything, the polite word instead of 
the rude outburst. 
1 could go on analysing such unlikely 
national humours as the Greek or the 
Swiss. | have given considerable time 
trying to understand the Chinese, and 
even more, the Japanese sense of 
humour. | failed. In our European 
arrogance we are inclined to believe 
that they have no sense of humour 
just because it is so different from 
ours. Well, | am not sure. 
All | can say now, in conclusion, is 
this: yes, there is such a thing as 
national sense of humour. As long 
as there are national characteristics, 
they will manifest themselves also in 
national humour. How long this will 
last in a world which is steadily 
becoming duller and more uniform, no 
one can tell, 
Does then, national humour exist? 
It does. There is a less frequently 
asked but perhaps more Interesting 
  
 
  
  
 
 
    
  
  
AR MLTTTT IAAL Seine 
WE 
| | = = = = 
» Exe SO = 
Ea No \ aD 
i 
if 
= 
 
 
      [TTTTTTITIT IT Igy] |   
he 
=
=
 
    
iil REALL (ny a rg LP
Yl 
 
FY 
  
Drawing © ‘Ronald Searle from “The Square Egg”, \ 
Weldenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1968 
4 
D
r
a
w
l
n
g
 
©
 
C
a
r
e
l
m
a
n
,
 
F
r
a
n
c
e

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=8) 2

### 49500: The Gift of the gabrovo: how Bulgaria became famous for good humour as well as yoghurt

### 49499: The Importance of not being earnest; humour across frontiers: make laugh(ter) not war

4 question to pose: Is there such a thing 
as international humour? Does hu- 
mour, can + humour travel - across 
international boundaries? 
Many people maintain that it does 
not and cannot. This statement, 
however, just is not true. People laugh 
at the same jokes all over the world. 
Having said it, | hasten to qualify, and 
enlarge upon, this statement. 
Educated people laugh at the same 
things and uneducated or less edu- 
cated people also laugh at the same, 
though different, things. 
This does not mean that educated 
people will not laugh at the man who 
slips on a banana skin or has custard 
pie thrown into his face. This banana- 
skin or custard-pie humour releases 
. such atavistic feelings of fear and 
. aggression that all barriers of edu- 
. cation fall to the ground like the walls 
. of Jericho. - ‘We may be thoroughly 
‘ashamed of our low taste; but we shall 
laugh. 
"There are certain other types of 
jokes and certain types of humour 
. which are far below the level of some 
people and far above the level of some 
others. The education barrier is more 
difficult to cross than the national 
barrier. , 
Some jokes are not only international - 
but pretty ageless. Some crop up at 
various places in different centuries. 
Sometimes they are cleaned up, 
modernized, dusted, put into a new 
guise but they do come back. Jokes 
born at the time of the post-World 
War | ‘German inflation reappeared 
half a century later in Brazil or ltaly; 
jokes told against regimes in, say, 
Greece or Chile, were already told - 
~against Hitler, against Napoleon Ill or 
even against Caligula. 
. So | can emphatically repeat that 
“humour does not respect. national. 
frontiers. This, however, does not 
mean that jokes and humour travel 
- more easily than, say, wine. Some 
wines do not travel at all; many people 
detest Retzina, others would not touch 
anything else; others again do not 
like wine at all, and so on. Similarly, . 
the popularity of jokes depends on: 
‘many factors: the national ..mood;- 
people's individual sense of humour; 
education; momentary painful problems 
‘or euphoria; taste," etc, 
But the foundation Is there: humour 
can travel and in many cases does 
travel. It is not easier to establish 
true internationalism in humour than 
in anything else. No, on second 
thoughts, | think it is easier: people, 
after all, are more inclined to laugh 
than to make political concessions. 
So make laugh(ter) not war. 
B George Mikes 
 
Photo Unesco Courler 
  
  
‘SAD TAIL OF 
GABROVO'S CATS 
Cats had no easy life in 
the town of Gabrovo, Bulgaria's 
internationally famous capital of 
humour, The Gabrovians have 
glven themselves a reputation 
—totally unjustified—for 
stinginess. The story goes that 
" they cut off their cats’ tails so 
that the animals took less time 
to pass through the doorway, 
thus saving heat In winter. : 
So it's not suprising that a 
tailless cat (right) is the symbol 
of the festival of humour and 
satire held in Gabrovo every 
year. Satirically smiling cat on 
dish (left) still has a tall, but it 
will soon lose it (below) to the 
astonishment of Gabrovo's dogs. 
i A nt rT fa } " —E aT 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
Photos © Sofia Press . 


### 49500: The Gift of the gabrovo: how Bulgaria became famous for good humour as well as yoghurt

THE GIFT 
‘OF THE GABROVO 
how Bulgaria became famous 
for good humour as well as yoghurt 
by 
Bogomil Gerasimov 
A SK a Scot if he can tell you 
where mini-skirts, tight trou- 
sers, gliders, the smallest coin in the 
world or similar things were invented 
and he knows immediately that a joke 
* about Aberdeen is coming up. Put the 
question to a Bulgarian and he knows 
that he can expect a quip about the 
town of Gabrovo in central Bulgaria. 
It was only a few years ago that 
"" “the British learned to their surprise that 
Aberdeen’s fame for stories of mean- 
 
BOGOMIL GERASIMOV, Bulgarian humorist ; 
and journalist, has published an anthology of 
Scottish jokes and anecdotes: From Aberdeen 
with Laughter (in Bulgarian). He is the author 
of several novels, television plays and film 
scenarios. . 
ness is shared by Bulgaria’s Gabro- 
vo—and that Aberdonian and Gabrovo 
jokes are astonishingly alike. And not 
only the jokes, but also the sense 
of humour behind them is identical. 
This whole revelation on a new type 
of town-twinning came about by pure 
accident in 1967, when | was an offi- 
cial of the Bulgarian Embassy in Lon- 
don. | was joking with a British jour- 
nalist friend of mine about the fact 
that both Bulgarian yoghurt and Scotch 
whisky have achieved world-wide re- 
nown, when he asked me to tell him 
a typically Bulgarian joke. So | told 
him about the inhabitants of Gabrovo, 
"who are said to be extremely mean, 
and far from resenting this reputation, 
do their best to feed it by inventing 
-~their- own “jokes “and “even publishing” 
collections of them. 
To illustrate my point | told him that 
Gabrovo people stop their clocks and 
watches during the night, in order not 
to wear out the cogs. “But what do 
they do when they want to know the 
time at night?”, asked my friend, and 
before | could reply he added: “An 
Aberdonian always keeps a trumpet be- 
neath his bed. When he wants to 
know the time during the night, he 
opens the window and lets off a blast 
on it. There is always a neighbour who 
will bang up his own window and 
shout: "Who's the idiot making that 
racket at twenty past two in the morn- 
ing?" Incredible, but true; the ending 
was identical with that of the joke from 
Gabrovo, 
My friend seemed fascinated by the 
Gabrovo sense of humour, and so | 
told him a few more typical Gabrovo 
stories. The Gabrovians dance bare- 
foot, so they can hear the music from 
the next village... They put green spec- 
tacles on their horses, so that they 
take straw for fresh grass... They .throw_. 
their cats down their chimneys to avoid 
paying chimney-sweeps... They heat 
their knives before dinner, so that 
guests can’t use the butter... They join 
wildlife protection societies so that 
their wives won't ask them for fur 
coats... 
Out of this conversation was born 
the idea of organizing a competition for 4

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 49500: The Gift of the gabrovo: how Bulgaria became famous for good humour as well as yoghurt

© 
Yu
ri
 
D
e
n
i
s
o
v
,
 
U.
S.
S.
R.
 
> 
  
 
  
    
  
   
  
      
the best Gabrovo-type Scottish joke, 
run in Glasgow, Scotland's largest city, 
by the Daily Record newspaper. The 
grand finale of the competition was, of 
course, held in Aberdeen, where the 
winners were awarded a free two-week 
stay in Bulgarian holiday resorts, inclu- 
ding a special visit to Gabrovo. 
The Daily Record headlined its report 
of the final “The Night Aberdeen Dou- 
bled up with Laughter”, and the Aber- 
deen Evening Express ran an article 
headed “Humour links Aberdeen with 
Bulgaria”. As a result of the publicity, 
I received an avalanche of letters, not 
only from many places in Britain but 
also from the U.S.A., Zambia, Australia 
and New Zealand. All these letters, 
together with those sent directly to the 
Daily Record are now carefully pre- 
served in Gabrovo. 
As | have said, a number of Scottish 
anecdotes are virtually identical to 
those found in Gabrovo. | have often 
been asked who thought up these stor- . 
ies, and whether one country could 
have picked them up from the other. 
In my opinion, there may well have 
been some borrowing, but it is very 
difficult to prove, and in any case the 
question is not that important. 
It is well known, in Bulgaria at least, 
that Scottish bagpipes are of Bulgariar™ 
origin, although this does not prevent 
the Scots from claiming them as their 
own invention and as their special 
contribution to the world's musical cul- 
ture. 
Some witty Gabrovo jokes may well’ 
have followed the bagpipes to Scotland 
where they speedily took root in the 
‘northern Scottish soil and flourished. 
In the same way, no doubt,’a number 
of Scottish jokes took out Bulgarian 
citizenship and settled down cheerfully 
in the town of Gabrovo. These obvious 
similarities are curious enough but the 
most striking thing of all is the basic 
resemblance of the sense of humour 
in both places. 
, In Bulgaria, Gabrovo has the same 
reputation that Aberdeen enjoys in 
Scotland. The inhabitants of both 
towns are considered to be misers, 
penny-pinching, deeply cunning and 
‘always on the lookout for ways of 
‘making easy money. The facts, as 
10 
 
often, are different from the fiction. 
The inhabitants of Gabrovo are hard 
working, honest, hospitable and gen- 
erous. And from my own experience 
of the Scots, | can say the same thing 
about the Aberdonians. 
The town of Gabrovo lies on wooded 
slopes of the foothills of the Balkan 
range not far from the ancient capital 
of Bulgaria, Veliko-Tirnivo, and ex- 
tends along both banks of the Yantra 
river. Mountain: towns generally are 
short of arable land, and the people 
who settled the area in the 16th cen- 
tury had to find other ways of existing 
than farming; so they turned to crafts- 
manship. : 
There was no electricity then, but the 
fast flow of the river was there to 
work for them, harnessed by their 
own ingenuity. They produced excel- 
lent quality goods, and then set out 
to sell them, becoming tradesmen in 
the process. But salesmanship is not 
easy. It demands special qualities. The 
people of Gabrovo had to fight off 
‘competition, pull in the customers, flat- 
ter them and convince them that buying 
Gabrovo goods was the hallmark of a 
customer with an eye for a bargain. 
With this in mind, the tradesmen 
All the cartoons on these pages are taken from the catalogue of th 2nd Int. Bi nial of Cart 
Caricatural Sculptures published by the House of Humour end Satire, Gabrovo, Bulgaria, 0s %a4 Sasi) 
©
 
S
h
i
g
e
o
 
Fu
ku
da
, 
Ja
pa
n 
of Gabrovo exaggerated some of their 
own defects, and passed themselves 
off as simpletons. They constantly 
polished this particular tactic and laugh- 
ed at themselves as hard as they 
could, provided it was good for busi- 
ness. They made up jokes and anec- 
dotes about their own shortcomings 
—but never about the goods they 
were selling. That is a fundamental 
rule of Gabrovo humour. 
As the years went by, the small 
craftsmen were joined by larger enter- 
prises. The first factories went up. 
The town was slowly changing. But 
Gabrovo was only really transformed 
after the Second World War. The old 
- workshops and small factories were 
© replaced by modern industrial plants 
from which goods are today exported 
. to dozens of countries. 
The people's lives too have chan- 
ged. Gabrovo is now a pleasant and 
steadily growing town. It has wide 
streets, parks, monuments, elegant 
buildings and attractive: suburbs. 
Nothing is left of its former poverty, 
hovels and narrow dusty streets. All 
that is a thing of the past Only the 
Gabrovo flair for business, its inge- 
nuity and enterprise and its sense of 
humour—constantly replenished by 
streams of new jokes—carry on un- 
changed. : 
One striking example of this enter- 
prising spirit is the well-known 
museum-village of Etara just outside 
the town. The village recreates for 
visitors the atmosphere and way of life 
of 150 years ago. (See "Unesco Cou- 
"rier" October 1975). Its narrow paved 
streets are lined with fine examples 
of the old architecture of Gabrovo, and 
with small workshops where master 
craftsmen and their apprentices prac- 
tise traditional skills using the old ma- 
chinery powered by the flow of the 
river. The number of foreign tourists 
visiting Etara is growing annually. 
And, of course, Gabrovo remains a 
town bubbling with humour. The peo- 
ple seem to be born with a sense of 
fun which they keep for the rest of 
their lives. In the centre of the town, 
on a rock in the middle of the river, 
is a statue of the town's founder, 
Ratcho the Blacksmith. Another exam- 
ple of the citizens’ parsimonious out-. 
look: why not use the useless rock 
as a pedestal and save the good 
land on the riverbanks? 
The unofficial symbol of Gabrovo 
is a tailless cat. Gabrovians, it is 
  ©
 
T
s
e
n
d
i
y
n
 
D
o
r
z
h
g
o
t
o
v
,
 
M
o
n
g
o
l
i
a
 
- 
  
  

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 49500: The Gift of the gabrovo: how Bulgaria became famous for good humour as well as yoghurt

  said, cut their cats’ tails, so that the 
animals take less time to pass through 
a doorway, thus saving heat in winter. 
Each May, Gabrovo organizes a 
great festival of humour and satire. 
It starts off with a symbolic gesture: 
the tail of an enormous dummy black 
cat is cut off. Then comes the carni- 
val procession, with floats presenting 
scenes from satirical shows, and illus- 
trating old jokes, with participants 
dressed in fantastic costumes and 
wearing masks, singing and dancing. 
Nowadays a special place is reser- 
ved at the festival for Scottish humour, 
and the links created between Gabro- 
vo and Aberdeen. The people of Ga- 
brovo, dressed in Scottish "costume, 
carry posters written in English and 
act out Scottish sketches. 
All this is treated as excellent fun 
by participants and audience alike with 
spectators packed on the pavements, 
massed at the windows or even look- 
ing down from vantage ‘points on the 
roofs in order not to miss anything. 
But the Gabrovo festival is not just 
  
    
  
           
    
  
    
  
     © Julian Bohdanowic
z
,
 
Po
la
nd
 
 
a carnival. During a whole week, 
theatres and cinemas present all-com- 
edy programmes. At the same time, 
conferences discuss the nature of hu- 
mour and satire. Exhibitions on hu- 
mour are staged, and the festival ends 
with. games and comic contests in the 
town stadium. 
In. May 1973 the first International 
Biennial of Cartoons was launched 
during the Gabrovo festival, under the 
title “Gabrovo 73". Its display of over 
"1,300 works by 348 artists and car- 
toonists from 22 countries, gave a pro- 
mising start to this international cul- 
tural event. The second Biennial, held 
during the 1975 festival, was even more 
successful, 
The Biennial of Cartoons was the 
first important event organized by 
~Gabrovo's “House of Humour and 
Satire”. Now completed, this centre 
has its own film projection room, a 
  
    theatre for staging satirical works, and 
© Francis Georges, Belgium aut 
conference and exhibition halls. The 
    
    
KY ul wih \\ \! TR HW hl tony and at Corned 
WA HORA LY INR! Lyd support from well-known humorists 
UAL Whe bed \ P . ; 
WR TURK Fa Li Ly \Y such as Charlie Chaplin, Jean Effel, 
1 IW LH dl by! ny | . Herluf Bidstrup, Eric Lipinsky, among 
I“ {| J Hil A | i 1, many others. 
Us I EY: oh I The House of Humour gets a steady 
Hi UY 1h flow of: enthusiastic letters from all 
TAY Wh LER VE over the world and has received more 
I ATL UR itil "i (1 ~ than 10,000 contributions for its collec- 
pl my Ly! nu ul TRL tion. * Through its wide-ranging pro- 
Yh i! HL AL LN Ta gramme, this remarkable cultural cen- 
| (CAN 1! I {| | RY tre will contribute to the development 
AM h NTL EL Ta of humour, and will promote contacts 
rH 1h UNL ILL : and exchanges | between creative ar- 
| | tists in this field. 
WUNYUL Ci : 
a \ \ h IT NR i The humour of Gabrovo is thus part 
5 | | AY hd I Ll of Bulgaria's national heritage and one 
a Ml (IN| il [WN that is not kept in museums or guard- 
EE UN Il TOY ed in safes. It lives in the hearts 
£ Le It | AN of those who enjoy it and who are 
3 Ul WN EL I proud "to" preserve and enrich the 
_ Th lh traditions of Bulgaria's “capital of 
2 ; | - humour™*™ 
© Mm Bogomil Gerasimov      
n

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  ©
 
Th
e 
W
o
r
m
 
Ru
nn
er
's
 
Di
ge
st
/T
he
 
Jo
ur
na
l 
of
 
Bi
ol
og
ic
al
 
P
s
y
c
h
o
l
o
g
y
 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
of
 
Mi
ch
ig
an
, 
An
n 
Ar
bo
r,
 
U.
S.
A.
 
Yol. XVI, No. 2 
December, 1974 
$2.50 per copy 
the 
WORM RUNNER'S 
digest 
FIFTEENTH ANNIVERSARY ISSUE 
    
  
  
  
    
  
Ado> 1d 05°28 
LI “Jequadag 
Z ON “IAX ‘197 
  
ADO IOHO/Sd 
O00 
JO pownof ayy 
  
EE —— au ays on (0 aes ee © ee 
  
Shown above are two title pages belonging to the 15th anniversary issue of one 
periodical—it all depends which half of it you're reading: The Worm Runner's 
Digest or The Journal of Biological Psychology. The Worm Runner's Digest 
was started by American biologist James V. McConnell and a small team of 
colleagues as a scientific joke. 
even taken seriously in some scientific circles. 
It became an immediate success and was 
Later serious articles were 
mixed in with the spoofs and the magazine then split in two, one half upside 
down. Photo right is a drawing of planaria by the Dutch artist M.C. Escher. 
It is shown upside down in The Journal of Biological Psychology, above. 
rea i if 


### 49501: Worm-breeding with tongue in cheek, or the confessions of a scientist hoist by his own petard

WORM - BREEDING 
  
WITH TONGUE IN CHEEK 
or the confessions of a scientist 
hoist by his own petard 
by 
James V. McConnell 
  
JAMES V. McCONNELL, founder-editor of 
the satirical magazine The Worm Runner's 
Digest and [later The Journal of Biological 
Psychology, is Professor of Psychology at the 
Mental Health Research Institute, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor (US.A.). The author of 
numerous papers snd articles on planarian 
worms and the biochemistry of learning, he has 
edited the volume The Worm Re-Turns: The 
Best from the Worm Runner's Digest (7965). 
A longer version of this article originally appeared 
in Unesco’s quarterly Impact of Science on 
Society (July-September 1969). It has been 
very slightly amended to bring it up to date, 
12 
F OR sixteen years now, l've pub- 
lished a somewhat humorous 
semi-scientific journal called Worm 
Runner's Digest. Herewith begins my 
confession. .For the Digest started as 
my own personal little joke on the 
Scientific Establishment but has turned 
out to be more of a joke on me. 
I've lost grants because of the Di- 
gest, had my laboratory experiments 
questioned not because of their content 
but because of the Digest, had articles 
| submitted to other journals turned 
down because | dared to cite studies 
published in the Digest. It would seem 
that a little humour goes a very.long 
way—towards excommunication! 
This scurrilous journal will seem 
humorous to you only if you happen 
to know a great deal about flatworms. 
On the off chance that some of the 
finer planarian points are lacking from 
your store-house of knowledge, | will 
duly explain a bit about the psychology 
of worms’ so that you will gain some 
insight into the psychology of worm 
runners. It's a strange tail, | assure you. 
The planarian, or common flatworm, 
is a small aquatic animal that seldom 
grows to more than three centimetres

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 49501: Worm-breeding with tongue in cheek, or the confessions of a scientist hoist by his own petard

$ 
E 
= 
— 
c 
Ss 
= 
£ 
« 
L- 
= 
Q 
X 
= 
° 
3 
@ 
= 
© 
£ 
a 
oF 
-— 
Ed 
£ 
= 
® 
= 
OQ 
@« 
w 
g 
= 
br 
© 
2 
= 
o 
= 
o 
= = 
E 
o 
= 
£ 
> 
- 
5 
@ 
2 
  
in length and is found in ponds, streams 
and rivers throughout the world, | got 
interested in the beast because it's 
the simplest animal on the phylo- 
genetic ‘tree that has a true brain 
and a human-type nervous system. 
But the planarian is famous for many 
reasons beyond its brain. For instance, 
it is the simplest form of life to have 
true bilateral symmetry-—~which means 
~ that you can cut it in half from head to 
tail and the left half will be a mirror 
image of the right. And it has about 
the most mixed-up sex life of any 
animal going. 
Let's face it: the planarian is that 
psychological anomaly, an anti-Freu- 
dian animal. To begin with, it is an 
hermaphrodite, having a complete set 
of both male and female sex organs. 
The flatworm lacks a mouth; instead, 
it has a pharynx in the middle of its 
body that it extrudes when it comes in 
contact with food. The pharynx latches 
on to whatever is to be the meal and 
the worm sucks the juices up through 
it as through a drinking straw, 
As a graduate student at the Uni- 
versity of. Texas, | had undertaken a 
project with another student, Robert 
Thompson, to see if the planarian could 
be trained. Presumably, since it is the 
simplest animal to possess a true brain, 
EEE 
it should be the simplest animal capable 
of showing true learning (or so the 
psychological theories of the day 
insisted). 
So Thompson and | set up an exper- 
iment in which we demonstrated—at 
least to our own satisfaction—that the 
flatworm could be taught the type of 
lesson that Professor Pavlov called the 
conditioned response. Later, when | 
went to the University of Michigan at 
Ann Arbor as a struggling young 
instructor, the head of the Psychology 
Department called me into his office 
for a friendly little chat. : 
“Jim”, he told me, “you may have 
heard a nasty rumour that to survive 
in the academic world, you must 
‘publish or perish’. | just want you to 
know that the rumour is true. I'm sure 
you know what is expected of you, but 
| have a favour to ask. If at all poss- 
ible, will you please try to do good 
research. But if you can’t, for God's 
sake, publish a lot of bad research, 
for the Dean won't know the difference 
anyhow.” 
| got the message and right away 
set up the first “worm lab.” at the 
- University of Michigan. 
| was given a tiny little basement 
room and enough funds to purchase 
a very modest amount of equipment 
and a few worms. Like all eager 
young instructors, | was wise enough 
to talk two very bright young students 
(Daniel Kimble and Allan lacobson) 
into doing all the actual work for me. 
But 1 had a problem; we had 
demonstrated that worms could learn, 
so what were we to do next? For 
a long time | puzzled over this problem, 
then recalled that one day when 
Thompson and | were working at the 
University of Texas, we had had a 
wild idea. ’ 
Planarians not only reproduce 
sexually, but asexually as well (one 
might say they have by far the best 
of both worlds). When a worm is first 
hatched from its egg, it is fully equipped 
to do everything but reproduce. After 
a few months of fattening up, it 
reaches puberty and begins mating. 
Sexual activity continues for three to 
four years, after which the animal 
seems to go into a senile decline, 
becomes all lumpy and misshapen—and 
then a miracle often occurs. 
One day as the animal is crawling 
along the bottom of some pond, the 
tail develops a will of its own and 
grabs hold of a rock and refuses to be 
budged. The head struggles to get 
things going again, but no matter how 
hard the head pulls, the tail remains 
obstinately clinging to the rock. 
Not able to convince the tail to get 4 
| 13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 49501: Worm-breeding with tongue in cheek, or the confessions of a scientist hoist by his own petard

on with it, the head does the next 
best thing: it pulls so hard that the 
whole animal comes apart at the 
middle. The head then wanders off, 
leaving the tail to manage as best 
it can. 
Now, if you cut a human being in 
half across the waist, he has a 
tendency not to survive the operation. 
But if you do this to a flatworm, you 
merely trigger off asexual reproduction 
in the same way that the animal 
occasionally does itself. For the head 
will grow a new tail in a matter of five 
or six days, and the tail, clinging 
gallantly to its rock, will regenerate an 
“entire new head (complete with brain, 
eyes and full sensory apparatus) in a 
matter of a week or two. 
Furthermore, each of the regenerated 
portions of the beast will soon grow 
up to the same size as the original 
animal and, being rejuvenated as well 
as regenerated, will begin sexual 
mating again. (Now there's a topic 
that needs further research if ever 
| saw one!) 
Thompson and |, knowing this odd 
habit of the flatworm, thought it might 
be clever if we trained a worm, then 
cut it in half, let the head grow a new 
tail and the tail grow a new head, and 
then tested both halves to see which 
half remembered the original training. 
Thompson and | never had the time to 
do that experiment at the University 
of Texas, but at Michigan | had 
students, worms and apparatus, so we 
set out to see what would happen. 
To our great surprise, we found that 
the heads remembered (a month after 
original training) just as much as did 
worms that had been trained but not 
cut in half at all. Apparently, if you 
are a worm, losing your tail does not 
affect your memory. To our greater 
surprise, we found that the tails 
remembered even better than did the 
heads. Obviously, for worms, losing 
your head actually improves your 
memory! 
These odd results suggested to us 
that, in the planarian at least, memories 
might not be stored just in the head 
section. Our next experiment con- 
sisted of chopping a trained animal 
in several pieces and letting all of them 
regenerate. As we half expected, 
each regenerate showed memory of 
what the original animal had been 
taught. 
Slowly it began to dawn on us that 
the usual theories of memory storage 
just didn't hold, for these all insisted 
.that memories were stored neuro- 
physiologically in the brain. Since our 
regenerated worms had to re-grow an 
entire new brain, it seemed to us that 
' they must be storing their lessons 
chemically. 
14 
In other words, whenever the worm 
learned something, there had to be 
some corresponding change in the 
molecules in their bodies (just as there 
must be an electrical or mechanical 
change in a computer each time it 
stores a bit of data). Our chemical 
theory of memory was interesting, but 
‘how to go about proving it? 
People have personalities and, after 
you've studied them a while, it becomes 
apparent that planarians do, too. That 
is, each organism reacts slightly dif- 
ferently from its cousins and brothers. 
But chemical molecules are all sup- 
posed to be the same. So, when one 
worm learned his lesson in our training 
apparatus, we assumed that the chemi- 
cal changes inside his body were more 
or less the same as those that would: 
take place in any other worm’s body 
when it learned the same lesson. Now, 
that's a perfectly tenable hypothesis if 
you don't’ happen to know much about 
zoology or biochemistry so, blessed 
with a most enthusiastic ignorance of 
such arcane topics, we ploughed 
ahead. 
Here was our reasoning. Worms 
are rather special. Not only can you 
cut them in half, and each piece will 
regenerate into an intact organism, 
but you can also play all sorts of 
sadistic games with them. 
If you slice the head in half, from 
the tip of the snout down to where 
the worm’'s Adam's apple would be 
(if it had one, which it doesn’t), and 
then you keep the two sections of 
the head separated for 24 hours, each 
section will regenerate separately. 
You'll end up with a two-headed worm. 
Interestingly enough, a chap at Wash- 
ington University in St.Louis worked 
with two-headed planarians later on 
and found, to our delight, that these 
animals learn significantly faster than 
- 
  
Ph
ot
o 
M.
 
Be
ll
ie
ud
 
© 
Pi
tc
h,
 
Pa
rl
s 
Photo of the common flatworm or planarian, 
the origin of the humorous scientific : 
magazine The Worm Runner's Digest. 
do normal beasts. So, as far as the 
worm is concerned, two heads are 
indeed better than one! 
And if two heads aren't enough for 
you, split each of them again, and 
you'll have four heads on the same 
body. You can get up to twelve heads 
at once, if you and the worm are 
interested in such things. More than 
that, you can take the head from one 
animal and graft it on to another— 
planarians don't reject tissue grafts 
the way that most higher organisms do. 
Well, if the memory molecules were ° 
the same from one worm to another, 
why couldn’t we train one worm, 
extract the chemicals from it, inject 
them somehow into another, and thus 
transfer the “memory” from one beast 
to another? 
Hat! — WHAT Do BiChologisTs Kiow | 
TH & LAND of THE BUND, 
    
  
Dr 
* 
   
  
THE CRO%-E\ED ARE Kings. 
ie 
[#3 
Bt 
or    
  
  
 
~ 
 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 49501: Worm-breeding with tongue in cheek, or the confessions of a scientist hoist by his own petard

* For several months we tried to do 
just that, but we failed, simply because 
we were rather stupid about it all. 
Our hypodermic needles were far too 
large and we tried to inject far too 
much material. The poor little worms 
swelled up like balloons; a few popped. 
Eventually, though, a brainstorm hit us. 
Hungry planarians are cannibalistic. 
If we couldn't make the “transfer” 
using our crude injection techniques, 
perhaps we could induce the worms to 
"do the work for us. 
So, in our next experiment, we 
trained a group of “victim” worms and 
- then chopped them in pieces and fed 
them to an unsuspecting group of 
hungry cannibals. After the cannibals 
had had a chance to digest their meal, 
we promptly gave them the same sort 
of training we had given the victims. 
To our delight, the cannibals that had 
eaten educated victims did significantly 
better (right from the very first trial) 
than did cannibals that had eaten 
untrained victims. We had achieved 
the first inter-animal transfer of 
information. 
After we had repeated this exper- 
iment successfully several times, we 
went on to show that the chemical 
involved in the transfer was RNA 
(ribonucleic acid), a giant molecule 
found in almost all living cells. For 
we showed that we could achieve this 
type of “memory transfer” using a 
crude extract of RNA taken from the 
bodies of trained planarians and in- 
jected into untrained worms (using, | 
may say, a very, very small needle). 
In recent years, a considerable 
controversy has cropped up concern- 
ing a whole series of similar exper- 
iments using rats and mice as subjects 
rather than worms. And, despite the 
outcries of the orthodox, it does now 
- seem as if chemicals extracted from 
the brains of trained rats and injected 
into their untrained brethren does 
cause much the same sort of “memory 
transfer” as we had originally dis- 
- covered in flatworms. 
! But 1 stray from the point. We 
\ published our original regeneration 
. results in 1959 and at once found our- 
selves mentioned in several national 
publications. Of course, none of the 
journalists . ook our work at all 
seriously but, unfortunately for us, 
there were hundreds of high-school 
students around the country who did. 
Many of the brighter students in the 
biological sciences saw immediately 
that the worm could make an intriguing 
and most inexpensive substitute for the 
rat. So in 1959 we were inundated 
with letters from these bright young- 
sters asking us to tell them all about 
the care and training of worms. (A 
few more aggressive souls wrote us 
 
  
     
demanding that we send them a few 
hundred trained animals “at once”, 
because they needed them instantly 
and didn't have time to mess around 
doing the work themselves.) 
| answered the first few letters per- 
sonally at great length, but when 
several hundred arrived, it became 
- clear that some more efficient means 
of communication would have to be 
arrived at. So my students and | sat 
down and wrote what was really a 
manual describing how to repeat the 
sorts of experiments we had been 
working on. 
It took us all of fourteen pages to 
pour out our complete knowledge of 
planarianology. We typed the material 
up and reproduced it on “ditto” paper 
(using purple ink guaranteed to fade 
rapidly so that years later we wouldn't 
be embarrassed by residual displays 
of our youthful ignorance). 
Now, | had always been noted for 
the oddness of my sense of humour, 
and ‘the planarian research greatly 
enhanced this reputation. Thus none 
of my students considered it strange 
that we should try to make a joke out 
of this little manual, so joke it became. 
First of all, it had to have a name. 
In psychological jargon, a person who 
trains rats is called a “rat runner”, 
because, presumably, his task is to 
get the rats to run through a maze or 
some other piece of apparatus. A 
man who trains insects is a “bug 
runner”, and someone who works 
with humans is, quite seriously, called 
a “people runner”, Obviously we were 
“worm runners”, and so the title of 
our manual simply had to be Worm 
Runner's Digest. 
~ One of the girls designed a crest that 
appeared on the cover, with a rampant 
two-headed worm, a coronet of con- 
nected nerve cells at the top, a Latin 
motto (which Arthur Koestler translates 
as “When | get through explaining this 
to you, you will know even less than 
before | started”), an S and R for 
“stimulus-response”, a y¢ for psycho- 
logy, and a pair of diagonal stripes 
painted the maize-and-blue colours of 
the University of Michigan. (It wasn't 
until years later that we learned that 
in the language of heraldry, diagonal 
stripes across your escutcheon mean 
that you're descended from a bastard; 
as | like to say, there's been a good 
deal of serendipity in our research.) 
To top the manual off, we called it 
“Volume |, No. 1”, the joke being that 
we had no intention of continuing its 
publication. Little did we appreciate 
the strength of the publish-or-perish 
syndrome. Academic scientists are so 
desperate that they will publish any- 
where (for the Dean really doesn't 
know the difference), so to our utter 
amazement, we began getting contri- 
butions for the next issue. Hoist with 
our own petard, there was nothing we 
CONTINUED PAGE 32 
  
  
; — ; 
Bo ! ’ TT 
° . 
= 
= 
= 
[1d ‘ 
Ei 
o |, 
2< 
0 . 
25 
—- 
Pe 
Lo) 
eo = . 
PA) 
EZ 
E. 
Ss © 
LE 
[fd 
@ 
2 
£8 2 . : 
> . 
0 
oo." 
Ew 
zo 
go _ 
an 
   
    
        
    
   THE QUESTION 
5 NOT - Po WE 
UNDERSTAND THE 
FUNDAMENTALS . OF 
RESEARCH — BVT, Ty? 
  
  
1d

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

EER | 
LJ : is a 


### 49506: Nasrudin Hodja: the man who rode his ass backwards; the legendary hero of Muslim humour whose wit and jocular wisdom have the world splitting its sides with laughter

NASRUDIN HODJA 
THE MAN WHO RODE 
HIS ASS BACKWARDS 
“the legendary hero 
1] 
of Muslim humour 
HERE] jocular wisdom . 
(ENERO ERVITT splitting its sides 
“with laughter | 
By IZLE 
ills 
EW comic folk heroes in world 
literature rival Nasrudin Hodja, 
~ the author of innumerable pranks and 
[ the subject of waggish stories which 
EL IVETE Tole I [= [Te] TR T=YoT ol FOR eT, IV [To 
~ occo to the frontiers of China and 
~ from Siberia to the Arabian Peninsula. 
: Stories by Nasrudin or about him are 
found in some forty languages. 
"For centuries the name of Nasrudin 
~ Hodja (Hodja is a term of respect, 
meaning teacher) has been associated 
g naive, ribald, and yet imbued with pro- 
found folk-wisdom. These stories also 
| exemplify the use of wit and irony as 
‘weapons egeinst, brutal force ELE : 
oppression. 
But whotwas Nasrudin? Lo} 
~ Some think he never existed an 
nd of popular legend. Others are 
convinced that he was a man who 
BIE 10 (VEL AVA [AVZ-Yo B-TaTe BRAVE N o ToT WTO VTS 4-3 
~ but many countries claim to be his 
place of birth. al - 
According to tradition “Nesrudine 
“was born about eight centuries 
ago in Turkey, in the little village 
of Harto near the township of Bivrihisar 
(to the west of Ankara). For over a 
century s cholars have been trying to 
discover where he really came from. to 
claims him as a son, a festival is held 
This is 
with tales that are amusing, somewhat ty Akcheir, another town in Turkey which 
Be Log Te Te TToF-1 AVANT WN (TEER Vo To Te TOT 
~ where he is supposed to be buried 
and an inscription on the wall of his 
~ mausoleum {Ve [o [CTT JR (oF: 1 SN a TN [-Ye 
~ some time before 1392. But there 
is no means of proving these Ba 
WI and theories. 
t he is part of the. inexhaustible 
A According hes | roo 
was surrounded by columns but was 
without any railings and merely had or IVAN SOP, Yugoslav ——— me critic, 
isan authority on the humour of the international 
folk hero Nasrudin Hodja. He has written a 
yi doctoral thesis on this subject for the University 
: iia Bh Liters 
of Belgrade and is the author of "The Meta- 
morphoses of Nasrudin®, a book published in 
: B 1973. He is currently fing with the Eelirane 2) 
“oe 3 massive door with a padlock and no 
key. This was said to be an example 
of the wisdom of Nasrudin who used : 
nd Cad ) Gi |  
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
Co
ur
le
r 
—— 
LES Can: (Ng Ong 
  
SYMMETRY PRINCIPLES 
AT HIGH ENERGY 
Trmemetry ond Nomi tem 
JANUARY 30.30, 194 | UNIVERSITY OF Miam) 
Behram Kaingunojiu §-Arnald Parimitios TONS 
! 
THE GLOBE-TROTTER 
Nasrudin Hodja is often depicted sitting 
backwards astride his donkey. He 
explained to his students why he did this: 
“If | rode facing ahead”, he said, “you 
would be behind me. If on the other hand 
you were to walk in front, you would turn 
your backs: on me. | think therefore that 
to ride this way solves all these problems 
- and besides it's far more politel” In 
Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
Co
ur
ie
r 
Turkey, Nasrudin has been represented 
in many ways: right, 18th-century 
miniature in the Topkapi Museum, istanbul; 
below, cover of an illustrated book of 
200 tales of Nasrudin by Alfred Morer, 
published in French, Istanbul 1975. This 
picture has also been used as a postcard 
in Turkey. Nasrudin and his donkey have 
even crossed the Atlantic. Above, they 
figure on the cover of a collection of studies 
presented at a conference on high energy 
physics held at the University of Miami, 
U.S.A. (Symmetry Principles at High 
Energy, published by W.H. Freeman and 
Co., San Francisco and London, 1965.) 
Anecdotes and aphorisms of Nasrudin 
are scattered throughout the texts. 
ALFRED MORER 
 CONTES CHOISIS 
ILLUSTRES 
- 
a _\ 
HSS 
Re 
os I 
  NASREDDIN HODJA

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 49506: Nasrudin Hodja: the man who rode his ass backwards; the legendary hero of Muslim humour whose wit and jocular wisdom have the world splitting its sides with laughter

Ph
ot
o 
Ro
la
nd
 
M
i
c
h
a
u
d
 
©
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
. 
—
-
—
 
We
ld
 
Re
 
' 
 
h
e
 
“ - 
11

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

et i a a A i a RL 
ART OF IMPARTIAL JUDGEMENT 
When the Mulla was a judge in his village, a dishevelled 
figure ran into his court-room, demanding justice. 
“I have been ambushed and robbed”, he cried, “just 
outside this village. Someone from here must have done 
it. | demand that you find the culprit He took my 
robe, sword, even my boots.” 
“Let me see”, said the Mulla, “did he not take your 
undershirt, which | see you are still wearing?" 
“No he did not.” 
“In that case, he was not from this village. Things are 
done thoroughly here. | cannot investigate your case.” 
  
'n 
h 
  


### 49506: Nasrudin Hodja: the man who rode his ass backwards; the legendary hero of Muslim humour whose wit and jocular wisdom have the world splitting its sides with laughter

THE 
THOUSAND 
AND ONE 
PRANKS 
OF MULLA 
NASRUDIN 
Nasrudin Hodja, the great comic folk hero of the 
Muslim world, whose origins ao back to medieval 
times, has become an international character of 
universal appeal. The anscdotes of Nasrudin are 
enjoyed for their exhilarating humour and admired for 
thelr jooular wisdom, 
  
        
WHERE THERE'S 
LIGHT THERE'S HOPE   
Someone saw Nasrudin searching for something 
on the ground. “What have you lost, Mulla?" 
he asked. “My key", said the Mulla. 
   
    
    
  
  
  
    
   
     
        
      
  
    
  
         
   
               
      
       
  
  
         
So they both went down on their knees and $5 “Good enough for Nasrudin™ is the hallmark of a 
looked for it. After a time the other man 52 rib-tickling story in Turkay, Egypt, Syria. Yugoslavia. 
asked: “Where exactly did you drop it?" BZ Bulgaria, Greece, Iran, Pakistan and India, and he is 
In my oun house.” “Then why are you looking “= increasingly read in many other countries ranging here?” “There is more light here than t28 5 5 R d U.K. to tha U.S.A Chri 
inside my own house." 33 rom the U.S. A. and U.K. to the U.S.A, and China, 
g i, A Soviet film has also been made depicting Nasrudin 
From The Explohs of the Incomparable Mulla Nasrudin®, ETL 4 as a paople’s hero, 
by Idries .|llustrations by Richard Williams © 1966, "3 : "a The stories and witty drawings on this double page and ulla Nuweugin Enterprises Ltd, published by Jonathan Cape 293 In our covar ara From two collections of Nasrudin tales 
IY 3 PRE pad told by ldries Shah, a writer born in Indian from an I HTS FEL 13 | Afghan family, and published by Jonathan Caps Ltd., 
35% Hy Londan © "The Exploits of the Incomparable Mulla 
a A Tr Sox i Nasrudin” (1966) illustrated by Richard Willlams and 
A £3 Lr 4 "The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulia Nasrudin® 
A MAN OF HIS WORD pr" 1 (1968) illustrated by Richard Williams and Errol le Cain LAST YEAR'S NESTS 
} Nasrudin had some good news for the King, and after 52s Pou (see also front cover). A third book, “The Subtleties 
. ho of difficulty managed to gain a ous 0] [ of the Inimitable Mulla Nasrudin”, illustrated by Richard “What are you doing in that tree, Mulla?" “Looking for eggs.” 
; whim by tradition every subject theoretically had SE : Ba Williams and Richard Purdum was published by “But those are last year's nests!” 
} the right of immediate access to the Court 235 r—r— ) Jonathan Cape In 1973. “Well, if you were a bird, and wanted a safe place to lay, would you build a new 
|! The King was pleased with what he had been told. i, Bo oS ry - - o < nest, with everyone watching? 
“ Choose your own reward", he said. “Fifty lashes", 22% I ly lt — Nl iL 
said Nasrudin. Puzzled, the King ordered that Nasrudin be eel TRING (TS) pe From “The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin®, by Idries Shah, illustrations by Richard Wil- 
| beaten, When wenty.five sokes ad boos Aiigtored, ! 53 g li il I il iil Wo | il 4 Sei] liams and Errol le Cain © 1968, Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd., published by Jonathan Cape Ltd., London 
asrudin called: “Stop!” “Now”, he said, “ n WL Twi VINEE LSE aL 
my partner, and give him the other half of _—__.—.—."" _— 
the reward. The chamberlain, Your Majesty, would 
not allow me to see you unless | would give him 
exactly half of anything that | got for my good news.” 
  
WHICH WAY ROUND ? 
A man who had studied at many metaphysical 
schools came to Nasrudin. In order to show 
that he could be accepted for discipleship 
he described in detail where he had been 
and what he had studied. “| hope that you 
will accept me, or at least tell me your ideas”, 
he said, “because | have spent so much of 
my time in studying at these schools.” 
“Alas!” said Nasrudin, “you have studied the 
teachers and their teachings. What should 
have happened is that the teachers and the 
teachings should have studied you. Then we 
SEE WHAT | MEAN ? 
Nasrudin's tomb was fronted by an 
immense wooden door, barred and 
padiocked. Nobody could get into 
It, at least through the door. As his 
last joke, the Mulla decreed that the 
tomb should have no walls around it ... 
The date inscribed on the tombstone 
was 386. Translating this into letters 
by substitution, a common device 
on Sufi tombs, we find the word 
From “The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin®, 
by ldries Shah, lliustrations by Richard Williams end Errol le 
Cain © 1968, Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd., published by 
Jonathan Cape Ltd., London 
SHWF. This is a form of the word 
“seeing”, especially for making a SiN 
person see. Perhaps it is for this 
reason that for many years the 
dust from the tomb was 
considered to be effective in curing 
eye troubles .. 
would have had something worthwhile.” 
     
    
   
LES — VE Vy 
4 CF CRE AVY J) ANE TL v Wee nd © fos oF 
  
Fo 
  
From “The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin®, 
by Idries Shah, illustrations by Richard Williams and   
  
NE ises Ltd., : From “The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin®, by Idries Shah, Illustrations by Richard Wil- / . = oo { Er ede an nea. Kula Near ol Emery x Hrd and Errol Je Cain © 1968, Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd., published by Jonathan Cape Ltd., London y 
| en a i : ’- 4 
  i + : : . ! — - I mmm i I 
I _ _ |r ~~ sir B i i r= = x g — 19 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 49506: Nasrudin Hodja: the man who rode his ass backwards; the legendary hero of Muslim humour whose wit and jocular wisdom have the world splitting its sides with laughter

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 49506: Nasrudin Hodja: the man who rode his ass backwards; the legendary hero of Muslim humour whose wit and jocular wisdom have the world splitting its sides with laughter

Nasrudin Hodja is known by the name of . 
Goha in Egypt where many anecdotes are 
told about him. “Il saw your wife at the 
market!” a neighbour remarked to Goha. 
“That's right,” Goha replied. 
"fortieth birthday today, | propose to barter 
her for two twenty-year-olds!” Widely popu- 
lar, Goha figures in a series of Egyptian 
children's books, “Stories of Goha™ by 
Kame! Kilani, published by Dar Maktabat. 
al-Atfal, Cairo. Drawing below is from one 
of them, “The Sack’ of Dinars”. 
“As It's her. 
    
  
      
20 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16 
He is always popularly represented 
as an old man with a white beard 
wearing an outsize turban, simply 
dressed and sitting backwards astride 
his donkey so as to be sure that he 
is always facing in the right direction 
for, as he says: “whatever | tell my 
donkey to do, he does the opposite.” 
The character of Nasrudin, an aston- 
ishing blend of wisdom and native wit, 
has long since gone beyond the 
frontiers of popular Turkish literature. 
He is part of the folklore of the Balkan 
peoples, the Serbians, the Croatians, 
the Macedonians, the Bosnian Muslims, 
the Bulgarians and the Albanians. 
His stories are also current in ‘Iran, 
Armenia, Georgia, the Caucasus, Tur- 
kestan, and in many other countries. 
Nasrudin exemplifies the humour 
that is deeply rooted in oral folk tra- 
ditions, so it is hardly surprising that 
so many of his “brothers” are to be 
found all round the Mediterranean. 
. The Arabs know him as Djuha, 
Djoha, Djuhi or Goha, the Berbers as - 
+ 8i Djeha or simply as Djeha,. the 
Maltese as Djahan, the Sicilians as 
Giufa, the Calabrians as Hioha or 
". Jovani. 
In reality, Nasrudin is something of 
- an anti-hero, a parody of the epic hero; _ 
. he is poor, dirty, shabbily dressed and 
uses - coarse language. He steals 
without hesitation when he has the 
opportunity. 
One day when he was singing while 
‘washing himself, Nasrudin decided that 
he had a very pleasant voice. When 
he emerged from the bath house he 
rushed to the top of the minaret of 
the mosque and, although it was noon, 
he called the faithful to evening prayer. 
Someone shouted up from below: 
“Fool. With such a horrible voice 
you should be ashamed to give 
the call to evening prayer when it's 
midday.” Nasrudin leant over and 
shouted back, “If some kind person 
had built a bathhouse on top of the 
minaret you would see what a fine 
voice | have.” 
innumerable - stories illustrate his 
character and behaviour. When his 
wife died Nasrudin did not seem very 
upset. Shortly afterwards his donkey 
- died and he wept bitterly. Someone 
said to him, “The death of your donkey 
seems to have upset you more than 
the death of your wife.” 
replied: “That's quite easy to explain. 
When my wife died my friends told 
me, “We'll find you an even more 
beautiful wife.” But when | lost my 
donkey nobody said to me, ‘Don’t 
worry, we'll buy you a stronger donkey. 
Surely I've every reason to mourn my 
donkey.” 
One day, Nasrudin was throwing 
fermented milk into Lake Akshir. A 
passerby called to him, “What on earth 
are you doing? “I'm making yoghurt.” 
“Do you think it'll take?” asked the 
man in astonishment. “I'm quite sure 
it won't”, answered Nasrudin, “but just 
supposing it did!” 
"influences 
Nasrudin | 
Since folklore is a valuable well- 
spring of literature, anecdotes about 
Nasrudin have served as an inspiration 
for poets and authors of many national- 
ities, - Russian, Ukrainian, Romanian, 
German, Serbian and Turkish among 
In some cases one adaptation 
another. The Yugoslav 
writer Slovko Micanovic used a book 
about Nasrudin by the Soviet author 
others. 
- Leonid Golovyov as a model, in writing 
his novel “Nasrudin Hodja in Istanbul”. - 
Nasrudin appears to have been 
- everywhere as we learn from ubiquitous 
legends about his life. According to 
one such story Nasrudin was a sage 
living in Baghdad around the tenth 
century, at the time of the Abbasid 
Dynasty. Having been accused of 
heresy during a period of religious 
strife, he is said to have feigned mad- 
ness in order to save himself from 
the scaffold. 
Other accounts say he lived in Asia 
| Minor, in Anatolia, in the 13th or 14th 
centuries. Tradition also has it that he 
lived at the time of Sultan Bayezit and 
his wars with Tamerlane—in the late 
14th and early 15 th centuries. And an 
entire cycle of tales about him and 
Tamerlane exists in Turkish folklore. 
Some stories about Nasrudin and 
Tamerlane. reflect” the spontaneous 
popular resistance to the Mongol con- 
queror. In the following stories, for 
example, .the dialogue between Nas- 
rudin and Tamerlane initially seems to 
be merely an exchange of ideas but 
then a sudden flash of Nasrudin's wit 
makes Tamerlane seem ridiculous. 
Tamerlane said to Nasrudin, “All 
the Abbasid Caliphs are known by a 
nickname. Al-Mustansir means ‘dep- 
endent on God's help’, al-Mu'tasim 
means ‘seeking protection in God’ 
and al-Mutawakkil means ‘trusting in 
God’. What would you have nick- 
named me if | had been one of 
them?” Straight away Nasrudin repli- 
ed, "Tamerlane God-help-us.” 
One day Tamerlane invited Nasrudin 
to the bathhouse and asked him, “If 
| had been a slave what do you think - 
| would be worth?” “Fifty pence” 
replied Nasrudin. Tamerlane was 
offended: “Don't you realize that the 
loin cloth | am wearing is alone worth 
that?” “Yes, of course”, replied Nas- 
rudin smiling, “That's my offer for the 
ot!” . tr 
One day when Nasrudin was with 
Tamerlane in his: palace, a platinum 
mirror was brought to the conqueror 
as a gift. Tamerlane looked at himself 
in the mirror and a. few tears came 
into his eyes. Noticing this, Nasrudin 
in his turn began to weep. Soon 
Tamerlane recovered his composure. 
whereas Nasrudin was still sobbing. 
“Nasrudin” said Tamerlane, “when 
| saw how ugly | was in the mirror, 
| was a bit upset. Knowing how 
fond you are of me | wasn't sur- 
prised to see that you shared my 
sorrow, and | thank you. But, tell me, 
why are you still crying now that |

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 49506: Nasrudin Hodja: the man who rode his ass backwards; the legendary hero of Muslim humour whose wit and jocular wisdom have the world splitting its sides with laughter

have got over it?" “Sire”, said Nas- 
rudin, drying his tears, “seeing your 
face for a moment in the mirror upset: 
you for quite a time. | see you all 
day long. It's only right that | should 
weep a little longer. 
Variants of these stories occur in 
which ordinary people get the better. 
of the powerful and in. which the 
“adversary” who is made a fool of is 
not Tamerlane but a bey or a pasha. 
However Nasrudin's witticisms some- 
" times have quite a different character, 
» as in the following story. A man 
said to Nasrudin, “Look at that goose 
running over there.” “And what's that 
to do with me?” Nasrudin replied. 
“But it's just gone into your house”, 
the man said. “And what's that to do 
with you?" retorted Nasrudin. 
Nasrudin, one of the poorest of men, 
also stands up for a certain stan- 
dard of human dignity and moral inte- 
grity although it is the comic vein 
which prevails, as in the following tale. 
One day Nasrudin was a guest at 
dinner and turned up wearing thread- 
bare clothing. Everyone ignored him. 
Feeling his pride hurt, he slipped out 
of a side door, hurried home, changed 
into suitable clothing, put on a beauti- 
ful fur-lined cloak and returned to the 
palace. This time he was welcomed 
at the door with great ceremony and 
was ushered to a place at the prin- 
cipal table. He was offered the best ° 
dishes and every attention was lavish- 
ed upon him. After enjoying all his 
favourite foods, Nasrudin took hold of 
the fur on the ample sleeve of his 
cloak, leant towards it and pushed it 
affectionately towards a well-filled 
plate saying “Eat, eat, my furl” 
The other guests were intrigued 
by this prank. *“Nasrudin, what are 
you doing?” ‘With his customary good 
humour, he described what sort of 
welcome he had been given on his 
first arrival and the reception that had 
been accorded him when he returned a 
second time... “As it is my fur that has 
received the honour”, he concluded, “it 
too should share in the feast”. 
The humour of Nasrudin is not only 
social satire, it is also a way of looking 
at life which was obviously not always 
in agreement with the ideology and 
ruling powers of the time. 
The character of Nasrudin is a pro- 
duct of anonymous creators: crafts- 
men, peasants, shopkeepers, donkey 
drivers, carters, beggars, shrewd 
townsmen and countrymen, dreamers, 
all those who felt social injustice more 
clearly than they understood the. 
reason behind it, and who expressed 
their human predicament in stories, 
tales, jokes and quips. 
Nasrudin’s stories have a value 
which is universal: always using the 
same . effect, that of comedy, they 
approach and sometimes even rival 
the great works of world literature. 
MW /van Sop 
 
       ZZ 
di... | 
 
STROKE OF LUCK 
Nasrudin Hodja lost his donkey and began to look for it crying “Thanks be to 
God, thanks be to God".. “Why are you thanking God?” people asked him. = ° 
" “Pm thanking him because | wasn't on the donkey when it got lost, otherwise { - 
should have got lost with it.” oe 
_ 
Dr
aw
in
g 
fr
om
 
“P
ol
it
ik
in
 
Za
ba
vn
ik
",
 
Be
lg
ra
de
 
  
  
  
 
ONION MYSTERY 
One day when Nasrudin Hodja was stealing onions in a field he was caught by the 
owner, who asked what he was up to. “I was blown here by the wind”, replied 
Nasrudin unabashed. “And who uprooted the onions?" “| caught hold of them 
' to stop myself being blown away.” “And how did they get in the sack?” “That's 
just what | was wondering when you interrupted me.” 
~ 
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
by
 
A
l
e
k
s
a
n
d
a
r
 
Kl
as
, 
Be
lg
ra
de
  

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

© Georg! Anastasov, Bulgaria; from the catalogue of the 
2nd Int. Biennial of Cartoons and Small Caricatural Sculptures, 
published by the House of Humour and Satire, 
Gabrovo, Bulgaria, 1975 
  
A eee April Fools’ Day to all 
our readers! Even if this issue 
didn't coincide with International 
Laughter Pay, | would still wish you 
a happy April Fools’ Day because for 
people who like to laugh, the first 
day of April lasts all year round. And 
since one of the Specialized Agencies 
of the United Nations and its magazine 
are showing an interest in laughter, 
this is just the moment to wish the 
whole world a happy April Fools" Day. 
What does the world have to do 
with laughter and what is laughter 
to the modern world? And what does 
laughter have to do with Unesco? 
| think it is all to do with the nature 
of humour and its broad social rele- 
vance. As an organization dealing with 
education, science and culture, Unesco 
strives to express in its work the moral 
awareness of mankind. Laughter, by 
asserting the high ideals of goodness 
and humanism, favours the develop- 
ment and heightening of this aware- 
ness and promotes the growth of the 
ideals which guide it. 
The dictionary tells us that to laugh 
means “to give audible expression 
to an emotion by the expulsion of air 
from.the lungs...” This is true as far 
as it goes, but if laughter were only 
the expulsion of air, it would not be 
much good for anything but blowing 
down houses of cards. 
Actually, as the great Russian satir- 
ist Mikhail Saltykos-Shchedrin has 
pointed out, laughter is a very power- 
ful weapon, for nothing so discoura- 
ges a vice as the knowledge that it 
will be perceived and ridiculed by 
others. The. laughter of the great 
French philosopher Voltaire strikes 
and sears like a flash of lightning. 
Laughter knocks down idols. Wit was 
the favourite weapon of Vladimir 
Mayakovsky, the greatest revolutio- 
nary poet of the 20th century. Char- 
les Chaplin holds that humour is to- 
day's antidote to hate and fear—it 
clears the fog of suspicion and anxie- 
ty that envelopes the world. 
All panegyrics of laughter extol it 
as a powerful weapon. But, unlike 
other weapons, laughter is extremely 
selective in its choice of targets. A 
bullet does not care who stops it 
but laughter always homes in on 
scoundrels. 


### 49509: The World will never die if it dies laughing

22 
THE WORLD 
WILL NEVER 
DIE IF 
IT DIES 
LAUGHING 
by Yuri B. Boryev 
  
YURI B. BORYEV, Soviet writer and literary 
critic, is a senior research associate at the 
U.S.8.R. Academy of Sciences’ Institute of 
World Literature. He participated in the 1975 
international symposium on humour and satire 
in Gabrovo, Bulgaria (see article page 8). 
He is the author of over 250 articles and 710 books. 
His works have been published in 17 languages. 
the world were born. 
We are talking here, of course, 
about satire, for humour is always 
harmless, though not toothless. Satire 
is indignant laughter, aimed against 
the vices of mankind. Humour is 
friendly laughter, aimed against the 
defects that are the other side of our 
better qualities, 
friends and at things that correspond 
to our ideals. 
In the nuclear age, laughter is the 
only weapon that may be praised 
without violating humanitarian princi- 
ples, for laughter is a creative, not 
a destructive weapon, in other words, 
an anti-weapon. Incidentally, every- 
thing there is to say about creative 
laughter was said long ago by the 
ancient Egyptians, who envisaged the 
creation of the world like this: God- 
laughed, and the seven gods who rule 
After the first 
burst of laughter there was light, after 
the second, water, and so on until, 
finally, after the seventh and last peal 
of laughter, the soul was born. 
This notion .that laughter was the" 
source of the world's creation is in 
keeping with.a saying popular in the 
Bulgarian town of Gabrovo: “The 
world has not perished because it has 
always laughed” (see article page 9). 
Humour and satire by their very 
nature are democratic. Laughter is 
very much a- collective phenomenon, 
tied up with a sense of community. 
Henri Bergson, the great French phi- 
losopher, quotes an interesting exam- 
ple in his book, Le Rire. During an 
exceptionally inspired sermon by a 
well-known local preacher, only one 
man failed to react in any way, being 
moved neither to tears nor laughter. - 
When asked why, he replied, “] don't 
belong to this parish.” 
nature: “Laugh and the world laughs 
with you, weep and you weep alone.” 
. Satire is a special kind of social 
criticism designed to organize public 
opinion and orientate it aesthetically. 
By its nature, therefore, satire is 
linked to democratic traditions. 
| am not, of course, suggesting that 
humour and satire do not exist in 
undemocratic societies, but that laugh- 
ter is part of the richest fabric of a 
people's life. Democracy provides 
the most favourable conditions for the 
art of comedy, showing tolerance to- 
wards even the most caustic satire. 
Laughter is 
a social reaction, it has a collective 
laughter aimed at -

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 49509: The World will never die if it dies laughing

  
v - 
N J   100000008 ¢ 
- 
  
© D. Koprivchtenov, U.S.5.R. 
1 
The very fact that laughter is addres- 
sed to public opinion and not to offi- 
cialdom shows its democratic nature. 
Even the most ancient examples of 
satire show its democratic origins and 
character. Aristotle claimed that com- 
edy had its beginnings 
Greece in the democratic period follow- 
ing the banishment of the tyrant 
Theagenes. Only a democracy could 
tolerate the frank personal nature of 
the comedies of antiquity. 
When the tyrant Dionysius wanted 
to get to know Athens, Plato sent 
him Aristophanes’ comedies, saying, 
“If he understands these comedies, 
he will understand the Athenian 
State.” Born of and nurtured by demo- 
cracy, comedy has always been a 
grateful child and repaid its mother's 
kindness. 
“If subordinates were allowed to 
laugh in the presence of their supe- 
riors, then we could say farewell to 
subservience,” wrote the great 15th- 
century Russian democrat and revo- 
lutionary Alexander Herzen. This cha- 
racteristic, the social function of laugh- 
ter, is what gives Andersen's mar- 
vellous tale “The Emperor's New 
Clothes” its satirical point. The em- 
peror is an emperor only so long as 
those around him maintain their ser- 
vile attitude towards him. But when 
the people believed their eyes and 
realized that the emperor had no 
clothes on, it was indeed good-bye 
to. subservience—the people began 
to laugh. 
© 
Ga
nt
ch
o 
Ra
ie
v,
 
Bu
lg
ar
la
 
in ancient - 
As time goes by, the democratic 
role of -satire grows. . In the future, 
it will no doubt be satire that will 
replace the present agencies and me- 
thods for the prevention of anti-social 
behaviour. The disturber of the estab- 
lished social ‘order will be punished 
" by public ridicule, which will be a more - 
effective and perhaps an even more 
severe kind of lesson and punishment 
than the coercive measures hitherto 
taken by society. 
Powerful though the effect of laugh- 
ter in society may be, let us not over- 
estimate its possibilities. Ten years 
after the publication of Gulliver's Trav- 
els, Jonathan Swift expressed his 
amazement that toadying, stupidity in 
high places, harebrained scheming, 
vain ambitions and other human vices 
could still exist after he had so harsh- 
ly and convincingly ridiculed them, 
Laughter can be effective only in 
conjunction with other means, includ- 
ing action in the fields of politics, 
economics and culture in general. 
This is the right moment to recall 
the Bulgarian town of Gabrovo | men- 
tioned earlier. 
When, in the spring of 1975, | ar- 
rived from warm and sunny Moscow in 
cloudy, rainy Gabrovo, and when the 
next morning, wanting to shave, | spent 
an hour searching for the shaver-plug 
and finally found it, of all places, 
under the table, | realized that | was 
in the humour capital of the world and 
that this was merely an example of 
a Gabrovian practical joke. 
Yet nowhere in the town did | find 
a monument to Aristophanes, or a 
street named after Gogol, or a Mark: 
Twain Square, or a Yelin Pelin ‘Way, 
or a Rabelais Avenue, or even a 
- dead-end named after the theoretician 
of laughter, Yuri Boryev. However, | 
did find the wonderful “House of 
Laughter”, where | saw a widely rep- 
resentative and well-presented inter- 
national exhibition of cartoons. 
Some cities are built on oil, like 
Abadan, or on coal, like Donetsk. 
Gabrovo's mineral resource is the pure 
gold of folk humour. ‘What a good 
thing it is that this resource is begin- 
ning to benefit the whole world. Fes- 
tivals of humour have become a tra- 
dition in Gabrovo. The Gabrovo car- 
nival is colourful, witty and full of 
folk humour and the spectacle attracts 
people from all over Bulgaria and 
abroad. 
And it is good to know that the 
idea has been taken up elsewhere. 
The Soviet city of Odessa, famous 
not only for its courage during the 
Second World War, but also for the 
quick wit of its inhabitants, has 
started to hold an annual Spring Fes- 
tival of Humour. The main theme of a 
recent Odessa carnival was: “What 
have you done to bring the population 
of ‘your city up to a million?” 
But then there are also Tarascon 
in France, birthplace of the famous 
Tartarin, and Windsor in England, with 
its merry wives, immortalized by 
" Shakespeare, .and many other towns 
       
  
  
  | ©
 
Jo
se
ph
 
G.
 
Fa
rr
ls
, 
fr
om
 
Sa
tu
rd
ay
 
Re
vi
ew
, 
“
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
, 
U
.
S
.
A
.

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 49509: The World will never die if it dies laughing

J throughout the world that are famous, 
or worthy of being famous for their 
wit. 
It is worth recalling that even in the 
darkest periods of the Middle Ages, 
every European spent a quarter of his 
life at carnivals, since the high days 
and holidays of those times added up 
to three months out of every yearl 
. At one time, each of the seven 
cities of ancient Greece contended for 
the honour of being the birthplace of 
Homer, incontestable proof that all 
of Greece claimed the lliad as its 
own. For centuries, at least six cities 
. of the Middle East and Central Asia 
have claimed and still claim to be the 
burial-place of Nasrudin Hodja. [f 
the “disturber of complacency,” as 
Nasrudin Hodja is known, has six 
different burial places in six different 
cities, that means that he never died 
and never will die. He, like all heroes 
of folk humour, is immortal (see ar- 
ticle page 16). 
Humour is national and internatio- 
nal—national in its form but in its 
content common to all mankind. Spring- 
ing from the depths of a people's 
life, and drawing upon the incompara- 
ble wealth of experience, humour 
in its highest classical forms of ex- 
pression always becomes international 
property. Universality is of the very 
essence of humour, 
Every people has its own favou- 
rite quick-witted hero who embodies 
all its joys and sorrows, all its skill, 
cunning, common sense and resour- 
cefulness, in short, everything neces- 
sary to live in a hard world among 
the strong and the all-powerful, whom 
one must deceive and outwit if one is 
to survive. Much can be said about 
each of these heroes of folk humour, 
I VANUSHKA - DURACHOK—Ivan 
the Fool—for instance, is a favour- 
ite of Russian folk stories. He en- 
joys neither wealth nor station, he 
suffers many trials and tribulations, the 
high and mighty of this world look 
down upon him with disdain and take 
him for a fool, and Ivan himself is not 
averse to posing as a fool. 
. But he is always ready to come to 
the ald of a friend or of any good, 
deserving person in need of a helping 
hand, and finally all the troubles that 
he encounters end up bouncing off 
him. He conquers the strong, outwits 
the clever, surmounts misfortunes and 
hardships, and copes successfully with 
even the most hopeless and insolu- 
ble problems, usually with some gain 
for himself. 
Nesterko is a hero of Byelorussian 
folk tales who is too lazy to work and 
not bold enough to beg, and so lives 
by his wits and the bold inventiveness 
of his artful dodges. 
The cheerful rogue Péacald is a hero 
of Moldavian tales who is charac- 
1 
terized by the quality of "dor"—a 
mixture of hopefulness and nostalgia. 
Arlecchino, (Harlequin) the hero of 
Italian folk comedy, is a country lad— 
bright, naive and direct. He is not very 
practical and does everything on im- - 
pulse, for which he Is rewarded with 
cuffs and blows. But this does not 
diminish his gaiety or his open and 
childishly naive view of the world. 
The favourite character of the French 
puppet theatre, Polichinelle, is a jolly 
hunchback, a bully and a mocker. 
Nasrudin, the hero of Eastern hu- . 
mour, goes by many names: the Azer- 
baijanians call him Mulla Nasrudin, the 
Tajiks—Mulla Mushfiki, the Turkomans 
—Nasrudin Hodja, the Tatars—Ahmed 
Akai, the Kazakhs and Kirghiz—Aldar- 
Kose. He Is a convivial fellow, a man 
of wit and wisdom, a rebel and a pro- 
tector of the weak. 
A LL these national heroes of folk 
humour are basically similar in 
that they stand up for the downtrodden 
and abused, are optimistic and cheer- 
ful by nature, witty, cunning, resilient 
and able to overcome any obstacle. 
But they are as different as the 
national characters of the peoples who 
created them. 
And how instructive, significant and 
relevant for the modern world are the 
heroes of the great classics of com- 
edy: Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry 
Finn, Khlestakov and Chichikov, Fal- 
staff and Monsieur Jourdain, Don 
Quixote and Sancho Panzal 
Cervantes’ two heroes, for instance, 
.. though opposites in many ways, share 
a wonderful and rare human quality— 
unselfishness. Because of this quality 
we are ready to forgive them their 
eccentricities, follies, shortcomings 
and foolishness. Sancho Panza, the 
realist, is no less unselfish than Don 
Quixote, the dreamer. He abandons 
his position of power, of which he has 
grown weary, taking only some oats 
for his ass and half a loaf for himself— 
the only profit derived from his 
governorship. Yet his “laws” stand 
and are known as the “Decrees of the 
Great Administrator, Sancho Panza”. 
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza are 
not of this world, because they are 
too good for it. We may measure the 
world by their standards of humanity, 
unselfishness and wisdom. In the crazy 
world of these characters, there is 
so much freedom and poetry lost by 
people in their everyday lives that in 
the final analysis the mad Don Quixote 
turns out to be more sane than the 
“normal” people, who are consumed 
by greed and the lust for power. 
We would like to believe that the 
happy day will eventually come when 
the wisdom embodied in the images of 
these and other immortal comic heroes 
will become popular not only among 
the citizens but also among the leaders 
. garian, 
of the countries represented In the 
United Nations. 
Humour and satire represent the. 
two poles of laughter. In between is 
a whole world of different tonalities: 
Aesop's merry and bitter mockery, Ra- 
belais’ rollicking fun, Swift's biting, 
sardonic humour, .Erasmus of Rotter- 
dam’s refined irony, Voltaire's wise 
ridicule, Béranger's alternatively care- 
free and. satirical laughter, Beau- 
marchais’- sparkling wit, Daumier's 
caricatures, Goya's horrifically cruel 
world of grotesques, the barbed ro- 
mantic irony of Heinrich Heine, Ana- 
tole France's scepticism, Mark Twain's 
gaiety, Shaw's ironic humour, Jaroslav 
Hasek's mischievous wry comedy, Go- 
gol's laughter through tears, Saltykov- 
Shchedrin’'s wrathful, scourging, 
scalding, scathing sarcasm, Chekhov's 
soulful, sad lyrical humour, Maya- 
kovsky's triumphant laugh, Gorky's 
optimistic satire, and the irrepressible 
humour of Tvardovsky's hero, Vasily 
Terkin. 
What riches! Aristophanes, Juve- 
nal, Shakespeare, Moliére, Lope de 
Vega, Goldoni, La Fontaine, Krylov, 
Griboyedov, Dickens, Fredro, Chalup- 
ka, Caragiale, and Delavrancea—all 
masters in using the multi-coloured 
pallet of laughter. 
True laughter is rich in different hues 
and glows with the most diverse emo- 
tions. This was beautifully expressed 
by Leonardo da Vinci in his Mona: 
Lisa. What an Inspired smile on 
her beautiful countenance, at once 
mocking, mischievous, tender, pensive, 
sceptical and melancholic and express- 
ing many other deep and contradic- 
tory emotions. 
} O live aright, one must laugh, and 
to laugh one must know what 
laughter is and what laws govern it. 
| thereiore "suggest to you, dear 
readers, that you get hold of a copy of 
my book, Comedy, or How Laughter 
Castigates the World's Shortcomings, 
Purifies and Reforms Man and Asserts’ 
the Joy of Living (1) and keep it by your 
bedside—you will never suffer from 
insomnia. But before you fall asleep 
please think about whether or not your 
town is worthy of staging a camival, 
of humour. in its tum. . And when.you 
awake in the morning, . don’t forget. to 
smile and wish everyone a happy April 
Fools’ Day. 
In the world of laughter and in the 
laughter of the world lies one of the 
hopes for peace on earth. The citizens 
of Gabrovo are right: the world will 
never perish so long as it can laughl 
In other words, the world will never 
die, if it dies laughing. 
BW Yuri Boryev 
{1) It has been published In Russian, Bul- 
and German, and | hope that 
all the *Courier's” readers understand one 
of these languages, at least in their dreams.

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

aE il . 
if 
Be 2 
i 7 prong ty 
 — 
a i [PLTELR 
tures et Société” 


### 49520: The Political and satirical cartoon; stepping in where angels dread to fear

THE POLITICAL 
AND SATIRICAL CARTOON 
stepping in where angels 
dread to fear 
by Ivan Tubau 
5 Taken 
© Maison Mame, paris; 1974   
  
Ho. anybody in this exciting and 
contradictory century would deny the 
importance of the cartoons that appear in 
the press. The cartoon is important as a 
historicai document, as an x-ray of society 
and politics and as a form of artistic and 
literary expression, - 
What essential differences are there 
between cartoon humour and oral or literary 
humour? 
According to Freud, humour is a first 
step to liberation. “It is a triumph of 
- gaiety, and represents the victory of the 
pleasure principie”. But this victory must be 
. considered as resulting from frustration: 
“Dreams become ingenious and amusing 
because more direct and comfortable chan- 
nels for the expression of our feelings are 
blocked”. "In the same way, we crack 
jokes when other, more directly aggressive 
forms of activity are denied us. 
_ in line with this reasoning, it is sometimes 
argued that a joke involves at least three 
persons: the author, the reader (or listener) 
and the “victim”. This proposition may be 
more or less valid for oral or written jokes, 
but does not seem to apply to cartoons 
and humorous drawings. - Some of the best 
cartoons produced this century—and here 
one inevitably thinks of the brilliant Saul 
Steinberg—have no victim, 
A much more acceptable definition of 
. most of today's cartoon humour is this 
one of Kuno Fischer's describing humour 
"in general: “Humour is an unbiased judge- 
ment”. According to Fischer, “Aesthetic 
freedom is the detached observation of 
things”, “It may be", he adds, “that 
this aesthetic freedom gives rise to a dis- 
tinctive type of judgement... which because 
of its origin we will call detached judge- 
ment”. And he affirms: “Freedom pro- 
duces humour and humour is simply a game 
with ideas”. 
One couid apply this definition to the 
cartoon and call it a game with ideas, 
  
IVAN TUBAU, Spanish cartoonist well known 
by the pseudonym of ” Pastecca ”, is an authority 
on the graphic techniques of the mass media. 
A journalist and writer, he has published many 
studies on popular art and culture. The present 
article is adapted from his book De Tono a 
Perich. EI chiste grafico en la prensa espafiola 
de la posguerra (From Tono to Perich. The 
Cartoon in the post-war Spanish Press) published 
in Madrid (1973). 
 
  
     
Drawing by Vazquez de Sola Spaln Taken from 
“Carlcatures”, © Editlons Albin Michel, Parls, 1975 
expressed in a drawing with or without the 
assistance of words. However, the con- 
cept of “detached judgement” does not 
apply to the majority of cartoons appear- 
ing in the press. On the: contrary, the 
most effective of them imply a definite 
and categorical judgement based on a 
real situation. 
| have already used the word “freedom” 
several ‘times, and with good reason, 
Without a certain degree of freedom, the 
political cartoon and the social caricature 
could not exist—at least not in a legally 
authorized publication, 
And yet the cartoon often emerges from 
conditions of “relative freedom”, as a subs- 
titute for more direct forms of expression. 
which cannot be used openly. On this score 
the Spanish essayist Carlos Castilla del Pino 
has written: “The distinctive characteristic 
of a joke is that by laughing at a problem, 
one avoids the opposite down-to-earth and 
serious approach. Thus, for instance, the 
political joke shows critical awareness, but 
it cannot replace active, direct criticism, 
which is ruled out by either external or 
self-imposed censorship. 
The cartoon requires of its creator a 
minimum of dexterity in drawing and a 
25 
4

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 49520: The Political and satirical cartoon; stepping in where angels dread to fear

> 
0 
minimum of aesthetic judgement, two cha- 
racteristics which can only exist when a 
certain level of culture has been reached. 
An illiterate person may be able to draw 
because he has inherited a natural cultural 
. sensibility. 
However, the cartoon—in the opinion 
of the Spanish humorist Maximo, which 
| share—is a literary form. Although 
expressed fundamentally through drawing, 
it is much closer to the narrative form of 
expression than the plastic arts. One might 
say (even of work like Steinberg’s which 
would seem to suggest the contrary} that 
in humorous drawings the aesthetic treat- 
ment always takes second place and the 
idea is always of primary importance. 
NCE we accept the status of the car- 
toon as a literary form, it seems lo- 
gical to point out that the development of 
the cartoon is closely linked to the develop- 
ment of printing techniques. Even if some 
scholars claim to have found traces of gra- 
phic humour in the contexts of prehistoric 
times, Ancient Egypt, Classical Greece and 
the Middle Ages, the cartoon as such was 
born when printing allowed it to be widely 
circulated. 
Vases have been found in Apulia, Cam- 
pania and Sicily which, like the paintings 
of Cranach, Breughel, Bosch or Teniers, 
provide examples of a caricaturist’'s outlook 
on the world, bordering on the humorous. 
Other artists, such as the English painter 
Hogarth or the Spaniard Goya, can be 
seen as genuine humorists, 
But the development of the cartoon went 
hand in hand with the rise of periodical 
publications: in Germany and the Nether- 
lands during the religious wars; in England 
with the growth of journals of opinion; 
and in France under the Bourbon monar- 
chy and during the Revolution, until Napo- 
leon and his rigid censorship of the press 
cut short its development. 
The spread of lithography brought the 
cartoon a wider audience during the 19th 
century. This was particularly striking in 
France in publications like La Caricature 
(1825) and Le Journal pour Rire {1848} both 
founded by Charles Philipon, and in Chari- 
vari (1832). This last magazine numbered 
among its contributors the great caricatu- 
rist Honoré Daumier. Almost every great 
French caricaturist of the age appeared in 
Philipon’s magazines: Paul Gavarni, Gus- 
tave Doré, Grandville, Bertall and André 
Gill. 
In Spain, however, few printed cartoons 
were produced during the religious wars 
in Europe. “Spain itself was a caricature”, 
commented the 19th-century thinker Jacinto 
Octavio Picon. Then during the war of 
independence the country found an effec- 
tive pioneer in Leonardo Alenza. 
In the mid-19th century, satirical publi- 
cations began to proliferate in Spain: Gil 
Blas (1864), El Fisgén (1865), Dona Ma- 
  
. nuela (1865), El Sainete (1867), La Gorda 
(1868), Jeremias (1869), La Flaca (1871). 
In the majority of them we find the work 
of the prolific Francisco QOrtego, the most 
important cartoonist of 19th-century Spain, 
whose work was to some extent carried -on 
by José Luis Pellicer (EI Cohete, 1872). 
26 
In Spain, as elsewhere in the world, the 
history of graphic humour, which began 
about 150 years ago, has been a check- 
ered one, But in general terms we can 
follow the evolution of cartoon humour from 
the viewpoints of aesthetics, expression, 
content and diffusion. 
From an aesthetic viewpoint, the general 
tendency in cartoon-drawing has been 
towards progressive economy of line. Even 
though the immense amount of detail shown 
by contemporary cartoonists such as Topor 
rivals the work of Bertall, in the 19th 
century, the majority of today's cartoonists 
have opted for a simplification of forms, a’ 
rigorous visual synthesis and an economy 
of detail which in the last century already 
characterized the work of French illustra- 
tors such as Doré and Caran d’Ache, 
If attempts to separate content and 
form are regarded today as arbitrary and 
controversial, then to try to separate the 
purely aesthetic aspect of a cartoon from 
the idea it seeks to express would be the 
very height of absurdity. 
The aesthetic evolution of the cartoon has 
therefore been accompanied by changes in 
its form of expression, which have also be- 
come more simplified. Texts or captions, 
where present, have become shorter and 
more cryptic, the drawings less concerned 
with detail except where necessary. 
Most important of all, however, is the 
fact that the drawing has thus gained 
complete autonomy and its own power as a 
means of expression. Even the best humor- 
ous drawings of the last century were 
almost always illustrations—often excellent, 
but ultimately no more than illustrations— 
of a given text which was often a play 
on words or a literary joke; a text, in short, 
which could have stood alone without the 
image. 
But although cartoons of this type are 
still published today, they are no longer 
considered to qualify as genuine graphic 
humour if the drawing can be suppressed 
leaving the words on their own. Only when 
the text, title or caption have no meaning 
without the image are we looking at a 
genuine cartoon. Purists go even further: 
only the “mute” joke, the cartoon with 
no words, is for them the genuine article. 
However, even without making this sort 
of demand for absolute purity—almost im- 
possible in political or topical cartoons—a 
close interdependence between text and 
image is today considered indispensable 
in graphic humour. And if we are now 
thoroughly aware of this new dimension of 
humour, it is very largely due to the car- 
toonists and humorists of North America: 
they “invented” modern cartoons, as they 
“invented” the silent movie comedies, This 
conclusion in no way detracts from the 
merit of their European forerunners, such 
as Mélies or Max Linder in the cinema, 
and Caran d'Ache in cartoons. 
It is almost axiomatic that in talking about 
American influence, we tend to consider 
as American both the Rumanian Saul Stein- 
berg—the greatest cartoonist of all time— 
and Charles Chaplin, who is an English- 
man. But in addition to Steinberg other art- 
ists working in America have had a strong 
influence at a number of different levels: 
Peter Arno, James Thurber, Charles Ad- 
dams, among others. The New Yorker and 
Britain's Punch, with its extraordinary Ron- 
ald Searle, have incubated the best of 
modern humour. 
Yet Spain too has made its own very 
important contribution to graphic humour in 
the form of “gratuitous humour” or what 
| have called “Codornicesco” (1). It has 
sometimes been suggested erroneously 
that this is an imitation of the humour that 
in Italy under Mussolini appeared in publi- 
cations such as Bertoldo. The simple fact 
is that Spaniards and Italians made similar 
discoveries at about the same time. It is 
inevitable that periods of censorship which 
prohibit critical humour foster development 
of cartoonists specializing in allusive hu- 
mour, particularly in the field of the verbally 
absurd, where both the Spanish and the 
Italians have reached standards that are 
difficult to match. 
When it comes to the problem of content, 
evolution has been much more blurred and 
contradictory. One widespread idea is that 
humour (critical . humour, since drawings 
such as Steinberg’s by their nature lie on 
the periphery of this argument} has mainly 
concentrated, during the last century and 
a good part of the present one, on poking 
fun at anything new, from new means of 
transport to political theories. 
This idea demands a closer look. lh gen- 
eral terms, one can say that cartoons have 
been moving from “right” to “left’—nobody 
would consider the French cartoonist Siné 
as a conservative, for example—though it 
is equally true that progressive tendencies 
were also expressed during the last century. 
Even if it is true that Cham, Bertall and 
Doré were clearly reactionaries (Doré took 
refuge in Versailles when the Commune 
took over Paris during the Franco-Prussian 
war), and that Forain and Caran d’Ache 
were violently anti-semitic, it is no less true 
that Daumier (who refused the Legion 
of Honour offered him by the Second Em- 
pire} displayed a distinctly critical and pro- 
gressive attitude in his work. 
    
A: an International level, the fact that 
some critical humour seems to have 
moved towards non-conservative and some- 
times even revolutionary standpoints is due 
to its circulation among a much wider and 
more varied public. 
This brings us to consider the dissemi- 
nation of humour generally. It is obvious 
that the number and circulation of humorous 
publications have continued to increase, 
even if their growth has been uneven. 
Cartoons have also moved successfully 
into the general information field—after a 
long period of finding the door shut in their 
face—and have won a better-placed and 
wider showing in the daily press. 
Most significant of all, the importance of . 
the cartoon is now almost universally recog- 
nized. Today cartoons are not used sim- 
. Ply to fill up space. They occupy a privi- 
leged place in the best pages, next to 
the main editorial or the articles of leading 
contributors. 
WM /van Tubau 
1) Codornicesco: form of humour found in the 
Spanish satirical weekly La Codorniz.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 49520: The Political and satirical cartoon; stepping in where angels dread to fear

  P
e
o
c
e
c
c
e
c
e
c
o
n
s
a
 
    
ESS 
—— ER 
a EEE 2 
—- - H =x wwe xwxey 55 
1 fe a & & = 
ae =s SENT" 
rrr rr ry ex 
uid IIE Trex 
AEs a 
YET YT Yr yrx 
Bl =o xy wus Bl Ef 
it 
A 
g
i
a
 
  
0 
n 
i] 
0 
A 
0 
0 
n 
yu 
: 
0 
0 
“ 
=
 
(
N
W
 
— 
W
I
E
S
C
 
o
o
 
| —
 
NB
 
— 
=
 
C
O
C
O
 
C
O
E
 
O
O
 
S
O
S
 
m
a
c
a
w
 
L
B
 
S
T
O
O
 
O
e
   
“ 
B
E
E
B
E
 
I
B
S
 
e
m
D
m
 
e
s
 
=
 
=
 
B
O
S
E
 
a
p
e
E
 
Es 
  
* 
C
D
 
e
o
 
o
w
e
n
 
L
L
 
o
o
m
 =
 
    
  
     
   
=
 
o
e
 
e
n
 
=
 
e
x
 
c
o
 
0
0
 
&
 
o
o
 
o
o
 
t
o
 
t
n
 
o
x
 
> 
=
 
o
o
 
c
D
 
O
D
 
C
2
 
c
x
 
L
a
 
 

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 49521: The Chinese have a word for (w)it: Hsiao-hua

the Chinese 
have a word 
for (w)it IAQ-HUA    
by Kristofer M. Schipper 
4 A seventy-year-old scholar 
became the father of a 
son, and he proudly decided to call 
the child ‘Age’. The following year, - 
another son was born and, since the 
' new-born baby looked intelligent, he 
father decided to call him ‘Study’. A . 
year passed, and yet a third son came 
into the world. The old scholar laugh- 
ed and said, ‘Three sons, at my agel. 
This is getting to be funnyl’- So he 
called his last-born ‘Humour’ (Hsiao- 
hua). 
“The children grew up, and one day 
they went up into the mountains to 
gather wood for their father. On their . 
return, the old scholar. asked his wife, 
‘Which of my three sons has brought 
back the most wood? His wife re- 
plied, ‘Age gathered a handful; Study 
nothing at all; but Humour has brought 
home a whole pilel’” x 
This ancient tale is a good illustra- 
tion of popular Chinese wisdom, which 
holds that a little humour in life can 
be more profitable than either exper- 
ience or education. The philosophers 
of ancient China were well aware of 
this, for they often quoted witty stories 
in support of their theories. Mencius, 
the ancient sage-philosopher, writing 
in the 4th century B.C., tells the story 
of a villager who, distressed to see that 
his crops were not growing, tugged on 
the stalks with his hands so as to 
coax them into growing more rapidly. 
He returned home at the end of the 
day sighing, “I'm worn out; I've spent 
the whole day helping the crops to 
N
P
 
  
KRISTOFER M. SCHIPPER, born in Sweden, 
is Professor of Chinese Studies at the Ecole 
Pratigue des Hautes Etudes (Sciences of 
Religion Section), University of Paris. He is 
also Secretary of the newly-founded European 
Association of Chinese Studies. He is an 
authority on Taoist traditions of China and the 
author of L'Empereur Wou des Han dans la 
Légende - Taociste (Emperor Wu of the Han 
Dynasty in Taoist Legend) 1965, and Le Feng- 
teng, Rituel Taoiste (Feng-teng. Taoist Ritual) 
"1975, both published by [I'Ecole Francaise 
d’Extréme- Orient, Paris. He has published many 
reference works as research aids in the little 
explored field of Chinese Taoist ritual on which 
he is at present preparing a long monograph. 
Professor Schipper is currently also at work on 
a new French translation of the writings of the 
Chinese Taoist philosopher, Chuang-tzu. 
28 
   Ph
ot
o 
©
 
So
ci
ét
é 
As
ia
ti
qu
e 
de
 
Pa
ri
s 
Co
ii
ec
ti
on
, 
C
h
a
v
a
n
n
e
s
 
b
e
q
u
e
s
t

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 49521: The Chinese have a word for (w)it: Hsiao-hua

)y 
PA 
The Chinese ideogram reproduced above says hsiao-hua, 
meaning “joke” or “funny story”. A literary genre in its 
own right, the hsiac-hua has enjoyed wide popularity since 
ancient times in China, where the God of Joy (Hsi-shen) 
here depicted on a 19th-century engraving (left) was traditionally 
revered. Right, watercolour by Li-Ts’an (17th century) 
shows the Immortal, Chung-li Ch'iian, riding his donkey 
backwards, like Nasrudin Hodja (see page 16). The other 
figure is the famed Taoist philosopher Chuang-Tzu 
floating (frontwards!) on a huge gourd, 
   
Photo &) Almasy, Kristofer M. Schipper Collection, Paris 
grow!” His sons ran to the field to 
see what he had done, only to find 
that the stalks had already dried up... 
The moral of the story lent added point 
to Mencius’ belief that we should 
cultivate ourselves with. care and 
patience. 
The Chinese call this kind of anec- 
dote hsiao-hua which literally means 
“Laugh-talk™ or “stories to make you 
laugh”. The example just quoted is 
one of. the oldest examples of this 
kind of humour in the world. 
Though laughter is as old as huma- 
nity, or perhaps even older, the role 
of humour changes from one culture 
to the next. What is characteristic of 
China's own particular brand of -hu- 
mour is that the -hsiao-hua, whose 
origins were undoubtedly popular, was 
incorporated into the classical written 
tradition at a very early date, °° 
Another very ancient form of . hu- 
~mour in China is known as ku-chi 
which literally means “a side-swipe,” 
and is now used for sarcastic and 
satirical humour. Significantly, the first 
examples of this were handed down 
by a Taoist author named Chuang-tzu 
(who lived in the 4th century B.C). 
As opposed to Confucianism, Taoism 
" embodied the individual's aspirations 
to freedom and the throwing-off -of 
social, palitical and ideological cons- 
traints. 
Chuang-tzu uses humour to fight 
prejudice and dogmatism. For ins- 
tance, he shows us Confucius acting 
as a sort of Chinese Don Quixote, 
attempting to teach his moral precepts 
to a highwayman known as Ch'i-the- 
bandit. But the brigand turns out to 
~ be just as eloquent as the Master, 
and even manages to tie the latter 
. up in knots with his own arguments, 
concluding with the parting shot, 
“Since people call me Ch'i-the-bandit, 
why don't they call you (who are 
only a hypocrite after all) Confucius- 
the- bandit?” 
We later come across specialists 
in this kind of satirical repartee at 
the court of the emperors, and they 
were referred to by this same term, 
ku-chi. Tung-fang Shuo was one cele- 
brated ku-chi; he was a courtier of 
the Emperor ‘Wu, during the Han dy- 
nasty (141-187 AD.). One day, Tung- 
fang Shuo drank a magic potion in- 
tended for the Emperor, and which 
was supposed to make the latter im- 
mortal. The emperor was furious when 
he found out, and decided to execute 
the impertinent courtier forthwith. 
But the latter argued, “Your majesty, 
if the elixir works, then | am immortal 
and you cannot put me to death. If, 
on the other hand, the potion does 
not work, then what crime have | com- 
mitted?” The emperor had to laugh, 
"and he pardoned the ku-chi. 
Tung-fang Shuo subsequently be- 
came one of the patron saints of 
- laughter in Chinese folklore. 
clowns later came. to be canonized 
Other 
in China, such. as the two Buddhist 
monks Han Shan and Shih Te (8th ¢en- 
tury), 
ing sage, perfectly conscious of the 
"truth, meanwhile became a familiar one 
in Taoism. It is thought that it was 
this Taoist tradition that influenced Chi- 
nese sculptors when carving their 
first representations of the Buddha. 
In the Buddhist grottoes at Yun-k'ang 
..-the late fifth-century Buddhas wear 
. "a mystical smile to ‘be found neither 
in Indian nor in Central Asian art. 
~The fondness of the Chinese for . 
laughter meant that the hsiao-hua very 
“ soon became a literary genre in their 
own right, and more than 70 antho- 
logies of anecdotes of all kinds have 
been compiled over the centuries. The 
oldest of these is called the Hsiao-lin 
(The Forest of Laughter). Written by 
a scholar named - Han-t'an “ Ch'un 
(c. 132-222), the Hsiao-lin's amusing 
tales are perfectly harmless. They 
are innocent jests told in a gently 
mocking tone, Here is an example: 
“In the course of a dispute, a man 
bit off his adversary’'s nose. The 
judge wanted to condemn the man, 
despite the accused's claim that the 
~ victim himself had bitten his nose 
off. The judge tried to reason with 
him, ‘But the nose is placed higher 
than the mouth, so how could he pos- 
so frequently represented in 
. popular art. The figure of the laugh- 
sibly have got up there to bite it 
off?’ ‘He stood on his bed’ came the 
prompt retort.” 
As we said earlier, the hsiao-hua 
“were popular in origin, and yet they 
were mostly written down in classical 
language. This anomaly can be ac- 
counted for by the fact that the highly 
‘concentrated style of classical Chi- 
nese is ideally suited to sketching 
a situation with a few light touches 
and to rendering swift repartee. 
Where we possess two versions of 
an anecdote in Chinese literature, one 
written in classical Chinese, the other 
in spoken Chinese, the latter often 
turns out to be two or three times 
as long as the former. 
- But the scholars did not confine 
themselves merely to transcribing 
popular anecdotes. They also made 
up their own hsiao-hua. One of the 
more noteworthy features of these last 
is their “historical” character, in that 
they refer to named people, usually 
famous scholars, situated in their 
~ appropriate historical period. 
This genre first made its appearance . . 
at about the same time as the Hsiao- 
lin quoted above, among a group of 
cultivated and eccentric aristocrats, 
- the best known of whom have gone 
down in history as the “Seven Sages 
of the Bamboo Forest”. These sages 
to pin down a person or a situation. 
Their behaviour was often eccentric 
and openly defiant of etiquette. Their 
witticisms and jests were written down 
in a famous anthology entitled Shih- 
shuo Hsin-Yu (Contemporary Short 
Stories). 
But, as was to be expected, only 
people of their own time and milieu 
. could hope to understand fully the 
‘sense of humour of these eccentric 
scholars. = Their jokes have lost all 
meaning for us, though some acade- 
mics are striving obstinately to fathom 
them out—an activity that might have 
brought a smile to the lips of the sages 
themselves | 
A -good many other anthologies in 
a similar vein have made their appea- 
rance since. Some of the anecdotes 
29 
. enjoyed "thinking up fresh witticisms 
2

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 49521: The Chinese have a word for (w)it: Hsiao-hua

   
4 
‘ 
  
  
FROM 
MAGISTRATE 
PAO’S 
CASEBOOK 
have retained their meaning, but they 
are too deeply rooted in the rather 
special milieu that gave birth to them 
to be translatable without pages and 
pages of explanatory footnotes. 
Humour of this sort really cannot 
be said to cross all frontiers. In 
respect, though, the frontiers were not 
only national ones, for even inside 
China a deep gulf came to divide. 
scholars from the.ordinary people over 
the centuries. The coming of the mod- 
ern era and the arrival of Western 
civilization did little to attenuate this 
lack of communication. 
Around the 1920s and 1930s one 
came across Chinese writers so igno- 
rant of their own popular traditions 
they even claimed the Chinese had 
never had a sense of humour. Eager 
to introduce this wonderful Western 
discovery into their own country, they 
invented a new Chinese word for it, 
“Yu-mou”, which is simply a transli- 
teration of the English word “humour”, 
using two monosyllabic. Chinese cha- 
racters which, taken separately, mean 
“dark” and “silent” ! 
Fortunately, scholarly culture not- 
withstanding, popular humour has 
come down through the ages and 
across frontiers unscathed. A great 
popular story-teller and poet, long 
unknown to scholars, Feng Meng-lung 
(1574-1645) was also the author of an 
anthology of. genuine hsiao-hua enti- 
tled Hsiao-fu (Thesaurus of Laughter). 
This collection of stories enjoyed 
tremendous success not only in China, 
30 
actually born in China. 
blished by Panther Books, London, in 1970. 
In this 
soon, 
  
the same name, unravels a tangled web of criminal intrigue. 
but also in other Far-Eastern coun- 
tries, and especially in Japan. Some 
of the anecdotes in Hsiao-fu directly 
influenced seventeenth-century Japa- 
nese burlesque theatre (Kydgen). 
The original edition of Hsiao-fu 
contained 722 anecdotes, classified 
according to theme. The kindof sub- 
ject that amused the ordinary folk of 
China three hundred years ago inclu- 
ded: "Ancient luxury” (the rich); “Dil- 
apidated elegance” (Confucian scho- 
lars); “Not to be mentioned” (the 
poor); “Eccentrics and misers”; “The 
height of vulgarity” (debauchees and 
sharp-tongued women); “Inside the 
women's quarters” (naughty stories). 
As one can see from these themes, 
the Chinese used humour—as do 
others—as a critical means of expres- 
sion in a world of exploitation and op- 
pression. Rich persons and officials 
were favourite targets, For example: 
*A freshly qualified mandarin arri- 
ved to take up his first post. He asked 
his subordinates how things were 
done in the place. The answer came, 
‘In the first year, you're supposed 
to stay honest; in the second, half 
honest; but in the third year you can 
really go to with a will I’ ‘Shall | ever 
have the patience to wait three 
years?’ sighed the mandarin. ” 
“The mandarin’s birthday was due 
On hearing that he was born 
in the year of the mouse, one of his 
subordinates made a gold collection 
and offered him a model of the animal 
made from this precious metal. The 
  
Nineteenth-century Chinese polychrome engraving of an episode from a 16th-century comic novel entitled 
Five Rats up to No Good in the Eastern Capital. It depicts the marriage of a rat which is later eaten by the 
watchful cat. In the novel, Pao Kung, a character based on a famous 11th-century magistrate-detective of 
The detective story as a literary genre was 
A collection of detection tales (The Strange Cases of Magistrate Pao) was pu- 
mandarin was delighted with the pre- 
sent and added, ‘Did you know it'll 
soon be my wife's birthday? She was 
born in the year of the cow...”” 
The Japanese have a modified ver- 
sion of this last story: “A samurai, 
accompanied by his servant, spied a 
dead mouse lying in the road. ‘Pick 
it up for me!’ ‘But it's dead.” ‘l can 
see that, but you know perfectly well 
| was born in the year of the mousel’ 
‘Yes, my lord, and I'm glad it wasn't 
the year of the cow.” 
Professor André Lévy, who transla- 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
So
cl
ét
é 
As
la
ti
qu
e 
de
 
Pa
ri
s 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
C
h
a
v
a
n
n
e
s
 
be
qu
es
t 
ted these three last stories, shows how 
the Japanese adaptations of Chinese 
hsiao-hua tended to bowdlerize the 
sarcastic tone of the original Chinese. 
According to R.H. Blyth, in his book 
Oriental Humour, the difference bet- 
ween Chinese humour and Japanese 
humour can be compared to the dif- 
ference between the music of Handel 
and Mozart. 
In traditional China, amusing stories 
often served to enliven the atmosphere 
at gatherings and especially banquets. 
It was considered bad manners to em- 
bark upon long discussions at a ban- 
qguet; the conversation was supposed 
to be light-hearted and gay, and to 
avoid distracting the guests from their 
main occupation, namely eating. So, 
to pass the time, guests would play 
games, make up verses or tell hsiao- 
hua. 
Even today, on the occasion of 
feasts, each person is expected to do 
a little act, sing a song or tell a story.

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 49521: The Chinese have a word for (w)it: Hsiao-hua

. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
So
ci
ét
é 
As
ia
ti
qu
e 
de
 
Pa
ri
s 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
C
h
a
v
a
n
n
e
s
 
b
e
q
u
e
s
t
 
Certain authors of anthologies made 
allowance for this kind of usage and 
included instructions as to how the 
stories should be told so as to be 
sure of making a successful impact. 
Here is an example: 
“ A father was out walking with his 
son. A stranger noticed the son 
and asked, "Who is he?" The father 
answered, ‘this is the son-in-law 
of the granddaughter nine generations 
removed of the direct grandson by 
marriage of a president of the Chan- 
cellery, who was a great favourite of 
one of the emperors of the present 
dynasty; in other words, my son!’ Shih 
Ch'eng-chiin, the author of the collec- 
tion of stories entitled A Good Laugh 
(Hsiao-ti-hao) published in 1739, in 
which this story figures, adds, "One 
. should assume the air of a man 
obsessed with his own self-impor- 
tance, and the answer should be blurt- 
ed out in one breath.” 
But the author of this collection was 
not merely concerned to make his 
public laugh; he also regarded humour 
as a means to educate the masses. 
His attitude is summed up in a brief 
poem published as a frontispiece to 
his book: 
“People want hsiao-hua so as to 
[have a good laugh, 
But | use hsiao-hua so as to wake 
Co [them up... 
One can jest about the mysteries of 
[religion, 
But laughter is still a sure road to 
- [salvation!” 
HENPECKED 
BUT HAPPY 
Consequently, the stories contained 
in the Hsiao-Ti-hao are less satirical 
than those to be found in the Hsiao- 
fu. Most of them, moreover, are drawn 
from the everyday life of the people. 
“A master of the ch'in (classical . 
Chinese lute) was playing in the mar- 
ket (in the hope of attracting a few 
pupils). The people in the market- 
place at first thought he was playing 
a p'i-pa or a samisen (instruments for 
light music) and crowded round to lis- 
ten to him. But when they heard the 
calm, pure sounds of the ch'in they 
were disappointed and little by little 
the crowd drifted away. Finally, only 
one listener remained. The master of 
the ch'in was delighted and exclaimed, 
‘Well, at least one connoisseur appre- 
ciates good ch'in playing.’ The man 
answered him, ‘If the table your ch'in 
is standing on didn't belong to 
me, and if | didn't have to wait for you 
to finish your performance to get it 
back, I'd have been gone ages ago.'” 
“Two brothers bought a pair of 
shoes, saying they'd take turns to 
wear them. But when they got home, 
the younger brother wore them all 
day long. The older brother was most 
unhappy, as the only chance he got 
to wear them was at night, when at 
last he could go out for a walk. The 
result was that he never got any sleep. 
The shoes were soon worn out, and 
the younger brother said to the older 
brother, ‘Let's go and buy a new pair.’ 
The older brother frowned and said, 
‘Let's not buy any more shoes; I'd 
rather get some sleep at night.'” 
“A half-witted constable was ord- 
ered to bring a monk who had com- 
mitted a crime to the court for trial. 
Afraid of forgetting something, he drew 
up a precise list before setting out, 
‘Baggage, umbrella, cangue [large 
wooden collar worn by prisoners] 
documents, monk and me." All along 
the road he kept on muttering these 
two phrases. The monk rapidly gather- 
ed the constable was stupid. So one 
night he got his gaoler drunk, shaved 
his head, and locked the cangue about 
his neck before making off. When 
the constable awoke, he said-to him- 
self, ‘Let's see now: baggage, um- 
brella... yes, they're here.’ Then he felt 
about his neck and said, ‘Here's the 
cangue.’! Then the documents, ‘Ah, 
here they are.” Then, all of a sudden, 
he grew frightened, ‘Ayeeel But 
where's the monk got to?’ He stroked 
his skull with his hand, ‘Thank heaven, 
the monk's still here! But in that 
case, where am 1?” 
In this last example, in particular, 
the naively amusing surface conceals 
a much deeper meaning. It shows 
us man caught in the tangle of obliga- 
tions and possessions to the point 
where he loses his own identity. This 
story is familiar beyond the confines 
of China, though, for we come across 
it in a slightly different form in Cen- 
tral Europe. Which just goes to 
show that, cultural differences notwith- 
standing, man's condition is universal. 
M Kristofer M. Schipper 
This 19th-century engraving presents ten scenes of husbands being tormented in various ways by their cantankerous wives. According to Chinese tradition few men boasted that they were not afraid of their wives. There is a Chinese saying that to succeed in life and become rich, a man must fear his wife. 
  
  
  
    
 
  
       
 
3

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 49501: Worm-breeding with tongue in cheek, or the confessions of a scientist hoist by his own petard

WORM- BREEDING 
WITH TONGUE IN CHEEK (Continued from page 15) 
could do but put out a next issue, and 
a next, and a next... 
‘And now, here we are, a journal 
with 16 years behind us, an inter- 
national circulation that today is 
numbered in the thousands. One of 
our crowning achievements, inciden- 
tally, was the receipt of a letter from 
the Library of the Academy of Sciences 
of the U.S.S.R. offering an official 
exchange of journals. We wonder still 
if they quite knew what they were 
getting. oo 
Of course, even as our circulation 
increased, we remained unique. We 
decided that most scientific journals 
are deadly dull, and ours would be 
different. To pep things up a bit, we 
included poems, jokes, ‘satires, car- 
toons, spoofs and short stories 
scattered more or less randomly 
among the more serious articles. 
People seemed to like this melange; 
or at least, some of them did. A few 
people complained that they didn’t 
have time to waste on the (admittedly) 
sophomoric humour—they wanted the 
“truth” and nothing else. Their trouble 
was that they often found themselves 
getting halfway through a satire before 
they realized (dimly) that their leg was 
being pulled. 
W: would have ignored such 
complaints had they not come 
from some of the most famous and 
influential members of the scientific 
community. (Any conclusions you wish 
to draw about the qualities necessary 
to gather fame in the scientific com- 
munity are made on your own time.) 
  
To help these poor souls out, we. 
resorted to a propagation device much 
like the worm's—namely, we split in 
two. We gathered all of the so-called 
funny stuff and banished it to the back 
of the journal, printing it upside down 
to make sure that no one would 
confuse the fact with the fancy. 
The Digest inched along this way for 
several years, until we faced another 
crisis. The authors of our serious 
articles complained that they weren't 
getting adequate coverage. When an 
article is published in most scientific 
journals, it is picked up by one of the 
abstracting services for dissemination 
in abstract. form. 
Despite the fact that the serious 
side of the Digest contained some 
pretty meaty stuff,..none of the ab- 
stracting services would touch anything 
that came from a journal with such 
an odd name as ours. Eventually, as 
J2 
[3 
ap 
a kind of last-ditch compromise, we 
changed the name of the front half of 
‘the Digest, calling it The Journal of 
Biological Psychology. 
Nothing else was changed but the 
name, but what a difference it made! 
Within two months we received letters 
from Psychological Abstracts, Biologi- 
cal Abstracts and Chemical Abstracts 
asking that we send them this “new” 
journal for abstracting. Naturally, we 
. obliged. 
A. | look back at the past 16 
years or so, it becomes apparent 
to me that life would have been a lot 
easier had the Digest suffered a still- 
birth. Much of the controversy sur- 
rounding the work on “memory 
transfer” stems in no small part from 
the fact that it received its first publi- 
cation in what some of my colleagues 
still refer to as “the Playboy of the 
scientific world”. : 
| can recall attending a meeting at 
Cambridge (the one in England} in 
1964 at which | presented what seemed 
to me to be rather conclusive evidence 
that memories could be transferred 
chemically from one planarian to 
another. Afterwards, over the inevi- 
table soggy cookies and warm, flavour- 
ed water (the British national drink 
just isn't my cup of tea), | was taken 
to task by a noted Scientist who 
informed me flatly that he would 
refuse to consider seriously anything 
published in a “scientific cartoonbook”. 
When | asked him which of the British 
journals he had reference to, he almost 
dropped his cookie. 
| can also remember when a good 
friend of mine took me aside one day 
to tell me how much damage | was 
doing to my reputation by printing the 
Digest. He was really quite worried 
about the matter. 
“if you keep publishing articles in that 
thing, people may actually want to cite 
them some time, and then where will 
you be? You ought to change the 
name, throw out all that so-called funny 
stuff, and make it a respectable 
journal.” : 
| also treasure a letter | received 
from a world-famous zoologist who 
. demanded that we remove her name 
from our subscription list because 
we were “misleading students” into 
thinking that Science could be fun! 
Now, in all these cases, the person 
doing the criticizing was a bona fide, 
expert scientist as well as Scientist. 
They were quite sincere in their 
perceived incompetence. 
“My God", he said, 
comments, offered them up for my own 
betterment. "| respect their scientific 
work, but | do feel rather sorry that 
so much of what is great and glorious 
and meaningful about science seems 
to have slipped through their fingers. 
The kind of intropunitive wit that is 
the hallmark of the Digest can thrive 
only when its author is fairly secure 
emotionally and intellectually. People 
who neither understand nor appreciate 
humour are probably threatened by 
those of us who do. We speak a 
language they don't understand, we 
react to the world around us in ways 
that are foreign and disturbing to them. 
+ Most of them have based their entire 
approach to life on the premise that 
seriousness is next to godliness. 
. Those of us who see the occasional 
folly and ignorance of most of our (and 
their) behaviour often react by cracking 
a joke. Humour, particularly that 
directed against ourselves, keeps us’ 
humble in the face of our own too-weli- 
The totally 
serious person fears this kind of 
insightful perception into his own 
behaviour patterns and fears humour 
because he cannot afford to be humble. 
N - OW perhaps you see the Digest 
organ of an anti-Scientific movement. 
it is my firm conviction that.most of 
what is wrong with Science these days 
can be traced to the fact that Scien- 
“tists are willing to make objective and 
dispassionate studies of any natural 
phenomena at all—except their ‘own 
scientific behaviour. We know consi- 
derably more about flatworms than we 
do about people who study flatworms. - 
The Establishment never questions its 
own motives; the true humorist always 
does. : ve 
It is my strong hope that if we "can 
get the younger generation to the point 
of being able to laugh at itself, then 
and only then can we hope to.turn 
Science back into science. 
RB James V. McConnell 
i 
for what it really is: the house

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
4 
M
E
T
 
E
T
 
  
—
 
om
. 
T
T
 
R
E
 
S
R
C
 
T
I
 
ES
 
T
e
 
Ir 
       
Owen Ltd., London, 1974. 
BOOKSHELF     
UNESCO'S LITERATURE 
TRANSLATIONS SERIES 
IRAN 
(The Persian Heritage Series) 
HB The Rabai'yat of 'Umar Khayyam, 
translated from the Persian, with an 
introduction, by Parichehr Kasra. 
Scholars’ Facsimiles and Reprints, 
Delmar, New York, 1975. 183 pp. 
BM Manichaean Literature. An antho- 
logy edited and translated from 
various Middle Eastern languages 
by Jes P. Asmussen. Scholars’ Fac- 
similes and Reprints, Delmar, New 
York, 1975. 148 pp. 
JAPAN 
HB The Roof Tile of Tempyo, by 
Yasushi Inoué. Translated by James 
T. Araki. University of Tokyo Press, 
1975. 140 pp. 
HB The Broken Commandment, by 
Shimazaki Toson. Translated and 
with an introduction by Kenneth 
Strong. University of Tokyo Press, 
1974. 249 pp. 
BW Wonderful Fool, by Shusaku 4 
Endo. Translated and with an intro- 
duction by Francis Mathy. Peter 
S
L
 
E
e
 
Ba
il
 
glk 
S
S
 
  
[ orHen UNESCO BOOKS 
fi
 
wi
 
: 
@ The Book Hunger, edited by 
Ronald E. Barker and Robert Escarpit. 
Published as a “Sangam Book" by 
Priya Adarkar, Orient Longman Ltd., 
Bombay (India 1974. 203 pp. 
(Rs 7.00). 
Bl National Communication Systems, 
Some Policy Issues and Options, by 
E. 'loyd Sommerlad, 1975. 35 pp. 
BM The Rural World: Education and 
Development, by Louis Malassis. 
1976, 128 pp. Co-published with 
Croom Helm Ltd., London. 
  
Hl Open Learning: Systems and Pro- 
blems in Post-Secondary Education. 
A report prepared with the support 
of the Ford Foundation, by Norman 
MacKenzie, Richmond Postgate and 
John Scupham. 1975, 498 pp. (65 F 
hardbolind; 50 F softbound edition 
for developing countries). 
BM Producing for Educational Mass 
Media, edited by Alan Hancock. 1976, 
261 pp. Co-published with Longman 
Ltd., London. 
BM Cultural Trends in the 20th Cen- 
tury is the theme of Unesco's inter- 
national quarterly Cultures (Vol. Il, 
No. 4). Each issue 22 F; annual sub- 
scription 75 F. 
BM Function and Organization of a 
National Documentation Centre in 
a Developing Country, by a working 
group of the International Federation 
for Documentation Committee for 
Developing Countries under the 
direction of Harald Schiitz. (*Docu- 
mentation, libraries and archives: 
studies and research” series, No 7) 
1975. 218 pp.   
LR i hl a 
IHESED ESHO0 
Death of Mr. René Cassin | 
Mr. René Cassin, winner of the Nobel 
Peace Prize in 1968, one of the great names 
in the modern struggle for human rights 
and an architect of Unesco, died in Paris on 
20 February 1976. A distinguished French 
jurist, Mr. Cassin was French representative 
to the League of Nations (1924-1938) and 
between 1942 and 1944 he took part In 
meetings which led to Unesco’s creation. 
He served on the U.N. Human Rights Com- 
mission between 1946 and 1957, becoming 
its President (1955-1957) and played a 
major part in drafting the 1948 Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. Mr, Cassin 
was French delegate to many sessions of 
Unesco's General Conference and of the 
U.N. General Assembly. : 
‘Carthage must not 
be destroyed’ 
Inspired by the December 1970 Issue 
of the “Unesco Courier” devoted to the 
preservation of Carthage, first-year pupils 
at the high school in Mutuellevilie (Tunisia) 
carried out a programme of archaeological 
research on this ancient city, near Tunis. 
They set down the results of their project 
in a roneoed book over 100 pages long, 
illustrated with photos, drawings and dia- . 
grams. The children sent a copy of this 
remarkable example of collective work to 
Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, Director-Gene- 
ral of Unesco. In his reply, Mr. M'Bow 
told them: “I admire the way In which you 
have drawn full benefit from the stimulating 
teaching you have received, and congratu- 
late you on being able to deal with such 
an advanced subject for children of your 
age”. 
New life 
for ancient stones 
Experts from 43 countries who met re- 
cently in Warsaw have drawn up a Unesco 
recommendation establishing international 
standards for the preservation of historic 
quarters, towns and sites and their inte- 
gration in urban planning. 
The text which now goes for approval to 
the General Conference of Unesco in Oc- 
tober 1978, follows a series of international 
agreements adopted by the Conference 
since 1962 relating to the environment and 
other aspects of the preservation of the 
cultural and natural heritage. 
Flashes... 
BM A new chart of the oceans incorporating 
findings of the past 20 years of oceanic 
exploration is being published under the 
auspices of Unesco's Intergovernment 
  
- Oceanographic ‘Commission in Paris and the 
International Hydrographic Organization in 
Monaco. 
MB “Philae in the Saving”, a new Unesco 
16 mm. colour TV film shows the most 
recent stages in the international rescue 
operation of the.temples on the Nile island 
of Philae and their reconstruction on nearby 
Agiikia island. 
BM Unesco is to distribute a series of video- 
cassette films recording ethnological events 
in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania 
tor use by academic and cultural centres. 
(For details write Division of Cultural De- 
velopment, Unesco, Paris). 
miro 
    
human rights 
Unesco’s human 
rights poster 
" This Unesco Human Rights poster, pro- 
duced in collaboration with the International 
Association of Art (JAA) is designed by 
the famous Catalan painter Joan Miré. It 
is the second of a series of posters being 
produced on Unesco and U.N. themes, as 
a joint Unesco-lAA project called “Artists 
for Unesco”. 
Unesco cultural 
week in Venice 
Unesco is sponsoring a series of cul- 
tural events in Venice from the 19 to 26 
September 1976, to help the international 
campaign for that city. These will include 
concerts, an International contest of chil- 
dren's drawings and an auction sale of 
works by well-known artists. The proceeds 
will be used for one of the city's restora- 
tion projects. 
Cultural tourism 
in Jordan 
A Unesco study on the development of 
cultural tourism in Jordan suggests that 
priority be given to the preservation and 
development of touristic facilities at two 
major sites: Jerash—one of the best exam- 
ples of an Imperial Roman provincial town— 
and Petra, a famous ancient city with rock- 
hewn monuments and temples. 
~ APHIA 
takes humour 
seriously 
May 1973 saw the creation of the 
Association for the Promotion of 
Humor in International Affairs. This 
organization, known as APHIA, 
“takes humour seriously so that it 
has no officers or officiai meetings: 
and carries out its activities only on 
social occasions.” The Association 
awards what is called its “Noble 
Prize” for humour. In 1974 this 
prize went to the American humor- 
ous columnist, Art Buchwald, who 
received 100,000 American pennies 
as his $1,000 award. The Association 
plans to award another prize in 
1976. Co-founders of APHIA are 
Alfred E. Davidson, an international 
lawyer, and Unesco’s Deputy Direc- 
tor-General, John E. Fobes.     
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
DEFORESTATION 
  
. FOR AMAZONIA’'S ROADS 
Sir, 
The caption to the photo illustrating 
Paul W. Richards’'s article “Doomsday 
for the World's Tropical Forests” (in 
your October 1975 issue) states that 
during the construction of the Trans- 
Amazonian Highway—a major pro- 
gramme in Brazil's development plan— 
“over 130,000 sq. km. of forest (an area 
four times the size of Belgium) were 
cut down and burned”. However, even 
a layman would find it hard to believe 
that an area of forest four times the size 
of Belgium would have to be felied in 
order to build a road, even a road 
5,400 kms. long especially as at least 
a quarter of the road—almost 1.400 km. 
—runs through semi-arid and dry trop- 
ical regions. } 
| should like to make it clear that the 
Brazilian Government is currently build- 
ing not only the Trans-Amazonian High- 
way, but also other roads in Amazonia 
(which has an area of almost 5 million 
sq. km.) with the aim of connecting 
vast areas of Brazil by land routes. 
The most important of these roads are: 
—Brasilia-Caracas: 6,110 km. (about 
5,000 km. on Brazilian territory); 
—Cuiaba-Santarém: 1,650 km; 
—Northern peripheral road: 2,300 km; 
—Trans-Amazonian: 2,250 km. (first 
stage, Estreito-Humaitd, already built). 
The Trans-Amazonian road starts offi- 
cially at Joao Pessoa on the Atlantic 
coast and ends on the Peruvian frontier; 
its overall length being 5,400 km.). 
The regions where deforestation has 
taken place for the construction of 
these roads are, respectively: 
-~Brasilia-Caracas: 300 sq. km. (on 
Brazilian territory) ; 
—Cuiaba-Santarém: 100 sq. km.; 
—Northern peripheral: 140 sq. km.; 
—Trans-Amazonian: 135 sq. km. (bet- 
ween Estreito and Humaita). Total 
675 sq. km. 
This figure is a far cry from the 
130,000 sq. km. quoted in the “Unesco 
Courier” for the Trans-Amazonian alonel 
It is easy to calculate the precise figures 
from the fact that the average strip of 
deforestation needed to build roads in 
Amazonia is about 60 metres wide 
—10 metres for the road itseif (two 
lanes and verges}—and 25 metres of 
“protective clearing” on either side of 
the road. To justify the absurd figures 
which were given, the deforested strip 
would need to be over 24 km. wide 
{even supposing that the strip ran along 
all the 5,400 km. of road). In relation 
to the 10 metres needed for the road 
itself, it is clear that such deforestation 
is not only useless but impracticable . 
and quite uneconomical. If the figure 
quoted above were applied to the 
2,250 km. stretch of road where defor- 
estation has. already taken place, it 
would imply a strip over 57 km. wide. 
These figures speak for themselves. 
Finally, for your information, and since 
the same “Unesco Courier” article 
states (page 16) that “Brazil has 
earmarked large areas of Amazonian 
forest” as “biosphere reserves”, | 
should like to point out that there are 
currently eight forest reserves in Brazi- 
lian Amazonia, with a total area of 
150,000 sq. km. (which is indeed an area 
Letters to the Editor  
five times that of Belgium). The region 
also contains two national parks with an 
overall area of 14,600 sq. km. and two 
national forests with an area of 8,000 
sq. km. and two national forests with 
an area of 8,000 sq. km. None of 
these national reserves Is a “biosphere 
reserve” within the framework of 
Unesco’'s Man and the Biosphere pro- 
gramme (MAB). 
In February 1974 a symposium was 
held in Rio de Janeiro as part of MAB’s 
Project number 1, “Ecological effects of 
increasing human activities on tropical 
and sub-tropical 
and had an opportunity to see for them- 
selves the care with which the Brazilian 
Government is endeavouring to recon- 
cile the maintenance of the ecological 
balance with the region's development 
needs. 
Joao Frank da Costa 
Assistant Permanent Delegate 
of Brazil to Unesco 
Paris, France 
- 
HELPING GYPSIES 
TO HELP THEMSELVES 
Sir, 
In December 1975 you published a 
letter from Dr. Rémi Durand who took 
up some issues raised in your article 
“Gypsies: a Minority at the Cross- 
roads” (November 1974 issue). Show- 
ing a laudable desire to respect the 
cultural identity of the Gypsies, who 
have preserved “their nomadic way of 
life and independence during centuries 
of contact with the sedentary peoples 
of the Western world”, Dr. Durand 
protested against the “stubborn deter- 
mination to urge them to settle down 
and to teach them to read and write”, 
although he agreed that we should 
“help them to learn to read and count, 
if they wish to do so.” 
The problem is not as simple as that. 
There can be no doubt that nomadic 
Gypsies feel that the right to move 
about is an integral part of their 
freedom, At the same time they insist 
on their children’s right to education. 
But how can schooling be provided for 
children who are constantly on the move 
and live in groups too small or too 
rapidly changing to Justify an itinerant 
school? 
The Gypsies also claim the right to 
park their caravans in temporary 
encampments between spells of wan- 
dering. Such halts form an essential 
part of their rights. They are in no way 
an obligation for Gypsies to settle down 
but offer them opportunities to look for 
work and receive medical care. The 
right of Gypsies to park their caravans 
is also a factor in enabling their children 
to benefit from attending the local 
school. 
But we should remember that some 
Gypsies and travellers do wish to 
settle down permanently. They should 
be able to do so in decent conditions. 
In France the Association des Etudes 
Tsiganes (Association of Gypsy Studies) 
coliects information on Gypsies system- 
atically while the Comité National 
d'Action et d'Information Sociales pour 
les Nomades (National committee of 
social action and information for no- 
mads) promotes and supports social 
ecosystems”. The 
Unesco experts later visited Amazonia 
work for Gypsles and persons of 
nomadic origin. The committee aims to 
help Gypsies find their own place In the 
world, 
not only a welcoming attitude towards 
Gypsles, but the assurance that their 
rights and needs will be respected. 
While the governments of most 
countries today favour a wide-ranging 
social policy for Gypsies and travellers 
"in difficulties, none seem as yet to have 
worked out satisfactory means for 
operating one. In any case, any 
measures to benefit Gypsies are bound 
to fail unless they have the full weight 
of public opinion behind them. 
Henriette David 
Secretary-General 
Les Etudes Tsiganes 
Paris, France 
MICROBIUS THE MICROBE 
Sir, : 
Congratulations to Jean-Marie Clé- 
ment, the highly talented artist who . 
drew the comic strips “The Adventures - 
of Microbius the Microbe”, illustrating 
your issue “To the Microbe, with Scien- 
ce's Eternal Thanks” (July 1975). These 
lively drawings of microbes served as 
a delightful guide to microbiology, 
showing how each of these minute 
creatures has its own distinctive charac- 
teristics. : 
André Gray 
Richelieu, Quebec 
Canada 
  
"race and 
WORLD HUNGER 
Sir, 
460 million persons are today afflict- 
ed by hunger, 
senseless that babies should come into 
the world only to die prematurely or 
suffer hardship, to be deprived of the 
opportunity to live a normal life, or to 
fulfil themselves and serve mankind. 
The world community must act to 
solve the hunger problem, or we shall 
face the prospect of returning to jungle 
law, the law of chance, obscurantism and 
barbarism. 
World hunger has many causes. 
Since food must be paid for in currency 
whose value is today depreciating, a 
new social and economic situation has: 
arisen: the impoverishment of many 
peoples who now suffer undernourlsh- 
ment along with peoples which have 
always been poor. 
Furthermore, it is not’ uncommon to 
learn of food products being destroyed 
simply to keep stocks down and to 
maintain price levels, even when selling 
them would not produce a big profit. 
Arms spending is another cause of 
hunger. The immense sums spent on 
weapons are a crushing burden on 
world resources, leading to the arms. : 
international tension. * There. 
is no easy solution to the world hunger 
prcblem... and yet we have made so 
much progress in other fields. 
Suzanne Emery 
Saint-Ouen, France 
choosing for themselves as . - 
responsible persons which of their tra- 
ditions to preserve or abandon. These - 
aims require from the public authorities ** 
It is appalling and ~~ 
  
34 
Im
p.
 
GE
OR
GE
S 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.
 
— 
Dé
pé
t 
lé
ga
l 
C 
1 
— 
Ma
rs
 
19
76
 
— 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
FR
AN
CE
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
Just published 
by The Unesco Press 
  
HOW 11 COUNTRIES TRAIN 
FILM AND TV DIRECTORS 
In the early days of cinema the training of film-makers was often a 
matter of trial-and-error and apprenticeship. Today, training pro- 
grammes in many countries successfully integrate the theoretical" 
and practical aspects of film-making. The Education of the Film- 
maker surveys the current status of film and television education in 
eleven countries, covering such topics as: 
HW cultural impact of cinema and television 
B :cinema as a major art form 
B education of the film-maker as artist and craftsman 
'® ethical and legal problems 
HB current trends and new concepts in cinema education 
“Film education, like any other kind of education, is an act of faith in 
the future” — Satish Bahadur 
Film and Television Institute of India 
182 pages 30 French francs 
Co-published with the American Film Institute, Washington, D.C. 
Available through Unesco except in the U.S.A. where the American 
Film Institute has exclusive sales rights.   
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National 
Distributor In your country. (See list below; names of 
distributors In countries not listed, along with subscrip- 
tion rates In local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
— AUSTRALIA. Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. 
Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; Periodicals: Do- 
minie Pty., Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of Australia, 
Victorian Division 5th floor, 134-136 Flinders St., Mel- 
bourne (Victoria), 3000. — AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg 
Fromme & C°., Arbeitergasse 1-7, 1051, Vienna. — BEL- 
GIUM. “Unesco Courier’ Dutch edition only: N.V. Handel- 
maatschappij Keesing, Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne- 
Antwerpen. French edition and general Unesco publica- 
tions agent: Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. 
CCP 708-23. — BURMA. Trade Corporation N° 9, 550-552 
Merchant Street, Rangoon. — CANADA. information Ca- 
nada, Ottawa {Ont.}. — CYPRUS. “MAM”, Archbishop Ma- _ 
karios 3rd Avenue, P. O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA. SN.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 (perma- 
nent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka Prague 
1. For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag - Publishers, Hurbanovo 
nam. 6, 833 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — DENMARK Munks- 
gaards Boghandel, 6, Norregade, DK-1165, Copenhagen K. 
— EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for 
Unesco Publications, N®* 1 Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir 
Square, Cairo. — ETHIOPIA. National Commission for 
Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis-Ababa. — FINLAND. Aka- 
teeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 7, place de Fontenoy, 
75700-Paris, C.C.P. 12598-48, — GERMAN DEMOCRATIC 
REP, Buchhaus Leipzig, Postfach 140, 701 Leipzig or from 
Internationalen Buchhandiungen in the G.D.R. — FED. 
REP. DF GERMANY. For the Unesco Kurier {German ed. 
only): 53 Bonn 1, Colmantstrasse 22, C.C.P. Hamburg 
276650. For scientific maps only: GEQ CENTER D7 Stut- 
tgart BO, Postfach 800830. Other publications; Verlag Do- 
kumentation, Pdssenbacher Strasse 2, 8000 Minchen 71 
{Prinz Ludwigshéhe) — GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop 
Depot Ltd., P.O, Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers 
Ltd., P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The University Bookshop of 
Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape Coast, 
The University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — 
GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — GREECE. In- 
ternational bookshops. — HONG KONG. Federal Publica- 
tions Division, Far East Publications Ltd., 5 A Evergreen 
Industrial Mansion, Wong Chuk Hang Road, Aberdeen. 
Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon. — HUN- 
GARY. Akadémiai Kdnyvesbold, V4ci u. 22, Budapest V; 
AK.V. Konyvtarosok Boltja, Néopkdztarsasag utja 16, Bu- 
dapest VI. — ICELAND. Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co., H.F., 
Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd., 
Kamani Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400 038; 17 Chitta- 
ranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, 
Madras 2; B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 1; 80/1 Mahatma 
Gandhi Road, Bangalore-560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda 
Hyderabad-500001. Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery 
Co. 17 Park Street, Calcutta 16; Scindia House, New Delhi; 
Publications Section, Ministry of Education and Social Wel- 
fare, 72 Theatre Communication Building, Connaught 
Place, New Delhi 1. — INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers 
and Booksellers, 29 JI. Oto Iskandardinata Ill, Jakarta; 
Gramedia Bookshop, JI. Gadjah Mada 109, Jakarta; Indira 
P.T., JI. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, Jakarta ‘Pusat, — IRAN. 
Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution C°, 229 Danes- 
hgahe Street, Shah Avenue, P.O. Box 141486, Teheran. 
‘Iranian National Commission for Unesco, Avenue Iran- 
chahr Chomali No 300, B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. 
McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad; Univer- 
sity Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, - 
Baghdad. — IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ire- 
land Ltd., Ballymount Road, Walkinstown, Dublin 12. — 
ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blumstein's Book- 
stores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat Benjamin Street, 
Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street Jerusalem. — JA- 
MAICA. Sangster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O. Box 366, 101 
Water Lane, Kingston. — JAPAN. Eastern Book Service 
Inc, CPO. Box 1728, Tokyo 100-92. — 
KENYA. The E.S.A. Ltd., P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — KO- 
REA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box 
Central 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., 
Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LESOTHO. Mazenod Book 
Centre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Africa. — LIBE- 
RIA. Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Mon- 
rovia. — LIBYA. Agency for Development of Publication & 
Distribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEMBOURG. 
Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. — MA- 
LAYSIA. Federal Publications Sdn. Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, 
Jalan Riong, Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. Sapienza‘s Li- 
brary, 26 Kingsway, Valletta. — MAURITIUS. Nalanda 
Company Ltd, 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. — MO- 
NACO. British Library, 30, bd des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. 
— NETHERLANDS. For the “Unesco Koerier” Dutch edi- 
tion only: Systemen Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, 
Amsterdam-1007. Agent for all Unesco publications: N. V. 
Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. — 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned 
Ant). N.V.,, Willemstad, Curagao,N. A.— NEW ZEALAND. 
Government Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: 
Rutland Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford 
Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. 
Box 857 Hamilton; Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; 
Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, Wellington. — NIGERIA. 
The University Bookshop of Ife. The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286; The University Bookshop of 
Nsukka; The University Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY. All pu- 
blications: Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl. 
Johans-gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only; A.S. 
Narvesens Literaturtjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6. — PAKIS- 
TAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-e-azam, P.O. 
Box No. 729, Lahore 3. — PHIUPPINES. The Modern 
Book Co., 926 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404, — 
POLAND. All publications: ORPAN-IMPORT, Palac Kultury 
i Nauki, Warsaw. For the Unesco Courier only: RUCH, ul. 
Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Ltda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — SIN- 
GAPORE. Federal Publications (s} Pte Ltd., Times House, 
River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOMALI DEMOCRA- 
TIC REPUBLIC. Modern Book Shop and General, P.O. Box 
951, Mogadiscio. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook 
Sales (PVT) Ltd.,, 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. — SRI 
LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam 
Gardiner Mawata P.0.B. 244 Colombo 2, — SUDAN. Al 
Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. 
All publications: A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the 
Unesco Courier: Svenska FN- Férbundet, Skolgrind 2, Box 
15050 S- 104 65, Stockholm. — SWITZERLAND. All publi- 
cations: Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich. Librairie 
Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236. — 
TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar- 
es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 
Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402, 
Bangkok; Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Ave- 
nue, Bangkok; Suksit Siam Cempany, 1715 Rama IV Road, ~ 
Bangkok. — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Cad- 
desi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — SOUTH AFRICA. All publica- 
tions: Van Schaik's Bookstore {Pty). Ltd., Libri Building, 
Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. For the Unesco Cou- 
rier {single copies) only; Central News Agency P.O. Box 
1033, Johannesburg. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Statio- 
nery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l., and Government 
Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Man- 
chester, Birmingham, Bristol. — UNITED STATES. Uni- 
pub, Box 433, Murray Hill Station New York, N.Y. 10016. 
For “Unesco Courier” in Spanish: Santillana Publishing 
Company, Inc., 575 Lexington Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10022, — U.S.S.R. Mezhdu- narodnaja Kniga, Moscow, 
G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugosiovenska Knjiga, Terazije, 
27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zalozba Slovenije, Titova C 25, 
P.0.B. 50, Ljubliana. ,  

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074823engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

NOT 
A LEG 
10 
STAND ON 
 