# [073713](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf) 18

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
3 PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SBCIENTIFIC AND. CULTURAL ORGANISATION 
f 
Volume I.—No. 3. Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 12 Francs (in France only). APRIL 1948, 
Unesco Outlines Views at U.N. Meetings 
On Free Information 
ee first two. resolutions to ‘be adopted without opposition by: - — 
the United Nations Conferénce on Freedom of Information, | 
meeting at Geneva since March 23, were directly inspired by the work 
of Unesco. One resolution praises the Organisation for. its technical 
needs surveys of war devastated 
. areas and recommends that active 
steps be taken by Unesco and the 
Specialised Agencies of the UN 
to meet these needs. The second 
approves the proposal “to esta 
lish an International Institute jo 
Press and Information under the 
auspices of Unesco”. 
Unesco is thus taking an active 
part in the work of the Geneva 
Conference on Freedom of In- 
formation, which has attracted 
‘wide attention throughout the 
world. The conference, whichis 
still in progress, is being attended 
by delegates from 64 nations, the 
Specialised Agencies of the UN 
and governmental and inter- 
governmental organisations. 
In an important speech deliver- 
ed at the conference on March 25 
Dr. 
Unesco, defined the principles of 
freedom of information chiefly as 
“a just equalisation of the ma- 
terial and technical means of 
communication and of the mutual 
sharing of the technical skills 
which attach to the working of 
these communication systems” 
and “a sense of responsibility on 
the part of those who use the 
media of modern communica- 
tions”. (Excerpts from this ad- 
dress will be found elsewhere on 
this page.) 
Later in the discussion several 
delegates cited the authority of 
Unesco by direct reference to Dr. 
Huxley's speech. His words also 
served as a guide for the Unesco 
delegation in Geneva which is 
headed by Mr. John Grierson and 
M. René Maheu. 
The Geneva Conference divided 
the items on its agenda among 
four committees, two of which 
deal with technical and profes- 
sional problems, It is at these 
two committees that Unesco's 
contributions have been most 
noteworthy. 
" Needs Surveys Discussed 
In its study of unhampered | 
publication and reception of in- 
formation, the conference turned 
to Unesco’s 1947-48 survey on tech- 
nical needs. Amongst the fore- 
most obstacles to the free ex- 
change of information is the need, 
especially acute since the war, for 
such indispensable tools as radio 
sets, teletype machines and print- 
ing presses and the crying need 
for newsprint. 
The delegates heard M. Desjar- 
dins, of Unesco, report on the 
work the Organisation has done 
to date to study the technical 
needs of the less fortunate coun- 
XM Mr. Laves: Unesco and 
the U.N. Page 2. 
XM The Arab Cultural He- 
ritage. Page 3. 
X Fundamental Educa- 
tion in Haiti and Afri- 
ca. Center page. 
I 
M. Flornoy: Up the 
Amazon. Page 7. 
    
Huxley, ‘Director-General of ° 
 
New Surveys on 
Technical Needs 
Unesco experts have left 
Paris. to continue the 
technical needs surveys in 
- the fields of press, film. 
‘and radio begun in 1947 in" 
war-devastated countries. 
Equipped with exhaustive | 
questionnaires, the experis. 
- will begin surveys expected ~ 
to take about three months 
work in the field. Upon 
their return to Paris, the 
reports will be analysed 
and compiled into a volu-- 
me of detailed information - 
similar to .the 200-page’ 
report published last year, 
“Report of the Commission 
on Technical Needs in 
Press, Film, Radio”. 
The countries to be 
surveyed this year include: 
Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary, 
Italy, Roumania; Colombia, 
Cuba, Ecuador, Haiti, Hon- 
duras, Mexico, Peru, Do- 
minican Republic and Ve- 
nezuela; India, Pakistan, 
tries and the plans for assistance 
made to meet these needs, M- 
Maheu reviewed Unesco’s efforts 
to alleviate the newsprint short- 
age of the poorer nations with a 
plan for mutual aid. and recalled 
a declaration of the American 
delegation promising the support 
and participation of the United 
States in the programme of im- 
mediate newsprint aid for China, 
France and the Netherlands. 
Unanimous Resolution 
Following these discussions the 
delegates unanimously approved 
the following resolution: 
“This Conference, having heard 
- the representatives of Unesco, 
congratulates that Organisation 
on its enquiries into technical 
needs... expresses the hope that 
Unesco will proceed with the ut- 
most speed in carrying out the 
programmes it has prepared in 
this connection... and recom- 
mends that very early arrange- 
ments be made by Unesco, with 
the help of the other Specialised 
Dr. Julian Huxley, 
 
Director-General and Mr. 
Head of Mass Communications and Public Information of Unesco 
at a session of Geneva Conference on Frecdom of Information, 
(Official UN Photo. Dept, of Public Information. 
John Grierson, 
Agencies concerned, to meet the 
needs. of these countries... re- 
commends that the Economic and: 
Social Council instruct its regional 
economic commissions and re- 
quest the competent Specialised 
Agencies to assist Unesco in this 
task.” 
On April 6, Unesco expressed 
its views on the important ques- 
tion of the professional training 
of journalists and the creation of 
an international press institute. 
The Unesco delegation pointed 
out that if, as Dr. Huxley had 
said, the problem of information 
involves the content of informa- . 
tion, then its solution depends, in 
large measure on the quality of 
(Continued on Page 7.) 
Burma and Malaya. 
The questionnaires re- 
questing some two thousand 
answers are directed to 
“the governments, schools, 
commercial companies and 
the working members of the 
professions in the countries 
under survey, and will call 
for information on availa- 
bility of newsprint and 
other raw materials, the 
type and quantity of prin- 
ting, filming and broad- 
casting facilities, professio- 
‘nal and technical training 
and the obstacles to the 
free flow of information. 
Educational 
PARTS of the world programme 
of Unesco are to be extended 
to Germany, following unanimous 
approval of such action by the 
Executive Board and discussions 
with the British, French and Uni- 
ted States Zone Commanders in 
Germany. 
- Projects to be initiated include 
~the exchange of publications be- 
tween Germany and the outside 
world and a study of the problems     


### 73714: Huxley defines press freedom at Geneva Conference

  
At Geneva 
The following is the abridged text of the address 
delivered in Geneva on March 25 by Dr. Julian 
S. Huxley, Director-General of Unesco, before the 
United Nations Conference on Freedom of Infor- 
mation : « 
| do not need to emphasise Unesco’s interest in 
this question of freedom of information, 
Wherever Unesco urns in its task of deploying 
and developing the resources of education, science 
and culture in the cause of mutual understanding, 
it deals, of necessity, with the flow of information 
across the borders of nations... 
Unesco has, on the invitation of the United 
Nations, actively participated in the preparation 
of this conference, both in the general work of 
the sub-commission and in the work of the Secre- 
tariat. Here today, however, we come to the 
moment of practical decision. 
Unesco cannot be content merelp to express its 
sympathetic interest in the question before us. 
but, by the very nature of the tasks to which it is 
dedicated as a Specialised Agency, it is bound to 
emphasise ils desire and also its obligation to help 
you bring a living result from the body of this 
conference, 
This conference has before it the special work 
of preparing international agreements on freedom 
of information, as deriving from and giving reality 
to, one of the fundamental rights of wman.. 
Without a doubt we must meet and agree on a 
certain number of directive principles... But here 
Huxley De fines Press F reedom 
Con ference 
I might be permitled to quote you the advice which 
M. Jacques Maritain gave to us in his inaugural 
address to the General Conference in Mexico last 
December. 
Seeking to isolate and define the spiritual roo‘s 
of international understanding, M. Maritain dis- 
tinguished between speculative and explanatory 
ideologies, on which agreement is never likely to 
be found, and principles of human action on which 
men in Yeneral are agreed because they do in 
fact express their common will as human beings 
everywhere... 
Taking my lead from the distinguished French 
philosopher, I say that only a practical and not 
a theoretical conception of freedom of information 
is capable of overriding the political and cultural 
differences of peoples... 
The spirit of liberty is itself hostile lo abstraction: 
freedom can only be defined in concrete terms... 
It is an active force or it is nothing... The problem 
is, therefore, one of so organising both the spiritual 
and the material forces of the world to-day that in 
action and by action, the word of freedom is made 
Jlesh. 
It is, moreover, the view and emphasis of Unesco 
that these forces of action... only draw their strength 
and value from their relationship with the actual 
and paient meeds of people as they are felt in 
common, appreciated in common and realised in 
common. 
-- .. « (Continued on Page 2) . .   
iil} 


### 73715: Educational programme to be extended to Germany

Programme 
To be Extended to Germany 
involved in, and the opportunities 
which exist for, the exchange of 
German nationals outside their 
country. Both projects are aimed 
at increasing communication be- 
tween Germany and the rest of 
the world. 
Another project is that Unesco 
will study the question of texte 
books in Germany to define the 
‘criteria that should guide the pre- 
paration and publication of such 
textbooks from Unesco’s point of 
view. 
Initially, these and other active 
ities will be carried out only in 
the three western zones of Ger- 
many as Unesco officials have as 
yet been unable {o enter into ne. 
gotiations with the Russian occu 
pation authorities. 
Executive Board approval for 
such work came after three days’ 
discussion during an extraordinary 
meeting of the Board in Paris, 
April 2, 3, 4. It was also agreed 
- that negotiations with the Allied 
Supreme Commander in Japan be 
accelerated so that similar Unesco 
Tork may be begun in that couns 
ry. 
The Polish member of the 
Board urged that Unesco should 
proceed very cautiously in any 
projects dealing with Germany. 
The Czech member, M. Opocensky, 
who was unable to attend the ses 
sions, sent a telegram declaring 
his opposition to any immediate 
activities within Germany. 
Mr, Walter H.C. Laves, Deputy 
Director-General, recently visited 
Berlin to discuss the question of 
Unesco activities in Germany with, 
the Allied Zone Commanders. He 
consulted with General Sir Brian 
Robertson, British Zone Coms 
mander, General Lucius D, Clay, 
United States Zone Commander, 
and with General Noiret, Deputy 
to General Koenig, French Zone 
Commander. He was unable to 
arrange a meeting with General 
Sokolovsky, Russian Zone Come 
mander,

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 
 
HERE can be nc doubt that the peace of the world depends 
to-day on the effective 
and its related Specialised Agencies. 
functioning of the United Nations 
Of this framework 
of United Nations institutions Unesco is a part, guided 
by the same principles and assumptions underlying the 
United Nations Charter, and functioning as co-ordinately 
es possible with all of the Agencies concerned. 
In the scheme of world institutions thus developed, Unesco has 
< precise and special function. Simply stated, it is to further inter- 
national understanding through science, education and culture. 
Like most constitutions, that of Unesco means different things to 
different people, because individuals have different purposes in 
mind and because this Constitution, like any other, contains many 
general phrases, allowing considerable flexibility in interpretation. 
Thus, on some occasions it has appeared that a choice had to be 
made between two extreme views concerning Unesco’'s function. One 
view is that the Organisation should concentrate all of its energies 
upon those things which will affect the immediate prospects for 
international peace and understanding Another view is that the 
Organisation should promote international collaboration in science, 
education and culture, from which 
more peaceful relations may be a 
by-product. A balance between 
these two views must develop in 
the Organisation programme, 
Even a casual examination of 
the mosi critical current interna- 
tional problems confirms the 
view that it is essential to provide 
a common ground of communica- 
tion and understanding between 
the peoples of the world if the 
U.N. approach is to succeed at 
all, The barriers to free and ob- 
jective communication and to 
community thinking between the 
people of the Orient and Occi- 
dent, Eastern and Western Eu- 
rope, and the Occupied territories 
and the rest of the world, are so 
great that even the most elemen- 
tary common goals of peace and 
prosperity are jeopardized. To 
help in establishing communica- 
tion based upon common interest 
in education, science and culture, 
and thus to increase the pro- 
spects for international under- 
standing is the special function 
of Unesco among the United Na- 
tions institutions. 
Three Important 
Assumptions 
AS already suggested, the as- 
sumptions underlying the 
United Nations and Specialised 
‘Agencies are fundamentally the 
samge,- and among these, three 
are particularly important. 
The first is that the nations 
of the world and the activities 
of their peoples have reached a 
point of mutual dependence at 
which the maintenance of peace 
and the furtherance of sound 
economic, cultural, social and po- 
litical relations cannot be left 
any longer solely to the actions 
of individual nation states: world 
community procedures are Te- 
quired. 
The second assumption is that 
this need for world community 
procedures is sufficiently re- 
cognised among peoples and na- 
tions to ensure a co-operative 
approach within the United Na- 
tions framework, and a continued 
willingness of nations to seek 
truly international solutions for 
international problems: a world 
community attitude is essential 
The third assumption is that 
‘is possible to develop United Na- 
tions institutions, staffed by com- 
petent personnel able and willing 
to adopt a completely interna- 
tional approach in their thinking 
and actions: a world community 
civil service is possible, 
The attainment of the objec- 
tives of the United Nations and 
the Specialized Agencies depends 
upon the acceptance and realiza- 
tion of these assumptions. 
Institutions for the Solution 
of Common Problems’ 
THE United Nations and Spe- 
cialised Agencies were envi- 
saged toward the end of World 
War II as institutions for the 
solution of common problems in 
a world newly dedicated fo peace 
and the freedoms set forth in the 
Atlantic Charter. These prob- 
lems cover the range of human 
activity: economic, political, fi- 
nancial, social, cultural, educa- 
tional, scientific, etc. A world 
still in the stage when men live 
in highly organised national 
states, often moved by national- 
jsm, provincialism, prejudice and 
ethnocentrism had developed 
many functional relationships 
which made the acceptance of the 
“One World” thesis imperative for 
maintaining prosperity and peace. 
The common war effort of 1914- 
18 had already given rise to the 
League of Nations, in which va- 
luable experience was gained in 
the use of world community pro- 
cedures. The war-time co-opera- 
tion of the United Nations in 
world War II renewed men’s 
belief that international proce- 
dures might be used for meeting 
urgent world problems, upon the 
solution of which depend the pro- 
spects for peace, prosperity and 
human progress. 
The establishment of Unesco 
itself clearly was premised upon 
an acceptance of this same as- 
sumption, and 
and purpose provide procedures 
for action in the fields Qf educa- 
tion, science and culture for 
people of all faiths, political 
beliefs and cultures. 
The second assumption, that a 
world community attitude is es- 
sential for building a peaceful 
world, is reflected in those por- 
tions of Unesco’s programme re- 
‘lating to education for interna- 
tional understanding, develop- 
ment of the mass media of com- 
munication, exchange of persons 
and information, etc. All of these 
foster the growth and strengthen- 
ing of a world approach to world 
problems. 
Some special features exist in 
Unesco’s organisation to en- 
courage the growth of a world 
community attitude. Although 
Unesco is an inter-governmental 
institution, it is the essence of its 
its Constitution. 


### 73717: UNESCO and the work of the United Nations

    
Unesco and the Work 
Of the United Nations 
  
‘by Mr Walter H.C. LAVES 
Deputy Director-General 
work to further the establishment 
of direct personal relations across 
international frontiers in the 
fields of education, science and 
culture. Quite obviously, this ap- 
proach presents many difficult 
procedural problems, especially in 
relation to Member Governments, 
since the world of to-day is organ- 
jsed on a national basis. The con- 
duct of foreign affairs is a gov- 
ernmental function and the life 
and action of individuals and 
voluntary organisations are gen- 
erally regarded as coming within 
the surveillance of national states. 
Success in furthering direct con- 
tact between individuals separat- 
ed by national boundaries reflects 
a gradual acceptance of the world 
community approach by Member 
States. 
National Commissions: 
A. Newlink Between 
Peoples of World 
ANOTHER illustration of the or- 
ganisational acceptance of the 
second assumption is found in 
the constitutional provision re- 
garding the establishment of 
Unesco national commissions or 
co-operating bodies. The Secre- 
.tariat has been enjoined by each 
General Conference to take po- 
sitive steps to encourage the crea- 
tion of such bodies. These bodies 
provide primary interest groups 
in Member States and the pro- 
gramme of the Organisation is 
addressed to work and activity 
that can be carried on by such 
national commissions and co- 
operating bodies, The growth of 
  
such groups, bound together by 
a common purpose and similar 
programmes, provides a new 
means of communication between 
the peoples of the world, through 
channels approved by their gov- 
ernments. 
In still another way Unesco’s 
manner of functioning assumes a 
common ground among the people 
of Member States and builds upon 
the second assumption. Its Exe- 
cutive Board, consisting of eight- 
een members, elected by the Gen- 
eral Conference from among the 
delegates to the General Confer- 
ence, consists of persons selected 
for their competence in the arts, 
the humanities, the sciences, edu- 
cation and the diffusion of ideas. 
They are appointed by govern- 
ments: by the Constitution they 
serve as individuals and not as. 
government delegates. This Board 
is charged with responsibility for 


### 73714: Huxley defines press freedom at Geneva Conference

  
Huxley Defines Press Freedom 
~ {Continued from Page 1.) 
Unesco believes that this conception of needs 
and their satisfaction, should be lhe basis of ail 
‘our discussions, if we are to appear as practical 
men in the service of mankind. It seems to us the 
one concep which gives a common and charac- 
teristic physiognomy to the situation in the worid 
today... Freedom of information is neither a luxury 
nor an ideal; it is a necessity, if the native and 
natural frustrations which we see in the world 
today are not tc blow up in our faces... 
Everyone is agreed to the lowering of barriers 
to the free flow of information. However, what I: 
have to stress here is that this aim, and the 
methods of achieving it, must be strictly and prac- 
tically conditioned. > } 
...One condition that we must immediately recog- 
nise, is that the material means of communication 
cannot be allowed to be concentrated in Mmo- 
nopolies... (which) are incompatible with the real 
requirements of freedom. There must be no 
thwarting of free exchange of information where 
the patent service of mankind is at issue; mo 
thwarting of the right of all cultures to say their 
word in the world; nor thwarting of any service 
which, by developing mutual aid and understanding, 
lessens the disposition to war and develops the 
disposition to peace. 
Two further essential conditions of any effective 
realisation of freedom of information are: a just 
equalisation of the material and technical means 
of communication and of the mutual sharing of 
the technical skills which attach to the working 
of these communication sysiems. A fourth essential 
is a sense of responsibility on the part of those 
who use the media of modern communications, as 
freedom of information develops on the inter- 
national plane... 
Content of Information 
The realisation of freedom of information does 
not consist simply in opening up access to more 
and more masses of information of any and every 
kind. Nor does it mean merely the absence of let 
or hindrence td information... A laisser-faire anarchy 
in the services of information is incompatible with 
the true nature of liberty, and can only derive from 
a blindness to the real needs of the world, to the 
real inequalities which exist, to the basic character 
of many of the obstacles which have been es- 
tablished, and to the true sources of the differences 
of opinion on the nalure of these obstacles... 
We must have it in our considered minds to 
denounce both the distortion of news and the com- 
mon vulgarity of which the purveyors of news are 
so frequently guilty. Here the professional organi- 
sations in the field of information, with their un- 
doubted awareness of the problem before us, have 
a great social role to play in applying themselves 
even more intensely to the consideration of the 
self-criticism, self-discipline and self-education which 
the occasion requires. 
What criteria are we to adopt in the evaluation 
of the content of information? If we attach 
ourselves, as in the old days of artisan press solely 
to the individnal’s right to express himself, the 
only criterion we can adopt is the criterion of truth, 
From this standpoint, the only constraints you can 
ask for are those rooted in the requirements of 
public order. Further, it has become plain to us 
how much too general is this criterion of abstract 
truth... It would be better, I suggest, to describe 
freedom of information in terms of the junctional 
relationship of information to the needs of the 
people, whether it be in recognition of the mass of 
the people as the only true fount of right and 
law, or whether it be simply in recognition of their 
right to the information they need... 
I+ is, I believe, when we look on the problems 
of information in this way that we begin to realise 
their deep relationship with science and culture. 
Every group, scientific, artistic, professional or social 
which has its reality in performing a service to 
mankind should, for this reason, have ils own 
organs of information and expression. Though 
jrom one angle they may represent different and 
sometimes conflicting professional interests, their 
contributions are necessary to the common welfare 
of mankind and to the international understanding 
and unity we seek. 
It is with this in mind that Unesco’s programme 
today is devoted, on the one hand, to meeting the 
technical needs I have mentioned. But it also 
launches out to include the interchange of man’s 
achievements in science and the arts, philosophy 
and the humanities. In particular Unesco is 
developing today a large programme of articles, 
broadcasts and films demonstrating the excellencies 
and particular achievements of different countries, 
which will be interchanged amongst the nations of 
the world. 
It is out of these various considerations that I 
have instructed my representatives here in Geneva 
. to present to the conference only proposals which 
we consider to be concrete and practical. 
Unesco is, by ils character and Charter dedicated 
to freedom of information. But because we attach 
such importance to it, it is the substance and not 
the shadow which we want. We want that substance 
to be emphasised in practical measures and asso- 
ciated with the living and working groups which 
everywhere represent the creative forces in society 
today... 
We cannot afford any longer to have liberty 
confused, whether in the minds of politicians, in- 
tellectuals or commercial operators, either. with the 
forces of privilege or with the forces of anarchy. 
This we say must be done with, for only then can 
-man look at the true face of freedom and know, 
once and for all, that the one and only begelter 
of freedom is the spirit of fraternity itself.   
the execution of the programme 
voted by the General Conference. 
Its members are in effect, there- 
fore, a world council on science, 
education and culture, not re- 
sponsible, as such, to governments 
for what they do, but responsible 
in fact for the execution of the 
programme of an international 
organisation supported by Mem- 
ber Governments. i otE 
In some countries some of the 
delegates to the General Confer- 
ence, from among whom the 
Executive Board is elected, are 
nominated by professional groups 
which compose Unesco national 
commissions or co-operating bo- 
dies. To this extent again the pro- 
cess of building the world com- 
munity has thus been pressed a 
step further. 
The very concep{ of United Na- 
tions planning and action on 
matters of international concern 
is premised on the third assump- 
tion; that it is possible to staff 
United Nations Agencies with per- 
sons dedicated to an interna- 
tional service and willing to fore- 
go the guidance of purely na- 
tional viewpoints in which they 
have usually been trained. 
- The League of Nations and cer- 
tain other earlier International 
Agencies made great progress de- 
veloping such staffs, and the 
United Nations Agencies have 
found here considerable ex- 
perience and precedent for de- 
veloping their own services. 
A Common Aim 
NESCQO has made progress in 
developing such a staff, al- 
though the odds have thus far 
been against the attainment of 
this objective. The uncertainties 
of the programme, inevitable in 
its first year; the necessity of 
recruiting staff under pressure of 
time to meet the deadline of the 
annual Conference of 1947; the 
consequent inability to carry on a 
large-scale world-wide recruitment 
programme; the tendency eof 
Member States to keep the ser- 
vices of the best available na- 
tionals for home industry and 
public service, and finally the 
inevitable uncertainties of the 
post-war international political 
scene, have all been barriers to 
the effective establishment of a 
truly international civil service. 
Building a Secretariat requires 
not only the right personnel. It 
also requires daily preoccupation 
with the problem of knitting a 
coherent staff for a common pur- 
pose and on sound organisational 
principles. In part this is a mat~ 
ter of leadership, not merely at 
the top but throughout the Or- 
ganisation. In part it is a matter 
of language so that people under- 
stand each other. But more than 
any of these it is a matter of 
developing commonly acceptable 
work habits and working relations 
among persons who come from 
completely different societies and 
varyingly organised institutions, 
but who have a common “purpose 
and allegiance. No one national 
system is right; each must make 
its best contribution to the de- 
velopment of international ad- 
ministration. ‘ 
These problems have faced all 
United Nations Agencies, but 
special difficulties have arisen in 
Unesco because it requires the 
services of technical personnel, 
most of whoml have not had 
bureaucratic experience, or ex- 
perience in an international or- 
ganisation. 
The activities of Unesco provide 
a new method for developing 
closer relations among the peoples 
of the world. As these activities 
grow and succeed they provide 
an increasingly firm basis of in- 
ternational understanding and ex- 
perience upon which the fune- 
tioning of the United Nations and 
jts related Agencies depends.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=3) 3

### 73719: Director-General tours Middle East

UNESCO COURIER 
 
  
  
  
   
  
NESCO’'S visit to Beirut in 
' October of this year is not 
going to be just a reminder to 
the Arab States of what the UN 
. is doing for education, science 
and culture. It is also going to be 
a reminder to all the nations of 
the world of the great and ali- 
important place the Arab world 
holds in the history of thought. 
A Scotsma,n who spent many 
years of his life on the far away 
islands reaching northward to 
Norway recently recalled his 
youthful excitement when he 
learned that the designs which 
were used on the jerseys of his 
native district in Scotland, were 
of Arabic source. They had com: 
all they way from Spain starting 
with the Spanish galleon which 
had been wrecked on one of the 
Bicilian islands at the end of the 
16th Century. He recalled the 
thrill that had come to him upon 
learning, in school, that the word 
algebra was of Arabic origin and 
that chemistry was derived from 
the Arabic word alchemy and that 
Sinbad the Sailor and the Thou- 
sand and One Nights were only 
a part of a vast poetic literature. 
The philosophers and the scient- 
ists who gather in Beirut at Unes- 
co's Thirds General Conference 
will andoubtedly take the oppor- 
tunity to pay proper due to the 
astonishing and important fact 
in intellectual history that it was 
the Arabic people who kept alive 
the intellectual tradition of the 
Greeks and not least, the teaching 
of Aristotle between the fall of 
Rome and the European Renais- 
sance, : 
        
  
Historical Continuity 
The arts and skills of algebra 
and trigonometry and mathema- 
tics and geography and medicine 
‘and botany owe their historical 
continuity throught 
Ages to the Arabic peoples. In 
fact one can truthfully say that 
European civilisation was saved 
by the wisdom and enlighten- 
ment of the Arab Courts thag 
Tollowed 700. Indeed, it is not 
astonishing that King Richard I 
found Saladin the cultured cha- 
racter which Sir Walter Scott de- 
scribes in “The Talisman”. The 
12th century in England was 
meeting its own 16th century 
without knowing it. 
One of Unesco’s chief tasks is 
the development of the mass me- 
dia of the press, of the radio and 
film in the cause of international 
understanding and peace. The 
ancient ways of communication 
were slow. When Arabs travelled 
to China, or gave as they did the 
first written account of Czecho- 
slovakia and the city of Prague, 
their stories of observation took 
a long time to come and were 
dispersed even more slowly. 
The designs of Persia took 
hundreds of years to travel by 
way of Arabic architecture, illu- 
minated manuscripts and designs 
from Persia to Spain. 
“In Quest of Learning” 
The problem of explaining the 
Influence that the Arabs have 
had on Western civilisation can 
be approached in two ways. It 
is possible either to make broad 
statements, which while impres- 
sive and true may fail to touch 
the reader because of their remo- 
teness from everyday life, or we 
may touch here and there on the 
‘most ordinary objects which the 
West owes to the Arab world and 
which the West takes for granted 
until some twitch of the thread 
of history jerks back into our 
minds the realisation of what has, 
in fact, happened. 
Handfuls of Arabic coins of the 
10th Century found on a remote 
island in the Baltic Sea; a “jour- 
ney in quest of learning” made 
by the historian Al-Mas-udi to 
Zanzibar; a regular trade route 
linking Spain with Central Asia. 
These are only a few of the indi- 
cations of how the Arabs ranged 
round the seas eager for know- 
ledge leaving their mark on the 
the Dark . 


### 73718: The Arab cultural heritage

The Arab Cultural Heritage 
world about them. For basically, from the point of 
view of the West, the Arab Renaissance flourished in 
the 8th Century A.D. anticipating the Western Re- 
naissance by seven hundred years. 
The interest of the Arabic people in geography 
brought them rich dividends, but this interest came: 
originally not from a desire for trade. It sprang from 
a very different source—the need 
their way across the trackless sands to Mecca, the 
nesd to site mosques, so that they pointed to the Holy 
City and the desire of faithful Moslems to be sure 
that, at their prayers, they faced toward the Kaba. 
The discoveries of the voyagers, 
thinkers and investigators of the day were recorded 
on paper for the first time in history. At the same 
time, centuries before Gutenberg, 
cating systems were introduced to make possible the" 
Even the problem of 
.copyright, in which Unesco is interested today in an 
diffusion of these writings, 
effort to establish a world copy- 
right system, was strictly legislat- 
ed by the Arabs centuries ago. 
Juiep, soda and syrup, and sher- 
bet (the ancestor of ice cream) 
are not only words derived from 
the Arabic, but their nature is 
indicative of a civilisation in 
which there was the ability to 
enjoy some of the small, pleasant 
things of life. 
Silks anl Satins 
In making life more agreeable 
for themselves the Arabs develop- 
ed to a high degree the art of 
producing textiles—the silks and 
satins and tapestries mentioned 
above. Damascus made damask, 
muslin came from Mosul, Bagh- 
dad produced baldaquins, and so 
on, in a rich flood of colour and 
design. 
Arab culture thus was slowly 
absorbed by the West. From the 
Arabs in Spain, Arabic skills and 
customs made their way to Pro- 
vence (garnished by the charm- 
ing songs of the troubadours), 
from Provence into Lorraine, and 
thence all over Europe, 
The tragedy of this contact, 
however, is that there is so much 
that the Westerners never did 
learn. The great literature of the 
Arab world is still almost literally 
contained in sealed books wun- 
known to most of us. 
The Arab world had its first 
great flowering a thousand to 
twelve hundred vears ago, but 
even now, in some branches of 
thought, the West is only beginn- 
ing to catch up with it. Thus, 
for example, the Arabs long ago 
insisted that a medical doctor be 
not only a physician but a meta- 
physician, a philosopher and a 
sage, and thus understand fully 
the value of psychology in heal- 
ing. 
Indeed, such was the work done 
in the field of medicine that Avi- 
cenna (Ibn Sina, 980 fo 1037 
A.D.), who was not only a doctor 
and a philosopher but a philo- 
logist and poet as well, served 
as the chief medical authority to 
the West until the 17th Century 
Another Arab philosopher, Ibn- 
Roschid, known to Western Eu- 
rope as Averroes, and whose nu- 
merous writings (he is said to 
have used over 10,000 sheets of 
paper) summed up the work of 
Muslim thinkers up to the end 
of the 12th Century, was de- 
scribed by Renan as the “Boethius 
of Arab philosophy’. 
Averroes 
The introgiuction of Averroes 
meant the end of the Dark Ages. 
To Dante, he was “the Commen- 
tator” par excellence—“Averrois, 
che il gran commento feo”. Dis- 
cussed, prohibited, but always 
widely, read, he was for many 
centuries one of the main forces 
which lead to the Renaissance. 
By the beginning of the 16th Cen- 
tury he had become, to quote 
Renan again, “almost the official 
philosophy of Italy in general”. 
As one sees the new Arab world 
of today, one recalls that the 
phoenix, which rises splendidly 
from its ashes to a new life, is a 
bird whose dwelling place is Ara- 
bia and that his miraculous 
powers of re-incarnation are not 
yet exhausted. 
  
for pilgrims to find 
the findings of the 
mechanical dupli-   
ASIC MINEURE 
al 
Th SET 
  
 
 
 
 
Ld 
CA nf 
p 
E00 Bow 5 
  
i 1 Arab Influence 
Ni 
AR In The Mediterranean World 
Mer Nore 
4s /r/ / 
  
Director-General 
Tours M iddle East 
Dr. Julian Huxley, LT _ector- 
General of Unesco, left Paris 
oa April 7 for a five-wee!: tour 
of the Middle East to invite 
full participation of the Arab 
world in the Third General 
Conference of Unesco, which 
opens at Beirut on October 14. 
The Director-General, tra- 
velling by air, will visit Tur- 
key, Lebanon, Syria, Transjor- 
dan, Irak, Iran and Egypt. He 
‘f has also arranged to meet re- 
presentatives of Saudi Arabia. 
Of the foregoing countries, 
Turkey, Lebanon, Saudi Ara- 
bia, Syria and Egypt are al- 
ready full members of Unesco. 
Accompanying Dr. Huxley 
are Mr Claude Berkley, his 
Executive Assistant and Dr. 
Gholam Ali Raadi who is on 
loan Unesco from the Iranian 
Governmen{ to carry out an 
inquiry into cultural affairs in 
the Middle East. 
In addition to - extending 
personal invitations to attend 
the Beirut Conference, Dr. 
Huxley will discuss the esta- 
blishment of closer relations 
between Unesco -and the go- 
vernments and culfural insti- 
tutions of the Middle Fast. He 
will also stress the importance 
of the Beirut Conference, 
which will provide an wunpre- 
cedented opportunity for the 
Middle East to present to dele- 
gations from the rest of the 
world the full range of their 
achievements in education, 
science and culture. With this 
purpose in mind, and con- 
currently with the Beirut Con- 
ference, Unesco and the Leba- 
nese Government will jointly 
sponsor & Unesco Month pro-       
— 


### 73720: Lebanon preparing site for Beirut Conference

Lebanon Preparing Site 
for Beirut 
Ag its Second Session, at Mexico 
City, the General Conference 
agreed, at the invitation of the 
Lebanon, to hold its Third Ses- 
sion at Beirut. In February the 
Executive Board confirmed this 
decision and fixed the Conference, 
tentatively, from October 14 to 
November 6. 
In January, two members of 
the Secretariat visited Beirut to 
investigate its facilities and re-. 
sources, in the light of the vari- 
ous technical problems which 
the Conference’s Session will cre- 
ate. They were well received by 
the Lebanese authorities. 
The premises which seem the 
most suitable for the work of the 
Session consist of a group of 
buildings some two hundred yards 
from the shore and a quarter of 
an hour's “drive from the centre 
of the town. The existing build- 
ings can provide offices for all 
the delegations. Three halls for 
plenary meetings and the meet- 
Nngs of Commissions are being 
constructed. 
It is hoped to recruit a large 
" proportion of the technical staff 
locally, and thus to reduce to a 
minimum the size of the staff 
to be moved, since this is the 
most expensive item in the Con- 
ference's budget. 
The authorities in the host 
country have undertaken to 
meet the cost of all supplies, fur- 
niture and the fitting up of pre- 
mises, and more especially the 
cost of hiring the equipment for 
simultaneous interpretation which 
 
French Schoolboys receive gift packages of school supplies, collected 
by U.S. children of Michigan and Massachusetts. Gifts, which were 
shipped for distribution through Unesco, were presented in March 
to the schools of Boulogne-sur-Seine, a war-hit industrial Suburb 
of Paris. Above, Dr. Kuo Yu-Shou, Head of Unesco’s Education 
Section who represented Unesco with Mr, J.-P. Sussel of Recons- 
truction Section.   
Conference 
will be installed in two or three 
of the Conference rooms. 
The working languages of the 
Beirut Conference will be English 
and French; rut in order that 
the Conference may attract 
greater attention throughout the 
Near East, the Lebanese author- 
ities have asked that Arabic be 
a working language at meetings 
where simultaneous interpreta- 
tion is used. In addition, the 
main documents and the Confer- 
ence Journal will be translated 
into Arabic. The staff required 
for the work of interpretation 
and translation into Arabic and 
for the preparation of documents 
in that language will be recruited 
and paid by the Lebanese Gov- 
ernment, 
Agenda and Organisation | 
of Work 
Member States have been ask- 
ed to inform the Director-General 
of questions which they wish 
placed on the agenda of the 
Beirut Conference. In April, a 
Committee of the Executive 
Board will, in the light of the 
Member. States’ replies, fix the 
Conference's provisional agenda, 
which will be sent forthwith ‘to 
all those States. The latter will 
thus have sufficient time in 
which to consult their National 
Commissions and appoint their 
delegations. 
As the Organisation already 
has a programme most elements 
of which will take two or more 
years to carry out, it seems super- 
fluous to debate the whole of the 
programme over again. The Con- 
ference, while considering a limit- 
ed number of questions, will be 
able to devote some time to an 
active and thorough examination 
of completely fresh projects, or 
of projects already voted but for 
which a change of direction may 
be required. 
The Genersl Conference will 
also study the reports submitted 
by the Member States, the deci- 
sions with regard to new applica- 
tions for membership of the Or- 
ganisation, and elect seven mem- 
bers of the Executive Board. It 
will appoint a Director-General, 
and deliver its opinion on various 
questions of “internal organisation 
and on the work of the National 
Commissions. It will vote the 
Budget for 1949. 
To permit all delegations being 
represented on all the working 
bodies, not more than four meet- 
ings will be held simultaneously, 
and during the General Confer- 
ence no regional or special con- 
ferences will be held at Beirut.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=4) 3

### 73724: Rural schooling poses problems for Haitians

  
  


### 73721: Highlights of Haitian Project

     
  
Highlights of 
Haitian 
Project 
BACKGROUND:. For first time, 
three Specialised Agencies of 
the UN will work together on 
a joint prejeect: Unesco, World 
Health Organisation and Food 
and Agriculture Organisation, 
in co-operation with Haitian 
Government. 
REGION CONCERNED: About 50 
square mile area of Marbial 
Valley in southern Haiti, af- 
fecting 30,000 people of a 
rural and backward com- 
munity. 
PROBLEMS: Region well suited 
for experiment becaus: of 
wide-spread illiteracy, lack of 
educational means, overpopu- 
lation, tropical diseases, de- 
forestation, primitive agricul- 
ture, soil erosion, Population 
eager for education and 
schooling. 
PURPOSE OF PROJECT: To iry 
cut most advanced techniques 
of Fundamental Education, 
test new educational materials 
(improved text-books, visual 
and oral aids) and use edu- 
cation to raise social, eco- 
nomic and health levels, 
BASIC SURVEY: Dr. Alfred Me- 
traux, well-known anthropo- 
logist, recently transferred 
from Economic & Social 
«. Council of UN to Unesco, has 
left for Haiti to supervise 
Basic Sociological & Ecologi- 
cal Survey and stimulate de- 
velopment of Project. (See 
article by Dr. Metraux on 
adjoining columns). 
TEACHER TRAINING CENTRE: 
Two-year course 
school-teachers and adult and 
community education workers. 
PRIMARY & ADULT EDUCA- 
TION: Two rural primary 
school and 10 adult centres to 
be established, to eombat illi- 
teracy through mother tongue 
(Creole); experiment in mass 
language instruction of French 
HEALTH EDUCATION: Who to 
assume responsibilities of 
health programme; will at- 
tempt eliminate endemic dis- 
eases (malaria, yaws, hook- 
worm, etc.) bu curative & 
preventive medicine and sani- 
tary engineering. 
AGRICULTURE EDUCATION: 
FAO to co-operate in running 
model farm stressing moun- 
tain-side cultivation, rotation 
of crops, ete. Veterinary prac- 
tice to be included. 
OTHER FEATURES OF PRO- 
JECT: Community Mlbrary, 
museum and art centre to be 
set up; 
women’s education; survey on 
possibility of Rural Industry 
development. 
to train. 
encouragement of   


### 73722: Anthropologists report on fundamental education

Anthropologist Reports 
on Fundamental Education 
HE social anthropologist, be- 
1) cause of the very nature of 
his science and the special 
methods he has devised for 
carrying out his work has long 
been aware of problems of educa- 
tion, particularly among primitive 
and somewhat acculturated peo- 
ples. 
Unesco has shown considerable 
foresight in planning for funda- 
mental education in Haiti. Success 
will not come easily there, but by 
envisaging the need for anthropo- 
logy from the beginning, instead 
of calling in “trouble shooters” 
when difficulties have arisen, one 
may be assured that the pro- 
gramme will rest on firm ground. 
The present plans for the 
Haitian programme call for the 
preparation of an anthropological 
field survey of the Marbial Valley 
within the first six months of 
work. This is an exceedingly short 
period in which to obtain a satis- 
factory understanding of any cul- 
ture Nevertheless, if attention is 
concentrated upon the most fun- 
damental aspects of the society, 
the survey may provide the infor- 
mation necessary for the educa- 
tional and extension work fore- 
seen by the Pilot Project. 
Haitian peasant culture should 
not be regarded as a subculture or 
a variety of Western culture 
adapted to the tropics. Nor should 
it be looked upon as a transplant- 
ed African culture. It is rather, 
an amalgam of European and 
African traditions, from which a 
new and original culture has de- 
veloped. Although much In 
Haitian life recalls both Europe 
and Africa to the informed obser- 
ver, nothing would be more mis- 
leading than to regard the coun- 
try people either as European 
peasants or African tribesmen. 
The first task of the anthropo- 
logist will be to describe the life 
of the Haitian peasants in the 
Marbial Valley; their round of 
work, their relations to their im- 
mediate and extended family, to 
neighbours and to members of 
other cemmunities, their social 
organisation and religious orien- 
tation. - 
Cultural Overtones 
Secondly, the anthropologist 
‘must consider carefully the more 
subtle aspects of the culture so 
that he may sense the “eidos” and 
“ethos” of the community. In fact, 
a grasp of the overtones of the 
culture and an understanding of 
the values on which practices are 
based undoubtedly will be of more 
lasting importance for a pro- 
gramme of education than the 
most detailed knowledge of the 
material apparatus of life. 
Inevitably, in carrying out a 
programme of education, institu- 
tions and customs must be modifi- 
ed. When this happens, since no 
culture can be altered piecemal, 
all of life is affected in one way 
or another. Sanitation and schools 
do not automatically bring order 
and happiness to a retarded so- 
ciety; on the contrary, they may 
cause temporary chaos. Yet many 
of the difficulties can be met if 
points of resistance are foreseen 
and if the values and the places 
in the structure of institutions to 
be changed and customs to be 
abandoned are taken into con- 
sideration. 
So armed, the prudent educator 
or reformer may draw the people 
toward the desired goal by persua- 
sion and with their own collabora- 
tion. Educators, health and agri- 
cultural experts may provoke deep 
cultural change; if the results are 
to be positive and humanly valu- 
able, the process must be careful- 
ly controlled, 
In a changing culture the native 
is often tempted to despise his 
cultural heritage and to adopt in- 
discriminately the ideas and ways 
brought to him. The danger is 
particularly great in Haiti where 
the wish of more educated people 
is to westernise the country as 
rapidly as possible, One of the 
duties of the anthropologist would 
be to point out to his fellow work- 
ers aspects of the culture which 
are worth maintaining and sup- 
porting, By so doing, one may 
prevent a feeling of inferiority 
from developing in the community 
with regard to the past, and at 
the same time avoid an exaggerat- 
ed and superficial respect for 
what is new. 
Since one of the ultimate ob- 
jectives of the programme will be 
to raise the standard of life in 
this remote valley, and since ef- 
forts in this direction can only 
bear fruit when the health and 
agriculture experts are informed 
about present living conditions, 
the anthropological survey will 
pay close attention to local eco- 
nomy. : 
The inhabitants of the Marbial 
Valley, like most of the population 
of Haiti, are peasants who live 
from agriculture. Precise informa- 
tion will be needed about land 
tenure, property distribution, land 
usage for different types of crops, 
} land valuation, etc 
The second stage of the econo 
mic survey will be the establish- 
ment of a seasonal rhythm of 
work. An approximate schedule of 
the year round activities of the 
peasants will be ascertaifed so 
that agriculturalists may better 
estimate work habits and educa- 
tors may be able to adapt their 
programmes to the requirements 
of economic life. 
The third stage of the enquiry 
will be the determination of the 
division of labour within the fami- 
ly and the community. 
Severals forms of associations, 
formal and informal, are in exist- 
ence among Haitian peasants 
which serve for mutual help in 
tasks which are beyond the conve- 
nient capacity of one man and 
—_—— By 
Dr. Alfred METRAUX 
    
his family. The combite is such 
a working association and deserves 
rigorous study. A thorough under- 
standing 6f the combite and simi- 
lar organisations that may exist 
will do much to gain the confi- 
dence of the peasants and may 
suggest new ways of spreading 
ideas and techniques among the 
population. Moreover, the as- 
sistance of combite groups will be 
introduced in water distribution, 
necessary whenever buildings are 
to be erected and improvements 
sanitation and other concrete as- 
pects of the programme (1), 
Crafts and Skills 
The programme contemplates 
the fostering of local arts and 
crafts. Here again the anthro- 
pologist must provide the basic 
information, It has been observed 
that the Haitian peasant is a jack- 
of-all-trades who, in experimental 
situations, has learned new skills 
rapidly and proficiently, However, 
the development of new skills of- 
ten depend upon the extent to 
which an individual can be spared 
from arduous work in the fields to 
provide essential food. Consequent- 
ly, it is already clear that the 
development of crafts and indus- 
tries must go hand in hand with 
improved agricultural techniques. 
The Haitians are good basket 
makers and wood carvers and are 
better iron workers than has 
been generally assumed. Some of 
the iron objects found in Vodu 
temples suggest that metal work- 
ing, which was so developed 
among the African ancestors of 
the peasants, is not entirely dead 
and might be revived, 
The diet, of the Haitian peasant 
is often obviously inadequate, but 
unfortunately no adequate studies 
have yet been made of its compo- 
sition or of the peoples food 
habits. In the matter of food, it 
will be desirable for the health 
and agricultural specialists to 
work together with information 
provided by the anthropologist, 
since the solution of their prob- 
lems are inter-dependent, 
Popular Religion 
If conditions 
Valley are similar to those in 
other parts of the country, we 
may expect to find, together with 
Catholiscism, a strong indigenous 
religion known as Vodu, which 
has its roots in both African and 
Christian traditions, This popular 
religion is vigorous and is one of 
the keystones of social relations 
The Veodu priest, who may be a 
man or a woman, is without ques- 
tion a person of great prestige in 
the community. The Vodu temple 
(humfort) may be a gathering 
Place for a fairly large number of 
people, particularly women. A 
sympathetic attitude toward Vodu 
and some understanding of the 
functions of the temple will do 
much to gain the confidence of 
the peasants, 
Since Veodu is primarily concern- 
ed with the physical and emo- 
tional well being of the believers, 
medicine and various sorts of 
treatment are closely associated 
with other magico-religious beliefs. 
As often as not, the Vodu priest 
is a kind of medical practitioner 
and the temple may serve as a 
substitute for a hospital, Con- 
sequently, if we wish the peasants 
to adopt our viewpoint about 
hygiene and to take preventive 
measures to fight endemic diease, 
it is vital for us to know their 
own concepts of health and illness, 
- Experience with primitive peoples 
has shown that it is a shortsight- 
ed policy to fight the influence of 
the medicine man as a sheer im- 
poster. Often, with guidance, he 
can be turned into a valuable ally 
instead of an enemy. 
The fear of witchcraft is a 
disturbing element in Haitian 
peasant life. Some knowledge of 
the factors involved will lighten 
the task of educators and health 
experts alike 
Vodu ceremonies with their 
songs and dances contain the most 
original elements of Haitian peas- 
ant life. The celebration of cere- 
monies provides the peasants with 
almost the only entertainment 
they have and is a source of pres- 
tige for the best performers. In 
view of the prejudices that exist 
about Vodu, there is danger that 
the programme of fundamental 
education may destroy these ma- 
nifestation of popular art and de- 
prive the peasant of his most deep- 
ly appreciated outlet from a hard 
and dull life. 
Unquestionably the whole prob- 
lem of dealing with Vedu will be 
one of the most delicate from 
every point of view and it must 
be met with tact and skill. A 
study of popular religion will in- 
dicate those aspects which could 
be utilised in a programme of 
education without too heavily in- 
volving the sensibilities either of 
more cultivated persons, to whom 
the whole subject is anathema, or 
of the peasants to whom it is 
valued way of life. Consequently 
it will be necessary to find means 
of promoting tolerance and under- 
standing on all sides 
LA Folklore = + 
The Haitian peasants have in- 
herited from their African fore- 
bears a rich folklore of tales, songs 
and proverbs. They have also 
adopted a large number of French 
fairy tales and popular songs. In 
native folklore the educators may 
find abundant material for many 
sorts of textbooks. 
The anthropologist will endeav- 
our to make a collection of tales, 
proverbs and song texts. He will 
be able to collaborate in the selec- 
tion of suitable texts for educa- 
tional purposes, since he will be 
able to judge, from his broader 
knowledge of the culture, the si- 
gnificance of the stories in the 
minds of the peasants. Popular 
proverbs, of course, would seem 
to be especially valuable primers, 
particularly for adults, 
Haitian folk tales are not only 
engaging of themselves, they are 
also full of the humour and 
Penetrating observation that make 
the Haitian peasant a stimulating 
and delightful person to know. 
(1) For an ideal picture of a commu- 
nity undertaking, the reader may refer 
to the novel by Jacques Roumain : 
Masters of the Dew (New-York, 1947). 
*x Xx xX 
Note of Editor. — The above arti- 
cle is a digest of a longer report sub- 
mitted by Dr. Métrauxr to Unesco, in 
March prior to his departure for 
Haiti, 
  
| carven and painted figures   
Rural Sch 
Problem 
by E. GABRIEL, 3° 
Programme Specialist = 
in Fundamental -Education * 
LTHOUGH the Constitutions 
of the Haitian Republic p 
vides that primary educas 
tion is compulsory and free to alk: 
children from the age of 6 to 14¢ 
and that secondary, professional: 
and higher state schools arg 
open “without prejudice to condig! 
tions of entry” to all young peos: 
ple at no expense, in actual fact: 
only about half the young peo 
ple of school age in the towns: 
and a sixth of those in the coun: 
try can obtain entry to the State 
primary schools. i 
.At present, therefore, the law 
for compulsory education does nog 
apply in the case of about threes: 
quarters of the Republic’s schooki 
age population This affects some 
450,000 children. oo 
Another difficulty is gettingg 
teachers to leave the cities for thes 
  
  
         
| Tn many years, the so-| 
called - “civilised” peoples {° 
have taken practically no no- |. 
tice of the black world of Afri- | 
ca except to exploit it... 
In our dealings with the} 
black raoss, there are three 
different stages, with three} 
different attitudes, and w- 
have now reached the final 
stage. First came sheer exploi- 
tation; next, patronizing pity; 
and lastly that understanding 
which bids us not only to seek 
to succour them, to raise them 
up, and gradually to teach 
them, but in our turn, to learn 
from them. . 
Masks, statuettes and strange | 
re
 
6 
c
r
 
came to light. And we no 
longer found them misshapen |. 
or hideous, the moment we || 
stopped judging them by the |! 
Graeco-Latin standards toi: 
which our Western and Nor-}: 
thern concej!s of beauty had 
previously conformed. The 
work was then no longer either 
beautiful or ugly: it was the 
embodiment of a definite emo- 
tion expressed spontaneously... 
The tribes capable of produ- 
cing such work therefore did 
have something to tell us. Bug 
they had no language, no 
speech, or at least no language 
in which they could speak 
us... * 
We must therefore help them 
to find themselves and to gain 
self - confidence — two things 
that they still lack... 
ANDRE GIDE, 
(Quoted from French review | 
“Présence Africaine”, No 1. Nov.- 
Dec, 1947.) . 
—- 
c
m
r
—
 
    
in the Marbial 
   - RA L-2¥ 
fo . 
; -- » Sak y 
Haitian farmers still use the primitive hoe. 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=5) 3

### 73724: Rural schooling poses problems for Haitians

  
a 
IN HAITI AR 
  
 
 
  
ioling Poses 
r Haitians 
_ country. Since the only two exist- 
ing normal schools for primary 
school teachers are located near 
the capital (Port-au-Prince) the 
" pulk of the students is made up 
"of city-dwellers. After graduation 
most of these young teachers pre- 
fer to work in the towns rather 
‘than in the country where there 
is little to attract them. Those 
"that do go into the rural districts 
soon return to the cities, 
"Thus, despite the democratic 
provisions of the Constitution, pri- 
“mary and secondary school educa- 
‘tion is usually reserved for town 
children whose parents are rela- 
tively well to do. 
The situation in the rural dis- 
‘tricts reveals a completely diffe- 
rent picture. There are no secon- 
dary schools, no technical schools. 
The only exception is a small spe- 
cial school in the north of the is- 
land (the Chatard School), which 
‘can provide agricultural training 
‘for about thirty young farmers. 
‘The few privileged country 
children who manage to go to the 
towns for their studies rarely re- 
turn to their own villages. This is 
a serious intellectual loss to the 
rural districts, 
~The gravity of the problem is all 
the more striking in that agricul- 
‘ture is the main arch of Haiti's 
economic structure. 
The Language Problem 
In spite of the fact that French 
is the official language of Haiti 
and that, as laid down in the 
Constitution, “its use is compul- 
sory in the public services” the 
plain facts of the matter are that 
eighty to ninety per cent of the 
Haitian population speak and un- 
derstand only Creole, Although a 
dialect of French, Creole is never- 
theless quite different from the 
French language, 
Any programme for popular edu- 
cation in Haiti must use Creole if 
‘it is to make contact with the 
‘people, enlist their good will, con- 
vince them to adopt methods of 
‘hygiene and agriculture, improve 
‘their techniques in arts and crafts 
and develop principles of good 
Citizenship, all of which are essen- 
‘tial if the standards of the coun- 
‘fry are-to be raised. 
Finally, it is important to stress 
that suitable textbooks and mo- 
dern educational methods must be 
employed 50 as to render more 
effective the teaching of French, 
which is essentially a foreign lan- 
guage for the rural population of 
Haiti.   
OTHING in the world is so 
striking today as the fact 
that the peoples of the world 
are on the move, not only physical- 
ly but spiritually. One sees more 
than half the world restive in 
its illiteracy and half the world 
in various stages of revolt 
against the particular conditions 
in which men live, There is a 
challenge today to every depart- 
ment of every government and 
‘riot least to those departments 
involved in the processes of edu- 
cation. The challenge goes out 
to every thinking citizen because 
it is nothing less than the re- 
sult of the world’s own riches, 
of man’s collective technological 
advances and of the enormous 
gap in their distribution and 
enjoyment, the gaps that have 
so often challenged ‘the processes 
© of education and have so often 
failed to be understood by them. 
Abraham Lincoln said that 
“Man could not exist half slave 
and half free.” Julian Huxley, 
in one of his introductions re- 
cently, paraphrased this and 
said, “Man cannot exist half il- 
literate and half literate,” and 
he said it for the good reason 
that the whole question of peace 
and international understanding 
depends in the last resort on ac- 
cess to the means and skills of 
the modern world for which 
people are reaching out with de- 
sperate hands; it depends on 
them because ‘you cannot have 
peace in a world where there 
are vast fields of frustration, 
whether it be on the economic 
or the cultural level, and where 
prides are hurt by the assertions 
and assumptions of some of our 
Western peoples, 
What the film can do for in- 
ternational understanding there- 
fore depends not on knowing 
how to film, how to stand behind 
a camera and turn a handle, but 
on our concept of social respons- 
ibility. 
If we talk about the film in 
international understanding, we 
should therefore be clear about 
our purpose in this task, about 
the substance of the matter, and 
then the technical side will safe- 
ly take care of itself. For Unesco 
the substance of the task is the 
duty of Fundamental Education. 
Our Unesco work in Fun- 
damental Education is only one 
part of Unesco’s programme and 
is limited by budget. Its success 
must depend on national effort. 
So we arrive at the paradox 
which some of us have known all 
our lives, that internationalism 
begins in the nations, and for 
many of our immediate tasks, it 
begins at home. 
Responsibilities 
The wholt implication of Brit- 
ish social history, of British social 
policy and political policy, de- 
mands recognition of the fact 
that we are not a nation of 50 
million people today but a nation 
of 113 million people, white, black 
and others. Our governmental 
responsibilities are not a question 
only of Grantham, Birmingham, 
Leeds and Hull, but also of Nyasa- 
land, Nigeria, Tanganyika ahd 
Kenya, and of the other colonies 
outside Africa. 
There is another challenge, Hit- 
ler, not of pleasant memory, once 
used the phrase of Englands 
colonies that we were allowing 
“cobwebs to grow in our treasure 
house.” I shall not say much 
  
A typical rural hut-school in Haiti. 


### 73725: Noted film expert sees challenge in Africa

  
Noted Film Expert 
Sees Challenge in Africa 
about that, except to emphasise 
that international criticism is 
growing on how we use and de- 
velop our work in the Colonies. 
We are, in particular, challenged 
from without in respect of fun- 
damental education; and not least 
by the Soviet Union where in a 
period of less than twenty-five 
years illiteracy has been pratically 
wiped out by a plan of education 
involving the use of 90 regional 
languages. The examples in Mex- 
ico, China and elsewhere are there 
also to challenge us to the effort 
of which, I am sure, we are in- 
creasingly conscious today. 
Nor can we forget the United 
Nations, With the work of the 
Security Council, the F.A.O., the 
W.H.O., the 1.L.O. and Unesco, it 
has established for the first time 
in history, a world conscience in 
respect of what to do not oniy 
with health and with education, 
but also, and very fundamentally, 
what to do with the economic 
resources of the world so that the 
world’s needs can be integrated 
and filled, 
But our most profound chal- 
lenge, and the one that will have 
to be met, whether we like it or 
not, comes to us from the native 
peoples themselves. The achieve- 
By 
John GRIERSON 
     
ments of our own Negro popula- 
tions, for instance, and those of 
the American Negroes in various 
fields of science and medicine, 
- education, music and writing, are 
progressively creating a powerful 
body of world opinion. 
I find in Prance a new group 
under the title “Présence Afri- 
caine,» in which the best writers 
of French Africa have got togeth- 
er to produce a review of the 
greatest things of note in all fields 
of negro expression. Groups like 
this represent, not only an expres- 
sion of culture, but a watch on 
the interests of the African in 
the course of our next genera- 
tion’s development. 
My main proposition, therefore, 
is that it is not a question of 
films coming from outside but of 
~ films being created from the in- 
~ side by and for the Colonial 
peoples themselves. I am going to 
say directly that there is now no 
considerable body of knowledge in 
this field. Some experiments have 
been made, but in pretty piece- 
meal fashion. There is no body 
of knowledge, I think, because no 
sufficient interest has been creat- 
ed, no sufficient funds have been 
found, and no adequate organisa- 
tion has been established for the 
task in hand. We start almost at 
scratch. 
The first necessity is that we 
find a body of men who will make 
this their lifework, who will spe- 
cialise”’ in this as one of the 
inspiring tasks of our time, and 
begin with a proper knowledge of 
the Colonies. It is no longer a 
question of people dropping into 
Africa to make a picture, to “do 
something” for the natives, as 
only a generation ago, the Squire 
and his lady “did something” for 
us. That does not reflect the size 
or nature of the problem. We 
have got to create a body of men 
who live and work with the 
African problem, who are the 
African problem in its creative 
aspect, knowing it and living with 
it. It is essentially a problem of 
development on the economic 
technological, social and cultural 
levels. It involves sympathy with 
the cultures in the areas we are 
concerned with. 
Above all, we should have a 
great concern for the psychologic- 
al problems involved in the mak- 
ing of films in this particular 
field. Here I quote from a letter 
sent me by my friend Richard 
Wright, the Negro writer of 
“Bright and Morning Star” and 
“Native Son.” 
“Undoubtedly, such an impact 
of Western ideas and methods 
upon African natives will mean 
a disruption of their communal, 
fragile, traditional, tribal and al- 
most sacred institutions. Means 
will have to be found to enable a 
smooth and all but painless adap- 
tation of these institutions to the 
Western method of working and 
living. Let me cite just one im- 
portant psychological problem in- 
volved. In Africa,.for the most 
part, individual will and initiative 
are almost unknown and are lar- 
gely considered sinful. All work 
and endeavour are done under the 
guidance of traditional ceremony. 
Now, with the introduction of vast 
schemes for increasing production, 
one will find that individual effort 
will not only be encouraged to. 
come to the fore but must be 
rewarded. Indeed, the instilling of 
the desire for individual initiative 
in Africans can be a great gift 
which the Western world can 
offer to people slumbering in a 
kind of cosmic silence. And I can 
tell you that this lack of indivi- 
dual initiative in the Africans is 
deeply regretted by most educated 
Africans I have met; these edu- 
cated Africans know that this is 
one of their great handicaps, and 
if the British programme can help 
in this direction, it will have made 
a lasting and proud contribution 
‘to the peoples of Africa. What 
I mean concretely, is that Afrie- 
ans must be drawn into the ac- 
tual management and policy-mak- 
ing councils of these projected 
enterprises.” 
These are some of the problems 
and possibilities to which, I think, 
consideration should be given. The 
first of my propositions is that 
the heart of the matter lies in 
the subject matter; secondly, that 
appropriate machinery should be 
created: (a) in the form of a 
School of the Colonies; (b) in the 
development of the Colonial Film 
Unit with true regard for decen- 
tralisation and the part which 
natives will play in it; (¢) in the 
form of an African School of 
Film Experiment. 
These tasks seem to me not just 
minor tasks for Britain today but 
priority tasks and among the most 
privileged which face the present 
generation of British men and 
women. 
I conclude in the dark voice of 
Richard Wright and not in my 
own white one. 
“I feel this will be the first 
time that a collective and scien- 
tific effort has been made by 
Western civilisation to meet the 
needs of colonial people. One need 
not be at all ashamed that the 
motives which are spurring the 
British are those of self-interest; 
indeed, such motives, in my opig 
nion, can guarantee objectivity 
and rationality, and help rule out 
irrational racial fears on both 
sides. Such a project can be made 
into a model of colonial engineer- 
ing for all other nations to emu- 
late . , . I think that such a pro- 
gramme will be one of the big 
stories of the world.” 
At a recent meeting of the 
Royal Empire Society in Lon- 
don, Mr. J. Grierson, Head of 
Unesco’s Mass Communication 
and Public Information Sec- 
tions, delivered the address re- 
produced above in abridged 
form. 
Mr. Grierson was recently 
named Controller at the Cen- 
tral Office of Information of 
the British Government and 
will leave Unesco on April 30. 
He is credited with creating 
the word “documentary” and 
has been described as the 
“main driving force and inspi- 
ration of the realist film move- 
ment”, 
Mr. Grierson was the found- 
er of the first British Govern- 
ment film services and was 
later associated with the crea- 
tion of the Government film 
services of New Zealand, Aus- 
tralia and Canada.     
  


### 73726: Highlights of African project

    
  
Highlights of 
African 
Project 
REGION CONCERNED : Mpo- 
nela area eof Nyasaland, 
- 100 sq. miles, population 15,000 
coloured people of whom 
12,500 are illiterate, 2,350 lite- 
rate in vernacular and 150 in 
English and vernacular, A 
typical African rural commu- 
nity fortunate to live on fer- 
tile land growing all food 
‘needed plus a well paying crop 
(tobacco). 
PURPOSE OF PROJECT : To 
raise social, economic & edu- 
cational level of a represen- 
tative African tribal commu- 
nity on predominantly agri- 
cultural economy; special 
stress on local initiative. 
SCOPE : First three years pro- 
ject to concentrate on Mpo- 
nela area, then to be exten- 
ded to cover wider sphere. 
Scheme planned for five years. 
METHODS : Evoke specific de- 
mands for social betterment 
and higher living standard; 
bring community into close 
contaet with existing schools ; 
establish demonstration school 
for children and adults; ini- 
tiate literacy drive to educate 
individuals towards apprecia- 
tion of relation to wortd out- 
side village ; facilitate, encou- 
rage crafts; encourage, deve- 
lop singing, dancing, acting, 
puppetry. 
+ In addition to textbooks, 
other mass education me- 
thods used : cinema, film 
strips, puppet equipment, wi- 
reless, posters, gramophone 
and local recordings. 
PROGRESS MADE up to Feb- 
ruary 1, 1948: Local Afri- 
cans have formed society 
known as “Ukani” (i.e. “Rise 
Up”) Society meeting weekly 
to discuss problems and plans 
for community progress. As 
result wells have been clea- 
ned, washing places built and 
movement begun to form 3 co- 
operative society ; “Women’s 
Institute” created to learn 
sewing, knitting, cooking, Le- 
cal school teachers have for- 
med local associations; Fun- 
damental Education assistants 
have helped organise singing 
and dramatic plays, and have 
been trained in puppetry 
wich is very popular. Literacy 
campaign begun. 
“ASSOCIATED PROJECT’: : In 
Tanganyika, British Gover- 
nment has launched scheme 
for mechanised production of 
ground-nuts combining pro- 
gramme of Fundamental Edu- 
cation for 50,000 Africans; 
will be basis for comparison of 
results achieved in Tanga- 
nyika experiment,  

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=6) 5

### IGNORE

« UNESCO COURIER 
— 


### 73727: A Modern necessity: popular science

A MODERN NECESSITY: 
Popular Science 
By Borge Michelsen 
THE existing relations between 
science and the public in 
many countries can still be sum- 
med up in the anecdote used by 
Lord Raleigh a decade ago lately 
reto.d by R. W. Gerard in 
#Science’. 
The great Australian transcon- 
tinental railway had been com- 
pleted, and the first train was 
being dispatched at a gala cere- 
mony. At the climatic moment, 
the passengers waved, the crowd 
cheered, the signal was given, and 
the locomotive proudly started off 
«leaving the train standing. 
Someone had forgotten to cou- 
ple the engine to the cars. 
Food for Hungry Stomachs 
The engine of science is run- 
ning, but if it does not pull the 
public passengers along with it, it 
will not long be stoked and we 
never shall reach the station 
where there will be no disease and 
war, where everyone will have 
enough to eat and nobody will do 
more than three of four hours of 
disagreeable or monotonous work 
& day. The coupling must be clos- 
- ed and the ones todo the coupling 
work are the scientific journalists, 
popularizing science not only 
through the press but also 
through radio and film. 
An enviable job many railway- 
men will find, as their “col- 
leagues” the science writers are 
able io let “passengers” in one 
country have the benefit of a 
science engine in another. An en- 
viable job, yes, and nevertheless 
there is in the world today a 
shortage of scientific journalists, 
especially in the backward coun- 
tries where every article, every 
film and broadcast about the 
modern improvements in animal 
end plant breeding, in pest con- 
trol, in soil management will re- 
sult in more bread, more milk and 
meat for hungry stomachs. 
This lack of scientific journal- 
ists in countries where they are 
most urgently needed of course is 
due to the fact that it requires 
years of training to become a 
specialist in popularising science, 
o training difficult to obtain in 
countries where there is not the 
abundant means of mass media 
a8 in the Western countries. 
future General Conferences. 
Sclence In its nature 1s inter- 
national. That is to say scientific 
discoveries and their practical 
applications, no matter where 
they are originally made, can be 
transferred quickly and econo- 
mically to all areas where there 
is a stable and effective govern- 
ment. 
During the war a science writer 
in an occupied country discovered 
that scientists in Switzerland 
were experimenting with DDT as 
an insecticide. He wrote an article 
about it and the day after it 
appeared in his paper the first 
manufacture of DDT was started 
in his country. 
Every science writer can tell 
about instances like this. 
Through their articles they are 
stimulating industry and agricul- 
ture to make still more use or 
more adequate use of science, 
As to the importance of poou- 
larizing progress in the medical 
field a number of opinions have 
been expressed: 
Early publication may cause 
anguish to investigators flooded 
by appeals for unavailable mate- 
rials and to relatives believing 
that their loved one is dying in 
the presence of succour, but it 
may also arouse great action and 
gsccelerate use and speed advance 
Fighting Racial Theory 
and Astrology 
We have hitherto only been 
speaking about the immediate 
practical aspects of popularising 
pcience, but the responsible scien- 
tific journalist is aiming at more 
than giving his readers an apple 
a day to keep the doctor away. 
He will not only report that a 
scientist has come to a cerfain 
conclusion which might be applied 
in this or that manner, but he 
will also tell how he has come to 
this conclusion, That is to say he 
will try to give his readers an 
understanding of the scientific 
method in order to sharpen their 
critical sense. 
One of the reasons that so 
many accepted the tragic non- 
sense of racial theory and still ac- 
cept the ancient superstitions of 
astrology and spiritualism is that 
they are presented under the guise 
of science, and if science is only 
presented to the public as a set 
of statements which will have to 
be accepted on faith the public 
will not be able to distinguish truce 
science from these base imitations. 
“Why popularize science?” a 
journalist asked Dr. Holter, Danish 
cytochemisy and science writer, 
who lately received the science 
prize of the daily paper Ekstra- 
bladet, 
Dr. Holter answered: “As long 
as science is stamping our daily 
life to such a degree as it is at 
present the best way of securing 
the application of science in the 
most rational manner is that 
people appropriate the way of 
thinking which has produced the 
results we are using every day 
without reflecting upon it. I con- 
sider that the popularization of 
science is the most effective 
manner of rationalising peoples’ 
way of thinking; to give the com- 
mon people thai respect of ciphers 
and logic which is our best safe- 
guard against mystical enthu- 
siasms and anti-rational tenden- 
cies which are otherwise at the 
command of all fascist and war- 
mongering forces.” 0 
Popularization of | Science 
and the National Welfare 
I should like to conclude by 
quoting the answer which another 
scientist, James B. Conant, Pre- 
sident of Harvard University (in 
his book “On Understanding 
Science”) has given to the ques- 
tion: Why popularise science? 
the fact. Because of says 
Conant, that the applications of 
science play so important a part 
in our daily lives, matters of pu- 
blic policy are profoundly in- 
fluenced by highly technical con- 
siderations, Some understanding 
of science by those in nositions of 
authority and responsibility as 
well as by those who shape opi- 
nion is therefore of imporfance 
for the national welfare.” 
Such a statement made a de- 
cade ago might have seemed a 
presumptuous claim. Today, with 
the as yet unsolved riddle of in- 
ternational control of atomic 
energy hanging ominously above 
us, such a statement may seem 
50 obvious as to require no elabo- 
ration. 


### 73728: Science abstract experts to meet in Paris

SCIENCE ABSTRACT 
EXPERTS T0 MEET 
IN PARIS 
A Committee cf eleven Experts 
will meet in Unesco House on 7, 
8 and 9 April, to advise Unesco on 
lines of .action for the improv- 
ment and development of abstract- 
ing services for the natural scien- 
ces. Brief summaries, or abstracts 
as they. are called, of scientific 
articles form the principal means 
by which scientits are informed 
of the latest developments In 
science. 
Before the war it was estimated 
that three quarters of a million 
useful scientific articles were 
published each year, and about 
the same number of abstracts. 
However, these abstracts dealt on- 
ly with a quarter of a million 
articles. In other words, two 
thirds of the scientific articles 
published are not abstracted at 
all, while the remaining third of 
the articles are abstracted on the 
average three times. 
Unesco considers that this situ- 
ation is unsatisfactory, and is ask- 
ing the advice of the Committee 
of Experts in an effort to remedy 
it. 
The eleven experts will come 
from six countries, and will repre- 
sent six abstracting services. Most 
of the experts are qualified scien- 
tists drawn from five major fields 
of science. Librarians will also be 
represented. A report on the 
results of this meeting will be 
published in the May issue of the 
Unesco Courier. 
 


### 73729: World film catalogue issued

World Film 
Catalogue Issued 
~The first of a series of 
draft catalogues of films and 
filmstrips was issued by 
Unesco during the month of 
March, as part of the work of 
the Organisation's Production 
Unit, in a continuing process 
of compiling information on 
films and filmstrips dealing 
with education, science, cul 
ture and other Unesco fields 
of interest, 
The first list deals with 
films and filmstrips on archi- 
tecture, dance, drama, music. 
painting, design, tapestry, 
sculpture, modelling, wood- 
carving, pottery and the film 
as Art. It is being circulated 
to producers and distributors 
in all member states as a 
stimulus for the production, 
| distribution and exhibition of 
other films on the same sub- 
ject. 
Further world films lists 
now in preparation will deal 
with fundamental education. 
and the popularisation of   science,        


### 73732: UNESCO aids work of scientific institutions

Unesco Aids Work 
of Scientific Institutions 
INCE the latter part of the 
nineteenth century, a net- 
work of non-governmental inter- 
national organisations has de- 
veloped, uniting across frontiers 
educators, scientists and artists 
concerned with international co- 
operation. 
Long before the establishment 
of inter-governmental organisa- 
tions for this purpose, these or- 
ganisations promoted cultural ex- 
changes and contributed to the 
advancement of knowledge as 
well as to the furtherance of 
mutual understanding among the 
peoples of the world. To-day they 
continue to constitute a powerful 
force towards this end, and many 
of them can contribute effective- 
ly towards the achievement of 
Unesco’s major objectives. 
- Experience has shown that one 
important method by which 
Unesco can further the develop- 
ment of non-governmental inter- 
national organisations whose 
activities it considers of impor- 
tance for the achievement of its 
own purposes, is that of extend- 
ing financial support to them in 
the form of grants-in-aid. 
Such financial support is of 
particular importance in the pre- 
sent economic and financial si- 
tuation of the world. Sources of 
income have been greatly affect- 
ed as a result of the war; for one 
thing the general impoverishment 
and the inflationary process tak- 
ing place in many countries have 
particularly affected the social 
groups which have traditionally 
contributed to educational and 
cultural associations. In addition, 
the currency restrictions imposed 
in many countries prevent the 
free circulation across frontiers 
of the funds which might be 
made available for the financing 
of non-governmental interna- 
tional organisations. 
Thus, the continuation of many 
activities for which non-govern- 
mental international organisa- 
tions were responsible in the past, 
is to-day threatened. Their future 
may well depend upon how far 
Unesco will be able to aid them 
financially. 
Grants-in-aid 
In Natural Sciences for 1948 
At its first Session this year, 
the ~ Executive Board approved 
the allocation of $232,254 for 
grants-in-aid to the International 
Council of Scientific Union and 
its ten federated Unions; (1) 
Pure & Applied Physics, (2) 
Astronomy, (3) Scientific Radio, 
(4) Crystallography, (5) Chemis- 
try, (6) Geography, (7) Geodesy 
& Geophysics, (8) Biological 
Sciences, (9) Theoretical and 
Applied Mechanics, and (10) His- 
tory of Science. 
  
  
  
  
FTER two years’ pioneer work 
as first Head of Unesco’s Na- 
tural Science Section, Dr. Joseph 
Needham, F.R.S., will leave Unes- 
co on April 20 to resume his work 
at Cambridge University. 
In an interview Dr. Needham 
stressed the importance of co- 
operation on an international 
scale by scientists no less than 
educators and intellectuals and 
pointed out that “more than ever 
before, there is need of faith and 
support for the United Nations.” 
“The United Nations”, he said, 
“Unesco, the World Health Orga- 
nisation, and the Food and Agri- 
culture Organisation must have 
our active support for they are in 
a sense an embryo, a pilot plang 
of ultimate world government”. 
Dr, Needham added that he 


### 73730: Dr. Needham recalled to Cambridge

Dr. NEEDHAM = 
Recalled to Cambridge 
much regretted having to leave 
an international organisation be- 
cause of his recall to Cambridge. 
“I have always had the conviction 
of being an international citizen. 
I intend to come back to Unesco 
often to lend a hand in whatever 
way I can to the work of the 
Organisation”, he said. 
Born in London in 1960, Dr. 
Needham studied biochemistry at 
Cambridge University, where he 
. was later appointed Sir William 
Dunn Reader in that subject. 
From 1942 to 1946 he was Head 
of the British Scientific Mission 
in China and Counsellor at the 
British Embassy, Chungking, As 
Director of the Sino-British 
Science Co-operation Office, Dr, 
Needham worked to assure ade- 
quate liaison between Chinese 
scientists and technologists and 
their colleagues in the West. His 
knowledge of the Chinese lan- 
guage was of great advantage in 
this work. 
In 1944, Dr. Needham wrote and 
circulated a “Memorandum on an 
International Science Co-operation 
Service”, calling for the promotion 
of scientific co-operation, the col- 
lection and dissemination of scien- 
tific information, the facilitation 
of the movement of scientists 
across .natiohal boundaries and 
the provision of scientific assis- 
tance to all other international 
organisations. 
During a visit to Washington in 
1945 he participated in the plans 
under way for UNE-CO”, Dr 
Needham discussed the inclusion 
of science in the new organisation 
both with American scientists and 
government officials. These ideas 
- were circulated in various coun- 
tries. and found wide support. 
They ultimately helped to bring 
about the incorporation of the 
Natural Sciences in “UNE-CO” sc 
as to form the present UNESCO. 
Dr. Needham is the author of 
a number of books on scientific 
and philosophical questions, the 
two most important of which are 
“Chemical Embryology” (3 vols, 
1931) and “Biochemistry and 
Morphogenesis” (1942), 
“Science Outpost”, a new book 
to appear in September, 
compilation of articles, reports, 
letters and travel journals on the 
work of Chinese scientists and 
engineers during the war. Dr. 
Needham is now at work on a 
study of the history of science 
and technology in the Far East. 
to be called “Science and Civili- 
sation in China”. 
is aj   
In the field of international 
scientific services, Unesco is con- 
tributing—as it did last year—to 
the activities of: (1) Internatio- 
nal Time Bureau (Paris), (2) In- 
ternational Latitude Service (Ca- 
podimonte), (3) International 
Bureau of Isostatic Reductions 
(Helsinki), (4) International Seis- 
mological Summary (Cambridge). 
(5) International Commission on 
Zoological Nomenclature (Lon. 
don), (6) International Commis- 
sion on Botanical Nomenclature 
(Harvard) and (7) International 
Centre of Documentation on 
Optics (Paris). In addition, Unes- 
co will contribute, this year, to 
the international comparison of 
standard geomagnetic  instru- 
ments. 
The following well-known in- 
ternational laboratories will re- 
ceive financial assistance this 
year—as they did in 1847: (1) 
International High Altitude Re- 
search Station (Jungfraujoch), 
(2) International Zoological Sta- 
tion (Naples), and (3) Marine 
Biological Station (Roscoff). 
The International Centre of 
Type-Culture Collections (Lau- 
sanne) will receive this year—as 
it did in 1947—a relatively sub- 
stantial grant to be distributed 
to 18 bacteriological and myco- 
logical type-culture laboratories 
on five continents: 2 in North 
America, 1 in South America, 2 
in Asia, 2 in Australia and 11 in 
Europe. 
In the field of publications, the 
following scientific periodicals 
sponsored by the International 
Unions of Crystallography, Scien- 
tific Radio, Biological Sciences 
and History of Science, will be 
given partial financial assistance: 
(1) Acta Crystallographica & 
Structure Reports, (2) Monthly 
Bulletin of the International 
Union of Scientific Radio, (3) 
Resumptio Genetica, (4) Biologi- 
cal Abstracts, (5) Biologia, (6) 
Zoological Records and (7) Archi- 
ves Internationales d’Histoire des 
Sciences. The report of the Gen- 
eral Assemblies of 4 Unions (1) 
Astronotny, (2) Scientific Radio, 
(3) Geodesy & Geophysics and 
(4) Theoretical & Applied Mecha- 
nies, and of 3 International Con- 
gresses (1) Genetics, (2) Zoology, 
and (3) Entomology, will be print- 
ed with partial subventions from 
Unesco. Unesco also contributes 
a part of the cost of some 20 
other publications of the Coun- 
-eil and of 7 of its 10 federated 
Unions. 
In 1948 Unesco grants to Unions 
will contribute in part to the 
transportation expenses of the 
officials of 5 Unions who will at- 
tend their respective statutory 
General Assemblies, of the offi- 
cials of the International Geo- 
participants in the International 
the International Congress of 
Geography at Lisbon, of selected 
praticipants in the International 
Congresses of Geneties, Zoology 
Entomology and Mental Health, 
and of selected participants in the 
General Assemblies of the Unions 
of Astronomy and Geodesy and 
Geophysics. 
In the selection of these par- 
ticipants, the Unions are required 
to given preference to scientists 
from war-devastated countries and 
to young scientists. Altogether, 6 
or 7 symposia on specific scienti- 
fic problems, such as thermody- 
namics, physics of metals, macro- 
molecular chemistry, interaction 
between eggs and sperms in ani- 
mal reproduction, etc., are being 
organised by the Unions of 
Physics, Chemistry and Biological 
Sciences with subventions from 
Unesco. Unesco grants will also 
cover the transportation expenses 
of the membres who will attend 
the 17 Commissions of the Coun- 
cil and of the Unions of Physics, 
Chemistry, Biological Sciences 
and History of Science. 450 to 500 
scientists will thus be able to 
travel across frontiers and meet 
with scientists from other coun- 
tries with Unesco’s financial aid. to 
discuss problems in their various 
fields, . 
The whole program is an out- 
standing instance of what Unesco 
can do to stimulate international 
intellectual collaboration in the 
interests of Science for peace and 
human welfare.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=7) 4

### 73735: I.C.S.U. scientist on joint mission to Latin America

UNESCO COURIER 7 
 
Unesco To 
  


### 73733: UNESCO to use music as weapon for peace

Use Music 
As Weapon For Peace 
|B UNESCO'S programme of 
action music is included as one 
of the “weapons” to “disarm” 
men's minds. The Congress of 
Vienna, in its day, also made 
much use of music, but for dif- 
ferent purposes. Perhaps they did 
not know in 1814 that music is a 
force which can unite mankind. 
Or perhaps they forgot it, all those 
princes who danced, crowded the 
boxes at the opera and intrigued 
By 
Prof. Luiz Heitor 
Corréa de Azevedo 
   
together, their ears filled with 
sweet melody or whirling to the 
rhythm of palace bands. To-day 
the attitude towards the social 
influence of the Arts has been 
greatly modified. In many coun- 
tries—democracies and totalitarian 
lands alike—recourse has been 
had to music for ends trans- 
cending the boundaries of pure 
art. In Brazil (to quote an 
example familiar to me), 
teaching of music in the public 
-schools of the Federal District 
comes under the Division of 
Patriotic Education. Art is ex- 
pressly put to the service of na- 
tional sentiment; for the school 
administration it is a means of 
securing specific results which 
have nothing in common with the 
disinterested enjoyment of an 
aesthetic pleasure. 
Under these circumstances, 
could Unesco fail to use such a 
weapon in the field of interna- 
tional cultural relationships? Ob- 
viously not, and, if we glance 
through the programme. to be 
carried out in 1948, as prescribed 
"by resolutions of the Mexico Con- 
ference, we shall note that music 
has its part therein. 
Music, obviously has an im- 
portant place in study of Art in 
General Education. The impor- 
tance of musical education in 
primary and secondary teaching; 
the musical organisation of uni- 
versity life; the training of spe- 
cialised music-teachers for the 
"schools are all problems which 
Unesco must study, if it is to make 
use, through the student body, of 
this great force, the roots of 
which are sunk so deeply in 
human society. Concrete proposals 
to this end will have to be sub- 
mitted to the governments of 
Member States before the Third 
General Conference and to the 
latter for final consideration. 
Finally, it will be for Unesco 
during 1948 to promote the 
necessary consultations and agree- 
ments for the establishment of an 
International Institute of Music, 
for which a scheme is to be sub- 
mitted to the next Conference at 
Beirut. 
In addition to these three major 
projects, of which one is entirely 
devoted to music, and the other 
two, partly, music has its share in 
the routine activities of Unesco. 
The musicals specialists of the Or- 
ganisation are at the disposal of 
institutions, of creative or execu- 
tant artists, teachers and musico- 
logists from every part of the 
- world as a source of information 
and co-operation in all matters, 
wherever and whenever possible. 
An effective programme of colla- 
boration in the field of music as 
part of a wider programme of 
cultural and spiritual collabora- 
tion, directed towards interna- 
tional understanding, is only 
possible as a result of continuous 
contacts between the centre ins- 
tigating that programme—in this 
case the Arts and Letters work 
of Unesco—and the bodies or in- 
dividuals who are qualified to 
participate in it or who are to be 
influenced by it. 
A project now in hand in Brazil, 
promoted by the Brazilian Insti- 
tute for Education, Science and 
Culture (IBECC), the National 
Commission of Unesco, may serve 
as the model of a concrete pro- 
gramme of co-operation between 
the Organisation and Member 
States. 
The Brazilian Institute has 
decided that every year it would 
have a certain number of Brazi- 
lian orchestral compositions ceo- 
the 
pied with ‘a view io their per- 
formance abroad. The copies will 
be made on paper suitable for 
reproduction, thus permitting the 
printing of new copies of scores 
and duplication of orchestral 
parts at minimum cost. Suppose 
that one of these copies is for- 
warded to Unesco and that other 
countries follow the example and 
in their turn send us copies of the 
musical works most representative 
of their modern composers. We 
should thus collect a repertoire 
steadily fed by new works, which 
would be at the disposal of broad- 
casting stations, symphony or- 
chestras and musical societies in 
every country. 
I know from long experience 
that many such bodies would be 
glad of a chance to play the 
works of composers whose music 
cannot ordinarily be obtained 
commercially, never having been 
published or put in the hands of 
a body competent to ensure its 
distribution even in manuscript. 
In my view the suggested scheme 
would be most welcome in this 
quarter. Composers, provided their 
royalties on performance are 
safeguarded, which is a matter in 
the province of composers’ so- 
cieties, have every reason to 
welcome such a project, Unesco 
would in this way give real held 
to young composers or composers 
unknown outside their own coun- 
tries. . 
Ic seems to me that this exam- 
ple of Brazil points the way to 
wider action to be put in hand in 
the future and after the necessary 
study by Unesco. Heitor Vilia- 
Lobos, the distinguished composer, 
whose work needs no such help, 
since it is already sure of being 
spread throughout the world, ori- 
ginated this proposal, and it has 
been approved by the Brazilian 
Institute for Education, Science 
and Culture. 
Should Unesco take advantage 
of the idea by widening the scope 
and fitting it into an interna- 
tional scheme, ii may meet a need 
of artists all over the world by 
the embodimenf of that need in 
a project which has already been 
adopted by a National Com- 
mission.   
1 IKE the Indian, you have to 
4 make your way up river 
hugging the banks. 
The man leans his weight on 
the pole. The strong current is 
divided by the prow of his craft 
into two arms like his own. 
Yard by yard, the Indian must 
fight his way upstream. 
Thus, as day follows day, we 
slowly learn about the Amazon 
region. What appears from the 
air to be nothing but a uniform 
mass — scarcely broken by the 
winding lines of the rivers, is a 
world in itseif. It encloses all the 
primal forces of nature: it still 
shelters life as it was thousands 
of vears ago. 
The ground is not yet firm. 
The rivers overflow their banks, 
and even the proudest of trees 
tumble, rotting, into the current 
which hss uprooted them. Else- 
where the swamps run dry and 
palm trees rise on all sides. Here, 
animals are still subject to the 
old influences which, ages ago, 
changed the face of the earth. 
Here, in the clearings, men con- 
tinue to live the unhurried life 
of their ancestors. 
This world seems immutable, 
For centuries progress has been 
By = 
BERTRAND FLORNO 
Leader of the French expedi- 
tions to the Upper Amazon 
Area. 1936-37; 1941-42 and 1947     
arrested. The great cities built 
in the jungle by the Brazilians, 
the Peruvians and other Amazon 
nations still stand as the out- 
posts of our civilisation. 
The Amazon cannot be conquer- 
ed with speed. The little know- 
ledge we have today of the region 
has been paid for with the lives 
of generations of explorers, pio- 
neers and adventurers who were 
swallowed up, as it were, by the 
swamps. The numerous docu- 
ments that have been left behind 
are dispersed in different libraries 
  
An Indian family on the banks 


### 73734: Up the Amazon with a French explorer

UP THE AMAZON 
With a French Explorer 
 
and explain so little that every 
traveller who ventures along the 
Indian trails feels naked, isolat- 
ed, defenceless. } ] 
It is simply that this world is 
the realm where life is at its 
darkest level. It is that here, so 
much more than anywhere else, 
life and death are so closely link- 
ed that death leaves no trace. 
Nor is there any trace of those 
great migrations 
which came 
from the East, 
no trace, at any 
rate, worthy of 
© the vast move- 
ments of men 
who sailed up 
‘the river to- 
wards the Cor- 
dillera. The 
remnants; left 
behind — fami- 
lies, clans or tri- 
bes—live in the 
clearings and on 
the shores of 
the lagoons. 
They have for- 
A F.P. Photos. 
of the Amazon. 
re 
  
Unesco Outlines 
Views at U.N. 
Meetings On Free 
Information 
(Continued from Page 1) 
press and radio personnel; it de- 
pends on their breadth of ideas 
and their international under- 
standing. 
A draft resolution on this sub- 
ject proposed by Belgium and sub- 
sequently amended by France was 
adopted unanimously after 
lengthy discussion. It reads: 
“The Conference, taking note of 
the proposal to establish an In- 
ternational Institute of Press and 
Information under the auspices 
of Unesco, considering that such 
an Institute would be conducive 
to the improvement of the quality 
of information, invites Govern- 
ments and professional organisa- 
tions, national and international, 
to co-operate in carrying out this 
proposal after a thorough exami- 
nation of the possibilities of pu‘t- 
ing it into operation.” 
A further resolution, submitted 
by Unesco and amended by the 
Netherlands, was adopted recom- 
manding “the reduction of taxes 
and charges on receiving sets in- 
stalled in schools”. 
Unesco also supported proposaly 
at the Geneva Conference “to 
facilitate the entrance, residence 
and travel of press personnel”; a 
plan for the creation of an inter- 
national press card; and present- 
ed a draft for a convention *o 
facilitate the international circu- 
lation of visual and auditory ma- 
terial of an educational, scientific 
and cultural character 
The Conference is expected jo 
end about April 20. 
1.C.S.U. Scientist 
On Joint Mission 
To Latin America 
Dr. Angel Establier, represen- 
tafive of the International Coun- 
cil of Scientific Unions, will leave 
Paris on April 14 to visit eight 
Latin American countries to en- 
courage greater participation by 
South American scientific societies 
* in international work. 
He will visit the capitals of 
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay and 
Venezuela, meeting with pro- 
minent scientists and strengthen- 
ing liaison between and the work 
of the international scientific 
unions which make up the 1.C.S.U. 
On behalf of Unesco, Dr. Esjb- 
lier will also survey possibilities of 
greater participation by Latin 
American scientists in Unesco’s 
world programme in science. 
From April 30, he will represent 
the 1.C.S.U. at the Conference for 
the Creation of an International 
Institute of the Hylean Amazon. 
at Iquitos, Peru. : 
Unesco and the I.C.S.U. wor 
closely together under the terms 
of an agreement reached last 
year.   


### 73736: Hylean Amazon Conference to open at Iquitos, Peru

Hylean Amazon 
Conference to Open 
At Iquitos, Peru 
The Conference for the Creation 
of an International Institute of 
the Hylean Amazon will officially 
open at Iquitos, Peru, on April 30. 
Iquitos with a population of over 
40,000 inhabitants, is the principal 
city located in the Peruvian re- 
gion of the Hylean Amazon. 
The Conference, to be attended 
by representatives of at least nine 
nations and several international 
organisations, is the result of near- 
ly two years activities by Unesco 
and is regarded as a major step 
towards opening up the vast Hy- 
lean Amazon valley in South 
America. It will meet from April 
30 to May 11. 
The aims of the Institute will be 
to encourage and carry out scien- 
tific studies in the Hylean Amazon 
region (about seven million square 
kilometres in area), so as “to 
provide a greater knowledge and 
understanding of tropical na- 
ture, the practical development of | 
the regions by the Governments of 
Latin America directly concerned 
and as a basis for furthering co- 
operation and understanding on 
an international scale. 
CALENDAR OF CONFERENCES 
  
DATE CONFERENCE PLACE 
« 7 Apri TIOER -Youlh Camp Committee. Parks 
T= - RBapert Committee on Science Abstracling. ud 
12:1 —- Committees of he Permanent Bureau for Co-ordination of - 
International Congresses of Medical Sciences (with WHO), ~ 
23-33 —~ Conference of Organisers of International Voluntary Work - 
Camps. ” 
» = TICER Experts Committee, » 
2-27 — Programme Commilies of Execulive Board, - 
26. 1 May Experts meeting on Fundamental Bducation, ~ 
211 —  Oonference for creation of International Institute of Iquitos 
Mylean Amazon. (Peru)   
gotten the past. The forest 
should be viewed with the 
mind of a ten-year old boy. 
In that way, the {fear that 
it evokes in “rational” people will 
be avoided, fear crowded with 
snakes, fevers, poisoned arrows, 
or at least with the tales told 
about them, The Indian’s feel 
ing toward the forest is the same 
as we have when we are ten years 
of age, towards cities or machines 
—love, distrust... Let us go with 
him into his clearing and visit. 
Ti and his family. 
‘The hours Slip by’ 
Chakavé, his body shaded by 
the palm-leaf roof, his legs in the 
sun, is putting poison on the tips 
of his darts. Vikia, his first wife, 
ig stirring a jarful of manioc pas. 
te she has just been chewing. 
Near the fire, his second wife 
suckles a greasy-skinned little 
. fellow. The motions are ot yester~ 
day—and of tomorrow... Endsa mo- 
ves off to go hunting, his blow- 
pope poised on his shoulder like 
an harquebus. He will return to 
hang the water-fowl or monkey 
he has killed oh the bamboo 
boards, The hours will slip by.. 
Endsa, Ti, Chakavé, with their 
long black hair, their painted fa- 
ces, their loin-cloths, lead the sim- 
ple primitive life of the foresé 
folk. They have no problems eX 
tending beyond family affairs; 
none which is not solved by the 
community as a whole. Their 
most urgent preoccupations seem 
bo 25% with jet hons of hunting 
ishing, housing or '. ry g £ transpor: 
As for other things — those 
things which for us have become 
the essential part of our lives— 
they exist for the Indian only 
emotionally. Endsa, Ti and Cha- 
kavé have no ideas about the 
world; it stirs only their emotions. 
Their strongest effort to break 
away from the power of nature 
Is limited to the practice of ma- 
gic, to a blind belief in the power 
of spells, drugs or ritual murders. 
I believe that it is this depead- 
ence of the Indian on the forest, 
as much as the forest itself, which 
hinders colonization in the Amae 
zon. 
A Labour of Love 
I am speaking, of course, only 
of the last remaining free Indians, 
who constitute no more than a 
tenth of the native population of 
the Amazon region; but it is these 
free Indians who are important, 
since they preserve the dignity 
of their ancestors. 
. Today they are still men, wait- 
ing in the clearings to see what 
the white man will do. Yes, they 
are waiting. You have to under- 
stand Ti, my Jivaro Indian friend, 
when he speaks to me in the sofé, 
soothing voice with which he 
speaks to the domestic animals in 
his hut. 
I believe that the first duty of 
those who are to set out on the 
great adventure in the Amazon 
area, to which Unesco is once 
more opening the way, is to make 
it a labour of love, of love and 
respect for the Indian. Other 
wise, all the work will be in vain,

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073713engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 
 


### 73737: UNESCO surveys university problems

Unesco 
University Problems 
| preparation for the Confer- 
ence of University authorities 
from all over the world to be 
held during the Summer of this 
year, Unesco has invited its enem- 
ber states to submit reports on 
the principal problems which 
they encounter at present in the 
field of higher education. 
A preliminary survey, carried 
out by the Education Section of 
Unesco, shows a notable measure 
of agreement as to what these 
problems are; first of all there is 
an increase in the number of 
university students since the end 
of the war. The selection of stu- 
dents best able to profit by higher 
education and the finding of 
sufficient professors to provide it 
presents the greatest difficulty; 
attempts to hold the balance in 
the development of the different 
faculties is disturbed by pressure 
from outside forces whether offi- 
cial or unofficial 
‘ As the university population 
increases a new problem arises; 
hitherto a university education 
has been made available to an 
elite—whether of money or of 
brains. Now, the tendency is to 
make available higher education 
to everybody desirous of it—with 
a corresponding increase in the 
size of classes, etc, which may 
reduce standards of quality. 
Another recent change has 
been that in the connection bet- 
ween general or academic educa- 
tion and technical or professional 
training. 
‘In Unesco’s survey it is observ- 
ed that: 
“Historically, the function of 
the universities has been to pro- 
vide a liberal, or literary or 
humanistic education. With the 
increasing specialisation, typical 
of the modern world, there has 
been super-imposed upon this 
old and accepted ideal, a demand 
for the provision of personnel 
with special skills, to be acquired 
in advanced courses... the prob- 
lem as it now appears is whether 
the apnarent clash between old- 
established and accepted ideals, 
and the demands coming from 
the industrial and economic world 
for special forms of skill can be 
reconciled. In what can one 
attempt to combine the virtues 
of the old liberal education with 
the requirements of economic life 
in the world of to-day?” 
The intervention of the state 
or private bodies in university 
life affects, and will affect still 
further the traditional autonomy 
and freedom from state authority 
of the universities themselves; 
apart from what may be con- 
sidered the first priorities of 
universities from the point of. 
view of output of trained men 
and women, the rapid growth of 
the universities involves a situa- 
tion in which the state is increas- 
A — 
Surveys 
ingly called upon to help the 
universities expand. : 
“In doing so” Unesco poinis 
out “it naturally claims a certain 
measure of control over the ex- 
penditure of the funds allocat-   ed.” 
“In some countries, private; 
sources, such as wealthy indivi-| 
duals or great industrial corpora- 
tions, support or subsidise certain 
schools of the university, or cer- 
tain subjects. To some extent, 
the university's policy is thereby 
affected, since developments take 
place, not in the light of an aca- 
demically agreed policy, but 
rather in response to pressures 
or opportunities emanating from 
-outside. Specifically, the problems 
arising here have to do with the® 
methods by which university 
activities are financed, and the 
methods by which the adminis- 
tration determines expenditures, 
The practices in operation in va- 
rious parts of the world vary 
from full specific control of the 
university by the state, through 
the much less rigid methods used 
in France, through the ingenious 
mechanism of the University 
Grants Committee in the United 
“Kingdom to the methods used in 
the private universities found in 
the United States. . Co 
“In this complicated area of 
university development, the de- 
sirability, from the point of view 
of public policy, of a balance 
between public support and auto- 
nomy in university governance 
becomes a central issue. Is it 
possible to combine increasing 
amounts of public support with 
a legitimate degree of university 
autonomy? Answers to this ques- 
tion are related to the very basis 
of the role of the university in 
the modern world.” 
  
" International 
Universities 
Bureau Discussed 
About 100 university teachers 
and professors from 22 nations 
met in Paris between March 31 
and April 3 to discuss the creation 
of an International Universities 
Bureau, the foundation of a World 
University, the problem of equiva- 
lence of degrees and diplomas 
and the contribution which the 
universities of the world can 
make to better democratic citi 
zenship. 
The Conference was sponsored 
-by the International Association 
of University Professors and Lec- 
turers. Unesco was represented by 
Professor J. A. Lauwerys, consul- 
tant in education. Unesco is 
encouraging the work of this or- 
ganisation and has granted it a 
subsidy to study the problems of 
equivalence of degrees and school: 
grading systems. The LAU.PL,   will prepare a report for Unesco 
on these questions. 
  
“BUSINESS WEEK” (U.S.A), 
March 6, 1948. 
An article entitled “Cracking 
ihe Amazon Basin” states in pari: 
“ “Sir Arthur Conan Doyle novel- 
ized the mysteries cf the Amazon 
Basin in “The Lost World”. He 
saw it as a fanciful plateau where 
plerodactyls, dinosaurs, and other 
prehistoric monsters had escaped 
extinction. Now a full-scale ex- 
ploration of this unknown region 
is being launched by the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific & 
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). 
In its inventory of the resources 
of the vast jungle, UNESCO's ad- 
venturers don’t expect to add any 
hundred-ton brontosauri to the 
world’s meat supply. But their 
object is to make this wasteland 
carry its load in feeding the world 
and supplying its raw industrial 
material. = Co 
Dr. Paulo Carneiro, Brazilian 
biologist and delegate to UNESCO, 
set the ‘theme of the program. 
In proposig the campaign, he said 
hat if the Amazon could be 
brought into food production it - 
“to sup- would enable the world 
port its population’ . 
“THE MAINICHI” (Tokyo), 
January 25, 1948. 
An Editorial entitled “The Unes- 
co Movement”, states: . - 
© “The Osaka Unesco Cooperative 
Society was formally launched on 
January 22. Similar societies have 
already been formed in Sendai, 
Kyoto, and Kobe. Active prepara- 
tions are under way for the es- 
tablishment of Unesco units in 
Tokyo, Nagoya, Hiroshima, Wa- 
kayama, and other key cities. 
“The progress of the Unesco 
movement in Japan should never 
be considered as an expedient and 
“short-cut” route for Japan's re- 
entry into the socieiy of nations. 
It should be a sober and measured 
movement for the fostering of 
true and strong lovers of peace, 
rather than the seeking after of 
resplendent developments.” 
“SYNTHESES” 
10. 1948. 
Paul de Visscher writes: 
“Of the many critical state- 
ments made about Unesco there 
is one that we consider vital for 
the future of Unesco, and that 
demands an immediate change 
of policy within the Organisation. 
Unesco seems to have been 
working too exclusively isolated 
from the world without. Few 
real contacts have been made 
between Unesco and centres of a 
truly scientific character: uni- 
versities, academies and learned 
societies. Amongst these groups 
Unesco is losing prestige. Although 
Unesco is an inter-governmental 
organisation it must work with 
the scientific groups. Only there 
can it hope to find the men and 
the ideas which will permit it to 
live and develop.” 
(Belgium) No. 
BRIEF NEWS OF UNESCO IN ACTION 
French National 
Commission 
For Unesco Holds 
First Meeting 
The first plenary conference of 
the newly-created French Na- 
tional Commission for Unesco 
Paris, on March 17, was held at 
the Quai d'Orsay. The meeting 
was attended by Dr. Julian Hux- 
ley, Director-General of Unesco, 
M. Paul Montel, member of the 
Academy of Sciences, was elected 
President of the Commission. 
Other members elected to office 
included: 
M, Jules Romains of the Aca- 
démie Francaise, as Chairman of 
the Arts and Letters Committee; 
M. Paul Rivet, Director of the 
Musee de I'Homme, as chairman 
of the Social Sciences Committee; 
M. Emile Borel, member of the 
Institut, as Chairman of the 
Natural Sciences Committee; 
M. Henri Wallon, President of 
the French Pedagogical Society, 
as Chairman of the Education 
Committee; 
M. Julien Cain, General Ad- 
ministrator of the National Li- 
brary, as Chairman of the Libra- 
ries and Museums Committee; 
M. Marcel Abraham, Inspector- 
General of Public Instruction, as 
Chairman of the Technical and 
Information Committee, 
The nearly one hundred mem- 
bers of the French National Com- 
miasion are regarded as composing - 
the leading intellectual group 
of France. ’ 
Unesco Distributes 
1,000 Books 
to Medical Libraries 
Nearly a thousand volumes of medical 
books and periodicals have been dis- 
tributed through Unesco during the past 
two months to libraries in eight war- 
desvastated countries. The literature 
was donated by the Army Medical 
Library of Washington and the Vander- 
‘bilt University School of Medicine 
Library, Nashville, Tennessee. 
Fifteen libraries were the beneficiaries 
of the books which were solicited 
through the Unesco Clearing House of 
Publications. 
. * * * 
Foreign Students 
to Visit Unesco 
A series of three receptions will 
be held a{ Unesco House on April 8, 22 
and May 13, for foreign students 
studying in Paris. 
The April 8 gathering will be wel- 
comed by Deputy Director Walter H. C. 
Laves to be followed by a series of 16 
minute talks 
Unesco’s work. 
E. Gabriel, a native of Haiti ana 
Unesco's Programme specialist on Fun- 
damental Education will speak on the 
Pilot Project in Fundamental Education 
in Haiti followed by a 15 minute docu- 
mentary film on Haiti. The Head of 
Unesco’s Reconstruction Section, Mr, B. 
Drzewieski, will outline the work of the 
Organisation in the field of Reconstruc- 
tion. Dr. L, Grimmet will speak on the 
Hylean Amazon and other aspects of 
of Unesco’s scientific activities, 
im various aspects of 
  
 
ternationalism of Scholarship” 
I. L. Kandel writes: co 
“Those who have a responsibi- 
lity for the advancement of 
scholarship and learning cannot 
live in isolation from scholars in 
countries other than their own, 
nor can they evade all responsi- 
bility for the influence that their 
contributions may exercise on the 
progress of humanity. Sir Alfred 
Zimmern some lwenty years ago 
pointed out in his “Learning and 
Leadership” that a teacher must 
not only be familiar with the work 
of foreign scholars in his field, 
but should also have an interna- 
tional outlook and international 
experience. 
“Scholars, like creative writers 
and artists, cannot wholly escape 
the influences of their own par- 
ticular environment. This faci 
alone would prevent the develop- 
ment of uniformity and stan- 
dardization in the intellectugl life 
of the world. Difference in na- 
tional character and ethics may 
result in making the world «a 
great experimental laboratory, 
with each nation attacking prob- 
lems common to the world in ils 
own way, but utilizing ideas and 
methods that may come from 
other nations. 
“UNESCO, if it. should wunder- 
take to stress the importance of 
an international outlook and the 
contributions of the scholar to 
human progress, would be far 
more successful than any single 
world university that~is proposed, 
For leadership of UNESCO as a 
co-ordinating body or clear- 
ing house for university affairs 
would not only advance that in- 
tellectual and moral solidarity, 
which is the basis of peace, but 
could more directly promote co- 
operation among the universities 
of the world on problems of 
world-wide human interest.” 
of Unesco. 
Kléber, Paris-16e, France. 
Castle Street, — Cardiff: 
Tower Lane. 
Low Countries:   
SUBSCRIPTION RATES 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly in English, 
French and Spanish by the Public Information Section 
6-month subscription: 2s.6d. or $0.50 or Fr. frs. 60. 
Please write to the Unesco agent indicated below for 
your country, or directly to Unesco House, 19 Avenue 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos-Aires. 
Australia: H, A. Goddard Ltd, 255a, George St. Sydney. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West, Toronto. 
- Cuba: La Casa Belga, R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana, 
} Czechoslovakia : Librairie F, Topic, 11 Narodni, Prague. 
Denmark : Einar Murksgaard, 6 Norregade, Copenhagen, 
Great Britain: H.M, Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service) ; P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.1, (Post 
orders). — Manchester 2: 33/41 King Street. — Edinburgh 2: 13a 
1 St. Andrew's Crescent, — Bristol 1: 
— Belfast: 80 Chichester 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot, Paris, 5e. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale. Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie, Booksellers, The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle, Av. Fouad Ier, Beirut. 
N.V. Martinus 
9 Lange Voorhout, The Hague. 
Sweden: Ab, C. E_ Fritzes, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot, Lausanne, 
Street. 
Nijhoff, Afd., Fondsaministratie   
“In an interview granted by Dr. 
Corner to the “Correio da Manha”, 
Dr. Corner has identified himself 
so closely with the project tha! he 
seems more Brazilian than En- 
glish; so great is the interest and 
devotion he has shown in the 
success of this enterprise. The 
measured, judicious words of Sr. 
Corner should be carefully con- 
sidered by the public authorities 
of Brazil. 
“The Hylean Amazon can be- 
come a subject of popular interest, 
If this is 10 be achieved the 
project must be defined as what 
it really is: a boom for Brazilian 
science. The studies of the Insti- 
tute will be highly advantageous 
for Brazil. We must have done, 
therefore, with the indifference 
which is noticeable in certain ins- 
tances concerning this project ini- 
tiated by the famed Brazilian 
scientist Paulo Carneiro.” 
“THE SCHOOL GOVERNMENT 
CHRONICLE AND EDUCATION 
REVIEW” (England) February 
1948. 
In an article entitled “Central 
Bureau for Educational Visits and 
Exchanges”, this Review says: 
“The Ministry of education an- 
nounce that a Central Bureau for 
Educational Visils and Exchanges 
is to be established as soon as 
possible... 
- The first function of the Bu- 
reau will be to inform itself of 
the activities of the many agen- 
cies in this and other countries, 
concerned with educational visits 
and exchanges and to co-Operate 
with them as may be desirable. 
It will be in a position to advise 
the Ministry of Education, the 
local education authorities, teach- 
ers and voluntary organisations, 
and it is contemplated further 
that the Bureau will supplement 
the work of existing agencies 
where necessary, by undertaking 
responsability itself for the neces- 
sary arrangements... 
The Educational Cooperating 
Body for Unesco in the United 
Kingdom which was set up nearly 
a year ago, undertook, ds ome 
of its first tasks, the planning 
and establishment of such a Bu- 
reau, Even before the war the 
necessity of a national agency jor 
these purposes, such as exists in 
some other European countries, 
had become apparent; and when 
Unesco came into existence it was 
evident that educational visits 
and exchanges would become a 
feature of the post war world. 
The Co-operaling Body set up a 
Committee under the Chairman- 
ship of Mr. Ronald Gould, the 
General Secretary of the N.U.T., 
to work out a scheme for such 
an organisation and {0 proceed 
with its establishment...” 
Reproduction of all articles authorised. 
Director : H. KAPLAN 
IMPRIMERIE 
DU NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE 
21. Rue de Berri - Paris 8e¢