# [020805](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
The 2s. A window ores on the world 
mC ourier 
November 1966 (19th year) U.K.: 1/6-stg. - Canada: 30 cents - France: 1 F 
  _ tr NEM ——— I HT - —-— yw 
    = i a 
Goa WR 
Rg AES 
rng ag x ‘ . 
io EE ae  - = : 
i aS 
rl Pa ae 
    
    
  
» 
he” © 
   
3 
- 
GLOBAL 
~ ASSAULT —ot : 
~~ ON THE WORLD'S : 
~~ WEATHER 
  
   Lu | b 
y : : : : 3 
LVR. ly ~ TAY LE NTN 1 NL - - 
. \ ‘ ruts SHO wd Sie Sy i. 
R SUNY 25 wl TE 2 8S TE oad To 2 RAK SES

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

a
 
  
    
  
    
    
TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART 
10, 
Horseman of Kafiristan 
This wooden statue is one of 
many graveyard effigies found 
in Kafiristan, northeastern 
Afghanistan. Surprisingly, 
the Kafirs, who live in the 
high valleys of the Hindu 
Kush mountains, keep no 
horses and rarely see them. 
They prop the effigies against 
the wooden funeral caskets 
that lie above ground in 
their cemeteries. Standing 
over two metres (614 ft.) high, 
this figure wears a traditional 
costume—embroidered 
trousers, belted blouse 
and pointed turban. 
Kabul Muscum 
Photo Unesco - Cart

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"mCourier 
  
  
Page 
NOVEMBER 1966 -19TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
4 
English 
French 
Spanish 12 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 17 
Japanese 
Italian 
24 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7°. 30 
Annual subscription rates: 15/-stg.: $3.00 
(Canada); 10 French francs or equivalent; 
2vyears: 27/-stg.; 18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.: 
30 cents; 1 F. - 
* 33 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in July and August when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese and Italian. In the United Kingdom it is distributed 
by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.El. 34 
Individual erticles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 2 
will be supplied on request, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER, 
TELEVISION FOR THE PRE-SCHOOL CHILD 
By Henry R. Cassirer 
By lbne Insha 
GLOBAL ASSAULT ON THE WEATHER 
By Robert L .Munteanu 
THE WORLD OF THE 
COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE 
By Arthur C. Clarke 
HURDLES IN SPACE BROADCASTING 
By Nicolai I. Tchistiakov 
WORLD'S TALLEST TOWER 
Moscow's 1,700-ft. high television transmitter 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Horseman of Kafiristan   The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literatures, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chjef 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelii 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hlustrations: Betsy Bates 
Research: Olga Rodel 
Layout & Design: Robert Jacquemin 
Allcorrespondance should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief 
 
Ne
 
11
 
- 
19
66
 
M
C
 
66
-1
-2
18
 
A 
 
Cover photo 
The launching of the world's first weather satellite in 1960 opened a new era 
in metsoralody. Weather forecasting and exploration of the atmosphere can 
now be based on data obtained promptly and on a truly global scale. But even 
today only one-quarter of the surface of the globe has enough meteorological 
stations. To fill the gaps in the present weather observation network, the 
World Meteorological Organization is planning a bold new adventure in inter- 
national co-operation—the World Weather Watch. 
READING HABITS AND PUBLISHING IN ASIA 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
A
P
N
 
—
 
A.
 
V
a
r
f
o
l
e
m
e
e
y

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

TELEVISION 
FOR THE 
PRE-SCHO £ 
CHILD 
by Henry R. Cassirer 
| N Venezuela and Japan, in 
Czechoslovakia and the 
United States, special programmes are 
broadcast by television stations for 
children in kindergartens. In Britain 
tiny tots are asked to “Watch With 
Mother”, while in New Mexico, in the 
United States, where there are no 
public kindergartens, the “TV Kinder- 
garten” takes their place in many a 
home and community. Pre-school chil- 
dren tend to watch television whenever 
there is a receiver in the home, and 
educators are becoming increasingly 
aware of the importance of the tele- 
vision experience in the lives of young 
children. 
 
But why should special efforts be 
made to reach children between the 
ages of two and six with television 
programmes? 
Experience indicates two types of 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6 
  
HENRY R. CASSIRER is in charge of the 
educational use of mass media in Unesco’s 
Department of Mass Communication. He 
is the author of “Television Teaching To- 
day" (Unesco, 1960; price: $3.00, 15/-stg.). Ph
ot
o 
© 
IP
N 
- 
Je
an
 
Su
qu
et
 
- 
Pi
er
re
 
Al
la
rd
 
AREAS LR walls a -" . Cr AY ET

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

TELEVISION (Continued) 
Wonderland through the ‘looking-glass’ 
answers to this question. On the one 
hand, it is argued that in countries 
which offer massive television pro- 
grammes by day and night, children 
inevitably are attracted to the screen 
and see many shows either not suited 
to their age or of doubtful value. The 
moving image on the TV screen exerts 
a fascination quite independent of the 
content of programmes. This fre- 
quently tempts parents to use TV as a 
baby sitter; they urge their children to 
“watch the tele” in order to have them 
out of the way when they would like 
to get on with the housework. Under 
these circunmstances, it is particularly 
valuable to present programmes care- 
fully prepared and adapted -to the 
young ones in order to meet their 
hunger for TV and to give them a sense 
of values and discrimination with res- 
pect to the majority of unsuitable 
shows. 
Those who argue this way unques- 
tionably have the child's interest in 
mind; but this is essentially a negative 
approach: let's have TV programmes 
for the young ones, because we can't 
keep them away from television 
anyway. 
A more fundamental reason- 
ing stresses the important 
positive contribution which television 
is able to make in order to “develop 
the world within the child and fami- 
liarize it with the world around”, as 
the producers of one series of pro- 
grammes put it. This approach sees 
in television one of the tools to attack 
one of the basic sources of social 
inequality in our time, the great dispa- 
rity among children of school age 
between those who come from well- 
to-do homes and a cultured back- 
ground and those who bring with them 
the social and cultural deprivation of 
their home. 
Rather than difference in intelligence, 
it is difference in background which 
gives rise to the greatest problems in 
elementary education, prevents chil- 
dren from rising above the social status 
of their parents, and deprives them of 
the equality of opportunity through 
education—one of the fundamental 
objectives of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. 
The underprivileged suffer handicaps 
knowledge—certain words, ideas, hab- 
its— fall behind in their work and may 
take as long as five years to complete 
the third grade”, stated a leading edu- 
cator from one of the cities of the 
American Midwest. 
Her point of view is shared all 
around the world. Children who come 
to school with a very limited voca- 
bulary and with no idea of the way 
nature and the man-made world look 
beyond their restricted experience 
Photo © Rapho - Limot 
in urban slums or on a poverty- 
stricken farm, are unable to benefit 
from education to the same degree 
as children who have been more widely 
exposed to social and cultural experi- 
ences. It is here that the audiovisual 
media of communication, and especially 
television, become significant forces 
for the democratization of opportuni- 
ties. 
It is generally recognized that inborn 
intelligence is no more than a potential 
 
of both body and mind in the race 
through life. “Children need certain 
basic knowledge to profit even from 
kindergarten; children lacking this 
In the past decade special efforts have been made to reach 
children between the ages of two and six with television programmes. 
Well-planned programmes have proved to be effective helpers 
for the kindergarten teacher, and regular use Is made of them in some schools.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

to be cultivated. Without stimulation 
and education, particularly during the 
early formative years, such an intelli- 
gence is lost for the future. There is 
need, therefore, for a systematic edu- 
cational programme for pre-school 
children and a more intensive effort 
by both parents and educational insti- 
tutions; television can effectively assist 
such a programme. 
While the basic objectives of pre- 
school education are similar in most 
countries, the degree to which such 
education is carried by the home or the 
kindergarten varies not only (or 
perhaps mainly) between nations, but 
primarily between social classes and 
conditions of cultural environment. The 
role of television must thus equally 
vary in different conditions. 
In Venezuela the Audio Visual Centre 
of the Ministry of Education produces 
a programme entitled En el Jardin de 
Infancia. It is transmitted, via the facil- 
ities of a commercial station, primarily 
for use in kindergartens, but also for 
the benefit of individual families, to 
raise the standards and opportunities 
not only in Caracas but equally (or 
perhaps more particularly) in smaller 
communities. 
The programmes seek to assist kin- 
dergarten teachers and parents in 
activities aimed at developing psycho- 
logical functions and manual skills of 
children. 
JP rocrammes are deve- 
loped in close collabo- 
ration with the kindergarten teachers 
and designed for follow-up action in 
the group under the guidance of the 
teacher and through the stimulation of 
individual activities, 
These programmes have been pro- 
duced continuously since 1960, and 
many government and private schools 
in Caracas, as well as in other parts 
of the country have spontaneously 
bought receivers so they could benefit 
from these broadcasts. Their effective- 
ness is evident from an opinion survey 
among kindergarten teachers who 
reported: 
“Attendance has become better. 
Efficiency in manual skills has improv- 
ed. Vocabulary is richer and more 
correct. Collaboration... and compre- 
hension are enhanced. 
“ Television has helped to develop 
sight and hearing, to exercise memory 
and to stimulate attention. It has in- 
fluenced the children’s behaviour.” 
Kindergarten teachers recognize 
that the programmes are of value not 
only to the children, but to their own 
professional training. As so often in 
educational television, programmes 
which appear to be designed principally 
for child audiences are in fact of 
supreme value ° in the in-service 
training of teachers. Typical is a letter 
from one of the kindergarten teachers 
to the television teacher in Caracas: 
“I have learned a good deal thanks 
to you and your programme. | have 
taught the children what | learned and 
now | can teach with enthusiasm. 
Professionally, | have learned a num- 
ber of practical and useful techniques 
for teaching children of pre-school age 
—techniques which were entirely un- 
known to me.” 
  
M ANY of the values noted 
in these reports from Vene- 
zuelan teachers are echoed in other 
parts of the world. Expansion of the 
child's vocabulary, broadening of his 
horizon, stimulation of manual skills 
and of creative activities are key ob- 
jectives of kindergarten teaching which 
can be directly served by television. 
In Japan, the public broadcasting 
corporation, NHK, presents a total of 
10 hours 15 minutes per week of pro- 
grammes specially aimed at children 
under six years. Commercial stations 
also have regular programmes for the 
very young ones. NTV carries some 
11 hours a week of broadcasts primar- 
ily designed to entertain children 
through cartoons, quizzes, puppets, au- 
dience participation and physical exer- 
cises. NET, the commercial educa- 
tional station, has three programmes of 
70 minutes each (with three repeats) 
per week which follow the official 
kindergarten curriculum and show to 
the children fairy tales and folklore 
from Japan and other countries through 
dramatic presentations, teach them 
good manners and etiquette, and 
enhance rhythmical education through 
singing and dancing. 
In Japan television is popular with 
both children and teachers. Throughout 
Japan 82.19%, of kindergartens and 
71.6%, of nursery schools have receiv- 
ers, and a survey in 1964 indicated 
that the rate of utilizing NHK program- 
mes was 73.5%, in kindergartens and 
88.29, in nursery schools. 
At a recent regional conference of 
the National Federation of the Society 
for Study of Educational Broadcasts at 
Kittakyushu, | pointedly queried some 
one hundred kindergarten teachers 
about the value of using television. 
Does it not tend to create passivity 
among children rather than active 
expression? And does not the rela- 
tively poor quality with which scenes 
of nature and distant places are repro- 
duced on the TV screen provoke dis- 
tortions in the mind of the child and 
impair their value? 
Both arguments were recognized as 
valid but by no means inevitable prob- 
lems. Programme producers are 
conscious of the importance of stimu- 
lating classroom activities. Captain 
Do-re-mi-fa, for instance, a musical 
show designed for the musical educa- 
tion of children, aims particularly to 
inspire interest in music and to let 
children move and play in response to 
music. Rhythmical education is con-. 
sidered of key importance in Japan for 
both pre-school and school children, 
and believed essential for body control 
and the development of a harmonious 
personality. Here radio also proves of 
great value, and many of the kinder- 
gartens which receive TV programmes, 
also use their radio receiver for music- 
al programmes and story telling. 
As to the lack of full reality in pro- 
grammes which show nature and social 
scenes, it was pointed out that many 
children in the sprawling cities of 
industrial Japan had few other oppor- 
tunities to see more than their imme- 
diate surroundings. Teachers stressed 
the importance of familiarizing children 
with unfamiliar scenes, for they arouse 
natural curiosity and create a sense 
of familiarity which enlarges the voca- 
bulary and provides notions of the 
world around which are of great value 
to the child in preparation for more 
systematic learning at a later age. 
T HE home situation is the 
primary target of the BBC 
in Great Britain. Watch With Mother 
may well be the oldest television pro- 
gramme still regularly broadcast over 
the same national network. Five of 
its six series of 26 films were produced 
between 1952 and 1955, and have been 
repeated regularly ever since. Few 
British children today have not grown 
up with Andy Pandy, the puppet small 
child dressed in “clown” clothes who 
plays with toys, sings and dances like 
a three-year old with his companion 
teddy bear. Other familiar figures of 
early childhood fantasies on television 
are the Flowerpot men and the glove 
puppets, Rag, Tag and Bobtail. While 
most of these programmes appeal to 
the young child's love for stories and 
an imaginary world, a film series made 
in Canada using real animals to act 
stories of a colony of small animals 
(hamster, rat, frog, etc.) called The 
Tales of the Riverbank, is also very 
popular. 
A more distinctly educational pur- 
pose is served by Play School, a daily 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

TELEVISION (Continued) 
‘Much that portends of a halo’ 
25-minute programme aimed primarily 
at the child at home but ready for nur- 
sery school. The eavesdropping au- 
dience goes down to two-year olds and 
includes over a million regular adult 
viewers. Children with parents, family 
groups and nursery schools watch— 
but the target remains the intelligent 
four-year old sitting alone in front 
of the set. 
The purpose is to stimulate the child 
with ideas and information which affect 
him not only during the programme but 
long afterwards. There is, in fact, 
impressive evidence of long-term 
follow-up activities—art work (the BBC 
receives a steady supply of paintings 
for the Play School picture board), 
singing, imaginative games and prac- 
tical play. 
A report from the producer observes 
that “Play School tries to offer a child 
at this crucial stage of its develop- 
ment a wider range of subject matter 
and a richer canvas of people than 
has been customary in past children’s 
television programmes for this age 
range. It takes into account the limit- 
ations—restricted terms of reference; 
small vocabulary; shorter span of con- 
centration—but it makes no concession 
apart from this. Talking down is a sin. 
False attitudes are stamped on. The 
child under five is gullible and all tao 
easily influenced for good or bad. Our 
responsibility, therefore, lies in not 
taking advantage of this but assuming 
a taste and discrimination in the under- 
five which, like a rather frail flower, can 
respond to the hands of the right 
gardener.” 
Te gullibility of young 
children is of primary con- 
cern to the producers of programmes, 
An American student of communica- 
tions has suggested that “a child's 
early exposure to television, regard- 
less of the content, contains much 
that portends of a halo. It is all 
good. It amuses, entertains, and 
watches over the child. The child, left 
to his own devices, makes indiscri- 
minate use of the medium. When he 
is good, he is rewarded with more 
exposure; when bad, he is often 
punished by denied use. From these 
kinds of contacts, standards, tastes and 
discriminations find no formative 
roots.” Hence the particular respon- 
sibility of those who seek no more 
than to attract and amuse the child 
audience in order to reach a wide 
audience for commercial publicity. 
But there are pitfalls on both sides, 
as has been found in countries, such as 
Australia, where commercial and non- 
commercial programmes compete for 
the audience. A primarily purposeful, 
didactic approach may fail to Involve 
the child sufficiently to make an impact 
on a large portion of the audience. A 
primarily entertainment approach may 
fail to leave a constructive impact. 
How to balance both approaches is an 
issue which faces the television direc- 
tor, and not only in the sphere of pro- 
gramming for pre-school children. 
This competitive situation is of parti- 
cular significance to the United States. 
Among the commercially most success- 
ful programmes is Romper Room 
whose format is also distributed to 
many other countries. The programme 
emphasizes the. involvement of chil- 
dren, not only on the receiving end but 
in the studio itself. 
S OME educators feel that to 
show little children acting 
out their games in front of the camera 
is not desirable, that it impairs the 
educational impact and leads children 
to show off rather than to express 
themselves quietly and creatively as 
individuals. Others welcome this ap- 
proach as an inducement to the wat- 
ching children to participate in the 
action. 
Romper Room suggests many activi- 
ties which help keep the youngster 
physically fit, and develop his mind 
and social adjustment. To familiarize 
the child with natural and social 
scenes, and thus to enlarge his horizon 
and vocabulary, the programme uses 
films, pictures and objects to show 
foreign lands, interesting professions, 
as well as animal life. To develop 
“reading-readiness” among children, 
they are taught to recognize and draw 
letters and numbers, play a game called 
“Look 'N' See”, as well as a word 
game called “Words and Sounds” to 
increase their vocabulary. 
Here is a slick production designed 
to attract, amuse and instruct young 
viewers and, incidentally, also to sell 
merchandise. On the other side of 
American television are the non-com- 
mercial educational television stations 
which make special efforts to provide 
programmes which are of value to the 
children and their parents alike. 
Notable among the many program- 
mes produced by these stations is 
TV Kindergarten produced at Albu- 
querque, New Mexico. In this state 
the need for some new form of pre- 
school education is so evident that 
many of the usual reservations 
about the use of television seem 
to fail by the wayside. The people 
of this state have a trilingual culture; 
the basic language of children who 
enter school is English, Spanish or 
one of the American Indian langua- 
ges, and this diversity in linguistic 
and social backgrounds poses a 
particular problem for the school 
system. Another problem arises be- 
cause the state covers a large but 
sparsely populated area. There are 
no public kindergartens in New Mexico 
and much of the population could not 
take advantage of them even if they 
were offered. 
To meet these educational problems 
of cultural diversity and dispersal of 
population is one of the primary pur- 
poses of the TV classroom which 
reaches many remote areas and makes 
proper conditioning for school passi- 
ble. The programme seeks to prepare 
the pre-school youngster for his first 
school year. Using the standard kin- 
dergarten curriculum as a backbone, 
the programme is prepared with the 
advice of the educational authorities 
and stimulates the child in reading 
development, linguistic ability, number 
ability and social readiness. 
"Recognizing the limitations of only 
30 minutes per day with the children,” 
adds the report from New Mexico, 
“emphasis is placed on assisting 
parents to meaningfully guide the child 
after the programme is completed. 
Each project is designed to use inex- 
pensive, readily available materials. 
Thus, parent education is an important 
adjunct to the series.” 
A sence of public kinder- 
gartens, especially in the 
lower income parts of American cities, 
is a problem all over the United States 
and particularly in the large, urban 
areas of the eastern states. Here, 
educational television finds one of 
its most important tasks. Station 
WQED in Pittsburgh produces three 
times a week a semi-instructional 
series of programmes for the pre- 
school child entitled QED Kindergar- 
ten. The programme was started in 
1963 and is regularly used by fifteen 
other eastern U.S. stations as well as 
in Chicago and San Francisco. Here, 
too the station co-operates closely 
with kindergarten teachers and child 
development authorities in the elab- 
oration of the programme and the selec- 
tion of the teacher who presents it in

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

i 
5 
Television can introduce 
the young child to 
knowledge of all kinds, 
from drawing and music 
to the mysteries of Nature 
and the marvels 
of science. It is often 
through television 
that children in great 
industrial cities first 
learn to appreciate the 
beauties of the 
countryside. In certain 
regions, such as 
New Mexico, television 
programmes prepared with 
the help of teachers 
help to overcome the 
special problem of a 
trilingual population. In 
Czechoslovakia, traditional 
puppet shows help to 
stimulate artistic and 
mental activity. Right, 
a Czech puppet introduces 
some cartoon personalities. 
Photo © Loutkovy film, Prague 
front of the camera. Regular feed-back 
of reactions from children, parents and 
school authorities helps to steer the 
programme towards its main objective, 
to inform and shape the mind of the 
young child, and to draw on entertain- 
ment and amusement to the extent that 
it serves to enhance this purpose. 
All aboard with Mr. Be, another pro- 
gramme produced by educational tele- 
vision in Memphis, Tennessee, is de- 
signed to prepare the pre-school child 
for the first grade and aid in the maxi- 
mum development of his potential. This 
programme is presented in a nostalgic 
18th century setting built around the 
romance and exciting mobility of trains, 
with Mr. Be holding forth as the former 
engineer of the olden days who now 
lives in a combination train depot and 
general store. The store is filled with 
interesting junk, pictures and pets, and 
the train is a replica of a famous 
Civil War train “The General.” 
One hundred and eighty-three pro- 
grammes have been recorded on 
videotape, many of which introduce the 
children to new sights and facts. One 
day Mr. Be demonstrates with a home- 
made steam engine how steam is able 
to move a train, and tells the story of 
railroads up to a modern diesel passen- 
ger train. On another day, he explains 
how clocks tell “when” and “how 
long”, and how in earlier times people 
used to tell time by the sun and the 
moon. Visits to a shoemaker or a gro- 
cery store, to lions who live in the 
jungle or to the bird house in the zoo, 
bring knowledge and new words to the 
young ones. How electricity is a friend 
of man when controlled, but a danger- 
ET RE TT 
-* 
3 
* Tr 
-v. 
ous enemy children must beware of 
and follow important safety rules, is 
another of the many topics of this in- 
structive programme. 
One of the arguments against tele- 
vision for children is that it will keep 
them from reading, from seeking their 
own information at their own pace and 
choice. But experience has shown that 
television, whether for adults or chil- 
dren, can be as much a stimulator of 
reading as a distracting, deadening 
force. It is a matter of how TV is used 
and how it relates to books. In France, 
television has for many years carried 
a weekly programme for adults and 
a companion programme for children 
in which new books and authors are 
introduced to the large television 
public. 
The impact of these programmes is 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

10 
TELEVISION (Continued) 
Fan mail from 
the kindergarten 
shown by the eagerness with which 
publishers try to get. their books 
discussed on them. Similarly, tele- 
vision in the United States has also 
been a stimulator of reading; many 
programmes for young children are 
direct TV adaptations of books and 
thus contribute directly to their sale 
or borrowing in public libraries. 
Picture Book Parade is a series of 
films directly based on the illustrations 
and text of well-known children’s 
books. Through slow close-up photo- 
graphy, with the camera panning over 
pictures, picking up detail or showing 
the entire scene, and with the accom- 
paniment of music and text, these 
films are a simplified, slow type of 
animation whose pace is suited to the 
rhythm of child viewers. Local stations 
use these films, or produce their own 
visual book reports, as part of regular 
programmes for school and pre-school 
children. These programmes, enter- 
taining in themselves, induce children 
to get hold of the books so they can 
look at them, or read them if they 
have already learned to do so. 
R E-READING or re-viewing 
of the familiar is particu- 
larly satisfying to children, just as they 
love to hear the same story over and 
over again. Many television produ- 
cers labour under the fallacious as- 
sumption that only novelty counts and 
consider it contrary to the style of 
the medium to repeat themselves. 
But that is not the way children see 
it. “My five-year-old has been asking 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
BB
C,
 
Lo
nd
on
 
me to write for weeks to ask you if 
we could see ‘Red Carpet’ again,” 
writes a mother from Ithaca, New 
York, “We enjoyed the other stories 
too and would like to see them all 
again and then some new ones.” 
If television does not provide an 
opportunity to see the story again, the 
book does. And so many mothers 
echo a letter from a housewife in Cali- 
fornia who wrote: “After we watch and 
listen, we borrow these books from 
the library and get a real thrill out of 
re-reading them and getting a long 
close look at the pictures.” No wonder 
such programmes, whether produced 
on film or in local educational stations 
all over the United States, are parti- 
cularly popular with children's libra- 
rians who welcome the introduction of 
good books to both children and 
parents. 
Educational television in the United 
States is the work of devoted people 
who do not have at their disposal any- 
thing like the technical resources and 
finance available to commercial sta- 
tions. At Milwaukee, for instance, a 
group of performers who work for the 
museum, the public school system, the 
Bureau of Community Relations, or 
who are housewives looking after their 
families, come together as volunteers 
at the educational station to participate 
in Children's Fair, a variety show 
geared for viewers aged three to 
seven. “Tired of violence in the name 
of humour? Then try your children on 
a TV diet of Children's Fair,” runs the 
appeal for this programme whose pro- 
moters donate their time for this daily 
half-hour broadcast “to accent the 
 
positive aspects of life and the world 
in which we live.” 
Reaction against the violence of 
much of television, whether in pro- 
grammes specifically designed for 
them or, more frequently, in general 
programmes which are seen eagerly 
by children, is one of the prime motives 
in the production of programmes by 
educational stations. 
A: outline of the purposes 
of The Land of Play, a 
programme produced at Michigan 
State University, sums up this point 
of view: “There is no need and there 
is no place for violence in this pro- 
gramme. There are no weapons, no 
physical attacks, no verbal barrages. 
The stories may be suspenseful, but 
not frightening. We use no fear 
appeals. This is a happy, light, posi- 
tive programme. The characters who 
are involved in the programme are 
involved in positive ways. Proper 
conduct is rewarded and rewarding... 
not materially, but other ways. Stories 
and situations have morals, but morals 
are never drawn from them and pre- 
sented to the child wrapped in the 
label ‘MORAL'.” 
Concern for the moral development 
of children is also a preoccupation at 
the Kiev TV Centre in the Ukraine, 
which presents special programmes 
for pre-chool children every day in the 
morning and the early evening. These 
programmes seek to develop the 
curiosity of children, to give them

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 19236: Television for the pre-school child

Opinon surveys among 
teachers confirm that young 
children are far more 
attentive when schools 
make use of television. 
Kindergarten teachers in 
Venezuela, for example, report 
that collaboration 
and comprehension 
are improved. Left, two 
well-known puppets on B.B.C. 
television programmes for 
the very young: Bill and Ben 
the Flowerpot men. 
Can a chipmunk teach the 
new mathematics on TV? 
Here, at any rate, he is 
helping the television teacher 
to show children how to 
make a “telephone” with 
tin cans and string. Children 
benefit most when 
iearning is presented 
as a fascinating game. 
more intimate knowledge of their 
surroundings, to promote feelings of 
social adjustment, and “to help them 
to understand those actions which are 
good and those which should be 
blamed.” 
Here, too, it is emphasized that 
“such knowledge should come to small 
children by a fascinating game and 
not by direct admonition. While 
playing and dreaming, children learn 
at the same time various useful things. 
The programmes for pre-school chil- 
dren do not include direct teaching of 
certain subjects but they do include 
enrichment materials for the educa- 
tional programmes of kindergartens.” 
The Pencil Drawer, for instance, is a 
game .which has been broadcast for 
several years and in which an artist 
puppet called “Merry Pencil” teaches 
children the art of drawing and 
explains, at the same time, phenomena 
such as why the squirrel dries 
mushrooms on the pine tree and why 
birds fly off to warmer countries. 
“This programme is a great success 
among the little ones and the depart- 
ment receives hundreds of letters with 
pictures drawn by the children at home 
or in the kindergartens under the 
guidance of their teachers, nurses or 
parents.” 
Finally, we come to Czechoslovakia, 
the country which has perhaps the 
greatest tradition in puppetry, in 
children's films and now in television 
programmes for the little ones, broad- 
cast regularly ever since 1958. A 
report from the editor of kindergarten 
programmes in Prague reads like a 
summary of all that has been said by 
 
Photo © Holmes - Lebel - Larry Fried/Curtiss - Camera Press 
producers around the world; for 
children are children and have much 
the same reactions, independent of the 
culture in which they live, while the 
television medium poses similar prob- 
lems and opportunities irrespective of 
its particular form of organization and 
control. 
The danger of passivity in the viewer 
is recognized here as elsewhere. The 
child viewer “is inclined to consume 
passively miles of stories, events and 
tales, without being forced to strain 
his mind,” a danger which the pro- 
ducers in Czechoslovakia strive to 
combat by seeking “to incite, instigate, 
inspire and excite our children; we 
want to acquaint them with the 
unknown world that surrounds them. 
We want our viewers to be entertained, 
but simultaneously to be instructed.” 
WW ne initially Czech TV 
programmes were aimed 
at the entertainment of very young 
children, a much closer co-ordination 
with preparation for school in kinder- 
gartens is now sought by the producers 
who base their programmes on the 
official kindergarten curriculum. The 
fairy-tale form is considered most 
effective in order to influence and 
educate young viewers. They take 
children to the farthest corners of the 
world and are blended with realistic 
reportages about the world of grown- 
ups. 
Programmes are popular with kin- 
dergartens, a selected number of which 
regularly report back audience reaction 
to the station so that programmes may 
be adapted to their needs. Producers 
seem confident that the programmes 
are in fact stimulating artistic and 
mental activities, and contributing to 
the development of individual capacity 
in the child. Programmes are broad- 
cast twice a week (with one repeat) 
and on Saturday morning the announcer 
acquaints teachers with the content of 
subsequent programmes to aid them 
in their use. For the producers recog- 
nize the importance of the teacher 
“who must not waste the feelings which 
the children have experienced during 
the programme.” 
Television serves the child and the 
parents, the school, the teacher and 
society as a whole when it develops 
the personality and broadens the 
horizon of youngsters about to enter 
school. This educational task responds 
to the yearning of children for know- 
ledge, to their love of fantasy and 
their curiosity of life. “If it is said of 
adult listeners that you will never 
satisfy everyone,” states the producer 
of Czechoslovak kindergarten pro- 
grammes, “then our smallest listeners 
surely form an exception which proves 
the rule. Five and six-year-old viewers 
do not telephone, do not threaten, do 
not make categoric demands. But 
naturally they also have wishes and 
desires, usually that one of the fairy 
tales be repeated. Through adults 
they often show us their dissatis- 
faction when they are cheated out 
of a programme. But they have always 
been, they are and will probably 
remain the most grateful of television 
viewers,” 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 19865: Reading habits and book publishing in Asia

12 
the director of the National 
Book Centre of Pakistan examines 
READING HABITS 
AND BOOK PUBLISHING 
IN ASIA 
] HE great expanse called 
Asia extends from Iran on 
the periphery of the Middle East, to 
palmgrove islands of the Pacific, many 
thousands of miles eastwards. It 
covers a multitude of peoples, cul- 
tures, languages, and scripts; the vast 
region comprises radical variations in 
terrain, climate, customs, traditions, 
modes of living and thinking, as well 
as social and environmental situations 
generally. The patterns of statehood 
and economy differ, too, and the 
interstate cultural affinities are mostly 
limited to immediate neighbourhoods. 
Yet it is Asia all the same, with 
unmistakable features of identity and 
similarity. 
All these countries are what we call 
developing countries. All share a 
considerable, in some cases disturb- 
ingly high rate of illiteracy, and all 
are trying to improve the situation by 
employing breakthrough literacy pro- 
grammes. Most have neither a very 
high living standard or per capita rate 
of income, and the inadequacy of 
means of communication is a general 
handicap. All need a quickened pace 
of progress in technological fields; and 
the advancement and modernity of 
Japan, for instance, is still a rare 
phenomenon in this region. 
Most are tradition-bound and have 
often disregarded the utilitarian aspects 
of education. Even the learning of 
the three Rs has amounted to the 
achievement of knowledge for its own 
sake, or, at best, has been regarded 
as a key to professions like teaching, 
the priesthood or the judiciary. Now, 
however, the emphasis is changing in 
 
IBNE INSHA, Pakistani author, poet and 
literary critic, is director of the National 
Book Centre of Pakistan, Karachi. He has 
carried out surveys of reading habits in his 
country and has organized many book 
festivals, exhibitions and seminars. This 
article is adapted from a paper he contribut- 
ed to the meeting of experts on book 
production and distribution in Asia, held 
in Tokyo in May. 
by Ibne Insha 
favour of the sciences. Many of the 
countries in this region have been 
under foreign domination or influence 
for extended periods and are only now 
changing over, or going back, to na- 
tional languages as media of educa- 
tion. This has a considerable bear- 
ing on reading preferences of the 
better educated classes. 
What deters a potential reader? 
We may enumerate the deterrents to 
the use and enjoyment of books as: 
illiteracy; low purchasing power; non- 
availability of specific reading matter; 
lack of information about availability 
of books; inadequate library systems; 
inadequate book promotion. 
How to induce people to read. Of 
the deterrents named, abolition of 
illiteracy is of fundamental importance, 
yet we are not concerned with it direct- 
ly here. Our immediate concern is to 
induce those who are literate to read, 
and to encourage them to go beyond 
their textbooks. Qur typical client is 
a man with a reasonable measure of 
schooling (about four years) and a 
modest purchasing power. The prob- 
lem is to make reading a “felt need” 
for him. 
He must come to realize that as a 
student, he stands to gain by extend- 
ing his area of study not only for 
examinations but later in life. If he 
works in a factory or an office, reading 
can help to improve his efficiency and 
prospects. A businessman can profit 
from books imparting information 
concerning his affairs. A farmer is 
likely to be interested in better agri- 
cultural methods, and a mechanic in 
the techniques of his trade. A house- 
wife needs books on cookery, knit- 
ting or child-care. But of course, all 
of them need books for general read- 
ing—poetry, fiction, travel, history, 
biography and general subjects. But 
basically it is the potential reader, 
man, woman or child, who should feel 
the urge to read, and that urge has 
sometimes to be created. 
To be a reader requires a reasonable 
period of schooling—normally four 
 
Photo © Holmes Lebel - Camera Press 
years. It is at this stage that the 
school teacher or the school librarian 
should begin stimulating the student 
to read outside the classroom. 
The Unesco Seminar on Children's 
Literature, in Teheran, in April 1964, 
drew up a Book Utilization Course cov- 
ering about 36 hours over the whole 
college year. If the use of the school 
library is encouraged by teacher and 
teaching is not just confined to pre- 
scribed texts, it will go a long way 
to inculcate the book reading habit. 
Once acquired it is most likely to

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 19865: Reading habits and book publishing in Asia

In recent years Asian countries have made a tremendous effort to increase their book production and 
distribution. 
shortage of technical resources and capital. 
But to do so they have had to overcome formidable obstacles: high density of population, 
In May 1966, Unesco convened an important meeting to study 
the possibilities of developing Asia's book publishing industry. Photo shows young readers in a Singapore street. 
endure for a lifetime. Perhaps some 
sort of test based on non-textbooks 
read by a student might be introduced 
at the end of his course. School 
libraries need to be better equipped, 
too, for a broad, basic and enlighten- 
ing education. 
A network of public libraries. A 
student's awakened interest in reading 
will, in time, lead him to the public 
library and the bookshop. In Asia, we 
need a network of local libraries in 
cities and towns as well as in rural 
areas. Such a network would provide 
a much needed fillip to the publishing 
and the bookselling trade. In the 
United States and the United Kingdom, 
from 759% to 909% of children’s books 
are bought by libraries; the rest are 
sold by bookshops to the individual 
buyer. A similar, even a much smaller 
ratio of consumption would result in 
a vigorous publishing industry in Asia. 
Street lending libraries. The role 
of street lending libraries and mobile 
libraries is significant, too. In India and 
Pakistan, street libraries known popu- 
larly as “Anna Libraries” have existed 
and flourished for long. At one time 
one could take out a book daily for an 
anna (1/16th of a rupee, a pre-metric 
system coin) and a voracious reader 
was welcome to more than one book 
for the same fee. A survey has shown 
that housewives and students predo- 
minate as the clientele of these insti- 
tutions. 
The choice of books in these libraries 
is not always a happy one. In fact, 
there have been complaints that they 
stock cheap fiction only, and sometimes 
undesirable literature too, hence that 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 19865: Reading habits and book publishing in Asia

14 
READING HABITS IN ASIA (Continued) 
‘Penny book clubs’ for children 
the authorities should suppress them. 
It may be so. But some way should 
be found to improve rather than close 
them, 
Experiments are being conducted 
with mobile libraries and “box libra- 
ries” in some countries. The mobile 
libraries, which constitute the well of 
knowledge that goes to the thirsty have 
been very useful but their number is 
limited and needs to be increased. 
Box librairies contain standard sets 
of books catering to different tastes. 
These are supplied by community de- 
velopment organizations to community 
centres in rural areas and circulate 
from village to village. It is a good 
way to make literates life-long readers. 
The “home library” is one of the 
most effective ways to develop book- 
buying habits in Asia; it incorporates 
the features of book clubs as we know 
them to work in the West. A home 
library can be run by a single publisher 
who has a strong and varied list, or 
by a wholesale bookseller, 
What is a home library? An instal- 
ment plan relying on a strong body of 
patrons or subscribers. Books are 
dispensed on attractive terms, and the 
initial offer is often too alluring to be 
resisted. As can be seen in advertise- 
ments of book clubs, the bestsellers 
of the season are offered at extremely 
low prices to new members if they 
undertake to buy a specified number 
of books in a year, from a large 
selection offered, and at a specially 
low price. 
A model plan for a home library for 
Asian countries has been devised by 
the consultant to the All India Home 
Library Plan Society, Artur Isenberg. 
Subscribers are asked to pay 5 ru- 
pees (about one dollar) monthly, for 
18 months, or a total of 90 rupees. 
In return subscribers who complete the 
subscription period receive 100 rupees 
worth of books which they can select 
from a list of over 500 titles. In 
addition, each subscriber receives free 
of charge a number of bonus books 
as well as a monthly magazine, plus 
free packing and mailing of books. 
A modest discount (of about 
10%) on book orders placed after 
subscriptions have been taken out may 
be given; or other facilities such as 
limited credit made available. 
The subscriber who does not com- 
plete his subscription period does not 
receive the considerable extra benefits 
mentioned above, but he does receive 
his money's worth of books of his own 
choice. His accounts are credited with 
any payments he may have made and 
debited with the cost, at list price, of 
any books, including bonus books, sup- 
plied to him, as well as with the cost 
of posting them and also the magazine 
issues sent to him up to the premature 
closing of his subscription account. In 
other words, the incomplete subscrip- 
tion is treated like any other retail 
book purchase. 
Different organizations initiating 
home library plans in India are reported 
to have sold more than 10 lakhs of 
rupees ($210,000) worth of books since 
the first such scheme was launched in 
January 1960. Since the bulk of the 
clientele is that section not normally 
reached by bookshops or other con- 
ventional outlets, it really means that 
a new sector of the literate public is 
acquiring the book reading habit. 
The economics of a home library 
system are: small profits per sub- 
scriber, multiplied by a large number 
of subscribers into an attractive overall 
profit. 
A simple variation, especially 
for children, would be 
something like the “Paisa Library” of 
Lahore which flourished in the early 
1940s; we might call it a “Farthing 
Library” or a “Penny Library.” 
The “Paisa Library” scheme was 
designed to promote saving as well 
as the book reading habit. Children’s 
books are usually purchased by par- 
rents, but this scheme gave the child- 
ren a sense of importance since the 
books were bought out of their own 
meagre pocket money. The child had 
to save one paisa a day, which made 
30 paisas a month (less than half a 
rupee, or ten U.S. cents). The sum 
was sent to the promoters, a leading 
firm of publishers, who issued a child- 
ren's magazine of long standing, and 
all correspondence, dispatch and other 
costs were paid out of these ten cents. 
The child received a new book each 
month for about seven cents net. 
The important underlying idea was 
to encourage the buying of books out 
of one’s own resources as opposed 
to receiving books as a present. The 
project was abandoned after more than 
fifty titles had been published, ranging 
from 72 to 112 pages. The war raised 
the cost of materials and everything 
else involved in production, and it 
became impossible to continue the 
“a paisa a day” project. The hall- 
mark of the scheme had been inexpen- 
siveness which still is the prime con- 
sideration in most countries, and the 
system is well worth trying again. 
The importance of book festivals and 
book exhibitions in developing the 
reading habit in Asia cannot be over- 
emphasized. It is one of the striking 
ways of bringing books to the atten- 
tion of potential readers and informing 
people that the books they are inter- 
ested in have actually been published. 
Admittedly there is a shortage in 
Asian countries of books in certain 
fields, particularly science and techno- 
logy, or biography and literary criti- 
cism, but the books that are available 
are not always known to the general 
public. 
| wish | could quote from the register 
of comments we keep for every book 
exhibition. The response is so great 
that there are always requests by indi- 
viduals and especially educational in- 
stitutions for these book exhibitions to 
be prolonged. It is really exhilarating 
to see students eagerly queuing to 
browse among the stalls, and reading 
books on the spot. Such book exhibi- 
tions should be of a general as well 
as a specialized nature, to attract 
particular strata of readers. 
Our experience shows that book 
exhibitions should be accompanied by 
sales arrangements. People who see 
good books exhibited are disappointed 
not to find them readily available for 
purchase and by the time they return 
home other considerations dampen 
their enthusiasm and customers for 
books are thereby lost. 
In order to increase the book reading 
habit, book exhibitions need to be 
better advertised or publicized, either 
in the book supplement section of daily 
newspapers, or through posters, 
streamers and radiof/TV programmes 
where possible. [It is always good 
policy in Asia to declare a sale at 
discount for the duration of an exhibit- 
ion in order to attract potential book 
buyers. During the Pakistan National 
Book Festival of 1964, for example, all 
books were available at 10 9, discount, 
not only at the door of the exhibition, 
where sale arrangements” were pro- 
vided, but in city bookshops as well. 
Every bookseller could afford to give 
a 10 9%, discount without asking for 
special arrangements from publishers. 
In this connexion | should mention 
that it is not generally known, even 
in Pakistan, that money used to buy 
books can be deducted from income 
tax in Pakistan. The National Book 
Centre of Pakistan recently produced 
a poster to publicize this little known 
fact and this has had a marked effect 
on the sale of books. 
"Book Festival” is a much more 
attractive name for general annual 
events than "Book Exhibition,” and it 
should be given a festive look. In 
Pakistan, we gave away free of charge 
thousands of balloons with slogans, 
book marks and illustrated book lists 
during the festival. 
Movable feasts of books should 
be provided through bookmobiles, visit- 
ing educational institutions, industrial 
housing areas and other suburbs with 
displays of books, and carrying extra 
portable wire book racks and addi- 
tional stock for display outside the 
van, 
More and better book vending. Book 
buying is incentive buying. Books 
would surely sell in greater numbers 
if a potential reader had the chance to 
look at them. This takes us to the

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 19865: Reading habits and book publishing in Asia

need for more bookshops or book 
outlets with “browsing” facilities. In 
the West, these are offered by the 
drugstore or department store. In Asia, 
we should make use of restaurants, 
general stores, fairs and festivals or 
other places where people congregate. 
In Iran and in Andhra Pradesh, India, 
this has proved a great success. The 
success of Iranian paperbacks is based 
on a shift of emphasis from the book- 
shop to the news-stand and similar 
outlets. As a result, bookshop sales 
now represent only one half of total 
book sales. Millions of new readers 
are being created among people who 
hitherto were outside the orbit of 
conventional booksellers. Bookmo- 
biles or bookshops on wheels run by 
cooperatives of publishers and book- 
sellers would also help to boost sales. 
Though primarily a commercial en- 
terprise, a bookshop also plays an 
important cultural role. Municipal and 
other local bodies in Asia should there- 
fore be pursuaded to reserve centrally 
located stalls and kiosks for book 
vending and to lease them on special 
terms. Asia's railway bookstalls would 
do well to provide a larger variety 
of books. Enlarged book vending fa- 
cilities at the terminals and stopping 
places of other forms oftransportwould 
also do much to stimulate book buying. 
| T is imperative, of course, 
for the reader to be told 
what books are available. A need 
therefore exists for more subject lists 
of functional bibliographies to guide 
readers. Trade papers could do much 
in this respect if their scope was wid- 
ened to include reviews and articles 
on books. 
The National Book Centre of Paki- 
stan has itself published a book list 
of currently available children's litera- 
ture. Arranged by subject and carry- 
ing an authors’ index, the list gives 
details of the volume, illustrations, 
content and price of books. Another 
list published by the Centre covers 
reference books and book on Paki- 
stan. Such subject bibliographies do 
much to promote book sales. They 
should, however, be based on com- 
pletely objective selections of books 
so as to make them clearly distinguish- 
able from publishing trade catalogues. 
They should be modestly, even nomin- 
ally priced to allow distribution on the 
widest scale. 
Good books are not usually cheap, 
and cheap books, in turn, are not 
always good. The ideal situation of 
good books at cheap prices is a para- 
dox to a book producer. Paperbound 
books, while revolutionizing the distri- 
bution systems, have tried to reconcile 
the two situations and can be consider- 
ed as an answer to the growing needs 
of Asian readers with modest pur- 
chasing power. Mass production is a 
prerequisite, however, since the profit 
margin of publisher, bookseller and 
author on a paperback is far lower than 
in the case of a hard cover edition. 
According to one graph, the publisher's 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
- 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Although book production in many Asian countries is expanding, the number 
of books bought by the people of the region is still no more than one-thirtieth 
to one-sixtieth of that in the industrialized nations. Asian countries also 
need three times as many textbooks. Travelling bookshops, like this one 
in Ceylon, help to ease the book famine, but many more are needed. 
A revival of the “penny book clubs” which enabled children 
to buy a book each month for a very small sum has been proposed. 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 19865: Reading habits and book publishing in Asia

16 
READING HABITS IN ASIA (Continued) W Ww 
net profit on a paperback retailing at 
2/6 (stg.) is about 2 %. On a hard- 
cover book it would be about 15 9%. 
Paperback publishing deserves the 
utmost support and encouragment. 
Prerequisites are cheaper raw ma- 
terials, modern printing and binding 
facilities and also the services of 
technicians trained by European paper- 
back publishing firms. 
One Asian country, Iran, has 
developed a very successful paper- 
back series entitled “Kitabhai-lebi”, 
one of whose important innovations 
is a uniform sales discount. Whatever 
the price of a book, the retailer gets 
five rials (about 7 U.S. cents), and 
unsold books are collected and 
replaced by the publisher's repres- 
entatives. Western publishers should 
be asked to charge nominal copyright 
fees in order to encourage similar 
enterprises. 
For the illustrated books needed 
by children, and sometimes published 
in colour, arrangements for a central 
and syndicated production of il- 
lustrations are advisable, as was re- 
commended by the Teheran Seminar 
in 1964. The Franklin Organization, 
operating in some Asian countries, 
has tried this successfully. Illustrations 
for everyday science books by 
Bertha Morris Parker, published 
simultaneously in Arabic, Urdu and 
Persian, were produced centrally in 
Teheran, and the different language 
texts were printed in other countries. 
The writer has experimented with 
most of the book promotion measures 
described here, as Director of the 
National Book Centre of Pakistan, an 
organization created on Unesco's 
initiative, which seeks to encourage 
book development on progressive 
lines and to promote reading habits. 
We should like to see similar book 
promotion organizations, transcending 
professional interests, set up on a 
national basis, and then loosely 
federated on a regional footing. 
Ceylon, Iran and India already have 
such agencies, and in recent years 
the Unesco Centre for Reading 
Materials in South Asia, from its 
headquarters in Karachi, has actively 
promoted an exchange of information 
designed to encourage book pro- 
duction and development. 
The Unesco Centre issues a 
magazine, sponsors surveys of reading 
habits, arranges professional training 
“workshops” and helps to create a 
dialogue between representatives of 
the book world in South Asia. 
This has involved Pakistan, India, 
Burma and Ceylon, which have been 
in the Centre's orbit for about ten 
years, to a greater degree than other 
countries such as Iran, Nepal, 
Afghanistan and Thailand. As the 
Centre's orbit is expanding and as 
mass communication programmes are 
likely to be given a new stimulus, a 
closer integration can be expected in 
the years to come. 
wa he ON 
oo > J Me | t) Vs oy eT . 
25 wa hs =m A "? 
RR Ae ee Stars TL 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

GLOBAL 
ASSAULT 
ON THE   y Ld 
  
LY
 
| ~~ WEATHER 
: 
by Robert L. Munteanu 
2 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
He
nr
i 
Ca
rt
ie
r-
Br
es
so
n/
Ma
gn
um
 
  
Ar window on the world’s 
weather was thrown open 
on April 1, 1960 when Tiros |, the 
first complete weather satellite was 
launched. To the meteorologist's and 
the world’s amazement, man was on 
top of the weather, enjoying a long, 
intent look at its face below and 
savouring the boundless exciting 
possibilities of his new and revolution- 
ary approach to the exploration of 
the atmosphere. 
This new look at the vastness and 
complexity of the weather machine 
opened up a whole new horizon for 
meteorology. The satellite, and its 
ally, the high-speed electronic com- 
puter, as well as new developments in 
communications and observing techni- 
ques should enable the weatherman 
ROBERT L. MUNTEANU is external relations 
officer of the World Meteorological Organ- 
ization, Geneva. 
to expand his science to the point 
where forecasts for longer periods 
and even, perhaps, the dream of one 
day controlling the weather, become 
realities. 
For thousands of years, men have 
observed their local weather, noting 
its regularities and lamenting its many 
irregularities. They have naturally 
looked to the skies for knowledge, but 
their limited view of the world’s 
weather restricted and confined their 
knowledge and power to predict. 
For almost 100 years, meteorologists 
of the world have together sought to 
expose the physical laws behind 
weather and climate. This, of course, 
has been no easy task. Unlike other 
scientists, meteorologists cannot easily 
carry their research into the laboratory, 
as weather is altogether too large for 
study on this miniature scale, and 
certainly far too large for any one 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

  
wr —— 
THE WEATHER (Continued) 
country to undertake a sufficiently 
wide-scale study. 
When the study of weather became 
the science of meteorology, men of 
every nation realized that their fore- 
casts and research would be inade- 
quate unless they were based on 
global data and that their understand- 
ing of weather processes could only 
be translated into useful knowledge 
by international exchange and co- 
operation. World meteorology has 
become an active 24 hours a day 
science, rushing to meet a host of 
forecast deadlines. It has become 
one of the finest examples of interna- 
tional co-operation. 
Meteorological satellites and other 
new techniques have increased the 
need for international co-operation. 
The U.S.A. and U.S.S.R., for example, 
First complete view of the world’s weather 
Photo U.S. Department of Commerce, Weather Bureau, Washington 
hg - - x sal % % d Ae we le 
n-, 
co-operate closely in weather satellite 
activities through plans for the co- 
ordination of launching programmes 
and through the establishment, in 1964, 
of the Washington-Moscow line for 
direct transmission of satellite cloud 
photographs and other meteorological 
information. 
In 1961, the General Assembly of 
the U.N. called on the World Meteoro- 
logical Organization to develop a plan 
which would ensure: 
HB that these new devices are fully 
used to advance man's knowledge 
of the basic physical forces affect- 
ing weather and the possibility of 
large-scale weather modification, 
and 
HB that this knowledge is used to 
develop the existing forecasting 
Si 
capabilities of all member states. 
This recent chapter in meteorological 
history—and to date its most important 
—really began on April 1, 1960, when 
Tiros | was launched by the U.S.A. 
Since that day, ten in the Tiros family 
of satellites have been put into orbit, 
and one other experimental satellite 
called Nimbus. Although Tiros and 
Nimbus were intended primarily for 
research, the many thousands of photo- 
graphs they have taken and relayed 
to earth have also proved of immediate 
value to forecasters. Timely warnings 
of hurricane and typhoon formations 
have been derived from photographs 
taken by practically all Tiros satellites. 
The satellite stores its cloud photo- 
graphs on magnetic tape and relays 
them to earth as electronic signals 
when it comes within range of a ground 
receiving station. The satellite can 
transmit as many as 32 photographs 
in three minutes to a read-out station, 
where the signals are converted into 
pictures, and where electronic com- 
puters are used to insert latitudinal and 
longitudinal grids to give the geogra- 
phical location. This information is 
then flashed to the world within six 
hours of orbit time. 
One of the latest satellite devices 
is the Automatic Picture Transmission 
or APT system. The APT television 
system automatically transmits cloud 
pictures every 208 seconds during the 
daylight hours. Using a relatively 
simple and Inexpensive piece of receiv- 
ing equipment, any country can 
receive pictures from an APT equipped 
satellite as soon as it comes within 
their range. These on-the-spot pho- 
This remarkable picture is a mosaic of many photos taken by the weather satellite 
TIROS IX on February 13, 1965, and is the first complete view showing the 
world’s weather. One can see storm areas and cloud cover over all the continents 
and oceans; the Sahara Desert is clearly shown completely cloudless. Everyone 
talks about the weather—and today everyone is doing something about it. 
WE 
oil 
Every 
tographs give valuable local informa- 
tion to forecasters. 
Nor is the satellite inactive at night. 
Infra-red detectors measure radiation, 
the relative temperatures of land, sea 
and cloud surfaces, the geographical 
distribution of water vapour and the 
height of cloud tops. They can indi- 
cate where on the earth's surface there 
is a net gain or loss of energy from 
the sun. This information is invaluable 
for research into long-range forecast- 
ing. The Soviet satellite Cosmos 92 
has already given extensive information 
on terrestrial radiation and temperature 
variations through the atmosphere. 
On February 3, 1966, the Tiros 
Operation Satellite system was initiat- 
ed with the launching of Essa | at 
Cape Kennedy. Essa 1, and its 
descendants, will obtain cloud pictures 
po 
over the entire sunlit portion of the 
earth at least once every 24 hours. 
A new weather observation window 
was placed in space in August 1966 
with the faunching of the Soviet 
satellite Cosmos 122. This satellite 
is now transmitting to ground centres 
television pictures of clouds covering 
substantial parts of the earth's surface: 
Cosmos 122, however, is also equipp- 
ed with instruments for making 
radiation measurements in the infra- 
red band and can thus take “pictures” 
of cloud systems during darkness, 
thereby enabling meteorologists to 
compare cloud pictures made in the 
visible spectrum band with those made 
in infra-red rays. 
Cosmos 122 is also carrying out 
another important piece of meteorolo- 
gical research—measurement of the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
nation has its national meteorological service and all contribute to and benefit 
from the world weather system. The expansion of this remarkable example of 
international co-operation is now being planned by the World Meteorological 
Organization. The World Weather Watch, as this new global weather system 
is named, will have three world centres at Melbourne, Moscow and Washington. 
 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

20 
THE WEATHER (Continued) 
No weather data 
for four-fifths 
of earth's surface 
intensity of outgoing radiation. Solar 
radiation reaching the earth's surface 
is the main source of energy and the 
cause of atmospheric motion. In 
analyzing atmospheric processes, 
scientists need to know how much 
solar energy has reached the earth's 
surface and in what areas, how much 
is reflected back to space and how 
much heat energy is being emitted by 
the earth's surface and the atmosphere 
to outer space. Instruments installed 
in Cosmos 122 are collecting impor- 
tant data on this radiation balance in 
the earth-atmosphere system. This 
information is transmitted to offices 
of the U.S.S.R. Hydrometeorological 
Service as well as to the meteorolo- 
gical services and research institutes 
of other countries. 
In six short years, meteorological 
satellites have graduated from the 
experimental class to the fully oper- 
ational. 
Developments in space technology, 
automatic data processing and tele- 
communications will bring great 
changes to meteorology and to meteo- 
rological practices throughout the 
world. Change and development in 
this science have become more impor- 
tant than ever before. 
Although more has been discovered 
about weather in the past 50 years 
than in all previous history, there is a 
greater urgency behind each country’s 
need for a more perfect understanding 
of weather processes and for improved 
meteorological practices. 
TH weather may be no 
more malicious, no more 
devastating, no more kind than 20 or 
100 years ago, but the world today 
is more sensitive to extremes. Our 
greater population, urbanization, in- 
dustrialization, and increased depend- 
ency on agricultural production, make 
us more and more vulnerable to the 
whims of weather. What was once 
regarded as just a severe storm, or 
unusually wet, cold or dry conditions 
now quickly assumes the proportions 
of a national disaster. Financial losses 
soar to increasingly staggering heights. 
And the more complex our civilization 
becomes, the more damage the 
weather can cause. 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 22 
 
Photo © APN 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

g the Gulf Stream further to the north? 
duce loss of energy by reflection and 
e? With the planning and launching of the World 
earth's atmosphere on a truly global scale— 
be expected one day, because this observation 
creating our weather. 
55 degrees centigrade. 
Could the climate of Europe be modified by divertin 
Would blackening the Arctic ice re 
make neighbouring wastelands more habitabl 
Weather Watch—the observation of the 
improved possibilities of weather modification may 
and research will lead to fuller comprehension of how nature works in 
Photo shows Soviet far north where temperatures can drop to minus 
 
AL

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

21 
THE WEATHER (Continued) 
Can science change tomorrow's weather? 
The meteorologist urgently requires 
information and lots of it. For every 
24 hours, about 100,000 observations 
of weather conditions at the earth's 
surface and about 11,000 observations 
of the upper atmosphere are recorded 
and distributed throughout the world 
under the present international weather 
system. These observations come 
from some 8,000 land stations, from 
3,000 aircraft and 4,000 ships. 
Formidable as these figures are, 
they only represent adequate informa- 
tion for 20 9, of the earth's surface. 
Large areas of the world have yet to 
yield vital information. The oceans 
and deserts have long defied the appl- 
ication of normal observing methods. 
Satellite photographs are now filling 
in many gaps on the world weather 
map, and it is expected that new 
techniques, such as more sophisticated 
satellite sensors for the measurement 
of temperature and moisture distribu- 
tion and surface winds, and automatic 
weather stations, meteorological buoys 
and constant-level balloons will fill 
many more. The satellite will be a 
messenger as well as an observer, 
passing information from these auto- 
matic stations and balloons to data 
collection centres. 
The forecaster needs information, 
but he also needs to receive and pro- 
cess it with all possible speed and 
accuracy. 
Feed a satellite photograph to a 
computer and in an amazingly short 
time it has painted a portrait in letters, 
the shades of black and white in the 
photograph becoming a variety and a 
pattern of symbols. This new "photo- 
graph” is but one piece of information 
the computer will use in producing 
other analyses. 
The computer can perform a million 
calculations a second, assimilate infor- 
maticn from thousands of observation 
pcints all over the world, sort it, sift 
it, following faithfully the instructions 
contzined in intricate mathematical 
egueticns end print out, finally, the 
prebzble pattern of the atmosphere. 
It is 2 “forecezst” for the forecaster. 
  
For further rezdirg see three publications of 
the World Metsorcicgical Organization, Gene- 
wa: “World Westher VWeatch® (No 183. TP. 92; 
ice Swir. 1), “VWezsther and Man" (No 143. 
TP. £7; peice Swfr. 2); “Weather and Food” 
—fresiom from Hurger Campaign Basic 
Srdy Fo 1 {Mo 112. TP. 50; Sw.r. 2). See 
elso “A New Lock in Meteorology: the World 
VWezther Weatch™ by K. Langlo (Unesco's 
Guzrterfy “Impzct of Science on Society”, 
No 2, 1FE; annus] subscription: $2.50, 13/- 
st3). § F: per copy: $075, 4)- (stg). 3 F. 
Numerical models of the atmos- 
phere, the basic instructions fed to 
the computer, are a reflection of the 
meteorologist’s knowledge and of the 
development of new computer tech- 
niques. As his knowledge is incom- 
plete, so is the computer's “forecast”. 
When a computer produces a cyclone 
moving across the Atlantic at 500 
m.p.h. (the average cyclone travels at 
a sedate 15 m.p.h.), the meteorologist 
knows that somewhere along the line 
there is a missing quantity in his set 
of equations. The perfection of these 
equations is yet another problem for 
the weatherman to overcome. 
The World Meteorological Organ- 
ization was quick to realize that revolu- 
tionary developments in space tech- 
nology, computing and telecommuni- 
cations were too broad and far-reach- 
ing in their implications to be simply 
incorporated into the existing intern- 
ational weather system. An entirely 
new approach was called for. A new 
concept was needed, which would 
extract full value from these new 
developments, unite them with more 
conventional methods and allow both 
research and operational work every 
chance of developing and complement- 
ing each other. 
The answer is the World Weather 
(WWW). It Watch may best be 
  
described as a kind of international 
nervous system, highly sensitive and 
capable of immediate reaction to 
change in weather throughout the 
globe. Many thousands of points at 
the earth's surface and in the upper 
atmosphere will register any slight 
change in weather conditions. Satell- 
ites will provide the eyes and the 
overall view. Three world centres at 
Melbourne, Moscow and Washington 
and a limited number of regional 
centres will be the brains and memory 
of the system, receiving great volumes 
of data and processing them by com- 
puter. An elaborate network of tele- 
printer and facsimile links will quickly 
convey pictorial and written information 
to each component of the system. 
Men, money and machines, all the 
resources of meteorology throughout 
the world, will be poured into this 
new system. Highly industrialized 
nations in the temperate zone, develop- 
ing countries in tropical and sub- 
tropical regions, countries marooned 
in the vast oceans of the southern 
hemisphere, all, regardless of their 
stage of development, will have access 
to the same global information. For 
those countries whose weather ser- 
vices are still in their infancy, this 
will enable them to “leapfrog” over 
50 years of scientific and technical 
development. 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

It is an easy matter to draw up a 
long list of benefits which will follow 
in the wake of the WWW. Improved 
aviation forecasts, cyclone and flood 
warnings spell Safety. Greater know- 
ledge of rainfall and evaporation mean 
Power for industry and agricultural 
Prosperity. And as the Watch grows 
more alert, more knowledgeable, the 
list lengthens. 
All methods of observation, commu- 
nication and forecasting, old and new, 
and all future developments will be 
absorbed into the system. It is already 
visualized that satellites will collect 
reports from automatic weather sta- 
tions, floating balloons and meteorolo- 
gical buoys and pass this information 
on to the world centres. Communi- 
cation links will be further speeded up 
by using satellites for the exchange 
of data between world regional and 
national centres. The computer will 
take over more and more of the duties 
at present carried out by the forecaster 
himself. 
“Everyone talks about the weather, 
but nobody does anything about it.” 
This is an old complaint. But more 
frequently today there is talk of the 
long-range forecast and modification of 
weather and climate. 
Many weather services already issue 
Since 1961, more than 130 
typhoons in the Pacific, cyclones 
in the Indian Ocean and 
hurricanes in the Atlantic have 
been detected and tracked by 
satellite and long-range radar. 
Advance warnings of such 
calamities help to minimize losses 
on land and sea. Photo shows 
a coastguard cutter aiding a 
vessel disabled by a hurricane 
in the Gulf of Mexico. 
Photo USIS 
Every day over 110,000 
observations of weather 
conditions at the earth's surface 
and in the upper atmosphere 
are recorded and distributed 
throughout the world. These 
observations come from some 
8,000 land stations, from 3,000 
aircraft and 4,000 ships. Right, 
Argentinian weather observer on 
duty at a post 4,000 metres 
(13,000 ft.) high in the Andes 
waves to a passing aircraft. His 
post Is one of three weather 
stations on the border of 
Argentina and Chile. 
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris 
forecasts for periods of up to three 
days ahead and with substantial 
success. As knowledge of the 
general circulation of the atmosphere 
accumulates, the forecaster will en- 
deavour to extend the period of his 
prediction. 
When the meteorologist can produce 
mathematical models which are faithful 
to the atmosphere, the computer will 
not only forecast accurately, it should 
also help him to anticipate what would 
happen to the world's weather if man 
diverted the Gulf Stream, dammed the 
Bering Strait, poured oil on the 
oceans, or blackened the Arctic ice. 
  
By coating large areas of ocean with 
chemicals, for example, he might 
reduce evaporation and therefore the 
heavy rainfall and violent storms in 
tropical regions. By blackening the 
Arctic ice, he might reduce loss of 
energy by reflection and make neigh- 
bouring wastelands more habitable. 
But he can only embark on such large- 
scale modifications when he is per- 
fectly confident that their long-range 
effects will be entirely beneficial. 
The weather will be robbed of its 
power to catch us unawares, and may 
instead be harnessed for man’s greater 
comfort and prosperity. 
       
  
  
A 
{ 4 
| 
rd 
od 
Pa 
. 
, vt 
paw! 
~ : | 
< Al! » 
Fa JAN 
a «yy 
wc [BN 
WO )% 
~~ - 
~~ 
li 
— 
Pe 
/ 
AA 
    
  
    
  
     

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 20892: The World of the communications satellite

  
 
 
 
 
  
  
Cary 
    
    
  
Lo 
2 - N 
Ne LT SE 
To |) h 
J 
. 
y ki 
  
 
 
 
 
 
a 
F
e
r
 
T
R
 
\ 
“F
 
as
 
    
 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 20892: The World of the communications satellite

E
E
 
T
A
T
 
  
Tr abt PT a ye pg +, I TT Tt 7 TE ~ 
3 ~ 5 Sw A - Co CIE) Tas i: TT aa ee & ” 7) & E s bd 
3 er ¥, x » ~ 2 “tear - - 3 f : EB La A -— . A 
r 
~ : 
Pe 
¢ 
> 
2 
phere IoomiAg on he Werizpe like C is » dome 
No : Ter of the giant ‘antenna at Fleur Boudou, in Britanny (France). The antenna 
and one at AAA [pL ER (ULTITY | Kingdom) picked up the first television programme 
ey transmitted . “the LR Prares, A yl: -Sommupicstions Satelite Telstar, in 1962. 
FA  

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 20892: The World of the communications satellite

26 
  
The four space 
fantasy drawings on 
these pages are 
by the U.S. artist 
J. Huehnergarth. 
© Vitro Electronics, 
Silver Spring, 
Maryland (U.S.A). 
COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE (Continued) 
Orbital post offices 
telephones and newspapers 
The progress of astronautics since 
the opening of the space age in 1957 
has been so phenomenal that all the 
technical problems of the synchronous 
satellite should be solved by the mid- 
seventies. Millions need no longer be 
spent, as they are at present, in the 
vain quest for absolute component 
reliability. The communications satel- 
lites may not be permanently inhabited, 
but they will be regularly serviced by 
low-thrust ferries which can bring 
repair crews to dea! with any emerg- 
ency within a couple of hours. For by 
1975, of course, there will be numerous 
manned space complexes in orbit, to 
conduct scientific research and to 
operate the presently unimaginable 
zero-gravity, high-vacuum industries of 
the next generation. The communi- 
cations satellites of the later part of 
this century may be part of these sys- 
tems, and will share their servicing 
facilities. 
With the development of space tech- 
nology, therefore, all but one of the 
synchronous satellite's present limita- 
tions will pass swiftly into history. 
Rockets are already under develop- 
ment that can put many tons of pay- 
load into the twenty-four hour orbit; 
nuclear reactors such as Snap-8 could 
provide enough power for direct TV 
transmission to home receivers. Al- 
though those concerned with today's 
satellites have to use the tools current- 
ly at hand, they should not let present 
difficulties and failures condition their 
thinking. But | certainly do not envy 
them their problems, for every commu- 
nications satellite built during the next 
ten years will be obsolete as soon as 
it is launched. 
The only fundamental objection to 
the synchronous satellite is the pro- 
pagation time lag, which of course 
does not affect radio or TV services, 
but only telephony. | am convinced 
that once the inevitability of this time 
lag is understood and users are taught 
the proper speaking procedure, they 
will have no difficulty in handling it. 
Every generation comes to grips with 
new techniques; our fathers had to 
learn to use the dial telephone, our 
grandfathers, the telephone itself. We 
are currently grappling with long-dis- ~ 
tance dialling and ten-figure numbers; 
our children may think nothing of end- 
ing each stretch of conversation with 
“over"—and it would probably improve 
our own telephone procedure, and 
shorten our talking time, if we did this 
even now. 
In any event, if the delay does prove 
to be intolerable, then we can establish 
low-altitude satellites (perhaps in 
accurately sub-synchronous twelve, 
eight, six or three-hour orbits} purely 
for telephony. These might provide a 
first-class, premium rate service; the 
cheap rate would be through the 
twenty-four-hour satellites. (As a 
much longer term possibility, it might 
be mentioned that there are a number 
of theoretical ways of achieving a 
low-altitude, twenty-four-hour satellite; 
but they depend upon technical devel- 
opments unlikely to occur in this cen- 
tury. | leave their contemplation as 
“an exercise for the student”.) 
It seems clear, therefore, that the 
next ten years will be an interim, tran- 
sitional period, characterized by small 
low-powered satellites of the Telstar, 
Relay and Syncom type. Transmis- 
sions from these will be received only 
by very elaborate and expensive 
ground tracking stations, which can 
feed signals into national networks. 
There will be no question of direct 
broadcasting to the home viewer or 
listener; he will still have to rely on 
his existing local stations, if any, and 
must accept what they choose to give 
him. 
Even so, the communications satel- 
lites of the next few years will have a 
major impact on world affairs, and part- 
icularly upon relations between the 
United States and Europe. Telstar 
proved this in the first few weeks of 
operation, when it established the first 
TV bridge across the Atlantic. As in 
the case of the first Atlantic cable a 
hundred years earlier, contact was 
intermittent; but—agaln, as in that 
case—it will soon become permanent. 
Because they share many common 
interests (including language), already 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 20892: The World of the communications satellite

possess extensive rebroadcasting facil- 
ities, and are separated by a relatively 
small time differential, the Americas 
and Western Europe will obviously be 
the first to benefit from commuric- 
ations satellites. Some of the services 
which may reasonably be expected, 
either experimentally or on a full oper- 
ational basis, during the next decade 
are: 
The Orbital Post Office. It has been 
pointed out by S. Metzger that a single 
5 mcfs satellite has enough inform- 
ation-handling capacity to carry all 
first-class and airmail correspondence 
between the United States and Eu- 
rope. Delivery time would be reduced 
to approximately half, the limit being 
set by the physical collection and dis- 
tribution of the mail. One of the chief 
problems involved in this system is 
psychological; how would the public 
react to a postal service in which its 
letters could be read by unauthorized 
persons at any point? However, it 
accepted wartime V-mail; and for really 
confidential correspondence, there 
would be no difficulty in developing 
private electronic coding systems, so 
that only the right recipient could 
receive readable copies, 
As ground facilities improve, to keep 
up with the possibilities offered by the 
satellites, we may expect high-speed 
facsimile systems to spread to at least 
all important towns. For business (as 
opposed to personal) needs, the dis- 
tinction between mail, telegram and 
teletype will rapidly blur. In each case, 
transmission time will approach zero, 
with profound effects upon industry 
and public affairs, and a speeding up 
of the tempo of life. 
Orbital Newspapers. The simulta- 
neous setting of international editions 
has already been demonstrated. In- 
fluential newspapers such as The Times 
of London and the New York Times 
will experience a great increase in 
distribution and immediacy. One of 
the first countries to benefit from this 
will be, rather ironically, the United 
States, which has never possessed a 
really national newspaper. In the 
longer run, however, the newspaper 
as we have known it for the last three 
hundred years cannot be expected to 
survive the advent of communications 
satellites; ultimately, the home presen- 
tation will become purely electronic. 
Intercontinental Telephony. As more 
and more band widths are made avail- 
able, there will be a tremendous in- 
crease in long-distance telephony. It 
is impossible to set a limit to this; man 
is a talkative animal, and all estimates 
that have been made of his need for 
communication have been swiftly sur- 
passed. Although transatlantic calls 
may not be substantially cheaper 
during the next decade, | suspect that 
well before the end of this same cen- 
tury all telephone calls to anywhere 
may be charged at the same flat rate. 
(How much of the present cost of a 
call goes to maintain the equipment 
that merely calculates the bill?) Even- 
tually, the telephone may become a 
free public service; it will have the 
same status as the water supply, for 
in the society of the future it will be 
equally essential. Any tax on free 
communication is detrimental to the 
public interest. 
The full consequences of swift, 
cheap, and universal person-to-person 
telephony (and later television) cannot 
possibly be anticipated at this stage. 
One can only hint at some trends 
  
which may become apparent during the 
next decade, and dominant during the 
one that follows. They are: 
BM A great decline in personal corres- 
pondence, continuing the trend already 
started by the telephone—and conse- 
quently reducing the need for the “Or- 
bital Post Office” just when it becomes 
technically possible. 
HB A correspondingly great increase in 
long-distance personal contacts, The 
situation will develop over the whole 
world that now exists in great cities, 
when intimate friends may talk to each 
other every day but seldom meet. This 
would have been totally inconceivable 
only a hundred years ago. 
HB A steep decline in transportation for 
other than pleasure purposes. Effi- 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 20892: The World of the communications satellite

28 
COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE (Continued) 
Blackboard in the sky for multimillion classes 
communications and efficient 
transportation are, to some extent, 
opposing influences. If either were 
perfect (i.e. free and instantaneous) 
there would be no need for the other. 
Thus one can envisage the time, in 
the not too distant future, when con- 
ferences could be conducted with 
none of the participants leaving their 
own countries—or even their homes. 
It may be objected that much of the 
important work at such conferences 
takes place in private and behind-the- 
scenes negotiations between indi- 
viduals, not amenable to telecommuni- 
cations. But even this will cease to be 
true as person-to-person services 
multiply. A generation from now, a 
delegate in Canberra may be able to 
locate one in Washington much more 
easily than either could do so today, 
if they were both looking for each 
other among the many committee 
rooms, private suites, simultaneous 
lecture sessions, dining rooms and 
bars typical of a large international 
conference circa 1960. 
cient 
N ow let us look a little 
further ahead, to the se- 
cond phase in the development of 
communications satellites—particularly 
the impact of direct broadcasting on 
the undeveloped countries. This, 
coupled with the timely invention of 
the transistor, may give a great stimu- 
lus to radio; though we usually asso- 
ciate satellites with television, it must 
not be forgotten that most areas of 
this planet cannot yet receive reliable, 
good quality sound. 
However, radio brings us immedi- 
ately to the question of language. A 
single orbital transmitter can broadcast 
high-fidelity sound to half the world 
—but can it provide programmes of 
equal interest to the Congo Pygmy, 
the Afghan tribesman, the Greenland 
Eskimo, the man-about-Manhattan? 
Obviously not, until they share a 
common language and, at least to 
some extent, a common culture. 
Communications satellites will make 
a basic world language mandatory. 
Just as (in quite recent times) all men 
had to learn to read so that they could 
work and even survive in modern 
society, so in the one world of the 
very near future they will have to 
possess a language in common. 
The full potentiality of educational 
programmes from satellites could not 
be exploited, however, until the arrival 
of vision; one could hardly teach the 
written language without this aid 
(though a great deal could be done 
with the help of leaflets keyed to the 
programme and distributed in advan- 
ce). And here | would like to make a 
suggestion for an interesting compro- 
mise between radio and full-scale TV. 
Il: should be possible to 
develop a cheap and sim- 
ple slow-scan facsimile-plus-sound 
receiver which could operate on the 
normal radio band width, without 
requiring the approximately thousand- 
fold greater spectrum space needed by 
TV. Such a device could reproduce 
line drawings and cartoons (halftones 
would be unnecessary) at a perfectly 
adequate speed for educational purp- 
oses, where the same picture has to 
stay in view for a minute or more. It 
would be the remote equivalent of the 
teacher's blackboard, and with its aid, 
even language could be taught to peo- 
ples who did not share a single world 
of their instructor's tongue. It would 
thus be possible to tape programmes 
suitable for multimillion classes. 
The impact of such a device—every 
element of which lies completely within 
existing technologies—upon preliterate 
societies can perhaps be judged by 
the following example. 
In 1948 Monsenor Jose J. Salcedo, 
appalled by the poverty and illiteracy 
in his parish, set up a small radio 
transmitter in the mountain village of 
Sutatenze (Colombia). His facilities 
were quite limited but his objectives 
were large; reduction of illiteracy and 
provision of useful information. Start- 
ing with a few hours of broadcasting 
on Saturday evenings to fifteen 
receivers and an audience of some 
5.000 listeners, Monsenor Salcedo’s 
programme had grown by 1954 to six 
hours of daily broadcasting to 16,000 
receivers and 200,000 listeners... By 
1960 there were in excess of one 
million student listeners... With a very 
modest investment, Monsefor Salcedo 
has radically transformed rural life 
over a large part of Colombia. 
Through communal reception, support- 
ed by first-level maintenance by parish 
priests, he has provided a broadcasting 
system suited to the meagre resources 
of the people and responsive to their 
needs. 
This gives a foretaste of what may 
be done by satellite communications 
to reduce illiteracy and ignorance—if 
we decide to devote them to this ser- 
vice rather than to selling soap. (Not 
that | am against soap, but | am 
against pretending that one soap is 
better than any other, and feel that it 
is essentially degrading to the commu- 
nications industry to be dependent 
upon such impostures.) 
Because the slow-scan receiver 
would require a bandwidth of less than 
10 kefs, it avoids the power and fre- 
quency allocation problems which blur 
the global TV picture, and could start 
functioning in the very near future. 
There is no question, however, that 
global TV will arrive just as soon as 
it is technically and economically pos- 
sible, So much has been written on 
this subject that it is difficult to add 
anything new to it, but the following 
comments seem in order. 
It is often said that the existence 
of time zones will inhibit the develop- 
ment of instantaneous, planet-wide 
communications. This precisely paral- 
lels the argument, heard at the begin- 
ning of this century, that motor cars 
would only be of use inside the cities, 
because, of course, there were no 
roads elsewhere on which they could 
operate! 
W rer we have true global 
communications, our way 
of life will adapt to them—not vice 
versa. It would be frustrating to live 
in a society where, at any given time, 
between a third and a half of one's 
acquaintances were asleep. This will 
be the global situation, a quarter of a 
century from now, and society will 
have to make some Procrustean 
adjustments. Current attacks on the 
problem of sleep may give one answer; 
perhaps-we can condense our present 
requirements, by electronic means, into 
an hour or so a day. Or the long 
range solution, unattractive though it 
is, may lie in the wholly artifical world 
where life goes on independently of 
the sun, and all the clocks on the 
planet keep the same time. As will 
appear later, this solution would not 
be only unpleasant, but unstable. 
The existence of nationally operated, 
direct-broadcasting TV satellites will 
immediately focus attention upon two 
problems which today are merely a 
minor annoyance, but which tomorrow 
will be intolerable, They are cen- 
sorship and jamming. For the advent 
of communications satellites will mean 
the end of the present barriers to the 
free flow of information; no dicta-

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 20892: The World of the communications satellite

WORLD 
GIRDLING 
TRIO 
Drawing shows how three 
synchronous satellites 
placed In orbit around the 
equator could provide 
communications coverage 
over most of the world. 
Experiments have also 
en made with other types 
of communications 
satellites such as those 
placed on inclined 
elliptical orbits 
(see article next page). 
Drawing - USIS 
torship can build a wall high enough 
to stop its citizens listening to the 
voices from the stars. It would be 
extremely difficult, if not impossible, 
to jam satellite broadcasts; any at- 
tempt by one country to do so would 
result in an act of space piracy, or a 
global telecommunications nuisance 
which the rest of the world could not 
permit. 
One of the immediate objectives of 
the ITU, therefore, should be a total 
ban on jamming, and a recognition by 
all nations that such behaviour is as 
uncultured as interrupting other peo- 
ple’'s conversation by making rude 
noises. And very much more dang- 
erous, since so many vital lifesaving 
and navigation facilities now depend 
upon radio links. 
It seems that we have, in the com- 
munications satellite, a technical device 
that may help to enforce good be- 
haviour and co-operation even upon 
reluctant parties. (The meteorological 
satellite, with which it is closely linked, 
will do the same). Its influence will 
be like that of air transport, though 
on a much larger scale and affecting 
whole nations rather than a relatively 
few favoured individuals. The inexor- 
able force of astronomical facts will 
destroy the political fantasies which 
have so long fragmented our planet. 
For when all major artistic productions, 
entertainments, political and 
events can be viewed simultaneously 
by the whole world, the parochialism 
and xenophobia of the past will be 
unable to survive. 
news 
] his will be one major in- 
fluence of communications 
satellites; another, perhaps even more 
fundamental, may be the reversal of a 
historic trend which has proceeded 
with scarcely a break for five thousand 
years. The traditional role of the city 
as a meeting place is coming to end; 
Megapolis may soon go the way of the 
dinosaurs it now resembles in so many 
respects. This century may see the 
beginnings of a slow but irresistible 
dispersion and decentralization of 
mankind-—a physical dispersion which 
will take place, paradoxically enough, 
at the same time as a cultural unif- 
ication, 
It will be none too soon, for it has 
been truly said that the measure of 
man's unhappiness is his estrange- 
ment from nature. There is ample 
proof of this in the fact that the most 
vicious of all savages are now to be 
found in the rotting stone jungles of 
our great cities. Civilization, in historic 
fact as well as in etymology, was the 
child of the city; but now it has 
outgrown its parent and must escape 
from its suffocating embrace. 
It will be able to do so when almost 
all the sense impressions, skills and 
facilities that we employ in everyday 
life become amenable to telecom- 
munications—as they will. For as | 
concluded in my address to the Xllith 
International Astronautical Congress in 
Washington, 1961: 
What we are building now is the 
nervous system of mankind... The 
communications network, of which the 
satellites will be nodal points, will 
enable the consciousness of our grand- 
children to flicker like lightning back 
and forth across the face of this 
planet. They will be able to go any- 
where and meet anyone, at any time, 
without stirring from their homes... all 
the museums and libraries of the world 
will be extensions of their living 
rooms... 
And it will not matter where those 
living rooms may be; for on this planet 
at least, the conquest of space will 
be complete. 
This article was prepared at the request 
of Unesco to serve as background for a 
Unesco report on space communications. 
It was later presented by Arthur C. Clarke 
at the Unesco meeting of experts on the 
use of space communication by the mass 
media in December 1965. 
29 
 

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 21218: Hurdles in space broadcasting

30 
HURDLES IN SPACE 
BROADCASTING 
by Nicolai I. Tchistiakov 
J ust nine years have elaps- 
ed since the launching of 
Sputnik 1. In these few years, with 
much intensive work, the foundations 
for the use of satellites for communi- 
cation, and particularly for radio and 
television, have been firmly laid. 
Broadcasting was part of the earliest 
probes into space. Conversations 
with Yuri Gagarin during man's first 
orbital flight were transmitted through 
the broadcasting system of the 
U.S.S.R. in April 1961. In August of 
the same year the Soviet television au- 
dience had its first view of a cosmo- 
naut in space flight. By 1964 television 
viewers were shown not only the 
inside of the cabin, but also the view 
of Earth from space. In 1965 they 
watched cosmonaut Alexei Leonov take 
the first walk in space. 
With improvements in technology 
came the satellites Telstar and Relay, 
launched by the United States in 1962 
and 1963, which made possible for the 
first time short, experimental television 
transmissions over very long distances. 
In 1964, Syncom and Early Bird, in 
synchronous orbit, realized television 
transmission for long periods, includ- 
ing the broadcast of the Olympic 
Games from Japan. 
In April 1965, the Soviet satellite 
Molniya 1 (“lightning™) was launched 
on an elliptical orbit with its apogee 
in the northern hemisphere at a height 
of 40,000 km (25,000 miles). The 
period of orbiting is 12 hours, and 
Molniyva 1 makes one circuit over the 
U.S.S.R. and a following one over 
North America. A 40-watt active 
relaying apparatus on board, with two 
spares, made possible the first regular 
television transmissions between the 
western U.S.S.R. and its far eastern 
lands for periods of from eight to 
nine hours. 
in October 1965, the launching of 
Molniya Il further increased the possi- 
bilities of television transmission 
throughout the eastern part of the 
U.S.S.R. On October 17, for instance, 
  
NICOLAI |. TCHISTIAKOV is Professor of 
Radio Techniques at the Institute of Tele- 
communications in Moscow. He took part 
in the Unesco meeting on the use of space 
communication by the mass media, in 
December 1965. 
Soviet television viewers on the Pacific 
coast were able to see the Denmark- 
U.S.S.R. football match being played 
in Copenhagen. 
In November 1965 the first success- 
ful experimental transmissions of col- 
our television from the U.S.S.R. to 
France were carried out via Molniya lL. 
The successful experiments with 
communication satellites by the U.S.A. 
and the U.S.S.R. show that they have 
an important role to play in the devel- 
opment of broadcasting. Comparisons 
are now possible between various 
types of orbits. In the use of satellites, 
the main emphasis is on the transmis- 
sion of television programmes, 
Without using satellites, the long 
distance transmission of radio broad- 
casts has not been difficult or expen- 
sive, and improvements in shortwave, 
radio relay and cables offer continual- 
ly the possibility of further progress. 
Sound broadcasts are recorded and 
transmitted swiftly, and possibly will 
be sent by supersonic rocket in the 
near future. 
Copying television programmes and 
transmitting significant news events 
present greater problems. This calls 
for broad band channels such as 
coaxial cables, wave guides, micro- 
wave relay lines and communications 
satellites. We are aware of limitations 
of the present stage of development. 
Experience suggests two types of 
communications satellites as best for 
broadcasting systems: Satellites on 
synchronous equatorial orbits (see 
drawing page 29), such as Syncom 2, 
and satellites on stretched inclined 
elliptical orbits, providing long conti- 
nuous transmission periods, such as 
Molniya 1. The problem now is to 
improve the power sources, stability, 
reliability and life of the equipment on 
board the satellite. The launching by 
the U.S.S.R. of a satellite equipped 
with an electrical battery with radio- 
isotopes suggests one possible solu- 
tion. 
These are some of the advantages 
of the synchronous satellite : 
HE no time limit for transmission, 
HE 2 minimum number of satellites in 
orbit for global communication, 
BH comparatively simple construction 
of ground antenna, driving servo- 
mechanisms for the antenna and com- 
puter control devices, 
Hm remoteness of satellites from the 
effects of belts of intensive cosmic 
radiation, 
HW stability of received signals, 
HW absence of distortion from Doppler 
effect, 
HW the “earth satellite” permits relative 
localization of the radiated wave, 
reducing interference between space 
and ground equipment. 
Among the advantages of the high 
elliptical orbit are: 
 
EH an orbit which provides optimum 
receiving conditions for the ground 
stations of a given country or territory, 
WM use of the same satellite for pro- 
gramme exchange between territories 
in the eastern and western hemisphere 
with one-hop propagation, 
HW high signal to noise reception in the 
high latitudes where synchronous 
satellites do not provide good recep- 
tion, 
WM simpler and more economic launch- 
ing of satellites. 
It is possible that, for global com- 
munication, a system combining both 
types of satellites will prove most 
satisfactory. 
Direct broadcasting, which would 
provide a direct signal from the satel- 
lite transmitter to the ordinary home 
receiver, offers some apparent ad- 
vantages. But the shortcomings are 
so numerous and important that it may 
have limited scope. However, on the 
positive side, it would not be neces- 
sary to load national and local broad- 
casting stations with transmissions 
from satellites, and the listeners and 
viewers would have a more varied 
choice of international programmes. 
But there is an impressive list of 
obstacles to direct broadcasting. A 
high power supply would be neces- 
sary on the satellite, of an order not 
now technically available. Even if the 
power were available, it might not be 
practical to radiate it, since it would 
create interference with services such 
as fixed and mobile communication, 
and radar, which share frequency 
bands allocated for satellite commu- 
nication. 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 21218: Hurdles in space broadcasting

Television will be 
the biggest 
beneficiary from 
the revolution 
brought by 
communications 
satellites. Existing 
means of radio 
broadcasting 
are generally 
satisfactory and not 
costly. Right, 
transmitting antenna 
for world-wide 
broadcasting. 
Photo © Aart Fotograaf 
Klein, Amsterdam 
  
  
  
  
  
      
    
  
  
  
  
            

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 21218: Hurdles in space broadcasting

J2 
HURDLES IN SPACE (Continued) 
Not all eggs in one satellite 
The optimal bands for transmission 
from satellites are centimetre waves, 
but ordinary receivers cannot be 
readily adapted to this band. The 
installation of a complicated and 
expensive receiving antenna by the 
ordinary set owner for proper reception 
from satellites is also not practical. 
Direct broadcasting faces further dif- 
ficulties, With synchronous satellites 
of the “stationary” variety, the recep- 
tion becomes worse at the boundaries 
of the region served, mainly in the 
high latitudes. Signals from the satel- 
lite cannot be kept out of countries for 
which they are not intended. Transmis- 
sions cannot be shifted to more con- 
venient times for the populations of 
given territories. The sound on a tele- 
vision transmission cannot be proces- 
sed or changed if translation into the 
language of a given country or territory 
is desired. [In areas where the tele- 
vision standards differ from those of 
the transmission, reception would be 
impossible. 
Much further study of direct broad- 
casting will be required, in the event 
that countries reach agreements for 
its use. 
Broadcasting with retranslation is 
the system in which television and 
sound broadcasts are received from 
the satellite by the national ground 
station and then retransmitted to the 
individual home receiver via national 
broadcasting stations. The advantages 
of this system are numerous. Pro- 
grammes can be received on portable 
transistor radio and television receiv- 
ers. Optimal frequencies in the “sat- 
ellite-Earth” channel can be used, 
independent of the bands of ordinary 
receivers, 
For television, standards can be co- 
ordinated with the standards in each 
country. The schedule for international 
broadcasts can be co-ordinated with 
national broadcast schedules and for 
the convenience of the people. Pro- 
grammes can be recorded or taped at 
the receiving stations for broadcast at 
a more convenient time, Stable types 
of modulation and of signal processing 
can be used in the “Earth-satellite- 
Earth” channel for noise resisting 
reception and for narrowing of the 
occupied frequency band. 
For broadcasting by retranslation by 
synchronous satellite, the ground sta- 
tion can be located at a comparatively 
low latitude where, for the given 
country, optimal reception conditions 
exist. In the use of satellites with 
elongated elliptical orbits, it is pos- 
sible to switch from one satellite to 
another without programme interrup- 
tion. Also, it is possible to reduce 
interference from satellite radiation to 
ground services by decreasing the 
power of the transmitter aboard the 
satellite, by using sharply directional 
receiving antennae, or low noise am- 
plifiers. The power plant aboard the 
transmitter can be lighter and more 
compact, with a corresponding in- 
crease in reliability, in power conser- 
vation, and in the life of the satellite. 
For the new art of international 
broadcasting, each country should 
first develop its national radio and 
television broadcasting system. Only 
then can it adapt its national network 
for the reception of international pro- 
grammes. Broadcasting by retransla- 
tion best fits this principle. 
There is no reason to believe that 
satellites will in the future be the prin- 
cipal means for the international ex- 
change of programmes. Other means 
such as cables and micro-wave are 
available and are being developed 
further. Micro-wave links from con- 
tinent to continent could join together 
the various national communication 
networks to provide global networks 
of large capacity. 
T here are certain services 
which require the open 
propagation of radio waves. The lo- 
calization of radiation on the surface 
or in space is impossible, in some 
cases, or could create great difficul- 
ties. This is true of terrestial radio- 
location and navigational systems, 
meteorological, geophysical and navi- 
gational satellites, communication sys- 
tems for the flight safety of cosmo- 
nauts, planet radiolocation, radio- 
astronomy and communication with 
observatories in open space, and the 
important mobile communication ser- 
vice on the ground, in the air and on 
oceans . 
Development and improvement of 
mobile communication systems are 
important now and must go on in the 
future. Today there are systems for 
control of maritime, air, and other 
transport, and communications services 
for the passengers. More individual 
services will be required in the future. 
Satellites especially launched for 
the purpose may have a great role 
in mobile maritime communication ser- 
vice. 
And so we see that satellites in 
point-to-point communication systems 
may solve the problem of a global 
communication network. However, 
they do not give us the only solution, 
nor the most realistic one, 
Satellite communication systems 
must be designed with limitations on 
their range and the duration of their 
use, with relation to the availability of 
other systems, and to economic ad- 
vantage. This is my personal opinion, 
but | firmly believe that only by adher- 
ing to the principle can we exclude 
the crisis in the use of frequencies 
which arose in the high frequency 
(short wave) band. 
This point of view must also be 
considered in planning the develop- 
ment of broadcasting. The satellite 
communication channels should be 
used only when actually necessary; 
there must be economy of frequency 
channels. 
Immediate transmission is necessary 
only for actual important events, and 
that does not take much time nor 
many channels—on a global scale. 
There is usually a delay in transmis- 
sions of the principal parts of many 
broadcasting programmes, and the 
delay is often desirable because 
of zonal time differences. The 
processing of broadcast programmes 
for language differences requires a 
delay. The transcription of program- 
mes may serve satisfactorily, as in 
the case of the 1964 Olympic Games, 
when television programmes were 
transported to Europe from the U.S.A. 
after being received from Tokyo 
through the satellite Synchron lll and 
recorded on magnetic tape. They 
could have been transported directly 
from Tokyo to European central tele- 
vision stations. 
However, such considerations do 
not mean that satellite communication 
channels will not play a great role in 
the transmission of broadcasting pro- 
grammes. Television programme 
transmission by satellite may be very 
useful for areas where the ground 
nets of multi-channel communication 
are not adequate, and for towns situat- 
ed far from other towns across under- 
populated and inaccessible territories. 
A global system combining the use 
of all modern means and methods 
must be designed, providing for ap- 
proximate scheduling of the use of 
satellite channels, and it must secure 
for all parts of the world and all coun- 
tries an equal right of participation. 
However, that enterprise would have 
to be preceded by a broad interna- 
tional exchange of television broad- 
casting programmes via communica- 
tions satellites. 
In a global exchange, there must 
be an equal flow between developed 
and developing countries. Each coun- 
try possesses invaluable treasures of 
national culture. 
Since October 5, 1957, when the 
man-made Earth satellite became a 
reality, it has been clear that all tech- 
nical difficulties in this field may be 
overcome. But the regulation of major 
legal problems always goes slowly. 
Global broadcasting through commu- 
nications satellites must be regulated 
by an international convention, based 
on the relevant decisions of the United 
Nations General Assembly.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 21218: Hurdles in space broadcasting

WORLD'S 
TALLEST 
TELEVISION 
TOWER 
  
  
 
A lofty tower is now 
thrusting skyward above 
Moscow (above right). It is 
already as tall as the Eiffel 
Tower in Paris, and when 
completed in the autumn 
of 1967, its 520 metres 
(1,700 ft.) will make it the 
highest edifice in the world. 
Antenna on its summit will boost 
direct television transmissions 
from Moscow, providing good 
quality reception, without 
additional relay transmission, 
for people living up to 
150 kms. (90 miles) from the 
capital. Above, artist's sketch 
of the tower. Right, an 
impression of the base of the 
tower viewed from inside; 
giant concrete feet support 
the 26,000-ton structure. 
Photos © APN 
S
a
 
    \ 
Y 
3 
] 
& 
  
   

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

letters to the Editor 
STRATOSPHERONAUTS 7? 
  
Sir, 
The press in general, including the 
Unesco Courier (Man in Space, May 
1966) describes the score or so per- 
sons who have risen to a height of 
some 400 kms (250 miles) above the 
earth as “cosmonauts” (or astronauts). 
In my view this is an exaggeration 
or at least a premature use of these 
terms. 
An altitude of 400 kms (approxim- 
ately the length of Switzerland between 
its farthest frontiers) is still quite 
close to our planet; it is certainly not 
the cosmos. |f we picture our globe 
as a circle 10 cm. (4 in.) in diameter, 
then in proportion our pseudo cos- 
monauts have risen a mere 4 mm, 
(1/6 in). At that altitude they are 
still well within the earth's gravitational 
field which is why they have to orbit 
the globe at such colossal speeds. 
It would be more appropriate and 
more accurate to use the term “strato- 
spheronaut® and to keep the name 
“cosmonaut” for those who will 
actually reach the cosmos one day. 
F.E. Ducommun 
Geneva, Switzerland 
THE FIRST HISTORIANS 
Sir, 
I am one of your genuine admirers, 
and enjoy each issue as it comes 
along, largely because it takes the 
whole world as its oyster, Once in a 
while, however, when it falls short of 
this ideal, | am critical. The June 1966 
issue is one which provokes the 
comment below. 
Miss Barbara Bray, in an interesting 
article on Ibn Khaldun (1332-1406), 
calls him “the first man to treat history 
as the proper object of a special 
science.” But is this so? The Chin- 
ese for a millennium and a half 
before his time regarded the writing 
of history as a special province, and 
these historians conceived it their duty 
to dilate on the whole story of man's 
past. 
Charles Sidney Gardner of Harvard 
(in Chinese Traditional Historiography, 
1938, p. 16) writes thus about Ssu-ma 
Ch'ien (B.C. 100): 
"History is to him no mere genealog- 
ical record, no bald archival chronicle 
of a single court, no treatise on 
political morality. Nor is it dedicated 
to the glory of any individual or 
institution. Rather it is a composite 
portrayal of the whole past of his 
people, so far as accessible documents 
permit such a record. Especially is it 
a golden opportunity for the judicious 
historian to render justice to the 
worthy, and by the fullness of his 
narrative to rescue them from threaten- 
ed oblivion, even as he unflinchingly 
records the depths of human degrada- 
tion.” 
Edwin G. Pulleyblank of Cambridge 
(in Historians of China and lapan, 
1961, p. 136) writing of Chinese his- 
torical criticism, has this to say: 
“The first actual treatise on the 
writing of history in Chinese (or, as 
far as | can discover, in any language) 
was the Shih-t'ung (Generalities on 
History) of Liu Chih-chi (A.D. 661-721) 
...completed in 710.7 
One might add similar comments 
by other objective scholars. Fortun- 
ately, as the writings of the Chinese 
become better known through transla- 
tion, people unacquainted with the 
original may themselves judge the 
worth and standards of these his- 
torians. 
L. Carrington Goodrich 
Dean Lung Professor 
Emeritus of Chinese 
Columbia University, New York 
GHOSTLY POLYGONS IN SPACE 
 
Sir, 
1 would like to suggest a different 
explanation for the “ghostly polygons 
of light” that featured on the front 
page photograph of the May 1966 issue 
of the Unesco Courier, as taken from 
the Soviet spacecraft Voskhod |, and 
that were ascribed to “rays of sunlight 
reflected on the spacecraft window.” 
| have recently had a similar expe- 
rience with photographs that were 
not taken through a window. 
| happened to take some photo- 
graphs at a small angle toward the 
sun, though the sun never actually 
appeared in the photos, and in some 
of these there are one or two penta- 
gons (never more). 
Since the shape of the polygons 
resembles the aperture in the camera's 
diaphragm, | assume that the cause 
of this phenomenon is due to the 
sun rays passing through the aperture 
at a certain angle, hitting the inner 
lens and reflected (totally or partially) 
back outside, then once again reflected 
to the film from one of the outer 
lenses (size and brightness thus 
defined). 
The camera | used was a Contaflex- 
prima. My explanation Is just an 
assumption, 
Ariel Einat 
Tel-Aviv, Israel 
WHY NOT USE SEA WATER? 
Sir, 
With many regions facing water 
shortages, available supplies of fresh 
water must be used economically. 
While scientists are searching for 
the best way to desalt sea 
water (probably with chemical 
substances) there are many ways of 
using sea water as a substitute for 
fresh. Swimming pools which take 
enormous amounts of fresh water—to 
which salt is often added—could be 
filled with sea water. And what 
about industry? Iron and steel plants 
absorb vast quantities of fresh water 
to which sodium chloride is often 
added. !n its manufacturing processes 
the plastics industry uses hundreds 
of millions of htres of fresh water 
and almost as much salt. Why 
waste so much drinking water on 
other needs when to use sea water 
would be both an economy and a 
simpla solution. Its distribution would 
cost no more than the present 
collection and supply of fresh water. 
| should like to add my compliments 
to the many you have aiready receiv- 
ed for your remarkable issue on "Wa- 
ter and Life™ (July-August, 1964). 
E. Thumelaire 
Brussels, Belgium 
MAGIC WORLD OF PUPPETS 
 
Sir, 
May | say how much my family and 
| enjoy your magazine, especially the 
recent articles on art. The standard 
of the colour photography In the 
December 1965 issue was excellent. 
! lent several copies of the Courier 
to friends hoping that they would 
become subscribers. Unfortunately 
their home was one of many destroyed 
by bushfires last year and the copies 
of the magazine were destroyed along 
with the rest of their belongings. | 
list the copies that were lost and | 
wish to know if | can replace them. 
Many years ago the Courler devoted 
an issue to puppetry (Puppets: Magic 
World in Miniature, No 3-4, 1955). 
Would it be possible to produce 
another issue on this subject? | feel 
that the increase in subscribers over 
the years means that many will not 
have had the pleasure of seeing this 
or a similar issue, 
W.J. Shaw 
Diamond Creek 
Victorla, Australla 
  
NEXT MONTH 8 PAGES IN COLOUR 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Fe sab. 
Madonna-like portrait of mother and 
child—a UNICEF card design by Vietnamese 
artist Vu Cao Dam. 
 
UNICEF 
Courier, Nov. 1964). 
Over 50 watercolours 
and gouaches in 
colour illustrate the 1967 
UNICEF Engagement 
Calendar. In two 
bilingual versions 
(English-French 
and English-Spanish}. 
$2.00 or equivalent. 
UNICEF cards come in boxes of ten; price 7/6 (UK); $1.25 (US.A); 7 F 
(France). Large format card (lean Lurgat design) 15/-; $2.50; 14 F. For orders 
write: U.K. Cttee for UNICEF, New Gallery Centre, 123 Regent St., London 
W.L; U.S.A. Cttee for UNICEF, United Nations, New York, N.Y. 10017; Canadian 
Cttee for UNICEF, 737 Church St. Toronto 5, Ont; Comité Francais pour le 
FISE-UNICEF, 64, rue La Boétie, Paris. Please do not order through Unesco. 
t
e
]
 
GREETING CARDS 
UNICEF Greeting Cards and Engagement Calendar, whose designs are 
contributed by internationally-known artists, are sold for the benefit of the 
United Nations Children’s Fund. They help to bring food, medicine and 
education to needy children in over 100 countries. 
raised by the record 45 million UNICEF cards sold last year. 
ten cards sold means a week's supply of milk for 50 children. 
new cards available this year by artists from: Argentina, Canada, France, 
Haiti, German Fed. Rep., Japan, Lebanon, U.S.A, Viet-Nam. Special large- 
format card, "Bird of Peace”, reproduces detail from “Song of the World", 
an epic series of tapestries by the late Jean Lurgat of France (see Unesco 
Over $2,800,000 was 
A box of 
Sixteen 
Wi
 
pe
] 
  
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. {See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Longmans, Green & Co, Ltd., Railway Crescent, 
Croydon, Victoria; sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
tion of Austraha, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne C. I. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only : Dominie Pty Ltd, 463 Pitt- 
water Road, Brookvale (N.S.W.) ($A 2.25). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C-=., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.-). — BELGIUM. All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgever) Belgielei 147, Antwerp. |. For 
The Unesco Courier (140 FB) and art sl:des (488 FB) only: 
Louis De Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont. 
($3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chittam- 
palan Gardiner Mawata, P.O B. 244, Colombo, 2 (Rs. 7). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 9 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Tapeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS, 
“MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. SN.T.L., 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); Zahraniecm 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, Ltd., Prags Boulevard 47, Copenhagen S. (D. 
Kr. 17). — ETHIOPIA. Internauonal Press Agency. P.O. 
Box 120, Addis Ababa (10,-). — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk, 9.40). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48. (10 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, 8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
Ltd., Atlanus House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis Nikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akademiai Konybrbnolt 
Vici U. 22* Budapest V. Allami Kdényvterseszto 
Vallalat, P.O. Box 240, Budapest — JCELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
(120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2: Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New Delhi. 
1: Sub-Depot : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16; Scindia House, New Delhi, 
Indian National Commission for Cooperation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, for New Dethi 3. (Rs, 
10.50). — IRAQ. Mackenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid 
Street, Baghdad: University Bookstore, University 
of Baghdad, P.O. Box 12, Baghdad — IRELAND. The 
National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. 
4. (15/5). — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blum- 
stein’'s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlac 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv ([£8). — JAMAICA, Sang- 
ster’s Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, Kingston. (15+). 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd, 6 Tori-Nichome, Nihon- 
bashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo (1,200 yen). 
— JORDAN. Joseph 1. Bahous & Co, Dar ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road. P.O.B, 66, Amman. — KENYA. ES.A, 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi (10). — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. KUWAIT The Kuwait Bookshop Co, 
Led, P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286. Monrovia (10/-). 
— LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand- 
Rue, Luxemburg (F.L. 140). — MALAYSIA. Federal 
Publications Ltd., Times House, River Valley Road, 
Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3rd floor), 110, Jalan 
Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M. $ 7.50). — MALTA. Sapienza’s 
Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta, (15/-). — MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port- 
Lows (15/.). — MONACO. British Library, 30, Bid. 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (F. 10). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 8.50). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. N.A. (NA fl 4,50). — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 20, Molesworth Street (Private 
Bag), Wellington; Government Bookshops: Auckland 
(P.C. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dune- 
din (P.O. Box 1104) (15/-). — NIGERIA. C.M.S. Book- 
shops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-). — NORWAY. 
All publications: A.5. Bokhjornet, Lille Grensen 9, 
Oslo. For Unesco Courier only: AS. Norvesens Llitte- 
ratnrleneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, (17. 50kr.). — PA. 
KISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco 
Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree 
Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad. — PHILIPPINES, The Mo- 
dern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue, P.O, Box 632, Manila. 
— POLAND. "RUCH", ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 
(zl. 60.). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria 
Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisben, — PUERTO RICO. 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor. Roosevelt 115- 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. 
Textbook Sale (PVT) Ltd., 67, Union Avenue, Salisbury. — 
SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications : A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stock- 
holm 16. — For the Unesco Courier: The United, 
Nations Association of Sweden, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 12); SWITZERLAND. All publications ; 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse, Zurich. Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P, 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 10). — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 2775, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok, 
(35 ticals), — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O, Box 145, Kampala (10/-).— SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications : Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty) Ltd., 
Libr Building. Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only : Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. (R1.-50). 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kase EI Nil, 38, rue Kasr EI Nil, Cairo. Sub'agent : 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.EL, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham and Bristol. {15/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, New York, 
N.Y. 10016(% 5.00). — U.S5.5.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. ]ugoslovenska 
Knjliga Terazije, 27, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/020805engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

WORLD WEATHER WATCH 
A bold new adventure in international co-operation 
ET A ER EET, 
Already in use are: 
Wm a score of space satellite observatories 
m 8,000 ground stations, 3,000 planes, 4,000 ships 
m 100,000 observations daily 
TOMORROW: A WORLD-WIDE WEATHER NETWORK 
  
a Ce > ek Cr. eis vi: dk 2 a 
SA ir a 
. i 
en v Bare IK : Ered 7 3 
: N ., = ! _ : - ry 8 & 
TE BT > 5% 
or w 3 * Do» rT 3 w oe oo 
i ) : : 
2 
  
  gh 
Far y 
yg . eR . N 
bE 0d » 
a 
’ Re “ 
~ A TW v a 
ww L000 
: : J 
Be . ga ‘ { pt ' , ™ E ¥ 
Le Bk 3 3 sr Lh SRE WL Ga ER Ji a . } R. rr en Th » LAA Ar | yy WE Funk MN