# [016653](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
Theme A window ope on the world 
mC ouricr 
October 1966 (19th year) U.K.: 1/6-stg. - Canada: 30 cents - France: 1 F 
   
    
  
   
  
7 EON VN jor 
SUL I fy eq ny 
Ye dU JUN i JON 
CL ~~. Sad TE . Van vy 
SNE ENON, 
       
    
» an Y- £ -" d : a p; iid oN Wy A Sd = Co 
M . " - . ¥ _ <r 3 
r > = : va _— A F450 "Nae . : a y £3 : NE Sn = TA 3 RR 3 
[ : “N——— ad ha TR } as [2 EL 
=, is SRS RRA RE + aa : EN i Ae ow 
OIF : LEE Eo ANS Horo aad sie x 2S 
nw TOY a .e daw WN Pe - «pias iE 
: . haa. a TW aa 4 Ee < aul, h . - my g = . ps 
- ; 
rR - a -— LS 
» 
Cg ate nt. 
Capital of ancient Siam 
AYUTYA - VENICE OF SOUTH ASIA 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

> wi 
oF F ff a ie 3a 
TREASURES 
EE 
TIDY: 
Horse Jewellery 
FAUCET TT ET CEE ETN 
LUTE CET RENT ITI 4, 1) 
form of a horse's head 
cm.; 3 in. high), 
s made of gilded bronze 
inlaid with garnets. A fine 
example of Nordic stylized 
animal ornamentation, 
it is part of the bridle 
ELE ER CITT BLT 
ancient cemetery at Vendel, 
BCE VEE EEE ET) 
85 years ago. Many treasures 
of Nordic art dating : hy 
from between the 7th 
and 11th centuries were 
recovered from tombs i 
EY RCL CIAL  ETL TTT ships 
in which warrior-noblemen 
were buried together 2 i 
UN UR GETTER LT EN RB 
QGITECL GIG CTT: FRET SCTLEN 
COGIC TEC GT EL EL 
Antiquities, Stockholm, Sweden 
Rd  

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
smCourier a —— ee — 
OCTOBER 1966 -19TH YEAR 
Page 
  
4 | AYUTYA — VENICE OF SOUTH ASIA 
The capital of ancient Siam to be restored 
PUBLISHED IN By Sumet Jumsai na Ayutya 
NINE EDITIONS 
  
12 | THE CONTROVERSY 
English ON CONTINENTAL DRIFT 
French By Daniel Behrman 
Spanish 
G AND SEA-GOING LABORATORIES 
erman : 3 
. New tools for the deep-sea scientist 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 18 | A SHIP NAMED FLIP — Photo story 
Japanese 
Italian 20 NEW WAYS TO EXPLORE THE PLANETS 
By William H. Pickering : 
Published monthly by UNESCO 25 NATSUME SOSEKI 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
The most popular writer in Japan 
26 | THE THREE-CORNERED WORLD 
By Natsume Soseki 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢. 
Annual subscription rates: 15/-stg.; $3.00 
(Canada); 10 French francs or equivalent; 28 
2 years: 27/-stg.; 18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.; 
30 cents; 1 F. 
THE KNIGHT IN THE TIGER’'S SKIN 
Masterpiece of the Georgian poet Shota Rustaveli 
* By Irakle Abashidze . 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in July and August when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) th English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 30 A STATEM ENT BY ELEVEN 
Japanese and Italian. In the United Kingdom it is distributed 
by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.L 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 32 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name, Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 34 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 2 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Caurier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilsan Co., New York. 
* 
DISTINGUISHED GEOPHYSICISTS 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART (9) 
Nordic bridle decoration   
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
  
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
lllustrations: Betsy Bates 
Research: Olga Rodel 
Layout & Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief 
“26 SEPT 1966 
N
°
1
0
 
- 
19
66
 
M
C
.
6
6
-
1
-
2
1
7
 
A 
/ CL ei on 
® | od 
~~ = 5a ne 
{ a SS 4 
g Te ¥. i Re ot 
a lly See q 
$Y Fa 
PAS CB 7 = \ 
ws § 2 oud J 3 \ 
Ee NC DN \ 
Pnoto © Chicago Natural History 
Museum - Vadna Gearhart 
Cover photo 
 
The Thai Government has approved 
a 20-year project to restore Ayutya, 
the ancient capital of Siam, which, 
until the middle of the 18th century, 
was a busy, bustling city criss- 
crossed by innumerable canals and 
richly endowed with artistic trea-’ 
sures, This rubbing of a sculptured 
stone relief is one of 153 panels 
depicting the story of Rama, a hero 
* of Hindu mythology. This “Rama- 
yana" in stone once decorated a 
temple in Ayutya and is now in the 
Temple of the Sleeping Buddha, in 
Bangkok, the capital of Thailand.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

The Thai Government 
has approved a plan 
to restore the capital 
of ancient Siam, now 
half-buried in the jungle 
 
  
3 : 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
AYUTYA 
VENICE OF SOUTH ASIA 
  
by Sumet Jumsai na Ayutya 
S OME eighty miles north of 
the Gulf of Siam, up the 
river Chao Phya, past and beyond 
Bangkok, we come to the heart of the 
Indochinese Peninsula. Here amid 
the fertile expanse of the delta lands 
and rice fields is situated a ruined city, 
its derelict pagodas and its clusters 
of jungle foliage outlined against the 
skyline. As one approaches this 
green mass of vegetation, more 
pagodas and other structures such as 
brick arches of former bridges, walls 
and ramparts can be seen. Hidden 
under all this, under the trees and the 
reeds, one of the world’s most 
fascinating cities lies buried. 
This is Ayutya (variously written as 
Ayudhya, Ayuthia, Ayutthaya, and 
Ayut'ia) the biggest and most cosmo- 
politan city of the seventeenth century 
south of China. Originally the city 
dates back to the eighth century when 
the Thais were still predominently in 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE Until a few years ago, Ayutya was completely buried beneath a mass of 
jungle vegetation. Standing out above the trees (above), are the slender pinnacles of 
the three stupas of Wat Phra Sri-sanphet, the greatest and most beautiful of the city’s temples. 
P
h
o
t
o
-
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
A colossal statue of the 
Reclining Buddha (right), 
measuring 28 metres (90 ft.) 
today lies amid the 
ruins of Ayutya, Siam’s 
ancient capital which was 
destroyed in 1767. 
The statue is thought 
to date from the 
16th century, and is 
named after the temple, 
which once housed it—the 
Wat Lokaya-sudha 
(Temple of Water of 
Immortality on Earth). 
Left, detail of the statue. 
Photos @ Paul Almasy, Paris   

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
  
AYUTYA (Continued) 
’ 
—— re 
) ED goose rt=Fwn: nN 
= vw Foor ly | 
a J 
SAD 
 
Water-city of a hundred gates 
what is now the southern Chinese pro- 
vince of Yunnan, and when Angkor, 
built on a monumental scale, was the 
most thriving urban centre with its 
empire ruling over most of the Indo- 
chinese subcontinent. 
Kublai Khan of the Yuan Dynasty 
conquered the Thais of Yunnan in 1250 
and made that province part of China 
once and for all. This led to an 
emigration of the Thais southwards 
where several independent Thai 
kingdoms or city states were already 
being formed at the expense of the 
Kmer Empire, and on the decline of its 
capital city, Angkor. 
Ayutya was the last to emerge 
towards the end of the fourteenth 
century as the capital of Siam which 
was to become the most powerful of 
the Thai kingdoms and the only one 
to remain independent throughout its 
history. Ayutya continued to be the 
Siamese capital until 1767 when a 
Burmese army destroyed it completely. 
Since then the seat of government has 
been Bangkok. 
Most of the Thais remained a 
mountain or valley people, like those 
who stayed in Yunnan or those who 
settled immediately south of China, 
from Assam and the Shan States to 
Laos and most of what is now North 
Viet-Nam. But those who penetrated 
further south into the rich delta lands 
very quickly developed into an 
“aquatic” society, with paddy rice 
cultivation and waterways as the 
source of their wealth and power. 
The first immigrants, then, came into 
the powerful Kmer =~ Empire. They 
came into contact with a highly 
advanced “hydraulic” society whose 
power was founded upon rice agri- 
culture which was served by the most 
gigantic hydraulic installation ever 
devised. In the centre of this system, 
and controlling it, stood the city of 
Angkor. 
The world at that time had many 
water towns and cities with varying 
degrees of hydraulic sophistication. 
Before Angkor, there had been 
Shantan in China which was conceived 
and built as a gigantic urban machine 
operated and serviced by water. 
Soochow, in the Kiangsu Province, 
which is probably the most beautiful 
and completely planned canal city, 
dates at least one thousand years 
before Venice and its contemporary, 
Angkor, and therefore well before the 
Dutch water towns, before Ayutya) 
Tenochtitlan (Mexico City), which 
incidentally has become a completely 
“dry” city, and still later cities like 
Batavia (Jakarta) and Bangkok (both 
An early 18th-century plan 
of Ayutya drawn by a Dutch 
cartographer. It reveals the 
astonishing originality of this city 
built amid the waters. A 
network of canals criss-crossed 
the city, constructed on a 
natural peninsular formed by 
the meandering Menam river. 
A by-pass canal made the peninsular 
into an island. A bustling 
activity reigned in this Venice 
of the East, whose ruined 
buildings today reveal 
architecture of exceptional 
richness and variety. Right, the 
impressive royal temple of Wat 
Phra Sri, now fteed from its 
jungle shroud. Excavations here 
have brought to light hundreds 
of images of the Buddha as 
well as objects in gold, silver 
and crystal, now preserved 
in the Bangkok Museum.   
now becoming more or less “dry”), 
and St. Petersburg (Leningrad) still 
invariably known as the “Venice of 
the North", 
But Angkor was different in 
that it came into being through 
the coincidence of three factors: 
geography, technology, and urban 
symbolism. The particular geography 
with its floods and draining direction 
dictated a particular form of water 
“sculpture” which was relevent to both 
hydraulic engineering and cosmo- 
magic orientation. The Kmer city was 
the microcosm of Hindu cosmology 
with its formal disposition of the water 
and the solid elements. 
The Thais of the emerging Siam 
were pragmatists and flexible in their 
outlook. Although extensive canal- 
ization was embarked upon, the 
precise and somewhat vulnerable 
hydraulic planning of the Kmers made 
no impression on them. There was 
no real attempt to control water; 
instead, the whole society was part of 
water, living on it and flowing with it. 
Monumental structures and rigid urban 
symbolism gave way to what was the 
most practical and easiest solution of 
building a city. Therefore they chose 
first of all an existing settlement 
complete with the essential urban 
organization which was well placed in

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  
the middle of the rich delta lands. 
This was the eighth century city of 
Ayutya. 
Aerial photographs and a preliminary 
analysis show that Ayutya was a city 
of canals, with building compounds 
defined by and integrated into a 
network of waterways. In 1350, 
soon after the arrival of the Thais, the 
old site lost its importance when a 
newer urban centre was built 
immediately to the west, in a natural 
peninsula formed by a big meandering 
river. A by-pass canal was constructed 
to make the peninsula into an island. 
Here was the Siamese solution of 
doing the least work in exchange for 
a maximum result. 
The city was given a wide moat and 
a “ring road” which was always made 
navigable and flushed by the action 
of nature. Gradually two more big 
rivers nearby were linked to the new 
urban centre by the numerous by-pass 
canals. The newer city, now known 
as Ayutya, became the junction of 
three very important rivers. To the 
north, it gained access to and control 
over the northern Thai kingdoms; to 
the south the river led to the open sea 
and the control of the Malay Peninsula 
as well as the international trade 
between India and Japan. 
Agricultural products and trade 
   
   
           
converged upon Ayutya on boats. 
The canals were the all-weather 
highways. From the “ring road” or 
moat, they were led through water- 
gates into the innumerable canals 
within the confines of the city wall, and 
eventually to the palaces, market- 
places, temples, schools, and private 
house compounds: There were up to 
19 water gates, 15 main land gates 
with water landings, and numerous 
other smaller gates, giving a total of 
about 100 city gates. The city wall 
with some 17 forts for cannons, each 
guarding the main approaches of 
water traffic, enclosed an area of 
about seven square kms (3 square 
miles). 
As far as present research reveals, 
the number of canals within this area 
is staggering. The canals were 
straight and gridiron in plan. Many had 
brick-paved streets alongside, and all 
were lined with big trees, giving both 
pedestrians and water traffic ample 
protection from the tropical sun. 
With so many canals and streets, 
there must have been many bridges, 
but only 29 are named and identified 
by an old record. Half of this number 
were very high brick arches to allow 
for water traffic. One was constructed 
of laterite to accomodate elephants. 
There were The three palaces. 
I
L
 
. 
) 
I
 
y |
 
   
= —_— = 
het: 1 23 
2 
eT 
Photo Unesco - Sandy Koffler 
main Royal Palace was a complete 
walled-in city in itself and was 
subdivided into the king's private 
residence, and an outer walled 
compound containing various offices of 
the civil service. Private houses were 
simple constructions of wood, for all 
the effort was concentrated on the 
350 or more monasteries, many of 
which had their own schools and 
libraries. : 
The Chinese who had the special 
privilege of living within the city walls, 
had their Chinatown. This was the 
most opulent secular quarter, with 
shops and warehouses of brick and 
stucco. Here a European of Greek 
origin took up residence in an elegant 
building, then entered the Siamese 
civil service and became the First 
Minister of the Crown in 1686. 
Further along, behind the main forts 
overlooking the dock for sea vessels, 
he founded a college named after 
himself, Constantin (Phaulkon) College. 
The king had his own private dock 
next to the Royal Palace where the 
royal barges were kept. The city was 
subdivided into administrative units 
and quarters according to the different 
activities and types of industry. The 
centre was marked by a simple tower, 
housing a drum from which the hours 
were struck. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

AYUTYA (Continued) 
  1] 
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris 
{ 
Thailand has been called the land of Buddhist images. One 
of the most familiar sights in the ruins of Ayutya are the 
images of Buddha, though many, like the one shown here, are now 
disfigured. This statue stands near the Wat Chao Phya-thai 
(The Temple of the Supreme Patriarch), a former monastery for 
monks of a sect devoted to meditation. 
A royal procession 
with 3,000 barges 
and 20,000 boats 
The population seems to have varied 
a great deal. The success of a 
military campaign could mean tens of 
thousands of people being brought to 
settle at Ayutya. The city and its 
environs would then exceed the half 
million mark. But when the Burmese 
besieged the city in 1569 with an army 
of over a million men and eventually 
took it, only some 10,000 people were 
left behind among the ruins. (Accord- 
ing to Europeans observers, in this 
particular war the Burmese army was 
over two million men strong, and after 
its capture, Ayutya had a mere 
4,000 inhabitants!) 
Whatever the actual population in 
normal times, there appears to have 
been a great number of boats and a 
huge “floating” population. For a 
royal procession on water up to 
30,000 attendants might be gathered 
on some 3,000 barges, all fantastically 
sculptured and gilded, and flanked 
by 600,000 people on 20,000 boats 
along both banks of the processional 
waterway. 
It was truly a water city, rightly 
known to the Europeans of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as 
the “Venice of the East”. But it was 
more than this, for people were 
integrated into the water pattern. 
The whole society seemed to float 
and flow along the innumerable canals 
and rivers without calculation and 
struggle. This aquatic phenomenon 
may be equated with the sense of 
flexibility of the Siamese which 
accounts for their political survival. 
Certainly Siam had dealt astutely 
with the various European powers 
from the beginning of the seventeenth 
century when its first embassy to 
Europe was dispatched to Holland in 
1609 as the result of the growing 
Dutch trade and influence. Then 
there were the famous exchanges of 
embassies with Versailles in the 1680's, 
when an embassy was also sent to 
the Vatican. According to a member 
of the French embassy in Ayutya at 
that time, there were 40 different 
nationalities represented at the 
Siamese court. 
Foreigners were allowed to build 
their own towns and religious estab- 
lishments around the city proper. 
The Dutch, Portuguese, and Japanese 
towns occupied the best commercial 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

After its capture and 
destruction, Ayutya fell 
prey to plunderers and 
vandals who despoiled 
and defaced pagodas and 
shrines In their search for 
treasure. Traffic in works 
of art led to further 
ravages. Innumerable 
heads, like this one 
abandoned in the ruins, 
were removed from 
statues of the Buddha. 
- - x 
"ole aA 
- . 
A A 
- 
Sa
nd
y 
Ko
ff
le
r  Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

  
10 
AYUTYA (Continued) 
A unique contribution to world civilization 
positions, these being on the southern 
approach of all sea shipping. The 
king participated directly in the inter- 
national trade, maintained his own 
bank for money loans, and kept a 
private commercial fleet for shipping 
between India and Japan. 
Where now there is nothing but 
dense undergrowth and rice fields, 
there once flowed a rich life, full of 
bustling activities and colour, all based 
on water. The comings and goings 
of embassies and merchants, the 
ceremonial processions, the floating 
markets, music, court dancing were the 
essence of this remarkable aquatic 
society. When the city was sacked 
in 1767, its treasures were removed 
and its archives burnt. Robbers 
began a systematic uprooting of 
pagodas to find buried treasures. 
Then the jungle also moved in. 
The Thai Government has recently 
drawn up an ambitious scheme to 
make Ayutya a national historical park. 
The project was initiated by the Thai 
Department of Town and Country 
Planning which prepared a detailed 
plan in conjunction with the Fine Arts 
  
  
  
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris 
Beyond this portico stands the soaring 
pagoda of the Rajaburana 
temple built by King Boroma-raja Ii 
of Siam in the 14th century. 
The fire which swept through 
the city in the 18th century 
spared the portico and also the 
pagoda with its magnificent 
sculpted decorations. 
Department. Apart from its other 
cultural activities, this department is 
responsible for looking after all 
historical monuments throughout the 
country. 
The Department of Town and 
Country Planning is a newly- 
established office which, in drawing 
up development plans for towns and 
cities, not only considers the modern 
environment but also envisages the 
incorporation of existing historical 
landmarks into the overall design. It 
so happens that most of the towns 
throughout the kingdom are of an 
historical nature, and until recently 
still retained such historical landmarks 
as city walls and fortifications. There- 
fore in drawing up development plans 
for existing historical towns, the two 
departments work closely together. 
It was through the initiative of these 
authorities that the Thai cabinet met 
two years ago to discuss the problems 
of preserving what was left of the 
various city walls and fortifications, 
and decided to impose a strict order 
for the conservation of such national 
monuments. 
Ayutya, however, is different from 
other old towns because of its special 
significance to the country, having 
been the capital city of Siam for four 
centuries before the setting up of 
Bangkok as capital in 1782. In 
addition to the chaotic state of the 
ruins as the result of past vandalism, 
there are other problems such as 
modern encroachment, and the future 
expansion of a small town on the 
eastern rim of the old city. Some 
modern buildings have recently been 
built scattered among the ruins, 
often at the expense of the latter. 
The project aims to make a clear 
separation between the new town and 
the historical area. An old canal 
running north-south from the Palace 
of the Front to the old Chinatown acts 
as the demarcation between the 
modern town on the east, and the 
historical park on the west. A small 
part of the former island city will thus 
be given over to the development of 
the modern town. 
There are two reasons for this. 
First, the area in question is already 
partially urbanized, and mass eviction 
would be undesirable. Secondly, it is 
felt that the projected historical park 
immediately to the west should not 
be completely emptied of local people 
because their services may be needed 
to support the future tourist industry. 
In its final form, the project involves 
a rational allocation of urban and 
industrial centres away from the 
historical park, and a complete 
restoration scheme for the various 
ruins and canals. 
The project is a 20-year programme 
divided into three stages. The First 
Five Year Plan gives priority to the 
development of the modern town and 
to the prevention of any further 
modern encroachment into the his- 
torical area. It is assumed that at 
this stage there will be only a limited 
budget available for restoration work, 
all priority being given to Thailand's 
economic development. Even so, a 
definite move has been made towards 
long term planning in this field. 
The Second Five Year Plan involves 
projects for both the modern town 
and the historical park. As the jungle 
is cleared away, some of the old 
canals, brick-paved streets and bridges 
will be brought to light, and various 
palaces and temples uncovered and 
restored. Re-allocation to the modern 
zone of some of the modern 
buildings among the ruins will also 
begin. 
The last stage, a ten-year pro- 
gramme, involves clearing away the 
rest of the jungle and complete 
restoration work. At this stage many 
old canals will have been redug, 
serving not only as tourist attractions, 
but also as an essential part of a 
storm drainage system. The older 
eighth century city of Ayutya further 
to the south-east awaits a future 
research and restoration scheme. It 
should be mentioned that scattered 
throughout the country lie many walled 
cities and archaeological sites still 
covered by the jungle, and all awaiting 
researchers and funds for restoration. 
The Ayutya project will see many old 
waterways revived and buildings and 
fortifications properly restored. It 
will soon be possible for a visitor to 
meander once more along the 
innumerable canals of the old city 
among the palaces and pzgodas of 
the past. Thus, it is hoped, the 
aquatic culture of Ayutya will make a 
unique contribution to the civilizations 
of the world. 
 
SUMET JUMSAI NA AYUTYA is a young 
architect attached to the Department of 
Town and Country Planning in Bangkok. 
He is now doing research on urban symbo- 
lism and water towns at Cambridge Univer- 
sity School of Architecture.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

Above, detail of a 
17th-century sculpted pediment 
on the Wat Mae Nang 
Pluen at Ayutya. The 
central figure represents 
Garuda, the eagle with 
a human body and 
messenger of the god 
Vishnu. Right, an early 
20th-century view of Bangkok. 
In foreground a drawbridge 
of Dutch design spans a 
canal. In rear are temples 
and pagodas. Bangkok was 
built in the image of Ayutya, 
to which it succeeded 
as capital of Siam, today 
Thailand. The scene evokes 
an image of Ayutya at the 
time when it was one of 
Asia's great “water cities.” 
ay 
A 
Photo © Paul Almasy, Pan 
~ 
Ss 
  
  Ph
ot
e 
©
 
Br
it
is
h 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
 
[
R
Y
 
—

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 16925: The Controversy on continental drift

© 1964 Bruce Heezen and Marie Tharp 
Reproduced by permission 
ion 
ific -sponsored by Unesco and the Scienti 
nat 
ic Research of the Intemational Council of Scientific Unions. 
ty 
il of a physiographic diagram 
ocean ranges, estimated to he 
Part of this system runs through the Indian Ocean into the Arabian 
ished by the Geological Socie 
enters Africa along the Great Rift Valley. 
b= 
@ Q @ [2] 
» 
o
o
n
 
© 
5 
oN 
=] qn 
QO 
= 
'E 
PTY 
o
e
 
£5 
° 
s
o
n
 
«
3
a
 
© 
w 
ov 
a 
Pe 
> 
B
E
»
 
=
 
£
0
 
bi} 
K
Y
 
[1] 
©
 
© 
rr 
pd 
24 
20 
££ 
= 
» 
“ 
E 
0
5
 
[= 
£
 
3
C
 
=
o
 
* 
o
s
 
h
n
 
$5285 
3 n O 
o
k
 
t
3
a
8
 
L
 
a
=
 
P
N
 
cs 
2
C
S
 
= 
~
~
 
w
n
 
o
o
 
2
°
h
 
g
L
 
T
E
s
o
y
 
g
o
r
d
a
 
°
~
 
c 
[
h
-
I
 
3
2
 
5 
3
e
a
d
 
EDO" 
vw 
1q 
°
o
 
Pad 
3S 
[
A
 
o 
© 
Gg 
E
s
o
 
= 
0 
N 
E 
o 
C
a
s
o
o
3
8
.
=
 
[] 
£
5
 
2
o
5
c
 
Eg 
E2223 
C
0
 
.
a
v
e
-
T
 
a
l
 
"
8
2
>
 
5
°
 
x
8
 
“— 
S 
. 
ow 
2
 
O
p
r
—
€
 
F
B
S
 
s
a
n
t
 g
O
 
“
E
s
 
o
f
8
g
o
0
 
E
T
=
*
 
w
o
o
o
 
S
E
S
E
 
E 
G
O
E
L
 
5 
Es 
o
o
 
mm 
E
C
 
- 
L
O
 
s
S
E
C
E
 
2
.
2
8
2
0
 
55 
“
w
o
 
LL 
[YS 
>
O
F
N
M
 
E
S
E
 
i 
Pails 
\' 
bite 
10 
a 
Ld 
L
l
 
  
y 
o
l
!
 
N 
0
 
hn 
{ 
| 
yl 
1 
WV 
: 
, 
J 
~ 
s
h
e
 
MN 
I
.
 
. 
! 
\' 
’ 
\ 
- 
e
y
 
. 
> 
 ¥ 
h
w
 
a, 
| 
A
T
V
 
re 
A 
N
g
,
 
“i. 
a 
r
i
 
-'e 
I 4 
Aver 
| 
L
T
T
 
C
A
 
SW 
C
o
 
a! Wl 
Y
E
 
Tal 
) 
: 
W
l
 J 
JR 
c
r
e
!
 
iy 
A 
od 
Le 
Hi) 
Ll 
ED 
p } i 
\ 
Din 
Wy 
\ ) » 
\ ~
 
5 
 

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 16925: The Controversy on continental drift

- THE CONTROVERSY 
CONTINENTAL DRIFT 
by Daniel Behrman 
ON 
N OT so long ago, it was fashionable to remark that we knew less about 
the ocean floor than the face of the moon. Despite progress in 
space exploration, this is no longer true. The Second International Oceanographic Congress, held in Moscow last June, heard reports of what can only be 
described as a breakthrough—no matter how much scientists hate the word—in 
man’s knowledge of the ocean floor and, consequently, of the processes that 
shape the earth (1). 
PR
 
C
a
,
 
3
 
> 
_ 
> 
C
o
 
M
a
g
 
g
o
 
¥. 
a
 = 5 
ig’ 
+ 
Te
 
E
N
 
4 
D
t
 
A e
e
 
  
  
Papers read at the congress by 
marine geologists from a number of 
nations—and notably Britain, the United 
States and the U.S.S.R.—showed huge 
progress not only in charting the ocean 
floor but in our understanding of how 
it works. 
For it does “work.” Our planet's 
youngest rocks are on the bottom of 
the sea and intense “manufacturing” 
activity takes place along the mid- 
ocean ridges that have now been found 
in every ocean. 
One of the most startling interpreta- 
tions of marine geophysical findings 
heard at the congress was presented 
by Dr. Bruce Heezen, Dr. Dragoslav 
Ninkovich and Dr. Neil Opdyke of 
Lamont Geological Observatory at Pali- 
sades, New York. They correlated 
reversals in the earth's magnetic field 
during the past three million years with 
major evolutionary mutations in marine 
life. 
A sampling of 5,000 cores drilled out 
of the sea bottom in all oceans to a 
depth of ten metres of sediment sugg- 
ests, they stated, that the earth's mag- 
netic field has first disappeared and 
then reversed at intervals between half 
a million and a million years. 
No magnetic field means no mag- 
netic shield. And this means intense 
bombardment of the earth by cosmic 
rays producing a disastrous effect on 
life. “Some species are completely 
killed off, other species are created,” 
Dr. Heezen noted. “Of current interest 
is the fact that the magnetic field is 
now decreasing and if this drop con- 
tinues for 2,000 years, it will be zero. 
| don’t want to sound like an alarmist 
but we may be next.” 
In the background of this research 
can be found the impressive advances 
recorded by marine geophysics in the 
last seven years. 
One such advance has been the 
magnetic surveying of the deep ocean. 
Off the coasts of California and Can- 
ada, a strange pattern of zebra 
stripes running north and south was 
recorded by magnetometers. A similar 
pattern was found by Soviet re- 
searchers in the Arctic. 
One theory of their’ origin is that 
new rock is polarized magnetically as 
it spews out of the median crack in 
mid-ocean ridges and is laid down on 
the sea floor. When it cools, this 
magnetism is frozen and remains con- 
stant as “paleomagnetism”™ despite 
later reversals in the magnetic field. 
The stripe is formed when new rock 
appears after a reversal. 
In the research described by 
Dr. Heezen, pencil-sized samples of 
deep-sea sediment cores were placed 
in magnetometers. The results imply 
that our magnetic north has been 
north only for the past 700,000 years; 
before that it was reversed for a time, 
so that a compass would have pointed 
south. These reversals, he explained, 
could be caused by disturbances with- 
in the earth's core which acts as a 
dynamo. 
Nine hundred thousand years ago 
there was another brief reversal; others 
occurred 1,900,000 years and 2,400,000 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
  
(1) The Congress, organized by the 
U.S.S.R. government and the Soviet Aca- 
demy of Sciences, under the auspices of 
Unesco, enabled over 1,700 oceanographers 
from 57 countries to take stock of progress 
in the study of the sea since the First 
International Oceanographic Congress was 
held seven years ago in New York. Under 
the general theme of "Ocean Research for 
the Benefit of Mankind,” the Moscow 
congress covered four major fields of 
study: ocean and atmosphere, ocean and 
life, marine geology and oceanography of 
the Antarctic and the Indian Ocean (special 
studies of the findings of the 25-nation 
Indian Ocean Expedition—1959-1965).

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 16925: The Controversy on continental drift

     
  
14 
» 
CONTINENTAL DRIFT (Continued) 
When the North was at the South Pole 
years ago. Study of the cores shows, 
Dr. Heezen stated, that the earth's 
magnetic field did not simply change 
direction but disappeared for a period 
as long as 10,000 years. 
During this period of full exposure 
to cosmic rays, drastic changes occur- 
red. Examination of fossil organisms 
in cores showed, for example, that 
one microscopic species of radiolaria 
had no spines before magnetic reversal 
but sprouted them afterwards. 
The magnetic zebra-striping, already 
detected on two per cent of the earth's 
surface, is not all that marine geolo- 
gists have found on the ocean floor. 
Their main achievements were reported 
to the congress in a masterly review 
by Sir Edward Bullard, head of the 
department of geodesy and geophysics 
at Cambridge University. 
Next in importance, he ranked the 
discovery of continental blocks in the 
middle of the ocean—that is, islands 
formed of old granite rather than the 
young basalts of the ocean floor. The 
Seychelles group, for example, is “a 
continent in everything but size” geo- 
logically speaking, and he suspected 
other oceanic areas as being of conti- 
nental origin as well. Continental 
rocks are much less magnetic than 
oceanic rocks, thereby giving away 
their origin. 
Work has also been done on the 
structural transition of the earth from 
the continent to the ocean. Magnetic 
surveys show that the old pre-Tertiary 
folding of Western Europe's mountains 
can be traced out across the continen- 
tal shelf... where it suddenly ends. 
The folding of younger ranges like the 
western Andes, however, has been fol- 
lowed magnetically all the way into the 
ocean basin. 
Sir Edward then touched on the 
theory of continental drift seen in 
certain quarters as confirmed by the 
intense activity of the mid-ocean 
ridges. The theory was discussed in 
much greater detail by Dr. Robert S. 
Dietz, of the Environmental Science 
Service Administration in Washington, 
who regaled congress participants with 
slides showing how continents might 
once have fitted. 
The most classic example of such 
a fit is what Dr. Dietz called “the knee 
of South America into the groin of 
Africa.” Working with computers, he 
has been able to fit India against 
Australia, Magadascar against India 
and Australia against Antarctica. A 
few missing pieces—each the size of 
Texas—are needed to complete this 
picture, and Dr, Dietz thinks they are 
lying on the floor of the Indian Ocean. 
His studies have led him to discard 
the idea of a single, primordial world 
continent, known as Pangaea, in favour 
of two super-continents each measur- 
ing 32 million squares miles—Laurasia 
in the Northen Hemisphere and Gond- 
wana in the Southern. 
Dr. Dietz and other proponents of 
the drift theory believe that the pro- 
cess began 150 million years ago, went 
on energetically for 50 million years 
and has reappeared less markedly 
in the past 20 million years. On the 
basis of movement observed along the 
San Andreas Fault in California, he 
estimates the present rate of drift at 
from 1 to 5cm (% to 2 in.) a year. 
However, the big question among 
geophysicists at the congress was not 
whither but whether we are drifting. 
Prof. V. V. Beloussov, of the Institute 
of Geophysics of the U.S.S.R. Aca- 
demy of Sciences, is still far from 
convinced (see the Unesco Courier, 
Oct. 1963). 
At the congress, he marshalled a 
number of impressive arguments. In 
particular, he maintained that processes 
affecting the earth's crust are rooted 
deep in its mantle, as much as 700 
to 1,000 kms (430 to 620 miles) down. 
This leads him to believe that the crust 
cannot move over the mantle—and also 
that movement of a layer of several 
hundred kilometres of crust and mantle 
is impossible for mechanical and other 
reasons. 
Continental drift is one of those geo- 
Photo © Les Requins Assoclés, Parls

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 16925: The Controversy on continental drift

### 21782: Diving saucers and sea-going laboratories

Diving salcers ¢ ad sea ging laboratories 
gu g 
ERR world's oceanographers may finall 
be railog by new tools now being put at the 
disposal of researchers (see photo story on follow- 
ing pages). 
ere offered 
WE “oceanic Stat 
ok 
vessel, 
~ undersea laboratories, buoys and di ing sg 
Previews of many Cli these devic the : 
Sp floating EET! 2 
skims the sea bed after i 
launched from its mother ship. Light and 
‘highly manceuverable, it can carry out exploratio 
J missions down to depths of 300 
a ] rah i, 7 - 
6: scauired by the expedition service cf the U.S.S.R. 
Academy of Sciences, is the largest ship 
ever built specifically for oceanographic research. 
~ carries 84 scientists and houses 22 laboratorie 
~~ and is almost as manceuverable as a rowboa 
{ 4 has a Separate electric motor and propeller on its 
logical theories, that have, as Sir 
Edward Bullard remarked in his lecture, 
“the great merit of suggesting nu- 
merous experiments and observations 
to verify or refute them.” 
One way to verify or refute conti- 
nental drift is to drill a hole in the 
earth's mantle under the ocean floor 
to see if it consists only of new rocks 
—which would indicate that the conti- 
nents have moved apart in the past 
100 million years. 
This is the purpose of the Mohole 
project designed by the United States 
to probe through the Mohorovicic dis- 
continuity layer between the crust and 
the mantle. At the congress, Dr. Henry 
Menard, of the Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography in the United States 
described the phases of the project. 
Its floating platform is expected to be 
ready in two years when it will be 
taken to a point 1,000 kms (620 miles) 
west of Southern California to drill 
about 350 metres (1,200 ft.) into the 
sea bottom at a depth of four kms 
(2% miles). 
If this experiment succeeds, the next 
point of research will be 500 kms (310 
miles) northeast of Oahu in the Ha- 
waiian Islands where an attempt will 
be made to drill at a depth of 4.5 kms 
(about 3 miles) through another 
4.5 kilometres of the sea floor down to 
rudder for working at slow speeds 
~ and can turn a full circle while 
‘advancing only 14 metres (45 feet). 
the mantle. It is planned to drill ten 
holes in the next twenty years. 
Prof. Beloussov also reported on a 
Soviet project now under considera- 
tion to drill down seven kms (about 
four miles)—this time on land—in the 
Kola Peninsula of northern Russia 
where there is a possibility of reaching 
the basaltic layer of the earth's crust. 
“These two projects form an en- 
semble,” Prof. Beloussov commented. 
Drilling holes, therefore, is the next 
step in geophysical exploration of the 
ocean bottom but it will have to await 
the proper tools. Once they are ready, 
they will spur marine geology in the 
future as much as the development of 
“sparkers” and “air guns” as sound 
sources replacing explosives in seismic 
refraction work has done in the recent 
past. 
Few sciences are evolving as fast as 
oceanography, and oceanographic re- 
search, while supplying answers to 
many vital problems, is also opening 
up new fields of investigation. Com- 
menting on the results of the Moscow 
congress, a Canadian scientist, Dr. 
Robert W. Stewart. of the University 
of British Columbia, observed: “The 
area of our known ignorance has been 
greatly extended.” 
Dr. Stewart is wrestling with one 
of the trickiest problems facing ocean- 
tha displacement of 6,8 
| length of 124 metres 
hip 
Ea ER gi 
LN a 
hb EE 4 
Photo © APN 
ographers—the interaction between 
the ocean and the atmosphere, and 
the consequent effects of the sea on 
the weather. 
Recent research has brought out 
that half a day of 60-knot winds affects 
the ocean more than a month of 
15-knot winds, setting up momentum 
that remains in the sea as much as 
a year. Dr. Stewart felt that further 
investigations should concentrate on 
the effects of very local storms. 
An example of such air-sea inter- 
action on a global scale was report- 
ed to the congress by Prof. Jakob 
Bjerknes, of the University of Cali- 
fornia, who presented an apparent 
paradox: when surface waters are 
warm in the equatorial Pacific, Europe 
has a cold winter. 
Prof. Bjerknes turned to the period 
from 1955 to 1958 when this phenom- 
enon appeared. It began when the 
prevailing easterlies along the equator 
weakened to the point where they 
no longer drove currents hard enough 
to produce normal upwelling of cold 
water from the depths. The Paclfic's 
“equatorial heat source” of warm 
water became much greater. 
This was a case not of winds driv- 
ing the ocean but of the ocean driving 
the winds. “When heat is high in 
the equatorial zone from South Ame- 
rica to the mid-Pacific, the Northern 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 31 
flo 4 
: 5 _— 
—p— Td, 
 
   
13

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 21782: Diving saucers and sea-going laboratories

  
DIVING SAUCERS (Cc 
  
   
    
    
 
    
| Et orth i Wan Se fol LAN ala 
er instead of waiting months to learn of its existence. 
fi And computers not only Fi more information 
The other is the Silas Bent, a 2364-ton ship i oe Ral ie 
operated by the United States Naval Oceano- ~~ AS, Sr Sal TY MAT pT 
‘graphic Office, and probably the most automated The congress was given a review of the recent 
“oceanographic vessel now in operation. While 546 which has seen such developments as FLIP, 
“under way, she can simultaneously measure depth, an American vessel 108 metres (355 feet) “long 
‘magnetic intensity, gravity, sea surface tempera- hat flips 90 degrees to become the most stable 
ture and the structure of the bottom. On station,  pjatform ever used at sea (see page 18) and a 
she iste Sone package corirueudly nee fain, ower Sed oy Soviet Goearogrrhers 
and light as far down as 6,100 metres (20,000 feet). the Caspian Sea to make wave measurements. 
and a meteorological rocket launcher 
l i * 
   
   
  
   
     
   
. b oo wT. Poni ys Th eit Hap! elle R pid mi AN 
od Co AE Green of orn che «Some of the least spectacular instruments have 
handle this Gulf Stream of data she | proved the most valuable. One is the “Swallow 
system” where information is immediately pro. Hn hamed Fleer the Br: Sceanogrenher who 
ah iv an" all- diaital ¢ ~7 77 designed it. This is simply a neutrally-buoyant 
RON Sssee by presl-puipose cigfal esmputer, ~~ float which can be set to drift at a at dont 7 
Computers like the ones aboard the Silas Be and follow a current, and which reveals its posi- 
and the Akademik Kurchatov can mean the tion by “pings”. Another huge advance is repre- 
difference between survey and research at sea. 
‘equipped with a “central data recording sub- 
sented by instruments measuring the conductivity 
Immediate processing of data enables a ship's and. therefore, the salinity of the sea, thus elimin- 
“chief scientist to change his research programme ating much tedious chemical analysis of wa er 
so as explore an interesting phenomenon— sé rr DO ai gy OL A 24 
Ta = ig Te EY a i Ty ai Te hm  
   
    of] 1 0 
A tal s 
Ne ©     ® 
 
: DRIFTING LABORATORY. Scientists at the Honolulu Biologica! Laboratory use this incongruous- 
looking seaborne house to study the behaviour of fishes, many species of which tend to gather 
| . : under floating objects at sea. Named “Nenue” (after one of the so-called “rudderfish” that 
| ay Sa Rp Eo are reputed to follow ships) it has a metal caisson with viewing ports suspended beneath it 
| : Phase Bussey Sommercis] # 1gTiss ‘From this vantage point, biologists have counted as many as 60 species of fish gathered 
© U.S. Fisheries and Wildife Service © around the craft. Some of their observations will be of great value to fishermen. 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 21782: Diving saucers and sea-going laboratories

            
od 
b
r
i
t
 
~ 
Ph
ot
o 
US
IS
 
EXPLORING / A NEW FRONTIER. For 4 5 days'lastiyean a group 
of 28 U.S. volunteer “aquanauts” lived on the ocean floor, or 
half a mile off the California coast, inside a 17 metres (57 ft.) ste 8]. 
~ cylinder, called “Sealab 11", anchored 62 metres (200 ft.) deep. 
At times the “aquanauts” left the cylinder to engage La 
oceanographic and marine biology research and 
to undergo physiological ELT CUT TEL DEER EH designed. to 
~ determine man's ability to live and work under the sea. x2 TEAR 
Here, an “aquanaut” repairs transmission apparatus ~ Photo © Pierre de Latil, Paris 
waiclied by, Tiricle sreciors gt the periisle. 
MIDGET SUBMARINE. This remarkable underwater 
research craft, the U.S. midget submarine “Alvin”, can 
‘carry a crew of two and a wide assortment of scientific 
instruments to an ocean depth greater than 1,800 metres 
(6,000 ft). “Alvin” is 6.6 metres (21 ft.) long ELCRUTS 
fibreglass portholes in its pressure sphere are 17 cms. 
(CRLER RUS Equipped with 3 propellers for speed 
‘and manceuverability, “Alvin” can cruise at 4.6 kms. 
Lis ign. pers four for. 30:40 lms. Ro2s miles). : 
Sybmeries | i" 
of them were | 
id power 2 
data i HE EST 
y Pa) ow? lL = wi i i ay 
ea vehicles have already or Conon © Wg Ser 
    
othe 3 for 3 th ry @ deep SIE 
the Toe pe re br lt can mea- 
sure temperature to 1/100,000th a degree anc 5 
=P pressure. to a A 0 of 1 millimetre (1/25 inch; 
8 “water coluran’ lometres €] miles) deep. 
a pod 6 m sms of data on magnetic 
a) “ 48 4 - A " Ph 
TELENAUT. This . Frencl aa submersible, CARTY 
controlled from a surface ship by a two-way cable 
~ transmitting power and orders from above and information 
~ from below. Carrying a combined television-cinematograph 
era, it can operate at a depth of 1,000 metres (3,300 ft.). 
When something of interest is picked up on the 
‘television screen, it is immediately recorded by the film = 
camera. “Telenaut” is also equipped with a grappling arm 
ca Bpalile. of liRing objects weighing! 50 kilogrammes did Ise) y 
ES Ho 5 TE 
  
gy
 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 21782: Diving saucers and sea-going laboratories

 sea-going scientists. They now have one 
“FLIP (for Floating Instrument Platform), 
~ 108 metres (355 ft.)-long, 600-ton craft d 
‘signed and built in the United States. Here is 
~ how FLIP flips. (1) Having no motive power o 
her own, she is towed in the horizontal position 
to her research station. (2, 3, 4) As the cre 
~ floods the ballast tanks with some 1,500 to 
EEC UR ECAR CW TCI TET TE EEE HR ER ET 
slowly sinks. (5) Suddenly, the whole 15 metres 
(50 ft.) of the prow abruptly lifts in a matter 
of seconds. The whole operation has taken 
only 15 minutes. Ninety metres (300 ft.) of the 
~ vessel now extend into the ocean, exerting a 
strong stabilizing influence. In the working 
portion of FLIP are four stories for use of 
crew and scientists (photo right). FLIP has 
em. 3 i 
= ui 
  
   
  
   
  
© 3 gon 
  
    
- lt a] 2 oy ,r 
- * ’ fl y it . OR yl SA 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 21782: Diving saucers and sea-going laboratories

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

20 
| he Earth seen 
from 
Photos NASA 


### 17602: New ways to explore the planets

NEW WAYS TO EXPLORE 
THE PLANETS 
  
  
ra 
Though it appears to be a crescent moon in the night sky, this object is actually the earth photographed for the first time: from deep space—from a distance of over 380,000 kms (236,000 miles}—by the U.S. spacecraft, Lunar Orbifer l, as it made its 16th orbit of the moon on August 23, 1966. Complete photo (right) shows part of the lunar surface, only 27 miles beneath the spacecraft.

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 17602: New ways to explore the planets

a ate 3 HE NA dy 
ANI RR a ak 
  
  
  
  
by 
William H. Pickering 
F OR many centuries, the 
planets of the solar system 
have been objects of study by astron- 
omers. Before the invention of the 
telescope, these studies were restrict- 
ed to an attempt to understand and 
predict their motion. 
Very precise observations in the late 
sixteenth century led to the conclusion 
that the planets moved in orbits around 
the sun, and from this, the modern 
concept of the solar system was 
established. 
Telescopes and accurate clocks 
allowed even more precise observa- 
tions, and outer planets, Neptune and 
Pluto, were discovered. 
Telescopes also provided astron- 
omers with their first evidence of the 
sizes and surface appearances of the 
planets, and of the existence of their 
moons. 
Then came the space programme, 
and the possibility of performing exper- 
iments on, or at least near to, other 
planets. Not only have active flight 
programmes of planetary investigation 
been established by the U.S. National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
but also ground-based observations 
have been greatly strengthened. 
Scientists from many disciplines in- 
cluding biology, geology, physics and 
chemistry, have found opportunities to 
conduct research in this new field of 
planetology. 
Since World War |l, many devices 
other than rockets have extended 
man's capability for planetary research. 
For example, telescopic observations 
have been improved by the use of bet- 
ter photographic film, including colour 
film, and by various electronic instru- 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
DR. WILLIAM H. PICKERING has been 
director of the let Propulsion Laboratory, 
California Institute of Technology, Pasa- 
dena, U.S.A., since 1954. The Caltec Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, as it is known, has 
been involved in rocket propulsion and 
space flight since 1936. It was responsible 
for the launching of the first rocket to enter 
space in 1949, the launching of the first 
U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958 and the 
development of the U.S. Ranger, Mariner 
and Surveyor spacecraft. 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 17602: New ways to explore the planets

2] 
EXPLORING THE PLANETS (Continued) 
Venus turns slowly counterclockwise 
ments. Sensitive infra-red detectors 
have become available. Spectroscopy 
has taken advantage of improved tech- 
nology. Radio telescopes have be- 
come sensitive enough to make plane- 
tary measurements. 
Within the past few years still 
greater steps have been taken. Tele- 
scopes have been lifted above the 
atmosphere with balloons. Radar 
signals have been reflected from the 
planets. Spacecraft have been sent 
to the vicinity of Venus and Mars. 
Soon an astronomical observatory will 
be orbiting the earth. Spacecraft will 
be sent to orbit nearby planets, and 
capsules from them will land on the 
surface. 
The first radar echo observed from 
any heavenly body was in January 
1946, when a group of U.S. Army 
Signal Corps engineers succeeded in 
detecting a signal reflected from the 
moon. By 1961, echoes had been de- 
tected from the planet Venus. Consid- 
ering that the distance to Venus is 
more than 100 times as great as that 
to the moon, this is an indication of 
the remarkable improvement in radar 
technology during this period of 15 
years. 
But it is not sufficient merely to de- 
tect an echo from a planet. Useful 
scientific information requires measure- 
ment of the properties of the echo. 
The time at which the echo occurs 
gives the range to the target. Echo 
power provides information on the 
scattering properties of the target. The 
echo’s radio frequency shift measures 
the relative velocity of target and 
receiver. Frequency dispersion meas- 
ures the rotation of the target, rela- 
tive to a line perpendicular to the di- 
rection of the receiver. Results 
obtained by these methods have prov- 
ed that radar is an exceedingly 
valuable new tool for planetary explor- 
ation, 
The distance from earth to the planet 
Venus has been measured to an accu- 
racy of about 25 kilometres (15 miles). 
These data supplement astronomical 
observations in a useful way. Astro- 
nomical data consist of angle measu- 
rements versus time. By adding pre- 
cise range to the astronomical data, 
the geometry and motions of the plan- 
ets can be calculated to a very much 
greater precision than formerly. 
Venus is a particularly interesting 
case because astronomical observa- 
tions had not been able to establish 
any definite rotation rate since no vis- 
ible fixed surface features were 
available. Spectroscopic observations 
indicated a very slow rotation but the 
data contained large uncertainties. The 
radar data showed unequivocally that 
Venus does indeed rotate slowly coun- 
terclockwise with a rotation period of 
about 250 days. 
Radar observations of Mercury and 
Mars have also yielded useful infor- 
mation. Jupiter has been detected by 
radar both at the U.S. Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory and by a U.S.S.R. group. 
Because of the great distance, and 
the large frequency dispersion due to 
rotation of the planet, Jupiter turns out 
to be a very difficult target. 
Planetary radar offers many oppor- 
tunities for extended research activi- 
ties, Systems are becoming more 
sensitive as transmitter power and 
antenna diameters increase while re- 
ceiver temperatures go lower. Other 
than the moon, Venus will continue 
to be the most attractive target. Con- 
tinuing study will provide a radar map 
of the planet. 
Within the past five years the possi- 
bility of sending instruments to the 
planets has advanced from speculation 
to reality. The United States has suc- 
cessfully sent two spacecraft to other 
planets: Mariner Il to Venus and Mar- 
iner IV to Mars. The Soviet Union 
sent a number of probes towards 
Venus, and after a three-month flight, 
the Soviet Venera 3 probe reached 
the surface of the planet on March |, 
1966. 
These flights clearly open up a whole 
new era in planetology. 
As a practical matter, the energy 
available from a booster rocket is 
limited and, therefore, on most mis- 
sions the spacecraft will fly to another 
planet along an orbit which requires 
minimum energy. To come near the 
target planet, it will be necessary to 
launch at a specified time when the 
earth and the planet are in the correct 
relative positions. 
This means that launch, and arrival 
at the planet, occur at times determin- 
ed by solar-system geometry. If, there- 
fore, an experiment requires observa- 
tions at some particular season on 
Mars, a flight will be possible only 2 at 
certain launch periods. 
Because the orbits of the planets 
are on different planes, the energy re- 
quired to send a spacecraft to another 
planet varies with the launch date. For 
example, in the case of Mars the lowest 
Ph
ot
o 
- 
Ob
se
rv
at
oi
re
 
du
 
Pi
c 
du
 
Mi
di
 
- 
B.
 
Ly
ot
 
Ph
ot
e 
US
IS
 
7 Vv 
¥ } 
1 
   
minimum energy orbit will occur in 
1969 and the highest in 1973. The 
cycle repeats in a 15-year period. The 
1969 launch requires that the space- 
craft leave the earth's gravitational 
field with a velocity of 2.8 kms. 
(1.7 miles) per second. In 1973, this 
will rise to 4.0 kms (2.5 miles) a sec- 
ond. The size of spacecraft which 
can be launched with a given booster 
will vary accordingly. 
Data sent back to earth from space- 
craft in the vicinity of a planet must 
travel vast distances. Hence, the com- 
munication system must be designed so 
that the maximum data rate is kept as 
low as possible. The instrumentation 
selected for the spacecraft must there- 
fore be designed to satisfy the low data 
requirement, or else must provide a 
data storage system able to collect 
data over a short period of time and 
send it over the communication link 
sufficiently slowly to meet the rate 
specification, 
Instruments designed to fly on a 
spacecraft must, of course, operate 
in the spacecraft environment. This 
environment can be divided into three

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 17602: New ways to explore the planets

FIRST M1 
CLOSE-UP | " t 
OF MARS i 
‘iM 
In the 350 years since 
. the telescope was in- 
vented, probably more 
time has been devoted i, 
to viewing and photo- } 
graphing Mars than to 
any other planet. Its 
varied colouring and 
polar caps. which appear 
to change with the Hi 
seasons, and its straight- 
line markings suggestive " 
of a rectangular net- f 
work of canals have H 
given rise to all kinds 
of theories. Top left, this 
view of Mars is repre- 
sentative of the best 
that can be made 
with the aid of earth- 
bound telescopes. Hence- 
forth. observations ob- 
tained through space ii 
probes are likely to ‘MN 
clear up many of the | 
mysteries of Mars. On Hid 
July 14, 1965, the U.S. 
spacecraft, Mariner IV, 
after a 228-day trip came 
within some 9,650 kms. 
(6,000 miles) of Mars and 
took a series of photos 
of the planet. Right, on 
one of these photos «a 
series of giant craters 
is visible. Bottom left. 
Mariner IV being pre- 
pared. The four arms 
are solar batteries to 
power instruments. At 
centre, protected by cover, 
is a television camera. 
  ———
—
—
—
—
 
- 
hi J 
ul dal 
{ il ! 
categories: launch, free-fall in the vacu- 
um of space, and landing on another 
planet or re-entry and landing on the 
earth. Each category has its prob- 
lems. 
The launch is characterized primar- 
ily by severe vibration and accelera- 
tion. Coasting in space presents prob- 
lems due to the long exposure to a 
vacuum. The landing or re-entry period 
presents further vibration and accel- 
eration problems, possibly complicat- 
ed by the gaseous constituents of a 
planetary atmosphere. 
While instruments have been built 
to operate properly in each of these 
environments, it is not an easy task. 
The worst environment is usually the 
vibration at launch. But the effects of 
a vacuum should not be minimized. 
These may include evaporation of in- 
strument materials; problems of lubri- 
cation of bearing surfaces; and temp- 
erature problems caused by the dis- 
appearance of convective cooling. 
Electrical problems may arise due 
to the passage through the atmosphere 
from sea level pressure to the vacuum 
  
    i 
Hi l lint 
  
" i hi! hi 
   
  
» 
—
—
—
 
r
—
—
—
—
—
—
.
 
A 
r
—
 
 
—
—
—
—
 
wi 
} WH 
i 
tf | 
A
 
—
 
  
iH 
] 
gr < 
J) hii! i] 
iki oh {id i 
i i i 4 ; ili 
gti {F ik 
{ils is : i 
i : 1 RETRY FT 
3 : 4 
  
  ih 1H 1 
ig i 
  
Wii if ith 
A bi 
of space, or from leakage of sealed 
compartments, 
In addition to the environmental con- 
straints, the instrument designer must 
live with weight, volume and power 
consumption specifications. On most 
spacecraft to date, these constraints 
have been quite stringent. However, 
looking into the future when larger 
boost vehicles become available, they 
should be relaxed. 
A spacecraft designed to land in- 
struments on another planet introduces 
still another constraint, namely the re- 
quirement for biological sterilization. 
One of the very interesting experiments 
which will be conducted on the surface 
of Mars is the search for life. There- 
fore, all space flight apparatus which 
has any probability of landing on Mars 
must be sterile to insure that life forms 
from earth will not be transported to 
the planet. 
The methods by which a large space- 
craft can be made completely sterile, 
and maintained in that condition through 
the launching, are currently being deve- 
loped. One possibility is a require- 
ment that the complete spacecraft be 
A i bi ih i 
| i 
aA 
ia kit % 
: 
rl > » 
   
    AL i 
itt 
: : te hil lif 
ii il : 
  
     
| 
d fil Ls i ili mh! 
: il $1 1 
iHiftil il il he TAME TE 
i hy hi if hi " af Tl 
Hi . hd : i. 
: 
: il i i iifh it iit 
i Hi Hi {Hi Ai TH i " 
H : : E Li ig8! : i 
i" it fi ih iH 
He il he i att : iN + $ 
eto 1 ar 
{4 ith itr! i) alle Hi i Bi $i T 1 i 
LHe 1 in ii h fH if 
ul ii iil 
fii 
I. Ba ; 
ay : si * 
titi hi 3M 
: 
: 
111 
: 
He 
Hit i 
| bl       
| ii dui 1 {i tik dh td 
pil ti $i i Hi fo! ig 
Photo NASA 
sterilized by heating above the boiling 
point for an extended period of time. 
In this case, of course, instruments 
would have to be constructed out of 
materials and components which could 
stand such treatment. 
Finally, there is the question of 
reliability on the long journey through 
space. Some instruments are required 
to work continuously for many months. 
Others are needed only in the vicinity 
of the planet. These must turn on 
reliably, with the correct calibrations, 
after the long exposure to space vacu- 
um and radiations. All equipment 
aboard the spacecraft must operate 
perfectly the first and only time it is 
given a completely realistic test. Once 
the launch button has been pushed 
there is no opportunity to make an 
adjustment or to replace a component. 
Mariner IV, which flew past Mars 
on July 14, 1965, illustrates the scien- 
tific instruments aboard a planetary 
spacecraft. 
In Mariner IV, the television system, 
mounted on a platform, was designed 
to scan the sky near the planet unt 
a photoelectric device “locked on” to 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
   
   
       
        
     
    
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
    
   Hi CR ta ban 
    
 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 17602: New ways to explore the planets

24 
Jupiter and 
ifs moons 
Jupiter, the 
largest of the 
planets, has a 
volume nearly 
1,300 times that or 
of the earth. 
Only Venus 
is brighter than 3 
Jupiter, whose - ) 
surface is hidden 
by bands of clouds. 
Twelve satellites 
orbit the giant 
planet, and the 
four largest— 
discovered by 
Galileo—are about 
the size of our 
moon. This view 
of Jupiter, taken 
through a telescope 
in 1962, reveals 
the satellite 
Ganymede 
(far left); 
Ganymede’s 
shadow 
(darker circle at 
centre) and the 
satellite lo 
(white disc at right). 
TH 
EXPLORING THE PLANETS (Continued) 
  
Photo - Observatoire du Pic du Midi, France 
Unmanned spacecraft for the solar system 
the planet and pointed the camera in 
the proper direction. The platform 
remained fixed while the motion of 
the spacecraft across the planet allow- 
ed the camera to take a series of 
photographs of the surface. These 
were stored on a magnetic tape and 
later played back to earth. The tele- 
vision system weighed 5 kilogrammes 
(11 pounds) and required 8 watts of 
power, 
Data from these instruments, and 
from 90 others measuring spacecraft 
performance, were collected in a data 
automation system, processed into 
“digital” form, and routed to the trans- 
mitter in the correct sequence, This 
data automation system contained 
about 11,000 components. It weighed 
5.4 kilogrammes (12 pounds) and re- 
quired 6.5 watts of power. 
The large amount of data received 
from Mariner was processed at the 
Space Flight Operation Facility in Pasa- 
dena, California. Within five minutes 
of receipt of the telemetry signal, both 
scientific and engineering data were 
available for initial evaluation. 
During the spacecraft's seven-month 
journey to Mars, weekly summary re- 
ports and tapes were made available 
to each experimenter at the laboratory. 
The final data are being collected into 
a master data library. There, the Mar- 
iner-transmitted data, organized into 
digital form, are available for computer 
processing by the experimenters. 
Mariner IV represents the most so- 
phisticated planetary spacecraft the 
U.S. has yet launched. It performed 
very well but its capability was limited 
by the 258-kilogramme (525-pound) 
total weight constraint. The next gen- 
eration of spacecraft, the Voyager 
series, will weigh more than ten times 
as much and will be capable of mis- 
sions considerably more extensive. 
Present plans call for both orbiting 
and landing versions of Voyager, start- 
ing in 1971, for Mars exploration. 
Later, Voyager will be used for a Venus 
mission and possibly for others. The 
detailed plans for the first Voyager are 
not yet complete. Many experiments 
have been proposed and are now under, 
consideration. J 
Exploration of the solar system has 
indeed entered a new era. The two 
foregoing examples—planetary radar 
experiments from the earth, and space- 
craft experiments at other planets— 
offer spectacular opportunities for in- 
vestigating our neighbouring planets. 
Radar experiments have shown that 
solar system geometrical relationship 
can be determined with extreme accur- 
acy, and that extensive new informa- 
tion on planetary surfaces can be ob- 
tained to supplement that from obser- 
vation with visible or infra-red light. 
Unmanned spacecraft travelling to 
the planets have demonstrated that 
complex experiments can be operated 
successfully at planetary distances, 
and that these craft can obtain much 
important information and permit close- 
up observations of the planets with 
television and other instruments. 
Eventually such craft may convey 
data from instruments landed on a 
planet. Soft landings on the moon 
have already been achieved by the 
Soviet Union with Lunik 9 and by the 
United States with Surveyor I. 
Although a soft planetary landing 
has not yet been demonstrated, the 
results of Mariner and the work of 
Surveyor | give us every confidence 
that Voyager will indeed succeed in 
making surface observations of Mars.

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

SOSEKI 
Soseki Natsume (1867-1916). 
scholarship gave him a balanced view of 
Western literature and the Oriental classics. 
His immense 
Unesco collection 
of world literature 
On these pages we present two outstanding writers who deserve to be 
better known beyond their national frontiers than they are. The first 
is the Japanese novelist, Natsume Soseki, whose books have attained 
phenomenal popularity in Japan in the 50 years since his death. The 
second js the epic poet, Shota Rustaveli, author of the greatest and 
most popular work of Georgian literature. Both writers have been 
published in the Unesco Collection of Representative Works. The 
Collection, sponsored by Unesco in collaboration with commercial 
publishing houses, has made it possible for new audiences to read 
masterpieces of world literature hitherto beyond the reach of all but 
readers of the original texts. Over 200 volumes have been published 
to date in various languages, and each year the Collection is enriched 
by new translations from Persian, Arabic, Chinese, Indian, Japanese, 
Latin American and African literature (translations of more than 
100 works are now in preparation). In a two-way flow of literature, 
classics and contemporary works are translated into French, English, 
German, Spanish and Italian, and great works of European literature are 
P
h
o
t
o
 
©
 
Ja
pa
n 
T
i
m
e
s
 
translated into the languages of the Orient. 


### 18425: Soseki, the most popular writer in Japan

the most popular 
writer in Japan 
N ATSUME KINNOSUKE, 
who is generally known by 
his pen-name, “Soseki,” is the most 
widely read and popular writer in 
Japan. Soseki was born in 1867, a 
year before the Meiji restoration, and 
died in 1916 at the age of 49. 
A Soseki exhibition was held last 
January at a major Tokyo department 
store on the occasion of the 100th an- 
niversary of Soseki's birth (Japanese 
custom counts the year of birth twice). 
More than 40,000 persons attended, 
establishing a new record for exhibi- 
tions for the department store. 
The popularity of Soseki's novels 
today is considered quite phenomenal 
even for Japan. One leading Japanese 
publisher, lwanami Shoten, began pub- 
lishing a complete collection of So- 
seki's works in December 1965, and 
over 100,000 persons subscribed for 
the series of 16 volumes, each priced 
at 1,200 yen (over $3.00) and contain- 
ing 700 pages. 
This year, with the publication of the 
seventh complete set of Soseki's 
works, the total number of his volumes 
has reached the impressive figure of 
6,450,000, an unprecedented event in 
-- 
- —- 
‘ Te 
fo 
\ 
NM 
. EEE 
LIP - 
LA * Lo, 
Japanese publishing for a writer dead 
50 years. 
Soseki's books appeal to a broad 
cross-section of Japan's population— 
housewives, factory employees, white- 
collar workers, college students and 
even secondary and primary school 
children. A survey conducted in 1964 
in five leading Tokyo secondary 
schools revealed that Soseki was the 
most popular author read by young 
people today. Paperback editions of 
his books now sell as fast as those 
of the biggest Japanese best-sellers. 
Soseki started out as a secondary 
school teacher of English, and then 
went on to teach at college. He 
studied in England for several years, 
and on his return to Japan he was 
appointed lecturer in English literature 
at the Tokyo Imperial University. 
In 1906, at the age of 39, Soseki 
wrote his first novel, “I Am a Cat”, 
a humorous, satirical commentary on 
modern society. The novel was an 
immediate success and it enabled 
Soseki to resign his university post 
and to devote himself to a literary 
career. In the eleven brief years 
before his death, Soseki wrote 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
2

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

26 
  
  
THE THREE-CORNERED WORLD 
by Natsume Soseki 
Text © Reproduction prohibited 
G OING up a mountain track, | fell to thinking. 
Approach everything rationally, and you become harsh. 
Pole along in the stream of emotions, and you will be swept away by the 
current. Give free to your desires, and you become uncomfortably 
confined. It is not a very agreeable place to live, this world of ours. 
When the unpleasantness increases, you want to draw yourself up to 
some place where life is easier. It is just at the point when you first 
realize that life will be no more agreeable no matter what heights you 
may attain, that a poem may be given birth, or a picture created... 
There is no escape from this world. If, therefore, you find life hard, 
there is nothing to be done but settle yourself as comfortably as you can 
during the unpleasant times, although you may only succeed in this for 
short periods, and thus make life's brief span bearable. lt is here that 
the vocation of the artist comes into being, and here that the painter 
receives his divine commission. Thank heaven for all those who in 
devious ways by their art, bring tranquillity to the world, and enrich men’s 
hearts. 
Strip off from the world all those cares and worries which make it an 
unpleasant place in which to live, and picture before you instead a world 
of graciousness. You now have music, a painting, or poetry, or sculpture. 
| would go farther, and say that it is not even necessary to make this 
vision a reality. Merely conjure up the image before your eyes, and 
poetry will burst into life and songs pour forth. Before even committing 
your thoughts to paper, you will feel the crystal tinkling, as of a tiny 
bell, well up within you; and the whole range of colours will of their own 
accord, and in all their brilliance, imprint themselves on your mind's 
eye, though your canvas stands on its easel, as yet untouched by the 
brush. It is enough that you are able to take this view of life, and see 
this decadent, sullied and vulgar world purified and beautiful in the camera 
of your innermost soul. 
Even the poet whose thoughts have never found expression in a single 
verse, or the painter who possesses no colours, and has never painted 
so much as a single square foot of canvas, can obtain salvation, and 
be delivered from earthly desires and passions. They can enter at will 
a world of undefiled purity, and throwing off the yoke of avarice and 
self interest, are able to build up a peerless and unequalled universe. 
Thus in all this, they are happier than the rich and famous; than any 
lord or prince that ever lived; happier indeed than all those on whom 
this vulgar world lavishes her affections. 
After twenty years of life | realized that this is a world worth living 
in. At twenty five | saw that, just as light and darkness are but opposite 
sides of the same thing, so wherever the sunlight falls it must of necessity 
cast a shadow. Today, at thirty my thoughts are these : In the depths 
of joy dwells sorrow, and the greater the happiness the greater the 
pain. Try to tear joy and sorrow apart, and you lose your hold on life. 
Try to cast them to one side, and the world crumbles... 
..It was just as my meandering thoughts reached this point, that my 
right foot came down suddenly on the edge of a loose angular rock, 
and | slipped. To compensate for my left foot, which | had hastily shot 
out in an effort to keep my balance, the rest of me—dropped! Fortunately 
| came down on to a boulder about three feet across, and all that 
. happened was that my colour-box, which | had been carrying slung 
from my shoulder, jerked forward from under my arm. Luckily no damage 
was done. 
As | rose and looked around me, | noticed away off to the left of the 
track a towering peak shaped like an inverted bucket. It was completely 
covered from base to summit with dark-green foliage, but whether 
cryptomeria or cypress | was unable to tell. 
This text, which is copyright ©, is taken from The Three Cor- 
nered World, published in the Unesco Collection of Represen- 
tative Works (Japanese Series) by Peter Owen Ltd., London. 
The book is a translation by Alan Turney of Soseki's novel 
Kusa Makura (literally, Pillow of Grass).   


### 18425: Soseki, the most popular writer in Japan

  
  
THE MOST POPULAR 
WRITER IN JAPAN 
{ Continued) 
numerous books, since acknowledged 
as literary masterpieces. 
As a writer, Soseki sought to har- 
monize the ideas of the Occident 
and the traditions of Japanese litera- 
ture, and to express simply and clearly, 
the innermost human hopes and de- 
sires. His work was also influenced 
by the spirit of social responsibility 
that characterized his contemporaries 
of the Meiji era. 
One reason why the works of 
Soseki are so popular is that the maj- 
ority of his novels are woven around 
an ordinary family and household, with 
which readers can readily identify 
themselves. 
Soseki's most popular novel is 
probably Botchan, his second book, 
which describes the life of teachers 
in a provincial secondary school. This 
novel, based on Soseki's own 
experiences as a secondary school 
teacher, has sold more than 2,140,000 
copies since 1945 in paperbound 
pocket editions alone. 
Soseki's extensive study of English 
literature added to his knowledge of 
Oriental classics gave him a breadth

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 18425: Soseki, the most popular writer in Japan

  
  
  
    
  
  
 
of background unique 
contemporaries, and in his last years 
this enabled him to write outstanding 
among his 
works such as Sorekara, Kokoro, 
Mon, Michikusa and Meian. These 
novels—the fruit of an intensive 
pursuit of the writer's “self"—are very 
different from Soseki's earlier works, 
which were masterpieces of wit and 
humour, 
In his later years, Soseki frequently 
wrote on the theme of conflict in 
family life, though each time he 
analyzed the theme from a different 
standpoint. Moreover, since these 
later novels are more powerful and 
probe more deeply into the psychology 
of the characters, they have a greater 
subtlety and refinement than the 
author's earlier writing. Soseki delves 
within the minds of his characters and 
through them strives to reveal the 
nature of man's inner life. 
The chief characters in the majority 
of Soseki's novels are men, and 
neither they nor even his women 
characters are depicted with the 
wealth of detail found in works by 
authors of the school of naturalism. 
On the contrary, many of the women 
  
    RE IT 
Photo © Smithsonian Institution, Freer Gallery of Art, Washington D.C. 
“Figures and wind in willows”, by the Japanese painter and poet, Yosa Buson (1716-1783), 
whose works were greatly admired by Soseki. This landscape is 
painted on one of a pair of silk six-fold screens in ink and colours. 
are portrayed as intensely self- 
centered beings, a further affirmation 
of the taste for introspection displayed 
by Soseki—an antinaturalistic writer 
par excellence. 
Soseki's last work, Meian appeared 
as a newspaper serial, 188 instalments 
of which were published before the 
author's death. In Meian, Soseki 
pursued to the end his efforts to 
elucidate the mysteries of “self”. 
Soseki was a man of many talents, 
well versed in Japanese, Chinese and 
Western literature, and before be- 
coming an author he had already 
established his reputation as a poet. 
Under the pen name of “Gudabutsu”, 
he wrote a great many Japanese Haiku 
poems in which he gives profound 
expression to such great concepts of 
Zen philosophy as “selflessness” and 
“quietude”. 
Soseki also excelled at calligraphy 
and painting and composed poems in 
Chinese. When he first took up calli- 
graphy, he was greatly influenced by 
the work of the Zen priest, Ryokan 
(1757-1831), but later changed his 
style completely, and created his own 
highly original calligraphic forms. 
In art, Soseki apparently preferred 
Japanese painting to Western-style 
oils. He started painting in water- 
colour around 1904, but it was only 
after 1913 that he concentrated his 
efforts in this field, after he became 
acquainted with the painter Seifu 
Tsuda. 
Few writers today in Japan possess 
talent comparable with that of Soseki. 
Still fewer writers have left as many 
excellent paintings as those from 
Soseki's brush. 
  
Following Is a list of works by Soseki 
translated into English: Kokoro, translated 
by Ineka Kondo (Kenkyusha, 1941), also 
published in French in the Unesco Collection 
of Representative Works (Gallimard, 1957); 
Botchan, translated by Yasotaro Mohri 
(Kinseido, 1947); Ten Nights’ Dreams and 
Our Cat's Grave, translated by Sankichi 
Hata and Dofu Shirai {Tokyo News Service, 
1949); | Am a Cat, translated by Katsue 
Shibata and Motonari Kai (Kenkyusha, 1961); 
The Three Cornered World, translated by 
Alan Turney (Peter Owen Ltd., London 1965). 
A translation of Michikusa, by E. McClellan, 
is in preparation for the Unesco Collection 
of Representative Works. 
21

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
“The Knight in the Tiger's Skin". 
illustrators. 
No true portrait exists of the Georgian poet, 
Shota Rustaveli, the 12th-century author of 
But Rustaveli’s 
work has Inspired numerous painters and 
Right, Rustaveli depicted by the 
Georgian painter, Niko Pirosmanashvili, or 
Pirosmani as he is called (1860-1917). A 
gifted artist with an original style, Pirosmanl often 
portrayed the history and legends of his 
country (see the Unesco Courier, Oct. 1962). 


### 18915: Rustaveli and 'The Knight in the tiger's skin'

RUSTAVELI AND 
IN THE 
TIGER'S SKIN 
Te Knight in the Tiger's 
Skin, a long epic poem 
written in the late twelfth century, 
is the greatest and most popular work 
of Georgian literature. But more than 
this, it is a story of the triumph of 
true love which deserves a high place 
in the annals of world literature, and, 
as we shall see, it has several features 
which make it especially attractive to 
the modern reader. 
The author, Shota Rustaveli, lived 
800 years ago, in the “Golden Age~ 
of the Georgian people, when the 
State of Georgia stretched from the 
Caspian to the Black Sea and from 
the Caucasus Mountains to the 
headwaters of the Euphrates. Rusta- 
veli was a feudal aristocrat about 
whom remarkably little is known; 
contemporary chronicles, although 
they describe the life and work of 
even minor figures of the epoch, 
hardly mention his name. The Knight 
in the Tiger's Skin (known in some 
English translations as "The Man of 
the Panther Skin") is his only surviving 
work. Indeed, the principal source 
of historical and literary facts about 
him is the Prologue to the poem 
itself. 
The plot of the poem is complex 
and involved, but Rustaveli unfolds 
it with all the mastery of a great poet, 
and to this day the story holds the 
reader enthralled. 
In his old age King Rostevan of 
Arabia, being without a male heir, 
vests the sovereignty of the realm 
in his only daughter, the beautiful 
IRAKLE ABASHIDZE is a prominent Georgian 
poet, translator and critic. He is first 
secretary of the Writers’ Union of the Soviet 
Socialist Republic of Georgia and a member 
of the Republic's Academy of Sciences. 
Among other works of poetry, he has written 
a bock of *verse devoted to Shota Rustaveli, 
‘THE KNIGHT 
by Irakle 
Abashidze 
and intelligent Tinatin, who is in love 
with Avtandil, a valiant knight. During 
a hunt arranged to celebrate the coro- 
nation, Rostevan and Avtandil come 
upon a mysterious knight clad in a 
tiger's skin, sitting mournfully by a 
stream and weeping tears mingled 
with blood. After they have tried 
in vain to speak with him, he 
disappears in the twinkling of an eye. 
This event upsets and depresses 
the old king, and Tinatin sends 
Avtandil to search for the strange 
knight. After three years of arduous 
wanderings, Avtandil succeeds in 
finding him, and the knight, whose 
name is Tariel, tells his sad story. 
He is the son of one of the seven 
kings of India; this king decides 
before his death to do homage to 
Parsadan, who rules over the othersix 
kingdoms. Tariel is brought up at 
Parsadan’'s court as his heir, and one 
day he falls passionately in love with 
Parsadan's daughter, Nestan-Darejan. 
But Parsadan threatens to marry her 
to a foreign prince and to proclaim 
him heir to the throne. At the 
princess's instigation, Tariel kills his 
rival. As a result, the princess is 
severely punished and exiled, and 
now, after a long search, Tariel has 
lost all hope of finding her and has 
been living in the forest with the 
wild beasts. 
Avtandil encourages him and pro- 
mises him his help, and after many 
adventures, he discovers that Nestan- 
Darejan is held captive in a remote 
fortress. With the help of a third 
knight, he and Tariel attack the 
fortress and free the princess. Thus 
honour and true love triumph: the 
Knight in the Tiger's Skin marries 
Nestan-Darejan, and Avtandil returns 
to Tinatin. Peacefully and humanely 
they rule their countries and happy 
peoples. 
  
Photo © APN 
Two things about this story strike 
the reader straightaway: the important 
part played by women, and the 
“modern” attitude tc romantic love. 
The crux of the plot is King Parsadan’s 
decision to arrange a political marriage 
for his daughter and her determination 
to marry only the man she loves. 
By medieval standards, King Parsa- 
dan’s action was absolutely reasonable 
and correct. It was unheard of at 
that time for mutual attraction to 
take precedence, as a foundation for 
marriage, over all other considerations. 
Rustaveli's great originality and 
genius is most clearly demonstrated 
in the fact that he made this very 
human situation the pivot of his whole 
work. 
However, to explain the ‘importance 
—and the brilliant characterization— 
of the women in The Knight of the 
Tiger's Skin, we must refer to the 
social and political conditions in 
twelfth century Georgia. 
The secluded way of life for women 
was thoroughly alien to the Georgian 
people. The conversion of the 
Georgians to Christianity was 
attributed to a woman, Saint Nino 
of Cappadocia. (Incidentally, whereas 
early Christianity in the West took 
the form of asceticism and the denial 
of all earthly pleasures, in Georgia 
it was closely connected with the 
concept of fertility and life. This has 
a greater significance than might be 
supposed at first glance, and may 
possibly account for the extensive 
secular literature which appeared in 
Georgian in the Middle Ages side 
by side with religious works). 
Early ecclesiastical writings had 
already pointed out that men and 
women were one and equal in the 
eyes of the Almighty, and Nicho- 
las Gulaberisdze, an ecclesiastical

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 18915: Rustaveli and 'The Knight in the tiger's skin'

writer who was a contemporary of 
Rustaveli's, composed a special 
treatise in defence and in praise of 
woman's honour and dignity. Finally, 
and perhaps most important, Rustaveli 
himself witnessed the splendid flower- 
ing of Georgia as a state under 
the reign of a woman, Queen Tamar 
(1184-1213), whom he praises in the 
Prologue to his poem. 
This was indeed a culture re- 
markable for its richness and diversity. 
There were two academies which 
offered a truly universal education. 
Many major works on religion, history 
and philosophy were written, and a 
considerable number of foreign writ- 
ings were translated. Still greater 
development was achieved in archi- 
tecture, painting and music (the 
written music of the period has been 
preserved). If the “Golden Age” 
reached its culmination under 
Queen Tamar, it dawned during 
the rule of her ancestor, King David 
the Builder (1083-1125): a man of 
culture who was accustomed to take 
his library with him when he went 
to war, and a pious Christian who 
wrote psalms of a rare beauty. He 
showed unusual religious tolerance 
for his time, and took pleasure in 
disputing with Muslim scholars on the 
finer points of the tenets of Islam. 
But | digress from the poem itself. 
The language it was written in is not 
so very different from modern Geor- 
gian—no more different, let us say, 
than the language of Shakespeare is 
from modern English. The poem 
consists of over 1,600 quatrains, the 
lines of each quatrain rhyming with 
each other, thus: 
Amartis perad shetsvalabroli tsremlisa 
[banaman. 
Didkhan itiris kmaman da man kalman 
[shaosanaman. 
Shekhspa, sheigo adjari, tskhenitsa 
[sheikvana man, 
Dadumdis, tsremlin mokhkvetna shav- 
[man gishrisa danaman. 
(Linguists may be puzzled at not 
finding the slightest similarity with 
any other language. This is not 
surprising: the origins of the language. 
like those of the Georgian people, 
are shrouded in mystery. The only 
European language which bears any 
similarity at all to Georgian is Basque 
—and even its relationship has yet 
to be proved). 
Suffice to say that the euphonic 
structure of the poem is brilliant, so 
much so that Georgian readers are 
often so carried away by the musical 
sound and linguistic magic of Rusta- 
veli's verses that they only begin to 
appreciate the content when they go 
back and read it over a second time. 
The poem's music must of necessity 
be largely lost in translation. But 
Rustaveli's skill in story-telling, his 
psychological insight and his poetic 
imagery are of universal appeal. 
For Instance, many of the devices 
which he uses In unravelling the 
complicated plot foreshadow those of 
the modern novel: flashbacks, exten- 
sive dialogue, secondary love inter- 
ests, the first description of char- 
acters through the dialogue of others, 
the quoting of letters. In fact this 
aspect—and the author's under- 
standing of all the intricate nuances 
of human psychology—justify us in 
looking on the poem as one of the 
first novels in the history of European 
literature. 
Rustaveli's imagery is so rich, and 
the poem's similes and metaphors 
fall so thick and fast, that | cannot 
hope to do justice to them in a few 
lines. | shall just mention two images, 
both important ones for an under- 
standing of the poem. 
The first is the tiger's skin itself. 
This, the leitmotif of the whole poem, 
is symbolic of Tariel's loved one: 
when she was in a rage at her father's 
decision to marry her against her will, 
she reminded him of a tigress—beau- 
tiful even in her fury. But it is also a 
symbol of his valour, and of his lonely 
life among the wild beasts. 
The other is the poet's comparison 
of the chief characters to the sun. 
This is more than just a conventional 
epithet suggesting the sun's brightness 
and physical beauty. The sun for 
Rustaveli, and here we get into the 
realms of the Neo-Platonist philosophy 
of the age, stands for an ideal state 
of goodness—the highest stage of 
development, to which man can attain 
through his intellect and will-power. 
He constantly reminds us that his 
heroes and heroines are close to this 
state. Towards the end of the poem, 
after the rescue of Nestan-Darejan, 
we read: 
“The Sun has returned and the 
[darkness is dispersed, 
Evil is overcome; the good prevails, 
[and will endure forever.” 
This optimistic and positive idea of 
the victory of justice over arbitrary 
power, of good over evil, is the 
underlying theme of Rustaveli's work: 
man must go on seeking, for he can 
achieve complete happiness in this 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
King Rostevan of Arabia meets a knight clad in a tiger's skin. 
The stranger is an Indian prince, Tariel, whose odyssey 
Rustaveli recounts in his long epic poem which ranks as a 
masterpiece of world literature. This miniature, decorating 
a manuscript of “The Knight in the Tiger's Skin", was 
painted by a Georgian artist, Mamuka Tavakarashvili, in 1646. 
  

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

J0 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
The embossing and engraving of metal with ornamental designs is a traditional 
form of Georgian art, going back 1,000 years. After attaining its peak 
in the late 12th and early 13th centuries—in the reign of Queen Tamar, 
whose praises were sung by Rustaveli—it slowly declined and finally died 
out. In the past two decades a number of young Georgian artists, using 
the techniques of the medieval masters, have succeeded in giving not 
only new life, but also new expression to this ancient art. 


### 18915: Rustaveli and 'The Knight in the tiger's skin'

THE KNIGHT IN THE TIGER’S SKIN (Continued) 
world. But above all this is a poem 
of passmn—and flesh-and-blood pas- 
sion: worshipping from afar is ob- 
viously no consolation to the Knight in 
the Tiger's Skin! Love is seen as a 
spur and a signpost in the direction 
of higher truth and harmony, which 
by the same token, is not to be 
achieved by mystic contemplation and 
passive “dissolution” in the Deity after 
the fashion of the philosophical poetry 
of the East: The Knight in the Tiger's 
Skin is a philosophical and ethical 
code of action, of will-power. It is 
the triumph of the mind and of active 
and radiant humanism. 
This makes Rustaveli's poem one 
of the first great works in a truly 
European spirit, if we understand that 
spirit to be the achievements and 
gains of mankind at the time of the 
Renaissance. And though he quotes 
from Aristotle and Plato as well as 
from the Bible and the Koran, it is 
not too much to say that Rustaveli 
came very close to a profound under- 
standing of Christian philosophy as 
it was before it was changed by later 
dogmas. At the same time, he is 
very close to our present-day un- 
derstanding of the world. 
The Knight in the Tiger's Skin has 
been translated into many languages, 
including Italian, Polish, Hungarian, Ru- 
manian, Czech, Mongolian, Spanish, 
Chinese, German, French and English. 
It has also been translated into 17 lan- 
guages of the Soviet Union, where 
nearly 1,400,000 copies of the work 
have been published. 
 
A French translation of “The Knight in the 
Tiger's Skin* has appeared In the Unesco 
Collection of Representative Works (Editions 
Gallimard, Paris, 1964). In 1965 this trans- 
lation was awarded the Prix Langlois of the 
Académie Frangaise. An English translation 
for the Unesco Collection Is in preparation. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N 


### 18953: A Statement by eleven distinguished geophysicists

A STATEMENT 
BY ELEVEN 
DISTINGUISHED 
GEOPHYSICISTS 
We publish here the letter ad- 
dressed to the London Times by 
eleven distinguished scientists 
who participated in programmes 
of study and research during the 
International Geophysical Year 
and the International Years of the 
Quiet Sun, organized by the 
International Council of Scientific 
Unions with the assistance of 
Unesco. The Times published the 
letter on July 25, 1966.

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=31) 2

### 18953: A Statement by eleven distinguished geophysicists

December 31, 1965, marked the end of the observational phase of the 
International Years of the Quiet Sun. This two-year enterprise, involving 
the closest co-operation between scientists of no fewer than 71 countries, 
has been concerned with the study of the sun and the earth under condi- 
tions of minimum solar activity. 
It formed a complementary enterprise to the even greater scientific 
co-operative project of seven years ago—the International Geophysical 
Year. 
Both projects were organized by special committees appointed by the 
International Council of Scientific Unions and financial assistance was 
given by this Council, by Unesco, and by the participating nations. 
Beyond question, the scientific achievements of these two enterprises 
have been immense and there can be little doubt that as a result of the 
IGY and IQ8Y, man's understanding of solar and terrestrial phenomena 
and of the relationship between them, has advanced to a really enormous 
degree. Vast stores of data have been assembled in World Data Centres 
located in a number of countries and are freely available for study by 
scientists of every country. The planning and organization of these enter- 
prises has occupied the time and energy of innumerable screntists from 
all nations over a period of several years. Men of science of every nation 
have been brought together in a spirit of friendly understanding and co- 
operation which has known no barriers of nationality, race, colour, 
religious or political opinion. 
The basic objective of both these projects could be summarized in the 
phrase: “The common study of our planet by all for the benefit of all.” 
and it is certain that the objective has been achieved in full measure. 
These world-wide co-operative scientific projects have shown conclusively 
that, however many and serious are the political problems that trouble the 
human race, it is possible for all the nations of the world to work closely 
together in great enterprises for the common good. 
We, the undersigned, officers of the special committees which organiz- 
ed the projects, wish to commend the examples of the IGY and IQSY to 
the peoples of all nations. At the same time, we would wish to express the 
earnest hope that scientific academies and governments everywhere will 
resolve to place this co-operation in geophysical science on a permanent 
basis. 
In so doing, we feel that not only will the rapid advance of geophysical 
science be maintained but, more importantly, it is certain that this continu- 
ed close co-operation between men of science from all parts of the world 
will make a significant contribution to the wider field of human understand- 
ing and goodwill. | 
V.V. BELOUSSOV 
Soviet Geophysical Committee, Academy of Sciences of the U.S.SR. 
LLOYD V. BERKNER 
Director, Southwest Centre for Advanced Studies, Dallas, Texas 
W.J.G. BEYNON : 
Department of Physics, University College of Wales, Aberystwyth 
SYDNEY CHAPMAN 
High Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colorado 
J. COULOMB 
Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, Paris 
G. LACLAVERE 
Director, Institut Géographique National, Paris 
HOMER E. NEWELL 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington 
M. NICOLET 
Institut Royal Météorologique, Brussels 
MARTIN A. POMERANTZ 
Bartol Research Foundation, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania. 
N.V. PUSHKOV 
Director, Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism and Radio Wave Propagation, 
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. 
G. RIGHINI 
Director, Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri, Florence 


### 16925: The Controversy on continental drift

The controversy 
on continental drift 
(Continued from page 15) 
Hemisphere receives more energy 
to maintain wind,” Prof. Bjerknes 
declared. “Winds increase in the 
North Pacific”, he said, “and, at the 
same time, winds in the North Atlantic 
decrease. Europe then receives less 
heat from the Atlantic and experiences 
a colder winter.” 
When Prof. Bjerknes summarized 
his work at a press conference, a 
correspondent at once queried: “But 
why do the easterlies grow weaker?” 
This is the kind of chicken-and-the- 
egg question that oceanographers will 
be able to answer fully only when they 
have understood the movement of 
great water masses transporting tem- 
perature changes over thousands of 
miles of ocean. 
Investigations along this line in the 
Gulf Stream were described by 
Dr. John Knauss of the University of 
Rhode Island in the United States. 
Working with newly-developed current 
meters that remain three days on the 
sea floor recording on magnetic tape, 
Dr. Knauss concluded that the Gulf 
Stream extends to the bottom even 
in deep water. The old concept of 
the deep sea as a “zone of no 
motion” is long dead. 
Dr. Knauss reasoned that if the 
Gulf Stream extends all the way down, 
then its meander pattern should be 
influenced by bottom topography. In 
other words, when the bottom rises, 
the Gulf Stream is more affected by 
the earth's rotation and wanders off 
its previous path. 
Dr. Knauss also investigated the 
amount of water transported by the 
Gulf Stream. Measurements in the 
Florida Strait—relatively easy to make 
because the Gulf Stream is flowing 
between fixed banks and not through 
the middle of the Ocean—indicate 
that here it moves 35 million cubic 
metres of water a second. In other 
words, in the Florida Strait this 
immense “ocean river” is moving 
350 times as much water as the 
world's greatest land river, the Ama- 
zon, whose average flow is only 
100,000 cubic metres of water a 
second. This particular piece of re- 
search points to the need for still 
broader studies—an investigation of 
the Gulf Stream’s flow in deep water 
for example. 
Seven years from now, the Third 
International Oceanographic Congress 
will probably see many of the ques- 
tions raised in Moscow answered— 
and many new ones posed. 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

J 
From the Unesco Ne 
Unesco awarded Marzotto 
Prize for international 
understanding 
Unesco has been awarded the Marzotto 
Prize created by the Marzotto Prize 
Institution in Italy for the person or insti- 
tution making a major contribution through 
cultural activity to the development of 
understanding and co-operation among 
nations. Mr. René Maheu, received the 
prize on behalf of Unesco at a ceremony in 
Valdagno, Italy, in September. 
Gift from Japan: 
$ 830,000 for Abu Simbel 
Unesco has received 300,227,861 yen 
(over $830,000) from the Tokyo daily 
“Asahi-Shimbum® as a contribution towards 
saving the temples of Abu Simbel in Nubia. 
The contribution is one of the largest 
Unesco has received from a private source 
for the Nubian campaign. The money was 
raised by an exhibition on Tutankhamen 
organized in Japan by “Asahi-Shimbum® in 
1965-66, and visited by some three million 
people. In 1963, the newspaper set up an 
exhibition on “Five Thousand Years of 
Egyptian Art" whose proceeds also went 
to the Nubian campaign. 
Over 800 libraries 
linked by teletype 
Eight hundred and twenty-one libraries 
throughout the world are now linked by 
teletype machines, reports the Unesco 
Bulletin for Libraries, which points out that 
as libraries have to rely increasingly on 
each others’ collections to fulfil requests, 
  
the teletype is needed to speed up and 
simplify operations. 
Indonesia to remain 
in Unesco 
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the 
Republic of Indonesia has informed the 
Director-General of Unesco that “Indonesia 
is ready to resume active participation in 
the work of Unesco". In February 1965, 
Indonesia sent notice of its withdrawal 
from Unesco, which was to have taken 
effect from December 31, 1966. 
New Assistant Directors- 
General for Unesco 
Mr. René Maheu, Director-General of 
Unesco, has appointed two new Assistant 
Directors-General. Mr. Tor Gjesdal, who has 
been Director of Unesco's Department of 
Mass Communication since 1955, becomes 
Assistant Director-General for Communi- 
cation. Mr. Gjesdal, who was born in Nor- 
way in 1909, was Director of the United 
Nations Department of Public information in 
New York from 1946 to 1955. Mr. Mahdi 
Elmandjra, formerly director of the executive 
office of the Director-General, now becomes 
Assistant Director-General for Social 
Sciences, Human Sciences and Culture. 
Before joining Unesco in 1961, Mr. Elman- 
djra was Director-General of the Moroccan 
Radio and Television Organization. He was 
born in 1933 in Morocco. 
in Teheran, Iran, to consider the problem. 
eliminating the scourge of illiteracy.   
U.S. PRESIDENT NAMES SEPT. 8, 1966 
INTERNATIONAL LITERACY DAY 
September 8, 1966 was designated as International Literacy Day in a proclamation 
issued on August 30 by President Lyndon B. Johnson of the United States. 
September 8, 1966 marks the first anniversary of the opening in Teheran of the 
World Congress of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of llliteracy convened 
by Unesco upon the initiative of the Shah of Iran. 
In his proclamation, President Johnson said, in part: 
“literacy is the greatest single barrier to economic and social progress in 
many of the countries of the world. September 8, 1966, Is the first anniversary 
of an event which | believe was the turning point in the battle against illiteracy. 
On that date one year ago the World Congress of Ministers of Education convened 
“That Congress, made up in part by a delegation of distinguished statesmen 
and scholars sent by the United States government, established the principles 
which now guide the highly commendable efforts of the United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Through experimental projects, Unesco 
is creating methods, techniques and materials for full-scale literacy programmes.” J 
The U.S. President called upon the people of his country to commemorate the day 
in ways most appropriate to the occasion and to co-operate with national and 
international organizations, private groups and individuals dedicated to the goal of 
 
  
ed on page 17 of our July-August number) 
failed to indicate that this picture was 
originally published in “Paleocurrents and 
Basin Analysis® by P.E. Potter and 
FJ. Pettijohn. Photographer W.K. Hamblin. 
Berlin, Géttingen, Heidelberg: Springer- 
Verlag 1963. 289 p. (Plate 2). 
  
Encyclopaedias and 
Civilizations 
We wish to bring to our readers’ attention a 
newly-published number of the Journal of 
World History entirely devoted to encyclo- 
paedias and civilizations (Vol. 9, No. 3, 1966). 
A veritable encyclopaedia on encyclo- 
paedias, the number spans the centuries 
from antiquity to the modern age and 
ranges over Europe, America, Asia and 
the Arab world, as it describes man's 
outstanding efforts to collect and present 
the immense sum of human knowledge. A 
quarterly review, the Journal of World 
History was initiated and Is published by 
the International Commission for a History 
of the Scientific and Cultural History of 
Mankind, and appears under Unesco's 
auspices. Order from Editions de la 
Baconniére, Boudry, (Neuchatel), Switzer- 
land. Subscription : Vol. 9 (4 numbers), 
iy of equivalent in any currency; No. 3, 
5.00. 
 
Mali aids fight 
against illiteracy 
The Government of Mali has given Unesco 
two million Mali francs (over $8,000) to help 
the world fight against illiteracy. This gift 
follows the World Congress of Ministers of 
Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy, 
held in Teheran last year, at which the Shah 
  
  
In The History of Unesco in Stamps (July- 
Aug. 1966; pp. 50-51), this stamp, issued 
by the Republic of China to commemorate 
the inauguration of Unesco's new Paris 
headquarters in 1958, was captioned, by 
error, as a Japanese stamp.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
receives 
  
Dr. Eugene Rabinowitch 
Kalinga Prize 
Dr. Eugene Rabinowitch, a U.S. scientist, editor and a founder 
of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, a Journal of Science 
and Public Affairs, received the 14th international Kalinga 
Prize for the Popularization of Science last month, at 
a ceremony in Unesco H.Q. As editor and editorial writer 
of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, published in Chi- 
cago, Dr. Rabinowitch has taken an active part in the “Pug- 
wash” movement which has held 14 conferences on science : 
and world affairs attended by some of the world's most eminent scientists and shap- 
ers of science policy (see the Unesco Courier, Nov. 1964). A member of the 
faculty of the University of lllinois since 1947, Dr. Rabinowitch has published books 
on the Implications of modern science for the world today and in the future, 
and also on uranium chemistry and photosynthesis. The Kalinga Prize, named 
after the empire ruled by the peace-loving Asoka in India 22 centuries ago, is a 
personal donation of Mr. Bijoyanand Patnaik, an Indian industrialist, and is awarded 
annually by an international jury appointed by Unesco. 
  
of Iran urged member states of Unesco to 
contribute one day of their military expendi- 
ture to fight illiteracy. Iran last May gave 
Unesco $700,000 drawn from the Iranian 
military budget. 
Flashes... 
  
BM Many countries are gravely short of 
trained health workers. At least 15 Afri- 
can countries were still without a single 
medical school last year, reports WHO. 
B About 129, of the world's annual fish 
catch comes from inland waters, says FAO, 
  
which is encouraging greater inland fish 
farming, especially in Africa and Latin 
America. 
B Tunisia is aiming at 100 9%, school enrol- 
ment by 1971. Last year, 86 % of Tunisian 
boys attended primary schools, but only 
44%, of the girls. 
B A WHO study on cities reveals that in 
75 countries one-third of townsfolk have 
running water, one-third use public foun- 
tains and the rest must make do with water 
from rivers, wells or gutters. 
HM /n Hong Kong over 900,000 students— 
one-quarter of the population—attend 
schools and educational courses. 
PRESERVING BOOKS ON FILM 
Millions of pages of manuscripts and documents—many of them rare or 
unique—have been reproduced on film in the past ten years by Unesco's 
mobile microfilm units. Set up as a Unesco contribution to educational 
services, and in particular libraries, all over the world, the first microfilm 
unit was given a threefold mission: 
HM to reproduce and thus preserve a record of documents of cultural, scien- 
tific or historical importance that might be lost through age, climatic condi- 
tions, fire and other causes; 
HM to train staff in countries requesting its services; 
HM to help these countries create their own microfilm services. 
From 1956 to 1961 the unit worked in eight Latin American countries, 
reproducing almost a million and a half pages of manuscripts and other 
important documents. In 1962 it spent nine months in Morocco, reproducing 
more than half a million pages. In 1963-1964 it went on to other Arabic- 
speaking countries, including Syria and Egypt. By the end of 1963 it had 
extended its operations to Asia, and helped by a second Unesco unit it 
has since been introducing microfilming in Malaysia, India and other Asian 
countries. 
Over 103,000 pages of rare manuscripts and documents were filmed at 
Phnom-Penh (Cambodia) by the second Unesco mobile unit between October 
1964 and April 1965. Many of these manuscripts had to be brought 
from temples in the interior of Cambodia. 
When it has been able to spare the time, this unit has also lent a hand 
with various local projects not really within its brief, helping with mapmaking, 
school television and other activities where it could save the community time 
and trouble. 
Microfilming has become an indispensable aid for the librarian and archivist. 
The work of Unesco's mobile units has brought it to many countries that 
would otherwise have been without its help for some time to come, with 
the consequent deterioration or even loss of much precious material.   
BOOKSHELF 
  
HM Population Geography 
By John I. Clarke. The geographical 
approach to population study and its 
demonstration of how variations in 
the distribution, composition, migra- 
tions and growth of populations are 
related to variations in the nature of 
places. (Commonwealth and Interna- 
or Library) Pergamon Press, 1965 
(21/9). 
B The United Nations and World 
Realities 
By Marc Lee. An appraisal of the 
United Nations since 1945. Describes 
how the U.N. has dealt with the 
complex problems within its sphere, 
and evaluates its success. (Com- 
monwealth and International Library), 
Pergamon Press, 1965 (21/-). 
HM Towards International Co-opera- 
tion 
By Sulwyn Lewis. Examines the ori- 
gins of forces that divide the world 
and their present consequences, and 
studies past and present efforts to 
develop international co-operation. 
(Commonwealth and International Li- 
brary) Pergamon Press, 1966 (25/-). 
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS 
HM The Book Revolution 
By Robert Escarpit. An authoritative 
study of the important changes in 
the publishing world over the last 
few decades. It discusses the prob- 
lems of writers, publishers and 
bookstores, and their re-adjustment 
under the demands of mass reader- 
ship (see the Unesco Courier, Sept. 
1965). A Unesco-George Harrap and 
Co. co-edition, 1966 (18/-;$3.50). 
BW The Psychology of the Use of 
Audio-Visual Aids in Primary Edu- 
cation 
By Prof. Gaston Mialaret. The 
growing use of audio-visual aids is 
explored In a searching international 
analysis of their psychological im- 
pact on teacher and pupil alike. A 
guide for educators who wish to use 
such aids intelligently. A Unesco- 
George Harrap and Co. co-edition, 
1966 (30/-;$6.00). 
HM Africa Prospect 
By Richard Greenough. An informa- 
tive account of recent educational 
progress in Africa as well as the 
problems encountered and those that 
remain to be solved. Unesco, 1966 
(3/-:$0.50). 
UNESCO'S TRANSLATIONS 
SERIES 
From Asia 
HM Javid-Nama 
By Sir Muhammad Igbal. Translated 
from the Persian with introduction 
and notes by A.J. Arberry, The 
magnum opus of a great Moslem 
poet and philosopher, Javid Nama 
describes a spiritual journey made 
by the poet through the spheres, 
during which he encounters many 
great figures of history with whom 
he holds converse. George Allen 
and Unwin Ltd., 1966 (27/-).   33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
letters to the Editor 
FATHER OF THE LASER 
Sir, 
In your article on lasers (Feb. 1964) 
no mention is made of the work of 
Professor Jean Becquerel, of the 
French Academy of Science. Yet all 
articles—even those written on the 
popular science level—which describe 
the purposes of lasers and masers, 
those extraordinary amplifiers of light 
energy, speak of lean Becquerel, to 
whose work the optical maser (laser) 
owes its origin. 
The optics of crystals at low tem- 
peratures, a science initiated by Jean 
Becquerel, is today undergoing a 
tremendous development. 
Jean Becquerel was the first to 
study the absorption and fluorescence 
spectra of the ruby and to reveal the 
collimation of red rays at low temper- 
atures. Using the red rays from the 
ruby, Dr. T.H. Maiman, in the United 
States, operated the first laser in 1960. 
The invention of the laser is therefore 
clearly linked with the pioneering work 
of Jean Becquerel in crystal optics. 
Mme. lean Becquerel 
Fontainebleau, France 
OUR SHRINKING PLANET 
Sir, 
You published some striking facts 
about the unprecedented growth of 
the world’s population in your February 
1966 issue. 
The Dutch live happily in their 
country with 356 people to every 
square kilometre. If Australia and 
New Zealand, which together cover 
7,973,835 square kilometres, had a 
population density like that of the 
Netherlands, their combined popula- 
tion would total 2,838,685,260 or nearly 
as much as the present world popula- 
tion. 
| believe the world is mis-managed 
because people limit themselves by 
boundaries which form states. Unite 
these states and everyone will live 
happily. 
If everyone takes care of his neigh- 
bour no one will suffer. 
H. J. Baarslag 
Mt. Albert, New Zezland 
WHAT 1S YOUTH ? 
Sir, 
You have published several letters 
expressing appreciation of your July- 
August 1965 special number on youth. 
I, too, liked this number. But may 
| ask a question? What is youth? 
Youth is just about the most relative 
term in the world—an arbitrary mental 
concept. For consider, “youth” is 
continuously merging into “middle 
age” which, in turn, is always merging 
into "old age.” Between these so- 
called groups, there is an infinitude of 
degrees. However young you are, 
there is always somebody younger; 
however old, always somebody older. 
So why speak of youth as though 
it is a static division of the human 
race? “Youth” is a disuniting label 
almost as dangerous as racist labels. 
When will we learn not to divide hu- 
man beings (yes, we are all human 
beings) into labelled groups? 
Mass circulation newspapers in Brit- 
ain are always writing about “Woman” 
and "Women" as though they are not 
half the human race. But this is not 
quite as stupid as the present-day 
concept of “youth"~—for youth Is 
something we all have in some degree 
or have had. The human race may 
be divided into men and women but 
it is not divided into young and old. 
Even Shaw forgot this when he said, 
"Youth is a wonderful thing; what a 
pity to waste it on children.” Far more 
precise was Havelock Ellis when he 
wrote that the climax of anti-social 
behaviour is reached round about the 
age of 20 (a fact proved by present- 
day criminal statistics). 
Most people, to my observation, get 
gradually less violent and more tol- 
erant as they mature in years. Even- 
tually they come to look back on their 
younger days, sometimes with pleas- 
ure but often with a blush or two for 
the stupidities and unthinking cruelties 
of immaturity. Those who blush most 
as they remember the past are those 
who have matured the most. | would 
ike to see more reverence for “Old 
Age“ and fewer pedestals for “Youth”. 
The greatest civilizations (the Sung 
dynasty for example) have revered ma- 
turity. 
Bernard Charlesworth 
London, England 
LEARNING FROM 
THE WINDMILL 
Sir, 
I read your issue on “Our Thirsty 
Hungry World® (April 1966) with much 
interest. It made me realize how we 
have failed to distribute our knowledge 
and means of modern technology. 
One of the reasons is the very nature 
of this technology, which cannot grow 
and bear fruit on a soil that has not 
been conditioned to receive it. For- 
tunately this conditioning will take less 
time and money than it has taken in 
the history of now highly developed 
countries. 
It might be good sense in the mean- 
time to take the experience of a less 
highly developed technical period and 
put it to good use until better means 
will be available. | know of one field 
in engineering where this collected 
experience is available and where it 
could be used. For this reason | bring 
to your attention a review of a book 
about the Dutch windmills. 
Prof. Dr. Ir. W.M.J. Schlosser 
Eindhoven, Netherlands 
 
 
- The book in question, “Research 
Inspired by the Dutch Windmills” by 
the Prinsenmolen Committee, and 
published by H. Veenman en Zonen, 
Wageningen, Netherlands, deals with 
the design of windmills—well proven 
machines for raising water—on the! 
basis of modern aerodynamics and 
wind tunnel tests. It presents, in 
185 pages with 90 drawings, the col- 
lected information about the subject 
that was available in the Netherlands 
between 1935 and 1960—Editor. 
RENDER UNTO CAESAR 
Sir, 
| was delighted by the article “For 
Children Only® (March 1966) on the 
remarkable children's library at Cla- 
mart, near Paris, which | visited re- 
cently with a group of librarians. 
Bravo, for showing readers this library 
which is an innovation from several 
viewpoints and one which we hope to 
see widely copied. 
What a pity, though, that the name of 
the architect was not mentioned. Much 
of the library's success is due to its 
design, to the use of simple materials 
and to the excellent lighting arrange- 
ments. 
In this particular case | would say 
that the architect has probably made 
a more original and novel contribution 
than the librarian. At any rate, it has 
a stimulating effect, as anyone can 
confirm who has seen the enthusiasm 
and satisfaction of the young libra- 
rians working in this field. 
Eliette Segalen 
Boulogne-sur-Seine, France 
Not one, but four architects designed 
the Clamart Ilbrary. They are: 
Messrs. J]. Renaudie, P. Riboulet, 
G. Thurnauer and ILL. Veret—Editor. 
WHY NOT A ‘JUNIOR COURIER’? 
Sir, 
My son, aged 6, Is very interested 
in space. | am sure he will hike the 
pictures in your May 1966 issue. But 
he is too young for the text. Why 
not have a Junior Courier for, say, the 
6 to 11 year-olds? Previous genera- 
tions (and the present one) have made 
a poor show of bringing the world to 
law and order; the sooner we set 
the next generation off along the path 
to world community the better. 
John Roberts 
London, England 
FOR FREEDOM FROM HUNGER 
Sir, 
As a representative of the Freedom 
from Hunger Campaign Committee In 
Beauvais, France, | should like to tell 
you what this group of yeung people 
is doing. A correspondent at Bossan- 
goa (Central African Republic) 
suggested that we should buy millet 
grinders which would lighten the work 
of the women and also help to reduce 
infant mortality. Porridge made by 
cooking millet meal is, In fact, much 
more digestible than porridge made 
from manioc meal, but millet is harder 
to grind. We aim to provide ten 
millet grinders at a total cost of 30,000 
francs {£2,100 or $6,000), and to raise 
this sum we have joined forces with 
the town of Chantilly, near Paris. 
Bernard Chandellier 
Beauvais, France 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
P
A
R
I
S
.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco 
manuals 
for 
libraries 
A series of practical manuals 
written in simple language by 
authorities on such basic 
topics as the organization of 
libraries, library manuals, 
buildings and library services. 
Published by Unesco since 
1948, the manuals are de- 
signed to meet the needs of 
developing countries. 
THE SMALL 
PUBLIC LIBRARY 
BUILDING 
Hovr R. Gawain 
and 
Martin Vax Buses 
  
THE PRIMARY 
SCHOOL LIBRARY 
AND 
ITS SERVICES 
Mary Peacock Douvaras 
I 
Bm The Organization of the Small Public Library 
by Ingeborg Heintze 
m The Primary School Library and Its Services 
by Mary Peacock Douglas. 3rd impression 1966 
HW Public Libraries for Asia: 
the Delhi Seminar 
HW The Small Public Library Building 
by Hoyt R. Galvin and Martin Van Buren 
Wm The Delhi Public Library: an evaluation report 
by Frank M. Gardner 
66 p. $ 1.25; 6/-; 450 F 
103 p. §$ 1.50; 7/6; 5.25 F 
165 p. $1.50; 7/6; 4 F 
133 p. $ 2.00; 10/-; 7 F 
94 p. $ 150; 7/6; 4 F 
Wm Libraries in Adult and Fundamental Education: 
the report of the Malmé Seminar, 
by Cyril O. Houle 179 p. $1.50; 86; 4 F 
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency ; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzal, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul, — AUSTRALIA. 
Lengmans, Green & Co., Ltd. Railway Crescent, 
Croydon, Victoria; sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
tion of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale Sc, Melbourne C. I. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only: Dominie Pry Led, 463 Pict- 
water Road, Brookvale {N.5.W.) (SA 2.25).— AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.-). — BELGIUM. All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard -We- 
tenschappelitke Uitgeverij Belgielei 1 47, Antwerp, For The 
Unesco Courier (140FB) and art slides only : Louis 
De Lannoy, 112, rue du Tr8ne, Brussels 5.CCP 3380.00. 
— CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont. ($ 3.00). 
— CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chittampalan 
Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 7). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS. 
“MAM, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); Zahranicni 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK, Ejnar 
Munksgaard, Ltd.. Prags Boulevard 47, Copenhagen S. (D. 
Kr. 17). — ETHIOPIA, International Press Agency. P.O. 
Box 120, Addis Ababa (10/-). — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 9.40). — 
FRANCE, Librairie de "Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48. (10 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications: R, Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, 8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
Led., Atlantis House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairia H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis Nikkis 4, Athens, — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akademiai Konybrbnolt 
Vici U. 22+ Budapest V. Allami K&nyvterseszto 
Vallalat, P.O. Box 240, Budapest — ICELAND. 
Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
(120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd.. Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chictaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16; Scindia House, 
New Delhi, Indian Nationa! Commission for Cooper- 
ation with Unesco, Ministry of Education, for New 
Delhi 3. (Rs.10.50). INDONESIA. P.T.N. ** Permata- 
Nusantra ” c/o Department of Commerce, 22 Djalan 
Nusantra, Djakarta, — IRAQ. Mackenzie's Bookshop, Al- 
Rashid Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, University 
of Baghdad, P.O. Box 12, Baghdad — IRELAND. 
The National Press, 2, Wellington R ad, Ballsbridge, 
Dublin. 4. (15/5). — ISRAEL. manuel Brown, 
formerly Blumstein's Bookstores, 3 Allenby Road 
and 48 Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (I£8). — 
JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, 
Kingston. (15/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo 
(1,200yen). — JORDAN. Joseph i. Bahous & Co., Dar ul- 
Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — KENYA. E.S.A. 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi (10/-). — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. KUWAIT The Kuwait Bookshop 
Co., Ltd, P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O, Box 286, Monrovia 
(10/-). — LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grand-Rue, Luxemburg (F.L. 140). — MALAY- 
SIA. Federal Publications Ltd.,, Times House, River 
Valley Road, Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3rd 
floor), 110, Jalan Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M.$ 7.50). 
— MALTA. Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta, 
(15/-). — MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, 
Bourbon Street, Port-Louis (15/-). — MONACO. British 
Library, 30, Bld. des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (F. 10). — 
NETHERLANDS. N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange 
Voorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl. 8.50). — NETHERLANDS 
ANTILLES. G. C. T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) 
N.V., Willemstad, Curacao. N.A, (NA fl 4,50). — NEW 
ZEALAND, Government Printing Office, 20, Molesworth 
Street (Private Bag), Wellington; Government Book- 
hops: Auckland {P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 
1721), Dunedin (P.O. Box 1104) (15/-). — NIGERIA. 
C.M.S. Bookshops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-). — 
NORWAY. All publications : A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille 
Grensen 7, Oslo. For Unesco Courier only: A.S- Nar- 
vesens Litteraturjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, (17.50kr.). 
— PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., 
Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree 
Highway, G/ 6-1, Islamabad. — PHILIPPINES. The Modern 
Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila. 
— POLAND. “RUCH", ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 
(zl. 60). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria 
Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO, 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115, 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. —- SOUTHERN RHODESIA. 
The Book Centre and Educational Supply Co., Colonial Mu- 
tual Building, Salisbury, — SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, 
P. O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publi- 
cations: AfB C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 
2, Stockholm 16. — For the Unesco Courier: The United 
Nations Association of Sweden, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. $2); SWITZERLAND. All publications : 
Europa Veriag, 5 Rimistrasse, Zurich, Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211,Geneva 11,C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1. rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 10). — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 2775, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 ucals). — TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala (10/-).— SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications : Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pry) Ltd., 
Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only : Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesbourg, (R1.-50). 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo, Sub/agent : 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo, — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.l, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester. 
Birmingham and Bristol. {(15/-). — UNITED STATES, 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 Ease 34th St, New York, 
N.Y. 10016 ($ 5.00) — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Mocow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska 
Knliga Terazije, 27, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/016653engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
   
NE Eon) eT oree SME 1 ERE 
| 
4 
i 
1 
t . 
rr J 
“ J 
yd ih 
C 
t 
— 
» 
+ A , 
> 
[| . 
4 St h 
  
  
  
  
g : - d 
. - 
| & ~ 
y/ 
ee 
Ea | on NT 
- “ut ‘NI Fb za 
  
  
     
   
 
   
i      
  
  
       
  
TEx 
t before its last plunge. But ““Flip”"—the 
oesn’t go down. This unusual oceano- * 
ble scientists aboard to conduct 
ovide (see page 18) 
hap=4 
"nig    
AEST CRE 
SHIP NAMED FLIP. It looks like a sinking ship jus 
name stands for Floating Instrument Platform —d 
~ graphic research vessel has merely flipped up on end to ena 
experiments under stabler conditions than a surface vessel would P 
  
  
        