# [074818](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

TREASURES 
lg WORLD AR 
Cuneiform ritual bucket | i 
Fingers grip the handle of a bucket in this detail from a stone low-relief sculpture unearthed several 
years ago at Nimrud (Iraq) by a team of Iraqi archaeologists. The sculpture is covered with cuneiform 
inscriptions. At Nimrud, site of the rich and powerful city of Kalakh, capital of ancient Assyria, the 
remains of royal palaces, huge statues of fabulous animals, paintings and an abundance of cuneiform 
inscriptions reveal the splendour of a vanished civilization. Located 30 kms. south of Nineveh, Kalakh 
was founded in the 9th cent. B.C. Assyrian sculptors embellished the city with numerous portraits 
of their king, Ashurnasirpal Il (883-859 B.C.) and depicted military and hunting exploits along with 
scenes and objects from everyday life, such as this bucket used for ritual ablutions. i 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"@mCourier @m(  
JANUARY 1976 29TH YEAR 
Page 
 
 
PUBLISHED IN 15 LANGUAGES 4 OUR SPLIT BRAIN 
English Arabic Hebrew By Vadim L. Deglin 
French J P 
’ pi h san nese Persian I. Research shows that each hemisphere of the human brain 
panisl talian - Dutc has its own independent functions 
. Russian Hindi Portuguese : 
German Tamil Turkish 10 Il. Left hemisphere: speech, writing and abstract thinking 
13 Ill. Right hemisphere: non-verbal memory, 
Published monthly by UNESCO emotions and concrete thinking 
"The United Nations wn ein wr. Y 
Educational, Scientific 14 IV. “Artist” and “thinker”: 
and Cultural Organization two hemispheres in competition 
Sales and Distribution Offices : 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Annual subscription rate 28 French francs 14 JOURNEY THROUGH THE BRAIN 
Binder for a year's issues: 24 French francs Photo report 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
-. year). For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 20 THE HUNGRY BRAIN 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from , . 
A baby’s brain can be irreparably damaged the UNESCO COURIER,” plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- because of the chronic malnutrition of its mother 
By Elie A. Shneour 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
- the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- 22 THE FIRST FOUR MO NTHS 
film andjor microfiche) by : (1) University Microfilms 8) F LIFE B EFORE Bl RTH 
(Xerox). Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.; (2) N.C.R. 
Microcard Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Photo report 
Street, New York, U.S.A.; (3) Bell and Howell Ce, 
Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A, 
Jointing sa yo g Mn 26 NEW MACHINES TO EXPLORE THE BRAIN 
H. W, Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- 
tents < Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. By José M. R. Delgado 
Editorial Office 33 UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 ) Paris - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler -34 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
Assistant Editors-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Olga Radel : ! 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
. Spanish Edition : Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German + Edition : Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim EI Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
2 TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
IRAQ: Cuneiform ritual bucket 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : N. K. Sundaram (Delhi) 
~ Tamil Edition : M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition : Paul Morren (Antwerp) Cover 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) -_ 
Turkish Edition : Mefra Telci (Istanbul) 
N Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Roy Malkin 
French Edition : Philippe Quannés, 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
IMustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard 
Research: Christiane Boucher } 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to 
the Editor-in- Chief in Paris 4 
  Ne 1 - 1976 MC 75-3-317 IS
SN
 
00
41
-5
27
8 
  
Design © Yuste Publicidad 
de Argentina, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina 
This issue is entirely devoted to the 
brain, its elaborate structure and 
complex activities. By demonstrating 
the special role played by each of the - 
two cerebral hemispheres, science has 
recently achieved major progress in its 
efforts to understand the mechanisms 
of the human brain. . Qur cover 
symbolizes the division of the brain 
into two hemispheres, each with its: 
own specific functions.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

  
i) 
ng 
@ 
= 
a 
Ld - 
~~ 
eS 
[+8 
oO - 
£ 
B
s
 
[
e
l
 
RI
GH
T 
HE
MI
SP
HE
RE
 
  
[1
% 
L
o
 
= 
F
    
‘Research 
LER DIR 
GEIR OER ET 
I EILRER CEL 
WOR CTHERT EG TTER 
each hemisphere 
having its own 
independent 
RUT ]ES 
3 3 ORTY years ago, the great physi- 
fel eTe 11ST ON AVZ= To Wl SO = VA (VAR oF- 14 \ T30 (I 
the conclusion that people could be 
~ broadly fo [\VITe [=Yo I To1 {oI 7) types—artists 
and thinkers. Neurophysiologists have: } 
recently discovered an anatomical : 
basis for this assertion. # SNE 4) re 
One of the specific charac a d 
k the human brain is what is known 
as the functional specialization of its 
two sides, the left and right cerebral 
hemispheres. It has been discovered 
[ER GIFT SR CVI TE SN (oY | I-11 : 
~ hemisphere of the brain controls 
logical and abstract thinking, whereas 
the right controls concrete and im- 
ginal Shining. The : PersoRRily, ph g 
i A 5 
TL | pi SL 
 vADIM LVOVICH DEGLIN, ning § Soviet 
neurophysiologist, is senior specialist in this 
field at the I. M. Sechenov Institute of Evolutio- 
nary Physiology and Biochemistry of the 
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, in Leningrad. 
He is currently engaged in research on the - 
functional specialization of the cerebral gener 
Author of more than 40 scientific studies, : 
‘has participated in many international con r- 
ences on problems concerning the physiology r= 
of the nervous system. A fuller version of this 
article was presented as a paper to the inter- 
“national meeting of experts organized by 
Unesco in June 1975, in Varna (Bulgaria) on 
the ethical problems posed by recent progress 
~ in bio logy. ’ 
   

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

  
         
by Vadim L. Deglin 
! modes! at Sercepiion of an Individual h 
- ot on which of his two cerebral 
BA e100 TETo Ya T=T CTS TES 1 ToT “SY [AVY [oY oT Ye 
~ (whether as a result of inherited a 
characteristics or education). 
~ Although the human brain is a 
~ considerable size and weight, ik 
“are animals with a larger and heavier 
‘brain. The human brain is large in 
2 relative terms, in other words the 
. brain is heavy in relation to the overall 
body weight. But even in this respect 
we are not superior to animals. Weight 
for weight the cetacea (the family of 
~ whales, dolphins and porpoises) haves 
even heavier brains. 
~ Scientists have long 2esumed ar 
the area of the human cerebral cortex 
was larger than that of animals, that it 
contained more convolutions and that - 
its nerve cells were more numerous 
and more densely distributed. How- 
“ever, we now know that even accord- 
ing to these criteria we are inferior to 
those legendary creatures, the dol- 
LITER P! or Le NK Yell 
OK neither size nor weight are the 
~ distinguishing characteristics of the 
human brain, what makes it unique? 
~ Today there is only one characteristic 
~ of the human brain which ii can 
Sr IA WEES Co fisda dr

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

> 
THE GEOGRAPHY 
AND FUNCTIONS 
OF THE BRAIN 
Drawing at right shows, on a 
schematic cross-section view of the 
brain, areas which control the major 
activities of the human body. 
Drawings far right, on opposite page, 
show the interior of the right 
hemisphere of the brain and the 
exterior of the left hemisphere. The 
two halves, interconnected by a 
bundle of nerve fibres known as the 
corpus callosum, are identical in 
structure but not in function. A 
number of crucial responsibilities are 
divided between them, thus giving 
specific functions to one hemisphere 
rather than to the other. Note that the 
motor and receptive areas for language 
(Areas of Wernicke and Broca) are 
both located in the cortex of the left 
hemisphere. Curves, folds and furrows 
outline the main areas of the brain, 
known as lobes, each of which is 
responsible for various functions. 
The parietal lobe, for example, 
contains the areas responsible for 
sensory inputs and motor responses. 
The frontal and temporal lobes are the 
centres of higher mental functions 
such as language, memory, knowledge 
and decision making. 
regard as unique, namely its functional 
asymmetry, 
The brain of all animals and of man 
himself is symmetrical. Its right and 
left halves are constructed identically. 
In animals, the right and left halves of 
the brain perform the same work. In 
man, however, the right and left 
cerebral hemispheres have different 
functions and govern different types of 
activity. It has long been known that 
damage to the cerebral cortex (caused 
by haemorrhages, traumas, tumours, 
etc.) may result in total or partial loss 
of speech—a condition known as 
aphasia. However, hardly more than 
a century ago, it was proved that only 
damage to the left hemisphere leads 
to aphasia. 
"In the second half of the 19th 
century and the early 20th century, 
intensive research was carried out in 
neurological clinics on deficiencies in 
the complex activity of the brain 
; 
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
Mi
ch
el
 
S
i
m
é
o
n
 
©
 
L'
Ex
pr
es
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
VOLUNTARY 
MOVEMENT 
(motor cortex) 
BODY 
SENSATIONS 
(sensory cortex) 
EQUILIBRIUM 
(cerebellum) 
TRANSMISSION 
INPUTS AND OUTPUTS 
(spinal cord) 
caused by damage to one or other 
of the cerebral hemispheres. As often 
happens, a mass of reliable facts was 
interlarded with data selected in order 
to support preconceived notions and 
theories. Consequently, neurologists 
associated not only speech with the 
activity of the left hemisphere but also 
all the higher functions of the nervous 
system—the intellect and complex 
forms of perception and activity. The 
left hemisphere 
known as the “major” or “dominant” 
hemisphere. 
- The right hemisphere was regarded 
as secondary and as subordinate to 
the left. It became known as the 
“minor” or “subdominant” hemisphere. 
It was referred to in neuropathology 
textbooks as the “mute” hemisphere, 
for it was not known what symptoms 
could be relied on in diagnosing a 
lesion affecting it. 
Until the mid-20th century, the 
therefore became . 
EMOTIONS 
(hypothalamus) 
SIGHT 
(visual cortex) 
’ 
  
SMELL 
AND TASTE 
(olfactory bulb) 
A 
HORMONAL 
EQUILIBRIUM 
(pituitary gland) 
functional asymmetry of the brain was 
of interest primarily to neuropathol- 
ogists endeavouring to find ways of 
accurately identifying localized damage 
to the brain. The detailed study of 
lesions in the left hemisphere was 
paralleled by intensive research on the 
symptoms of lesions in the “mute” 
right hemisphere. 
Finally, in the early 1950s, came a 
major breakthrough with the discovery 
of functions which belong exclusively 
to the right hemisphere. A series of 
remarkable studies on the independent 
functions of each hemisphere was 
carried out by Dr. Roger Sperry and a 
research team working at the Univer- 
sity of Chicago and later at the Califor- 
nia Institute of Technology. It became 
clear that the right hemisphere 
must not be regarded merely as an 
adjunct to the leff hemisphere, and 
that it makes its own substantial contri- 
bution to nervous activity.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

Right hemisphere 
CORPUS CALLOSUM 
(inter-hemispheric 
connexion) 
THALAMUS 
(central “switchboard” of sensations) 
HYPOTHALAMUS 
(instinctive behaviour : thirst, 
hunger, aggressivity, sex, fear) 
PITUITARY GLAND 
(hormonal equilibrium) 
HIPPOCAMPUS (memory) 
AMYGDALA 
(regulation of instinctive 
behaviour) 
MOTOR CORTEX 
(body movements) 
CEREBRAL CORTEX 
(upper surface of the brain 
[grey matter] 3-4 mm. thick) 
VISUAL CORTEX 
(sight) 
RETICULAR ACTIVATING SYSTEM 
Le in (sleep, wakefulness, 
alertness) 
    CEREBELLUM 
(equilibrium) 
SENSORY CORTEX 
(body sensations) 
  
FRONTAL LOBE 
(decision making) 
BROCA'S AREA 
(motor area of language) 
AUDITORY CORTEX (hearing) 
TEMPORAL LOBE 
PARIETAL LOBE   
(memory of language) 
OLFACTORY BULB 
(smell and taste) 
Left hemisphere 
The result was a break with the 
- traditional approach. The idea that 
one hemisphere was dominant was 
replaced” by the notion that each 
hemisphere _has its own specialized 
tasks and functions. At the same 
time, the problem of the brain's 
asymmetry ceased to be the sole 
province of neuropathologists and 
attracted the attention of physiologists, 
psychologists, specialists in the phy- 
siology of growth and even social 
scientists. Today, functional asym- 
metry is emerging as perhaps the 
main scientific problem in connexion 
with the human brain. 
The earliest source of information 
on the specialization of the brain's 
two hemispheres was provided by 
observations of patients suffering 
from localized damage in the right or 
left hemisphere. This traditional clini- 
cal method of research continues to 
yield new facts. 
 
The development of neurosurgery 
has paved the way for new methods 
and techniques in the study of the 
functional specialization of the hemi- 
spheres. In order to establish the 
limits of a brain lesion, surgeons 
sometimes stimulate ,the brain by 
means of a mild electric shock during 
the operation. As many brain oper- 
ations are carried out under local 
anaesthetic the doctor (who needs to 
know about the condition of the 
patient at particular stages in the 
operation) speaks to the patient and is 
able to find out what he feels when 
the various portions of the hemisphere 
being operated on are stimulated in 
this way. 
When patients are being prepared 
for a brain operation it is sometimes 
necessary to carry out a special test: 
a soporific drug is injected into 
the carotid artery supplying blood to 
one or other of the hemispheres. The 
(area of sensory inputs) 
OCCIPITAL LOBE 
(sight) 
WERNICKE'S AREA 
(receptive area 
for language) 
CEREBELLUM 
(equilibrium) 
SPINAL CORD 
(transmission 
inputs and outputs) 
hemisphere which is temporarily “put 
to sleep” in this way ceases to 
function,” and all the complex forms 
of nervous activity are carried out 
only by the other hemisphere. 
Although the hemisphere is “asleep” 
only for a minute or so, this has been 
long enough to provide fresh infor- 
mation on the functions of the right 
and left hemispheres. 
Nevertheless, the operation, the 
electric shock and the test using the 
soporific drug are generally confined 
to one hemisphere only. There is 
therefore no way of comparing the 
function of the right and left hemi- 
spheres in one and the same person. 
However, a few years ago, a kind of 
new operation was devised whereby 
all the nerve fibres linking the two 
hemispheres were cut. 
This operation, which is known as 
commissurotomy, is performed when 
1 
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
s
 
Ir
én
e 
P
e
c
h
a
r
d
-
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
Co
ur
ie
r’
 
4

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

4 it is essential to prevent the spread 
of a pathogenic condition from one 
hemisphere to the other. After the 
operation the two hemispheres begin 
to function independently. Although 
commissurotomy patients differ little 
from healthy persons it is possible, in 
the course of treating such patients, 
to discover what are the specialized 
abilities of each hemisphere in iso- 
lation, However, as commissurotomy 
is a very rare operation, it offers only 
limited scope for such observation. 
Experimental procedures, known as 
“dichotic tests”, have now been 
developed to provide a means of 
studying the functional specialization 
of the hemispheres in healthy subjects. 
These tests are based on the 
peculiarities of the brain's structure. 
It is known that the right ear and the 
right field of vision are linked more 
strongly with the left hemisphere, and 
the left ear and the left field of vision 
with the right hemisphere. If different 
material is simultaneously presented 
to the right and left sensory organs, 
the two hemispheres compete with 
each other and we can draw 
conclusions about the specialized 
functions of each hemisphere from the 
way it perceives things. 
Here is a. specific example. By 
using a special apparatus it is 
possible momentarily to present 
different letters to the right and left - 
fields of vision simultaneously, It 
emerges that only the letters shown. 
to the right hand side of vision are 
recognized. If geometrical figures are 
presented in a similar way they are 
recognized only in the left field of 
vision. 
Scientists now have a fairly impress- 
ive array of procedures and methods 
for the study of functional asymmetry. 
Some of them have stood the test of 
time whereas others have been 
developed only recently. One such 
method is connected with the form of 
treatment known as electro-shock 
therapy. 
The use of electric shock in 
treating mental illnesses became part 
of psychiatric practice some forty 
years ago when the possible forms of 
treatment available to psychiatrists 
were extremely limited. Doctors who 
had previously been powerless to do 
anything about severe nervous dis- 
orders found that this afforded an 
effective means of treatment. Mental 
diseases which had been regarded as 
hopeless and as leading inexorably 
to chronic insanity turned out to be 
curable. Psychiatrists now. have at 
their disposal a wide range of effective 
therapeutic drugs, but, even today, 
there are certain mental illnesses 
which respond only to electro-shock 
therapy. 
  
BRAINY HANDS 
A series of experiments carried out recently in North America 
tend to show that the left hemisphere of the brain (which in 
most people governs speech) also has a special control over the 
expressive, free-moving gestures people often make when 
they speak. Persons whose speech is controlled by the left 
hemisphere gesture primarily with the right hand, like the woman 
shown in this sequence of film stills taken during an experiment 
by a Canadian psychologist, Doreen Kimura. (If speech is 
controlled by the right hemisphere, the left hand makes more 
of the accompanying gestures.) 
In this treatment, electrodes are 
attached to the patient's head and a 
precisely calculated electric current is 
induced, thereby producing a state of 
shock which lasts for a minute. For 
some time after the shock patients 
are unconscious and their brain ac- 
tivity is depressed. But in the course 
of one or two hours this cerebral 
depression wears off and the patient 
regains full consciousness, A course 
of treatment comprises between eight 
and twelve shocks. 
effect generally appears after three 
to five shocks have been given and 
* gradually increases. 
In order to induce the electric 
shock, the electrodes are generally 
placed on either side of the brain. 
However, a few years ago, a British 
psychiatrist, Stanley Cannicott, sug- 
gested that the electrodes be placed 
only on the right hand side of the 
brain; subsequently shocks were giv- 
en from electrodes placed on the left 
side. These unilateral shocks, like the 
traditional bilateral shocks, have great 
curative powers but they are less vio- 
lent and are more readily tolerated by 
patients. 
Since 1967, the staff of the psychia- 
tric clinic of the LLM. Sechenov Institute 
of Evolutionary Physiology and Bio- 
chemistry of the U.S.S.R. Academy 
of Sciences have been carrying out a 
study of unilateral electric shocks. 
Over the last seven years electro- 
shock treatment has been given to a 
large number of patients in this clinic 
and we are convinced of its great 
efficacity. 
Our observations have shown that 
a unilateral shock does not depress 
the entire brain but only the hemi- 
The therapeutic 
treatment. 
sphere above which the electrodes 
have been placed. The other hemi- 
sphere remains active. Although it is 
something of an over-simplification, it 
may be said that after a unilateral 
shock the patient feels, behaves and 
thinks only with the active hemisphere. 
Electro-encephalograms recorded af- 
ter the shocks reveal a striking picture: 
one hemisphere is “asleep” whereas 
the other remains active and can be 
described as being “awake”. 
By placing the electrodes alter- 
nately on: the right and left of the 
patient's head during successive treat- 
ment sessions, it is possible, in effect, 
to “switch off” either the right or the 
left hemisphere of the same person's 
brain. One is thus able to compare 
a person's normal behaviour with his 
behaviour when only one hemisphere 
is active and to observe changes in. 
his behaviour after one hemisphere has 
been made inactive, In this way, uni- 
lateral electric shocks, the primary 
function of which is therapeutic, inci- 
dentally provide scientists with evi- 
dence of the fundamental functional 
specialization of each of the cerebral 
hemispheres, 
. The best way to sum up the facts 
which have been established is to give 
an overall description of a person in 
whom only one hemisphere is func-: 
tioning. It must be pointed out, how- 
ever, that our “one hemisphere” person 
is an invention. He is a collective syn- 
thesis of observations and -research 
bearing on a large number of patients 
who have undergone electric shock 
One further word of wam- 
ing: everything which follows applies 
to right-handed people; for left- handers 
all the facts are reversed.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

OUR SPLIT BRAIN 
Left hemisphere : 
speech, writing and 
] HE “left hemisphere” person is 
someone whose right hemi- 
sphere is inoperative and whose 
mental activity involves only the left 
hemisphere. } : 
The first and most important charac- 
teristic of the “left hemisphere” person’ 
is that he retains the power of speech. 
This is hardly surprising since the 
faculty of speech is governed by the 
left hemisphere. What is surprising is 
the fact that such a person is more 
willing and ready to engage in conver- 
sation and takes the initiative in dis- 
cussion, His vocabulary becomes 
richer and more varied and his answers 
more extensive and detailed. He is 
excessively talkative and even garru- 
lous. At the same time he is more 
receptive to what other people say. 
In order to test speech perception a 
technique known as speech audiometry 
is used. Specially selected groups of 
words recorded on magnetic tape are 
played to the patient through head- 
phones to each ear independently. 
First of all the threshold of speech 
awareness is measured, in other words 
the minimum intensity of the speech 
- signal at which a person can hear 
. speech sounds but is unable to identify 
the words. The volume is then gradu- 
ally increased and the person is asked 
to repeat the words he hears. A 
measurement is made of his speech- 
acuity—the number of correctly re- 
peated words expressed as a per- 
centage of the total, 
The “left hemisphere” person has a 
- lower threshold of awareness of 
speech sounds, that is to say he per- 
ceives quieter speech sounds than 
when both his brain hemispheres are 
working normally. He repeats the 
words he hears more quickly and with 
far greater accuracy. Generally, the 
“left hemisphere” person has a higher 
degree of speech activity and hears 
speech more easily. 
Do these facts justify the assertion 
that speech activity is improved if the 
right hemisphere is inoperative? If one 
listens attentively to the “left hemi- 
sphere” person one observes that, 
although he has become more talka- 
tive, his intonation is less expressive; 
it is monotonous, colourless and 
dull. Moreover, not only is his vocal 
expressiveness reduced but the voice 
itself changes: it acquires a kind of 
nasal twang or becomes unnatural, as 
though the subject were barking. This" 
speech defect is known as dysprosody, 
the intonation and vocal components 
of speech being known as prosodic - . 
elements. 
In addition to the “left hemisphere” 
person's dysprosody, his perception 
10 
intonations. He 
of prosodic elements in the speech of 
a person addressing him is also 
defective. ] 
Two series of experiments have 
been made in this connexion. In the 
first, a person was presented with 
short phrases played through head- 
phones and composed of nonsense 
syllables pronounced with exaggerated 
intonation—interrogative, angry, plain- 
tive, enthusiastic, etc. The person 
had to specify the meaning of the 
intonation and define the kind of ex- 
pression with which the phrase was 
uttered. In the second series of 
experiments the person, again through 
headphones, was presented with vowel 
sounds uttered by a man and by a 
woman. He had to repeat the sound 
and say whether the voice was male 
or female. 
It was shown that the “left hemi- 
sphere” person loses the ability to 
understand the meaning of speech 
listens attentively, 
tries to make sense of the nonsense 
- syllables and repeats them with great 
accuracy. But he is unable either to 
identify the tone of voice (interrogative, 
- angry, ete.) or to distinguish between 
a male and a female voice. 
Everyone is aware that the same 
words uttered with a different inton- 
ation can mean very different things. 
Similarly, the same words uttered by 
different people (i.e. in different voices) 
can have a completely different mean- 
ing. The way in which one says some- 
thing is often more significant than the 
actual words used. Prosodic compo- 
nents give the spoken word a specific 
reference, an expressiveness and. an 
affective colouring. If the spoken 
word is deprived of such components 
it sounds vague, formal and often 
incomprehensible. 
Thus, although the content of the 
“left hemisphere” person's speech is 
rich in formal terms, both lexically and 
grammatically, and although his 
speech activity increases and his 
hearing for words becomes more 
acute, he speaks without intonational 
or vocal expressiveness and what he 
says is therefore less graphic and 
specific. 
This confronts us with a paradoxical 
situation: certain aspects and charac- 
teristics of his hearing for speech im- 
prove while others deteriorate. What 
has happened to his hearing? Has a 
change occurred only in his perception 
of speech sounds or has his general 
. faculty of hearing been affected? Let 
us consider how a “left hemisphere” 
person perceives sound images other 
than speech. 
Tape-recordings were made of 
coughing, laughter and snoring, of the 
abstract thinking 
sounds of natural phenomena such as 
a thunderstorm and the roar of surf 
breaking and also of industrial and 
vehicle noises. 
The “left hemisphere” person's 
perception of such sound images is 
seriously impaired and he is completely 
baffled by many familiar noises. In 
cases where he does manage to recog- 
nize them he requires a great deal 
more time in order to identify them. 
In fact the “left hemisphere”. person 
develops auditory agnosia—the impair- 
ed perception of complex sounds. A 
similar disturbance can be demonstrat- 
ed with regard to musical images. 
‘The “left hemisphere” person not 
only ceases to recognize well-known 
tunes but is unable to hum them even 
if he hears the music: he begins to 
hum wrong notes and ultimately prefers 
to tap out the rhythm without the 
melody. 
As he is unable to identify speech 
images, the “left hemisphere” person 
endeavours to overcome his difficulty 
by the highly original expedient of 
classifying them. Instead of saying: 
“that’s a dog barking” or “that’s some- 
one laughing”, etc., he says: “that's an 
animal”, “that's a person”, or “that’s 
a folk-song”. As a rule he is mistaken 
but the very effort to classify and sche- 
matize is in itself symptomatic. As we 
shall see later, this tendency is cer- 
tainly not fortuitous. 
How should one treat the findings 
of research on the perception of sound 
images? Perhaps the * “left hemi- 
sphere” person simply forgets familiar 
sounds whereas his perception re- 
mains unimpaired. This hypothesis 
can be verified. 
—- 
Tape-recordings were made of pairs . 
of short musical phrases, each phrase 
consisting of four notes. 
the pairs the phrases were identical 
whereas in others they differed slight- 
ly. The subject was asked to state 
whether the paired phrases were ident- 
ical or not. This test provides a 
means of studying the ability to distin- 
guish between closely similar musical 
patterns. There is no need for the 
subject to recall what he previously 
knew. This test is performed less well 
by the “left hemisphere” person than 
by the “two-hemisphere” person. 
The “left hemisphere” person is 
practically incapable of observing vari- 
ations and everything sounds alike to 
him. Thus, it is not a matter of mem- 
ory impairment but of the specific 
characteristics of auditory perception. 
How is this to be accounted for? 
Perhaps there has been some general 
change in the sensitivity of his hearing. 
Such is not the case. The acuity of his 
CONTINUED PAGE 12 
In some of

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

Shean adit of a 0g 
" 
Ph
ot
o 
US
IS
, 
Pa
ri
s 
    
  
  
 
MONITORING 
THE BRAIN 
AT WORK 
Recent developments in 
electronics have provided 
new tools for exploring the . 
brain in minute detail. 
The electroencephalograph, an 
instrument long used to 
amplify and record the brain's 
electrical impulses, has now 
been developed into a 
" phenomenally sensitive device. 
Its electrodes, placed at 
different points on the scalp, 
as in the case of the prema- 
turely-born baby seen in photo 
at left, record electric cur-" 
rents at selected areas in 
the brain. Below left, 
image of a man’s head 
produced by thermography, a 
method of recording variations 
in temperature electronically, 
Different areas of the brain 
are revealed as “hot” or “cold” 
according to cerebral activity, 
whose pattern may be 
- modified by a tumour or other 
lesion. Below, new type of 
X-ray machine developed in 
Britain, allowing doctorstosee 
for the first time a living brain 
in cross section, just like an 
illustration in a book 
on anatomy. The machine 
can film any level of the brain, 
producing and recording as 
many as 25,000 images ina 
matter of minutes. 
    
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
P
a
r
i
m
a
g
e
.
 
P
a
r
i
s

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

) hearing remains as it was when both 
halves of his brain were working. 
However, let us remember all the 
auditory deficiencies of the “left hemi- 
sphere” person, his difficulty in identi- 
fying musical and other sound patterns, 
his difficulty in distinguishing between 
male and female voices, his complete 
failure to comprehend intonation. In 
other words, every aspect of his ima- 
ginal perception of sounds has been 
impaired. ‘There can be no doubt that 
we are here faced by a special situ- 
ation, a selective and specialized im- 
pairment of imaginal perception (as has 
been stated, his perception of words 
themselves was actually improved). 
A deficiency in imaginal perception 
may also be observed with regard to 
vision. If a “left hemisphere” person 
is asked to select pairs of identical 
geometrical figures such as triangles 
and squares divided into coloured or 
striped sectors, he is unable to perform 
the task as he cannot at the same time 
grasp the distribution of the sectors, 
their colour and their stripes. 
He continually sorts through the 
figures, frequently comparing them, but 
he is unable to pair them off correctly. 
He is also unable to observe a missing 
detail in uncompleted pictures: the fact 
that a pig has no tail or that spectacles 
have no ear-pieces, etc. Thus the 
“left hemisphere” person is totally 
unable to perform tasks in which he 
needs to grasp or recognize the speci- 
fic imaginal characteristics of objects 
presented to his field of vision. 
Situations in which the “left hemi- 
sphere” person is free to use his own 
judgement in choosing whether to apply 
visual or abstract criteria are of parti- 
cular interest. 
Four cards were presented to such 
a person. On one card was written 
the Arabic numeral 5 and on another 
the same digit in the form of a Roman 
numeral (V). On the third card was the 
Arabic numeral 10 and on the fourth 
the same digit in the form of a Roman 
numeral (X). He was asked to divide 
these cards into two groups of 
“similar” cards. 
It is evident that this op- 
eration may be made on the basis 
of the abstract numerical sign (in which 
case the two fives and the two tens 
will be in separate groups) or by the 
external appearance of the symbol 
(in which case the Arabic numerals 
will be in one group and the Roman 
numerals in the other), 
In his normal state, a person is 
usually in some doubt and points out 
that there are two equally plausible 
methods of classification. The “left 
hemisphere” person unhesitatingly 
chooses the abstract symbol, placing 
the fives in one group and the tens 
in another. 
What has been said above makes 
it clear that the mental activity of the 
“left hemisphere” person is stratified. 
His imaginal perception is defective 
whereas his verbal perception is im- 
proved. His handling of objects in 
12 
terms of their visual, external appear- 
ance is defective but his handling of 
concepts is improved. 
This stratification also emerges in 
studies on memory. The “left hemi- 
sphere” person retains the theoreti- 
cal knowledge which he learnt "at 
school; in other words his knowledge 
obtained through the medium of words 
remains unaffected. He also retains 
the capacity to memorize new verbal 
material and, as soon as he has heard 
a series of words, he is capable of 
repeating them. 
He is also capable of remembering 
them for a considerable period and 
two or three hours later, by which 
time he has returned to his normal 
state, he is capable of picking out 
from a large number of other words 
those which he had previously been 
given to memorize. However, if a 
“left hemisphere” person is asked to 
commit to.memory not verbal material 
but irregularly shaped figures to which 
it is impossible to attach a descriptive 
word, he Is incapable of doing so. 
There is another important feature 
of the behaviour and mental activity 
of such a person, namely his grasp 
—or, as neurophysioclogists say, his 
comprehension—of his surroundings, 
his orientation in space and time. If 
one judges merely by the answers 
given by “left hemisphere” people, 
they appear to be well oriented. Such 
a person correctly names the hos- 
pital he is in, the number of the ward, 
the date and the day of the week. 
But if one questions him 
more closely it becomes clear 
that although he has made 
a correct verbal statement of 
his whereabouts and knows that he 
Is in a hospital, the “left hemisphere” 
person does not recognize specific. 
rooms. He looks in bewilderment at 
the consulting room to which he has 
been a frequent visitor and says he 
has never been there before. Or, 
‘improves, 
although he has given the date cor- 
rectly, he is unable to confirm his 
answer by practical observations. 
Sometimes the “left hemisphere” 
person even looks out of the window 
at the leafless trees and the snow- 
drifts and is unable to say immedi- 
ately whether it is winter outside or 
summer. Indeed, if he answers that 
“January is a winter month” this is 
merely a formal inference and not a 
result of direct visual impression. 
Thus, although the verbal orientation 
of the “left hemisphere” person is 
unimpaired, his visual orientation in 
space and time is seriously disturbed. 
One of the most striking mental 
changes in the “left hemisphere” per- 
son concerns his emotional outlook. 
The attitude of mind of such a person 
he becomes more easy- 
going, sociable and cheerful. This 
transformation is particularly striking 
in the case of depressive patients, 
that is to say those who have a 
. pathologically low morale. 
“Left hemisphere” patients lose 
“their characteristic moroseness and 
low spirits. Instead of being preoc- 
cupied with their own symptoms, they 
become interested in topics uncon- 
nected with their illness. They begin 
to take an optimistic view of their own 
situation, believe they will be cured. 
and regard the future as an encour- 
aging prospect. 
Let us sum up what we have learnt 
‘about the mental process of the “left 
hemisphere” person. What defects 
has such a person? What faculties 
have been retained or enhanced? 
A deterioration has occurred in 
those aspects of his. mental activity 
which underlie imaginal thinking. Those 
aspects of his mental activity which un- 
derlie abstract, conceptual thinking 
have been retained and even improved. 
This stratification of the psyche is ac-. 
companied by an optimistic emotional 
outlook. 
LANDMARK IN BRAIN RESEARCH 
The left and right hemispheres of the human brain are each responsible 
for specific functions and are interconnected by nerve fibres (primarily 
the corpus callosum) so that they work together. New and convincing 
proof of the specialization of each hemisphere was provided about 
15 years ago by the research of leading American neurologists such as 
Roger W. Sperry, Joseph E. Bogen and Michael S. Gazzaniga. Their 
work was a major breakthrough in the history of brain research. 
Following operations which “disconnected” the two hemispheres (in 
patients suffering from epilepsy which other treatment had failed to 
relieve) it became possible to observe the functioning of each 
hemisphere separately and thus to verify the specific mental functions 
of each half of our brain. Diagram (right) shows how visual messages 
are transmitted to a brain whose two hemispheres have been 
disconnected. If the word “Taxi” is flashed on the right side of a screen 
placed before a person being tested, the Image of this word goes to the 
left hemisphere of the brain. It was found that a patient could “read” 
and give a correct verbal description of images received in the left 
hemisphere, the one that controls speech. He could not describe an 
image received in the right hemisphere, in this case a key, because the 
right hemisphere does not control speech. He could, however, 
recognize the key among other objects and pick it up with his left hand. 
Drawing also shows that movements of the right hand are controlled 
by the left brain hemisphere and vice versa. Other major specialized 
functions are shown in the hemispheres that govern them.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

OUR SPLIT BRAIN 
Right hemisphere: non-verbal memory, 
emotions and concrete thinking 
i ET us now consider the antith- 
esis of the “left hemisphere” 
person, namely the “right hemisphere” 
person. “He is the same individual but, 
“in this case, his left hemisphere is 
“switched off" and only the right 
hemisphere is operating. 
Unlike the “left hemisphere” person, 
the “right hemisphere” person has a 
sharply diminished capacity for 
speech. His vocabulary is impover- 
ished and does not include words de- 
noting abstract concepts. He has 
difficulty in recalling the names of 
objects, especially those which are 
infrequently used, although he is cap- 
able of explaining the purpose of 
any object and of showing how it is 
used. This shows that he recognizes 
such objects. 
His comprehension of speech is poor 
"and it is necessary to speak to him in 
very short and simply constructed sen- 
tences. His own speech is also made 
up of simple sentences and often of 
isolated words. 
The speech activity of the “right 
hemisphere” person is much reduced. 
He is taciturn and, instead of answer- 
ing questions in words, he prefers to 
‘respond by mime or gestures. It is 
difficult to converse with him, and he 
becomes silent after briefly answering 
one or two questions. His attentive- 
ness to speech is also reduced. 
The “right hemisphere” 
threshold of awareness of speech 
sounds is high. He is aware only of 
loud words. But even words which 
are uttered fairly loudly he is often 
unable to take in and repeat, although 
this falling-off in his sensitivity to 
speech sounds has nothing to do with 
any impairment in his hearing. 
At the same time, the voice of the 
“right hemisphere” person remains as 
it was before : although he is very 
uncommunicative the intonation pat- 
tern of his voice remains unaltered. 
Nor has his hearing of the 
prosodic elements in speech been 
affected : the “right hemisphere” per- 
son can distinguish between male and 
female voices even better than before 
and is more subtle and accurate in 
interpreting voice intonations. 
Although the “right hemisphere” 
person is less attentive to words, he 
is both attentive and active in listen- 
ing to various non-verbal sounds. He 
1 
 
  
  
Speech 
  
 
person's’ 
recognizes such sounds even more 
easily and quickly than when both hal- 
ves of his brain are working, whereas 
the sound of surf breaking on the 
shore, for example, is not often recog- 
nized by people in the normal state 
and then only with great difficulty. 
Listening to the tunes of songs, the 
“right hemisphere” person recognizes 
them much more quickly than usual. 
Moreover, he feels an urge to hum 
them without even being asked to do 
so. In contrast with his own perform- 
ance when only his left hemisphere was 
operative, he can now reproduce tunes 
accurately, but cannot classify sound 
patterns. 
This indicates that the “right hemi- 
sphere” person's perception has been 
restructured and is now the opposite 
of what was observed in the “left 
hemisphere” person. The “right hemis- 
phere” person shows a deterioration 
in verbal perception and a selective 
improvement in all aspects of imaginal 
perception. 
This observation is confirmed by 
other research. The “right hemisphere” 
person has no difficulty in selec- 
ting pairs of triangles and squares Jp 
LEFT HAND, RIGHT HAND 
Drawings below illustrate the different capacities of the 
brain's two hemispheres. They were done by a patient 
whose left hemisphere had been separated from his right. 
He was asked to copy the cross and cube (centre) first with 
his left hand, then with his right hand. Although the 
patient was actually right-handed, he did a far better job 
with his left hand (controlled by the brain's right hemisphere, 
which excels at space perception) than with his right 
hand (governed by the spatially inept left hemisphere). 
  
    
     
* 
Im
pa
ct
 
of
 
Sc
ie
nc
e 
on
 
So
ci
et
y 
"
-
U
n
e
s
c
o
.
 
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
  
   
   
    
    
   
   
    
  
Spatial perception 
Word comprehensio 
Non-verbal concept 
    Writing 
Main language 
   
     
       
   
 
  
                 
centre ¢ * 
. ation 
Calculation ormati 
~N 
Right visual field Left visual field 
projection projection AN 
O0== ~ 
~ 
- 
~Corpus callosum     
13 
Dr
aw
in
gs
 
© 
Jo
se
ph
 
E. 
Bo
ge
n,
 
Lo
s 
A
n
g
e
l
e
s

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

divided into striped or coloured sec- 
tors and he picks them out more 
rapidly than in his normal state. He 
experiences no difficulty in evaluating 
unfinished drawings and quickly points 
out what has been omitted. The 
“right hemisphere” person's greater 
capacity for imaginal perception stands 
out particularly clearly in situations 
in which he is free to select symbols. 
In classifying four cards bearing 
Arabic and Roman numerals, he selects 
the numbers by their visual appearance 
rather than by their abstract numerical 
values, putting the Roman numerals 
into one group and the Arabic numerals 
into the other. He recognizes all the 
numerals but in classifying them he is 
guided by the system of notation rather 
than the meaning of the numerals. 
The memory of the 
phere” person acquires characteristics 
which are the opposite of those observ- 
ed in the “left hemisphere” person. The 
theoretical knowledge he acquired in 
school through the medium of words is 
largely lost and his ability to memorize 
words is also impaired. 
He is not able to repeat immediately 
after hearing them a series of several 
words and is able, at best, to repeat 
two or three such words out of ten. 
Even if he is able to retain these words 
in his memory for a certain period of 
time he forgets them within two hours 
and cannot pick them out from among 
other.words. At the same time his 
imaginal, non-verbal memory is unim- 
paired and he is capable of memorizing 
oddly shaped figures and of picking 
them out several hours later from nu- 
merous other figures. 
The time and space orientation of 
the “right hemisphere” person is also 
affected but in a different way from 
that observed in the “left hemisphere” 


### 49417: Our split brain

OUR SPLIT BRAIN 
“right hemis-- 
person. Judging by his answers, he 
appears completely disoriented, not 
knowing where he is, nor the date nor 
even the year. 
However, he notices details of his 
surroundings and on the basis of his 
observations is able to say that he is 
probably in a hospital, without knowing 
which one. He recognizes the consult- 
ing-room in which he is sitting although 
he cannot say what its purpose is. 
Although he is unable to name either 
the month or the year he can tell what 
time of year it is by looking out of the - 
window and says approximately what 
the month is. Thus, although the 
“right hemisphere” person has no ver- 
bal orientation his visual and practical 
orientation is retained. 
Just as the “left hemisphere” person 
underwent a change of mood, so the 
“right hemisphere” person undergoes 
an emotional transformation in the 
opposite direction, towards negative 
emotions. His spirits decline, he be- 
comes morose and is pessimistic about 
his present situation and his future 
prospects and complains of feeling 
unwell. 
Let us sum up what we have dis- 
covered about the “right hemisphere” 
person. It is evident that here again 
we are faced with a disorganized 
psyche but the disorganization differs 
from what we observed in the “left 
hemisphere” person. 
The “right hemisphere” person mani- 
fests an impairment in those aspects 
of mental activity which are the basis 
of abstract, conceptual thinking while 
those aspects linked with imaginal 
thinking have been retained and even 
improved. This type of stratification 
of the psyche is accompanied by a 
negative emotional outlook. 
Artist’ and ‘thinker’: 
two hemispheres in competition 
W E have now made the ac- 
quaintance of two people 
who differ widely in their psychic 
make-up : the “left hemisphere” per- 
son whose thinking is highly abstract 
but whose imaginal thinking is defec- 
tive and the “right hemisphere” per- 
son who has a highly imaginal mode 
of thought but who is defective with 
regard to abstract thought. 
However, these two are the same 
person, the only difference being that 
in the first case his right hemisphere 
has been inactivated and he thinks 
"and feels exclusively with the left he- 
misphere, and in the second instance 
the opposite is the case. 
We are now in a position to draw a 
firm conclusion: there is a definite 
principle behind the functional asym- 
metry of the brain, namely that the 
14 
left hemisphere governs logical and 
abstract thinking, whereas the right 
hemisphere governs concrete and 
imaginal thinking. Apparently, each 
hemisphere, each apparatus, has its 
own set of instruments: its own speech, 
memory and emotional tone. 
Let us compare the instruments in 
each of the two hemispheres, 
As has already ‘been stated, the 
breakthrough in our understanding of 
the functional asymmetry of the human 
brain was the discovery of the ex- 
ceptional importance of the left 
hemisphere in speech activity. Even 
today, research workers use the 
terms “left hemisphere” and “speech 
hemisphere” as synonymous. However, 
study of the “single hemisphere” per- 
son shows the truth is more complex. 
Is it true that verbal speech—in- 
CONTINUED PAGE 16 
Ph
ot
os
 
Le
nn
ar
t 
Mi
ls
so
n,
 
Li
fe
 
© 
Ti
me
 
In
c.
, 
Ne
w 
Yo
rk
 
JOURNEY 
THROUGH 
THE BRAIN 
§ 
We present here and on the 
following pages (also on back 
cover) a series of remarkable 
photographs of different parts 
of the brain and its sensory 
outposts taken by a Swedish 
photographer, Lennart Nilsson. 
Produced in co-operation with 
doctors and research scientists 
at laboratories in Stockholm, 
these documents record stages 
in a unique journey through the 
“human brain. : 
=. 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

he  —- —— . 
a 
PORTRAIT OF A NEURON 
THE BRAIN'S SMALLEST ‘COG’ 
~ The nerve cell, or neuron, is the brain's smallest working L oe 
unit. A human brain has 11 billion of them. Right, a neuron 
i= ERC LIT (ELLER R OTE BIEN LAUT-Tg (HEED DTT ET (001) BE 
microscope. Bulging out at top of photo is the body of =" 
the cell. Branching out from it (enlarged detail, above) are 
the dendrites, the neuron’s receiving antennae. Left, a 
~ different-shaped neuron. The central body of a neuron 
~ often has a well-defined geometrical shape—pyramidal, 
star-shaped, lozenge-shaped or, like the one shown 
~ here, it may be elongated. [* i } 
i CONTINUED PAGE 1 a 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

4 volving both the formation and per- 
ception of words—is entirely depen- 
dent on the activity of the left hemis- 
phere. The reason for this is obvious: 
a system of words is a system of sym- 
bols and generalizations superimposed 
on immediately perceptible individual 
phenomena. A capacity for abstract, 
theoretical thinking can only be based 
on such a system of symbols or, to 
use the now accepted phrase, on the 
basis of a system of signs. 
But speech also comprises a non- 
verbal means of communication and 
information, namely intonation and 
tone of voice. And the intonation one 
gives to one's own speech, like one’s 
perception of the intonations used by 
others, are both governed by the right 
hemisphere. Only within a system of 
intonations do words or phrases ac- 
quire a specific meaning which is ap- 
propriate to a given moment and given 
circumstances. In the same way the 
voice itself is an individual charac- 
teristic of speech. 
The meaning of what is being com- 
municated also depends on whether the 
communication comes from a man or 
a woman, an acquaintance or a stran- 
ger, a friend or an enemy. This being 
so, the connexion between the intona- 
tional and vocal components of speech 
and the right hemisphere is also easy 
to understand: the right hemisphere 
controls the world of specific, indivi- 
dual phenomena. 
The intonational and vocal aspect 
of speech is essentially a melodic and 
musical one. But we already know 
that musical aptitudes are also con- 
trolled by the right hemisphere and 
it follows that in terms of their origin 
too the prosodic (melodic) charac- 
teristics of speech are linked with the 
activity “of the right hemisphere. . 
In evolutionary terms, “right hemis- 
phere” speech is of greater antiquity 
than “left hemisphere” speech. 
Highly organized animals living in 
herds transmit the danger signal and 
other signals to each other vocally 
by means of changes in intonation. 
The great antiquity of this communi- 
cation channel emerges also in the 
study of speech formation in children. 
It is a biological law that the physical 
development of the individual organism 
(ontogenesis) repeats on a brief time. 
scale the evolutionary development of 
the animal world (phylogenesis). 
The sequence in which functions 
come into existence in ontogenesis is 
therefore a clue to the evolutionary 
age of these functions. Research has 
shown that intonations which are 
characteristic of adults are present in 
the cooing and babbling of infants long 
before they have learnt to speak. It 
is also known that the child begins 
to understand intonations earlier than 
words. 
It is thus necessary to draw a dis- 
tinction between two channels of com- 
munication in human speech: verbal 
communication which is a purely hu- 
man characteristic and which is young 
16 
CONTINUED PAGE 31 
the start of the deep fissure dividing the right hemisphere; i 
g from the left hemisphere. ha 
SURFACE OF THE CORTEX. The interlocking ridges of the 
surface of the cerebral cortex vary in shape from one person t 
another, much like fingerprints. But the general pattern of 
UCR COR ER GEE CR LIEN TL ELE TET EN 
= 
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

     
 
  
      
 
      
. 
THE CEREBELLUM. Seen here in cross-section, the cerebellum (or “tree of life” as it has ig 
been called) is situated behind the brain. The size of a small fist, the cerebellum has even 
. more convolutions than the brain itself. Like the brain, it has its own cortex. The cerebellum 
~ monitors ERG RR IG IGE CE bodily movements. 8 | es . = oR a = 
ka a] al L i 
OPTIC NERVES. The two diagonal columns branching up from each side of the photo are the : rs Wg 
optic nerve tracts. Each tract links an eye to the hemisphere on the opposite side of the brain. ~ CONTINUED PAGE 18 
= Me . y : helt = ] - - Ala. — 
i . - " d E ll - i Bi : lor i A 
a vi : S- I i l . 
a _- 
 
   
  
. § Pr. 
% . 
& Ro if : “ 
a a Jy y 
Ne
w 
Yo
rk
 
Li
fe

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

Eas = . 
JOURNEY THROUGH THE BRAIN (Continued) a. 
a Sh i 
he # hE y 
i q i . 
k “i 3 Li 
= 1 he 
i pe 
¥ 
he BI 
~~ INTHE OUTPOSTS OF THE BRAIN. Right, inner segments of cells y 
in the retina of the eye, magnified about 4,500 times. These cells, 
known as rods and cones, transform light energy into the brain's A 
electrochemical language. Each retina contains some 120 million rods 
~ and 7 million cones. The balance of the human body is controlled by 
" ERED QR RL ETR LETC DR TTL EER GTA IEER QERVER CL IV ETE O10) FE 
in the inner ear. Bundles of “sensory hairs” (detail above) form part 
of this system and help record movements of the body. Another 
unit of the vestibular system consists of sets of “receptor cells”, 
BR ARLE WCET RE GENE CERN GENCY 8 CT ER) Je TE IVE SVR I ToT TR lr 
receptors are connected to a membrane filled with minute crystals 
of calcium carbonate (below). Whenever the body's angle moves, so 
I BGR ETERS TT END R GENCE GTO TEI ETEED EI OVERS E10 
BR CULER GER TEIN RR GR GUND CIM ENED RU EEL ER GRCE RG IRC ETED TEN if 
§ ri 
td : Id : aE 
- 
V Cond Rl 
 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

by Elie A. Shneour 
) HE growth of the human brain 
during gestation is one of the 
earliest, most rapid and most extensive 
developments of the whole organism. 
The mature human brain contains 
about 11 billion nerve cells embedded 
“in a matrix of “housekeeping” cells, 
the neuroglia, whose number exceeds 
100 billion. It is these nerve cells 
which perform the functions we asso- 
ciate with intelligence, consciousness, 
memory, biological control and inte- 
gration.  Nerve-cell proliferation is 
complete at birth, and none of these 
cells are replaced thereafter. 
One of the earliest recognizable 
“primordial tissues in the human embryo 
is the neural plate, the first evidence 
of brain development, which appears 
by the 18th day of pregnancy. This 
means that to generate the required 
11 billion nerve cells by the end of 
gestation requires the production and 
differentiation of an average of 20,000 
nerve cells per minute during this 
period. 
After birth the brain continues to 
grow at a much faster rate than the rest 
of the body, so much so that by the 
time a child is four years old his brain 
has reached 90 per cent of its adult 
weight, while the rest of his body has 
barely made it to the 20 mark. During 
this critical period of rapid growth, 
much more than just an increase in 
weight is involved. The structures 
  
ELIE A. SHNEOUR, of the United States, is 
a neurochemist who has devoted many years 
to brain research as well as problems of mal- 
nutrition and retarded mental development. 
He examines these related questions in the ar- 
ticle published here. A complete treatment of 
this subject is presented in his book The Mal- 
nourished Mind (Anchor Press, Doubleday 
and Co. Inc, New York, 1974). He has edited 
a major anthology on biology and the explora- 
tion of Mars for the U.S. National Academy of 
Sciences and is co-author of Life Beyond the 
Earth (7965). 


### 49423: The Hungry brain: a baby's brain can be irreparably damaged because of the chronic malnutrition of its mother

20 
  
BRAIN 
THE HUNGRY 
  
A baby’s brain can be irreparably 
damaged because of the chronic 
malnutrition of its mother 
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited 
making up the brain undergo complex 
and profound changes in anatomy, 
chemistry and physiology. 
The extraordinary growth of the 
human brain is shown in the table 
below: 
WEIGHT 
AGE OF BRAIN 
(grammes) 
Newborn ............... 340 
6 months .............. 750 
fyear .......c.ev..... 970 
2years ................ 1,150 
Jyears ................ 1,200 
Gyears ................ 1,250 
Qyears ................ 1,300 
12 years ................ 1,350 
20 years .........c.00nn 1,400 
While the rate of brain growth is 
highest before birth, the table shows 
that the weight of the human brain 
nearly triples during the first year of 
life. This outstanding growth rate is 
not shared with any other mammal, 
and provides a clue to the important 
role which the nutritional requirements 
must play during this early period. 
The inescapable conclusion, there- 
fore, is that the human brain is most 
vulnerable to inadequate nutrition dur- 
ing the earliest period of life. Further- 
more, the evidence available on the 
subject suggests that the entire course 
of human existence may be largely 
determined by the nutrition received 
during that time. 
The logistic problem of providing 
the nutritional requirements begins 
shortly after conception and culmi- 
nates in the development of the pla- 
centa. This is a disc-shaped tempo- 
rary organ in which the blood vessels 
of the foetus and those of the mother 
come together in an intertwined mass 
without joining. Prenatal nutrition of 
the embryo, which becomes the foetus 
when it acquires a human resemblance 
after six weeks, takes place through 
the placenta. Nutrients, oxygen, hor- 
mones and waste products are 
exchanged by diffusing from one blood- 
vessel system to the other. 
A malnourished mother may be 
unable to keep up foetal demands for 
essential nutrients. The classic work 
-of Drs. BR. A. McCance and E. M. Wid- 
dowson demonstrated that a growing 
organism is extremely sensitive to 
variations in nutrition, and that mal- 
nourished rats, for example, would be 
permanently stunted even if they later 
received an adequate diet, while over- 
nourishment would result in perma- 
nently larger animals. - 
That the placenta was involved 
was demonstrated in the U.S.A. by 
Drs. J. K. Stephan and B. F. Chow at 
Johns Hopkins University (Maryland), 
and by Dr. Myron Winick at Cornell 
University (New York State). Mal- 
nourished mothers produced smaller 
and lighter placentas than adequately- 
fed mothers. 
Dr. S. Zamenhof at the University 
of California at Los Angeles first 
showed that depriving pregnant rats 
of protein resulted in a reduced num- 
ber of brain cells in the offspring. This 
was confirmed by Dr. Winick, who 
made the striking observation that new- 
born animals from deficient placentas 
also had fewer brain cells. 
On the other hand, Dr. Zamenhof 
was able to raise very bright rats, 
animals which he calls “rat Einsteins,” 
by providing abundant and well-bal- 
anced food. Perhaps the most remark- 
able observation he made was that 
female rats born to malnourished 
mothers could not produce adequate 
placentas, even if they were well- 
nourished during their entire adult

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 49423: The Hungry brain: a baby's brain can be irreparably damaged because of the chronic malnutrition of its mother

Ph
ot
o 
W
H
O
 
lives. Their offspring exhibited the 
classic evidence of malnutrition, includ- 
ing a reduction in brain-cell numbers. 
This work supports the finding of 
Drs. J. J. Cowley and R. D. Griesel in 
South Africa that the effect of prenatal 
malnutrition on rat mental development 
could affect growth and development 
into the second generation. Thus mal- 
nutrition, an environmental influence, 
can produce effects very similar to 
those of hereditary origin. These 
experiments were carried out mainly 
- with animals rather than human beings 
for obvious reasons, but there is ample 
clinical evidence available to suggest 
that the conclusions are equally 
applicable to human children. 
Dr. J. A. Churchill of Wayne State 
University at Detroit (U.S.A.) examined 
black pregnant women in poor families 
and their children and was able to 
observe a definite relationship between 
the amounts of amino acids in the 
mother's blood streams during preg- 
nancy and the birth weights and skull 
volumes of their offspring. 
Mothers who had "a low level 
of these substances in their blood- 
streams as a result of a protein-defi- 
cient diet bore children who weighed 
less and had significantly smaller 
skulls than those of mothers whose 
blood had a higher level of amino 
acids. Since the duration of pregnan- 
cies was about the same for all women 
tested, premature births played no 
role in these results. 
The relationship between low birth 
weight and mental retardation had 
been known for a long time, but the 
interpretation usually given was that 
premature birth was an 
cause of mental retardation. This kind 
of explanation, while probably valid in 
part, obscured the effect of malnutri- 
tion on subsequent mental retardation. 
In fact, a number of investigators 
showed that some of the most severely 
mentally retarded children were the 
least premature. 
Dr. L. C. Eaves of the University of 
British Columbia (Canada) reported 
on the 1.Q. (Intelligence Quotient) test 
scores of children with a low birth 
weight. The results of this 18-month 
study with 502 children showed that 
those with low birth weight consistently 
scored lower than normal children. 
Social and economic status played an 
important role in these 1.Q. deficiencies 
and became even more significant with 
increasing age. 
important 
Hunger and malnutrition play a vital 
role in the growth of the human 
brain. It is now recognized that the 
child of a chronically malnourished 
mother may suffer irremediable brain 
damage. Malnutrition in early life 
also impedes the maturation of the 
brain and jeopardizes its later 
development. More than 350 million 
children in the world today suffer 
from the effects of malnutrition. Itis 
almost impossible to calculate what 
this may mean in terms of brain 
damage and mental retardation. 
At six months of age the 1.Q. differ- 
ence between normal and malnou- 
rished children was only 5 points. The 
spread increased to 17 points by age 
4. However, when the low-birth-weight 
children were contrasted with normal 
children of comparable social and 
economic background, the normal chil- 
dren still performed significantly better 
on these tests than did their birth- 
weight-deficient counterparts. 
This observation, confirmed by other 
investigators, is of capital importance. 
It suggests that social-and economic 
status alone does not account for dif- 
ferences in the 1.Q. test performance 
of these children, and that the prenatal 
environment must therefore have 
CONTINUED PAGE 24 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 49423: The Hungry brain: a baby's brain can be irreparably damaged because of the chronic malnutrition of its mother

  
nr 
THE FIRST 4 MONTHS ol 
"OF LIFE BEFORE BIRTH | 
~ The remarkable photos COR UEER AVNET]: 
“show three stages in the development CL 
~ a child before its birth. - 
wl Eleven weeks after conception the foetus TL : 
REEL ERED RR EITC RN ED TET TER 1 [Te RE. Sods 
with a salty solution. The foetus is linked by «BFS 
an umbilical cord to the placenta. Tne i 
ETC ENERER CI TET I EL WL RU TTR 4 TY 
“blood vessels of foetus and mother come 
together without joining. Through these " 
~ vessels, in which as much as 300 litres 
of blood circulate daily, food, oxygen, 
‘hormones and waste products are exchanged 
between mother and foetus, thus providing 
~ vital nutrients for developing bone structures, 
~ the QCA IVERSVES CHI RET Te TE TH IR AEN # 
By the 16th week the foetus has doubled | 
a CIPZ-I EN TeV 1S To TVR ai I Jos BR Fe To Te BET Te IES 
Linge recognizable as a human baby. Its 
face is completely formed but the eyes are 
still closed. A network of veins shows. EM 
ERULCITL] the transparent skin. 
: 3. At 18 weeks (4 months) the baby + Th 
~ measures over 15 cm. It begins to flex it: pod Be 
e » 
i 
| 
muscles. It sucks its thumb and may 
scratch itself with its fast-growing finger 
~ nails. At about this time (between the Jon, ie 
~ and 20th weeks) there is a major spurtin 
~ the growth of the nerve cells of the brain, 
LH LIVET MIRE BET-Tolo La Te YS ITT SF A OTR VAR 0) 
~ week. Development of the child's 
brain requires the production of 11 billion 
a. 
0 0, . 
an 
nerve cells during gestation at the rate of i a "3 : i 
20,000 a minute. If a mother suffers from 
~ malnutrition, her child's brain may not i 
develop fully. It may have a reduced number ple 
of nerve cells, with a consequent effect 
o LOR GERLTIN s “Intelligence Quotient.” 
Fa! 
hb 
fa
 
 £ Se ow WLP 
i J tL Or ehh TT 
_ mma 
  
  AS od 
i Nn 
y dt 
> A 
ob . 
ar 
pe 
5 Shoes 1 
    
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 49423: The Hungry brain: a baby's brain can be irreparably damaged because of the chronic malnutrition of its mother

 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 49423: The Hungry brain: a baby's brain can be irreparably damaged because of the chronic malnutrition of its mother

    a7 fet TRE TE g rr | ne Cah '% oe. J 
[i Rey ig, rE “ find Ta : » 
Te
 
E
L
 
SE
 
A
 
Rn
 
ae
 
e
B
 
» 
  
op 
AUSTRALOPITHECUS 
500,000 to 
2 million years ago 
Ay RA TRS 
played an important role in the out- 
come. Children born small at term, 
or premature children, do not seem to 
reach their full biological potential, no 
matter how well they are fed in later 
years. 
Such investigators as Dr. C. M. Dril- 
lien at the University of Edinburgh 
(UK. showed that there is among 
these children a much greater inci- 
dence of mental and physical handicap, 
and that the severity of the difficulties 
rises strikingly with decreasing birth 
weight. Less than one per cent of the 
normal children were found to exhibit 
mental deficiencies. But an astounding 
54 per cent of them had these prob- 
lems with a birth weight of 1.36 kg 
or less. : 
A vast amount of research work has 
also been done with twin births. It 
has been abundantly demonstrated that 
nutrients generally do not reach each 
twin equally during the prenatal period, 
and that the smaller of the twins almost 
always exhibits a lower mental poten- 
tial, as determined by |.Q. tests. 
In the chain of evidence linking early- 
life malnutrition to brain development, 
the work of Drs. M. Winick and 
P. Rosso of Cornell University Medical 
College - (New York) is particularly 
significant. Examining 19 brains from 
children who died accidentally in San- 
tiago (Chile), they found that while the 
brains of well-nourished Chilean chil- 
dren contained the same number of 
cells as those of well-nourished U.S. 
children, those of severely mal- 
nourished children who weighed less 
than 2 kg at birth had as much as a 
60 per cent reduction in their brain- 
cell numbers. 
Numerous studies exist which relate 
chronic  early-life malnutrition to 
lowered performance on |.Q. tests. 
The word “chronic” is emphasized, 
24 
41 2] 
“ E » “rr Yo. . - Me 
NL A NS ae 
a  —————. 
HOMO ERECTUS 
200,000 to 700,000 
years ago 
because there is also good evidence 
that even acute malnutrition during 
pregnancy and in the early years of 
life may cause no long-term damage 
to cognition. It is primarily the chroni- 
cally poor of the world, the disad- 
vantaged minorities, who are the most 
likely long-term victims of chronic mal- 
nutrition with all its tragic conse- 
guences. 
Investigators have grappled for 
years with the question of heredity 
versus environment on human cogni- 
tion. Some of the arguments presented 
in support of one over the other have 
reached the point of sanctimonious 
absurdity. The following three cases 
will illustrate the reason why such 
arguments are logically self-defeating: 
1. A child is born with the inherited 
error of metabolism disease phenylke- 
tonuria (PKU), which has a clearly- 
defined genetic origin. If left untreated, 
PKU leads to irreversible mental re- 
tardation. However, if the child is fed 
a diet free of the amino acid phenylala- 
nine, his chances of growing up with 
normal mental faculties- are excellent. 
2. A foetus with genetic potential for 
normal development is growing in its 
mother's womb. During the third 
month of pregnancy, the mother is 
infected by the rubella (German meas- 
les) virus. The child is born with 
severe and permanent defects. 
3. An adult with light skin migrates 
to a sunny southern climate and an 
outdoor occupation. 
considerably. Another person with 
dark skin moves to a northern environ- 
ment and a sedentary job, His skin 
eventually appears no darker than the 
light-skinned person before the move 
south. 
Other factors being equal, how 
would the relative influence of here- 
dity and environment on the outcome 
rR 
! 
Fle
: 
E
N
E
 
KE
 
SS
 
  
  
C
r
d
 
2
0
s
 
f
y
 
S
T
 
S
i
l
 
S
R
R
 
—
 
oo CRE BAT DA TE 
   
Cn I SE Bike a 
NEANDERTHAL MAN 
35,000 to 80,000 
years ago 
TWO MILLION YEARS 
HE human brain is the culmina- 
tion of almost three billion years 
of evolutionary history. It represents 
the most complex structure in creation, 
and is the site of man’s supremacy in 
the animal kingdom. 
The fossil record discloses that 
increased brain size has been the 
most striking sustained trend shown 
in hominid (family of man and his 
ancestors) evolution. A large brain 
must have conferred a clear advan- 
tage, and through the ages this attri- 
bute must have afforded greater 
opportunities for survival than did a 
small brain. 
While at first glance it might have 
been difficult to tell Australopithe- 
cus from a contemporary ape, since 
both could walk on two feet in an 
upright position, had opposable thumbs 
and stereoscopic vision, they never- 
theless differed in at least this funda- 
~ mental respect. 
Australopithecus and his descen- 
A Da Ae ME EB a Yen  ata 
His skin darkens 
of the three examples just cited be 
assessed? It is this dilemma which 
confronts those who consider the emo- 
tionally-charged issue of race and 
intelligence. Clearly there are many 
more variables to be analyzed in this" 
instance than in any of the three cases 
just cited. It seems clear that chronic 
malnutrition is a major environmental 
factor in considering the issue as a 
whole. The problem begins with what 
is meant by “race” and by “intelli- 
gence.” . 
The word “race” has almost always 
been used to define a group of human

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 49423: The Hungry brain: a baby's brain can be irreparably damaged because of the chronic malnutrition of its mother

  
i Se " rT nr 
CRO-MAGNON MAN 
10,000 to 35,000 
years ago 
oT Pr ae P—_ 
MODERN MAN 
Lt 
“ Ao 
AR NE A rE 
  
i , . Prat ge 
ANTHROPOID APE 
chimpanzee 
Drawings © from “The Malnourished Mind”, by Elie Shneour, Anchor Press, Doubleday and Co. Inc., New York, 1974 
OF CRANIAL EVOLUTION 
dants had larger brains and overwhel- 
mingly higher intelligence than the 
apes that were contemporary with 
them. The modern adult chimpanzee's 
average cranial capacity is less than 
400 cc. (cubic centimetres), the orang- 
utan’'s is slightly greater than 400 cc., 
and the modern gorilla’s exceeds 
500 cc. By contrast, the cranial capa- 
city of the fossil Australopithecus was 
about 500 cc., of Homo erectus more 
than 900 cc., and that of modern man 
(Homo sapiens) averages 1,400 cc. 
These striking relationships are gra- 
phically shown in the silhouettes on 
this double page. These data, however, 
must be interpreted with some caution; 
cranial capacity is not synonymous with 
brain volume, and is only a useful 
approximation of brain size. Brain 
weight today varies over widé limits, 
~ and size can no longer be used as a 
determinant of intelligence. Some 
very stupid people have large brains, 
and some brilliant ones have small 
brains. 
E.A.S. 
: B 
ol
 In : ; k : ! y 
 
beings who are sociologically related. 
The modern trend is to define race bio- 
logically. The two often coincide, but 
they are not synonymous. A biological 
definition of race states that members 
of a given human group share biologi- 
cal characteristics that make it pos- 
sible for that group to be differentiated 
from another group. This does not 
mean, however, that one group can 
be considered superior to another 
because of such characteristics. 
All men are created equal, but they 
are not all alike. And at the root of 
this diversity lies the assurance of 
human survival. But diversity is often 
confused with inequality. The essential 
point to remember in this context is 
that mankind belongs to a single spe- 
cies which has been derived from a 
common stock, The biological differ- 
ences exhibited by human beings are 
due to a combination of genetic and 
environmental factors. 
There exist no human groups to 
which the attribute of “pure race” can 
be assigned. Human hybridization has 
been going on for a very long time, 
and no human being alive today would 
have got where he is without his 
parents having mixed their genes 
together on his behalf. 
Intelligence is even more difficult to 
define. A British psychologist, Harold 
J. Butcher, has pointed out that the 
word “intelligence” is a noun, and that 
nouns refer to things. Intelligence is 
not a “thing,” but rather a sophisti- 
‘cated abstraction for the way people 
behave. 
"Intelligence is made up of a wide 
variety of attributes which individuals 
possess in varying degrees. Some 
' people have the ability to visualize 
concepts in three dimensions and can 
become outstanding architects or 
sculptors, yet may be very poor at 
manipulating mathematical abstrac- 
tions. Others have outstanding verbal 
facility, yet may be unable to write a 
declarative sentence even with extra- 
ordinary effort. 
All intelligence-test designers, begin- 
ning with the French psychologist 
Alfred Binet, recognize this problem. 
They attempt with varying success to 
probe a variety of factors which appear 
to correlate with their understanding of 
what cognitive faculties are. 
The misleading simplicity and attrac- 
tive numerical expression of the 1.Q. 
test, and its predictive effectiveness 
in assessing education or job potential, 
very quickly caused enthusiasm for it 
to overshadow the severe limitations 
that responsible psychologists had 
warned against. 
Dr. W. M. Littell, of the United 
States, emphasizes that these tests 
have no adequate rationale, and that 
they are yet to be placed on a firm 
theoretical foundation. . Another U.S. 
scientist, Dr. Arthur Jensen, states that 
intelligence, like electricity, is easier 
to measure than to define. He also 
points out that all major studies in this 
field have been based on the obser- 
vation of white European and North 
American populations, and that know- 
ledge of intelligence in different racial 
and cultural groups within these popu- 
lations (e.g., black populations in the 
United States), is nonexistent. 
While 1.Q. tests do not necessarily 
measure intelligence accurately, they 
are, properly used, a useful research 
tool and deserve further study and 
development. |.Q. scores may be valid 
for a given human group at a given 
time and place only. There is no such 
thing as a universal 1.Q. determination; 
therefore such numbers cannot be 
used to measure intelligence for peo- 
ple tested once and for all. 
Finally, while the issue of race and 
intelligence cannot be dismissed out 
of hand, the truth is that most conclu- 
sions drawn by scientists and others 
on the subject are devoid either of 
scientific validity or educational signi- 
ficance. It is far more productive to 
examine those controllable factors 
which are likely to affect cognitive 
potential. Chronic early-life malnutri- 
tion, a probable cause of cognitive 
deficiencies, is one such factor which 
deserves attention. 
Wm Elie A. Shneour 
2 
_
 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

  
THE TAMING OF THE BULL. Photos opposite show Dr. José M. R. 
Delgado, author of our article, stopping a bull in mid- charge by 
radio stimulation of its brain. Standing alone in a bull ring in 
Cordova (Spain) he waited until the bull was almost upon 
him before pressing a radio control that sent a current through 
electrodes planted in the bull's brain. Electrical stimulation of 
specific areas of the brain caused the bull to stop in its tracks. 


### 49425: New machines to explore the brain

NEW MACHINES 
TO EXPLORE 
THE BRAIN 
      
by José M.R. Delgado 
A charging hull pacified, angry apes calmed: 
some amazing results of electrical stimulation of the brain 
} T would be naive to try to under- 
stand the reasons for a riot. by 
the electrical activity in the brains of 
the participants. But it would be 
equally naive to ignore that each 
person has a brain and that determined 
constellations of neurons (nerve cells) 
are reacting to messages picked up by 
senses that subsequently produce the 
expression of violence. 
Both neurophysiological and envi- 
ronmental factors must be evaluated, 
and methods are available for their 
combined study. Experimental inves- 
tigation of the cerebral structures res- 
ponsible for individual and social beha- 
viour in general, and for aggression in 
particular, is an essential counterpart 
of social studies, and this fact should 
be recognized by sociologists as well 
as biologists. 
With the aid of recently developed 
techniques it has been demonstrated 
that we can investigate the neurological 
  
JOSE MANUEL RODRIGUEZ DELGADO, 
internationally-known Spanish neurophysiol- 
ogist, is director of research at the new National 
Centre “Ramon y Cajal” In Madrid (Spain) 
and chairman of the Department of Physiological 
Sciences at Madrid's newly created Autonomous 
University Medical School. For 20 years he was 
a member of the faculty of Yale University 
Medical School! (U.S.A.) where he devised 
many new techniques and instruments for 
research on the brain, using electrical stimula- 
tion. He is the author of “Physical Control of 
the Mind : Towards a Psychocivilized Society” 
" (Harper & Row, New York, 1969) translated 
into six languages, and over 250 scientific 
papers. Dr. Delgado now heads an interna- 
tional research team of neuroscientists in Madrid 
26 
"trical stimulation. 
mechanisms responsible for motor, 
behavioural, and mental functions, and 
also that we can influence them by 
physical and chemical means. 
portant group of these methods is 
based on the insertion of very thin 
electrodes in the depth of the nervous 
system in order to activate specific 
areas of the brain by means of elec- 
their results may be summarized as 
follows: 
Mapping of the awake brain. Needle 
guides anchored to the skull of ani- 
mals have been used for a systematic 
exploration of the brain and for the 
detailed mapping of its functions. The 
guides consist of pieces of stainless 
steel tubing about 15 mm. in length, 
piercing the skull at predetermined 
points and ending outside the scalp. 
A few days after surgery, the animal 
has recovered from anaesthesia and its 
fully awake brain is directly and pain- 
lessly accessible through the guides. 
In one experiment. with a gibbon a 
total of 30 guides spaced 3 mm. apart 
were used. Exploring electrodes may 
be introduced through each guide in 
1 mm. steps, permitting the systematic 
study of over 1,000 cerebral points. 
If necessary, the electrodes may be 
fixed permanently in the most inte- 
resting areas of the brain for more 
detailed experiments. Restriction of the 
‘animal in a chair permits the analysis 
of simple motor [voluntary] and auto- 
nomic [involuntary] responses, al- 
though the lack of free mobility may 
An im-- 
These methods and 
_influence these reactions and also pre- 
vents social contact with other ani- 
mals. 
When the cerebral targets are 
known, electrodes may be implanted 
permanently, The terminal socket is 
anchored outside the skull and elec- 
trical connexions for recording and 
stimulation are established by means 
of long leads. These allow for studies 
of the animal either in a chair or free 
to move on an observation stage (pho- 
tos 1 and 2, page 28). These experi- 
ments may be repeated indefinitely, 
and some of our animals have been 
kept for over four years with excellent 
tolerance of implants and reliability 
of results. : 
In one experiment a monkey was put 
to sleep by electrical stimulation in the 
septal area deep in the front of the 
brain. After about 30 seconds, the 
animal quietened down and slowly 
closed its eyes, lowering its head. In 
this relaxed state, the animal fell asleep 
in about one minute, 
While asleep, it responded to loud 
noises or to touch by waking for a 
few seconds, but then it fell asleep 
again for as long as stimulation was 
applied. The possibility of using sti- 
mulation in the septal area of the 
brain for therapy of chronic insomnia 
has been suggested, but further inves- 
tigations are required. 
Close to the sleep-inducing areas, 
there are other points stimulation of 
which inhibits the spontaneous aggres- 
sion of rhesus monkeys. As shown

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 49425: New machines to explore the brain

  
  
  
L . . Sa 
EL Sica I | ne 
» 
y i -.- ad 
- " 
- 
- 
  
  
  
Photos © J.M.R. Delgado, Madrid 
in photo 1 (page 28) this ferocious ani- 
mal usually attacks, grabs, and bites 
any approaching object including a 
human hand. Under stimulation of 
inhibitory areas, however, the mon- 
key becomes peaceful without being 
provoked by the proximity of the in- 
vestigator who can safely touch the 
animal's mouth and pet him (photo 2, 
page 28). 
The monkey is aware of the envi- 
ronment and reaches out to touch the 
investigator's hand without any sign - 
of hostility. This experiment demon- 
strates that aggression can be inhi- 
bited by electrical stimulation of spe- 
cific brain areas without producing 
sleep or depression. 
Excitation of other parts of the 
brain, especially the motor cortex, may 
) ! 
:   
  
- produce active responses affecting the 
animal's behaviour. A typical example 
of such motor effect elicited in a cat 
is shown in photo 3 (page 29). Elec- 
trical stimulation of a point in the brain 
known as the left sulcus cruciatus pro- 
duced a strong flexion of the cat's 
right hindleg. This occurred without 
disturbing the animal emotionally—it 
was actually purring—and without alter- 
ing its equilibrium which was main- 
tained well on three limbs. 
Depending on the stimulated point, 
flexion and extension of the limbs, 
turning of head and body, licking, 
yawning, and a great variety of motor 
effects may be electrically produced. 
In general, the animal integrates the 
artificial response with its ongoing 
behaviour, and, for example, electri- 
cally evoked licking may be purpose- 
fully directed towards available food, 
or towards the experimenter's hand, 
its own body, or the sides of the stage 
on which the animal finds itself. The 
integration of spontaneous and indu- 
ced activities indicates that electrical 
stimulation of the brain activates pre- 
existing physiological mechanisms. 
Radio communication with the brain. 
To investigate brain structures which 
play a role in social behaviour, con- 
necting wires cannot be used, and more 
refined radio controlled technology is 
therefore necessary. 
An instrument developed in our lab- 
 
  
oratory (the “stimoceiver”} is small ° 
enough to be carried on an animal's 
collar, permitting two-way communi- 
cation to and from the brain without 
21 
>

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 49425: New machines to explore the brain

   
    
    
  
  
E
l
 
H
T
 
a
 
NN
 
\ 
7 A ERAN 
rr pad 
  
  
a 
T
r
 
T
E
T
 
  
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
J.
M.
R.
 
De
lg
ad
o.
 
Ma
dr
id
 
Above, a normally ferocious rhesus monkey 
becomes peaceful when a point in its brain is 
stimulated by an electric current transmitted 
through implanted electrodes. In photo 1, the 
monkey attacks and tries to bite the 
experimenter’s hand (protected by a thick glove). 
In photo 2, taken a few minutes later, when 
the monkey’s brain is stimulated (note the 
time on both clocks) the animal has become 
docile and has lost all trace of hostility. 
28 
restricting in any way the animal's 
movements, : 
With this technique it has been de- 
monstrated that the social relations 
can be modified by the electrical sti- 
mulation of specific cerebral areas as 
shown in photos 4 and 5 (page 29). 
When the lateral hypothalamus of 
the brain was excited in a previously 
peaceful cat, rage was induced with 
an aggressive display clearly directed 
towards another cat which reacted 
appropriately by facing the threat. Dur- 
ing radio stimulation, the animal start- 
ed prowling around threatening the 
subordinate members of the group 
but at the same time avoiding another 
powerful cat. 
The experiment demonstrated that 
the stimulation of the brain had in- 
creased the cat's aggressiveness 
without changing its awareness or dis- 
turbing the memory of previous ex- 
perience, because the stimulated cat 
directed its hostility intelligently, 
choosing its enemies and moment of 
attack, and modifying its tactics to 
adapt to the reactions of its opponents. 
Brain stimulation had induced a state 
of hostility but had not altered the 
individual characteristics or skills of 
the animal. : 
Further studies have been performed 
outside the laboratory in a colony of 
gibbons located on the island of Hall, 
in Bermuda. These studies permitted 
comparison of experimental results 
with animals instrumented first in the 
laboratory colony and then in a “nor- 
mal” free ranging situation. 
Escape, fear, and lasting changes 
of behaviour including decreased 
friendliness were induced by radio sti-’ 
mulation of an area located in the 
stem of the brain known as the reti- 
cular formation. The stimulation of 
the caudate nucleus of the brain resul- 
ted in a lowering of the social status 
of animals as determined by the prio-’ 
rity they normally had in the pecking 
order at mealtimes. 
Brain-to-computer-to-brain exchange 
of information has been established 
in primates by means of radio links 
(photo 6, page 30). In one case, the 
spontaneous electrical activity of both 
the left and right sides of the 
amygdala was telemetered from an 
ape free to move about and identified 
by a linked-up computer. 
The computer was set to identify 
a specific pattern of “spindles” 
(signals), produced by the amygdala. 
Each time a burst of these waves 
appeared a signal was triggered 
through the computer to stimulate the 
reticular formation of the brain of the 
ape. These stimulations are known to 
produce unpleasant sensations. In this

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 49425: New machines to explore the brain

way the brain was motivated to sup- 
press the amygdala “spindles” and 
the animal's behaviour was changed. 
The ape became more peaceful and 
less interested in food. 
Clinical application of implanted 
electrodes. Some human patients with 
temporal lobe epilepsy do not respond 
to the usual drug therapy and may 
require brain surgery which calls for 
a very careful study of the location 
and reactions of the abnormal cerebral 
areas. This information may be ob- 
+ tained with depth electrodes, and sti- 
mulations and recordings have been 
performed using radio links. 
Other patients may require pro- 
grammed long term stimulation of the’ 
brain, for example, for the therapy of 
intractable pain. Surgical experience 
has proved that after the insertion of 
electrodes, the implantation wound 
usually heals without complications. 
However, the opening around the elec- 
trodes is a potential risk, and the pre- 
sence of terminal sockets in the 
patient's hair may be inconve- 
nient for grooming as well as aesthe- 
tically disturbing. 
. To solve these problems while re- 
taining the advantages of two-way 
communication with the depth of the 
brain, a new technique known as trans- 
dermal communication has been deve- 
loped (transdermal means across or 
through the skin). 
Transdermal communication. In order 
to stimulate and to make recordings 
to and from the depths of the brain 
through the intact skin, we developed 
a solid state micro-miniaturized ins- 
trument called the “transdermal stimo- 
ceiver”, which is totally implantable 
underneath the scalp. Four channels 
are available for stimulation and three 
for recordings. Power and information 
are transmitted through the skin by 
means of specially coupled coils. A 
goat with a subcutaneous stimoceiver 
is presented in photo 8 (page 30). 
As no batteries are used, the duration 
of the instrument is indefinite, and it 
is always ready for use simply by 
placing the external coil over the skin. 
The great advantage of this techno- 
logy is that no leads pierce the skin, 
thus increasing the safety, comfort, 
and long term use of the procedure. 
Possible applications of transdermal 
technology include long term record- 
ing of depth electrical activity to 
monitor physiological states, emotional 
reactions, abnormal epileptic activity, 
and effects of medication. Long term 
programmed stimulation of the brain 
has a wide range of uses to induce 
autonomic, somatic, and behavioural 
responses, and also to influence inhi- 
bitory systems, 
This last procedure has already pro- ) 
    
   
X 
0 0 
RRA 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
I
M
R
.
 
D
e
l
g
a
d
o
,
 
Ma
dr
id
 
ANIMAL c-6 X 1] 
POSITION Y 6 7) 
INTENSITY 4 vous 
NCY 260/s€c 
v 
: 
  
Experiments with cats and monkeys show that 
the electrical stimulation of the brain can make 
an animal move different parts of its body. 
. In photo 3, a cat raises its right hindleg when a 
current is directed to left side of motor cortex. 
Below, stimulation in a part of the brain 
known as the lateral hypothalamus caused a 
gentle cat (at left of photo 4) to become 
violent and aggressive. It prowled about the 
cage and attacked other cats (photo 5). 
         
        
92.99. 
AS 
% AN 
WOOOXXXE 
RRRXXX     
     
  
         
    
      
  
     
  
OOK Ne 
      
  
   
  
  
     
    
    
 
    
    XKRIXA 
. 
| 4 dr) , / 3 . IAT, ra; 
AI, SONOS I SOKA KAAKL 
// 7 
bi, 
   
   
    
  
 
   
     
   
.) 
 

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 49425: New machines to explore the brain

Recent development of miniaturized devices has given new 
scope to the use of electrical stimulation of the brain for 
research and medical treatment. This chimpanzee (6) 
has a special radio transmitter-receiver (the 
“stimoceiver”) anchored in its skull (not shown in our 
photo). This device permits two-way radio 
communication between the brain of the animal and a 
computer. A stimoceiver has been implanted beneath 
the skin of a goat (8). Using a special external coil 
(ring-shaped device clipped to goat's horn) it is possible 
to transmit an electric current and two-way information 
through the intact skin. A man undergoing a 
psychological test (7) has a stimoceiver implanted beneath 
his scalp. Radio-controlled “trans-dermal” (through 
the skin) stimulation of certain points in the brain has 
been successfully used for the relief of unbearable pain. 
ved its usefulness in the therapy of 
pain in the patient shown in photo 7 
(this page). We must consider this 
method as far more conservative than 
brain surgery which involves destruc- 
tion of cerebral areas and has been 
recommended and employed in many 
cases of intractable pain, 
Looking at the future. A possibility 
of transdermal technology which has 
been little explored is the sending of 
information directly to pathways or to 
receiving areas of the brain when nor- 
mal sensory receptors are damaged. 
To give light to the blind and sound to 
the deaf are within the possibilities of 
present bioelectronics, although pro- 
viding suitable information by means of 
these sensations would still be rather 
difficult. 
Transdermal stimoceivers allow the 
simultaneous recording and stimula- 
tion of brain functions, permitting the 
+ establishment of feedbacks and on- 
. demand programmes of excitation 
with the -aid of a computer, A reas- 
_ onable speculation is the transmission 
of signals directly from brain to brain 
of different individuals without the 
30 
Photos © J.M.R. Delgado. Madrid 
the usual intervention of 
organs. 
sensory 
The recognition of specific brain 
wave patterns to be used as a trig- 
gering device for the stimulation of 
specific areas of the brain would 
permit the modification of cerebral acti- 
vity as well as related behaviour, thus 
offering great promise for-therapy and 
research. 
We already have the capacity to 
construct a microscopic computer 
which could be implanted subcuta- 
neously. These units would be able 
to receive, analyze, and send back 
information to the brain for the estab- 
lishment of artificial links between 
unrelated areas of the nervous sys- 
tem. 
Limitations of brain control. In spite 
of spectacular achievements, the appli- 
cation of electronics to the brain has 
important limitations which make 
rather improbable the feared push- 
button control of behaviour. The elec- 
trical excitation of the brain can only 
activate pre-existing cerebral func- 
tions but cannot create them. Passing 
     
cs 
i “PETAR 
8 
an electric current through electrodes 
cannot be compared with the coding 
of information which takes place at 
the sensory receptors of the brain. 
In general, we accept the influence 
of mass media, education, and indoc- - 
trination as part of “normal”’ life, 
without realizing that, as recent res- 
earch has demonstrated, these sen- 
sory inputs circulate as coded signals 
within cerebral pathways and have a 
decisive influence on the anatomical 
shaping of neurons, in cerebral che- 
mistry and in the structuring of brains, 
minds, and personalities. Language, 
patterns of emotional and behavioural 
responses, beliefs, and culture are 
learned through the eyes and ears, 
but cannot be introduced into the brain 
by wires and electronics. 
Brain research offers a challenge 
comparable to exploration of the atom 
or of the universe, because to under- 
stand and influence the mechanisms 
of the mind would allow us to direct 
intelligently our own evolution and the 
source of all human activities, 
WM José M.R. Delgado

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 49417: Our split brain

OUR SPLIT BRAIN (continued from page 16) 
in evolutionary terms and is governed 
by the left hemisphere ; and prosodic 
elements which we have in common 
with animals and which are more 
ancient and are governed by the 
right hemisphere, 
"Our study of “single hemisphere” 
people has shown that the isolated 
"activity of each hemisphere is asso- 
ciated with a specific range of emo- 
tional states: the left hemisphere 
with positive emotions and the right . 
“hemisphere with negative emotions. 
It is extremely difficult to account for 
this unexpected fact. One can only as- 
sume that an important general prin- 
ciple underlies this “divergence” in 
emotions and that a positive emotio- 
nal tone is more closely related to 
abstract thinking, and a negative emo- 
tional tone to imaginal thinking. 
This general principle has already 
been noted by neurophysiologists. One 
well-known specialist in the physio- 
logy of the emotions, P.V. Simonov, 
drawing on his analysis of the 
characteristics of conditioned reflexes 
formed on the basis of negative and 
positive emotional states, has expres- 
sed an interesting idea: “Negative 
emotions have a propensity for con- 
crete. images... whereas positive emo- 
tions favour the transition to abstract, 
generalized models.” 
It is possible that the reason for 
the connexion between various emo- 
tional states and various forms of 
thinking and the activity of the two 
hemispheres should also be sought 
in evolution and in the history of the 
formation of mental activity. N.N. 
Traugott, a Soviet researcher, in 
studying the general principles of the 
depression and restoration of mental 
functions in acute pathological states 
of the brain, has shown that aspects 
of mental activity which, in evolutio- 
nary terms, are more ancient become 
depressed later than others and are 
restored earlier than others. 
It has also been established that, as 
cerebral activity becomes depressed, 
the first emotional reactions to dis- 
appear are the positive emotions and 
the last of all are the negative emo- 
tions. When cerebral activity is res- 
tored the sequence is reversed. There 
are therefore grounds for thinking that 
negative emotions are older in evo- 
jutionary terms than positive emotions. 
A further indication of this is the fact 
that young children display negative 
emotional reactions earlier than posi- 
tive ones. 
We already know that the most an- 
cient components of speech are as-’ 
sociated with the right hemisphere. 
We now see that the more ancient 
emotions are also associated with 
the right hemisphere, However, one 
should not think that the emotional 
mechanisms are localized in the cor- 
tex of the hemispheres. 
reactions are connected with the activi- 
Emotional 
ty of the deep cerebral tissues—the 
sub-cortical nuclei. The cerebral hemi- 
spheres merely exercise a regulating 
influence on these nuclei, each hemi- 
sphere, so we have become convinced, 
in its own different way. 
. Our study of the “one hemisphere” 
person showed that each hemisphere 
has its own memory and its own 
“archives”. Physiologists and psycho- 
logists are well aware that the memory 
is not merely a repository for the long- 
term storage of material that has ser- 
ved its purpose. The memory is intima- 
tely bound up with current mental ac- 
tivity and plays an essential part in 
the processing of information, We 
have become convinced that each type 
of thinking has its own working archive 
in its own territory. 
Obviously, the archive in the right 
hemisphere is the memory for indi- 
vidual specific phenomena and Is also 
more ancient than its counterpart in the 
left hemisphere which is a verbal 
archive. Even animals which are on 
a lower rung of the evolutionary lad- 
der than mammals have a well-dev- 
eloped memory for specific objects and 
phenomena. Children who have not 
yet learnt to speak already have an 
imaginal memory. If brain activity is 
sharply depressed the verbal memory 
is disturbed earlier than the imaginal 
memory and is restored later—ano- 
ther fact which points to the greater 
evolutionary age of the imaginal 
memory. 
Thus, the more ancient components 
of complex mental functions—speech, 
memory and the emotions—are asso- 
ciated with the right hemisphere. But 
imaginal thinking is itself more ancient 
than abstract verbal thinking. We 
resemble our younger brethren, the 
animals, In having an accurate and 
complex perception of the specific 
phenomena that make up our environ- 
ment, while our capacity for abstract 
thinking is the evolutionary achieve- 
ment which has set us above all living 
creatures. 
It is the functions of the left hemis- 
phere that have raised mankind to a 
position of supreme eminence. Very 
broadly, animals can be said to have 
two right hemispheres although, of 
course, one must not equate the right 
hemisphere of the human brain with 
the cerebral hemispheres of even the 
most highly organized animals. 
This brings us to one of the most 
intriguing questions in the study of 
the functional asymmetry of the human 
"brain: how did it come into existence, 
how was the anatomically and func- 
tionally symmetrical animal brain 
transformed into the functionally 
asymmetrical human brain? It must 
be said straight away that there is 
no categorical answer to this question. 
The problem of the emergence of func- 
tional asymmetry remains a matter 
of guesswork and surmise. This prob- 
lem has two aspects. 
In the first place, why are the new 
and specifically human functions of 
verbal speech and abstract thinking as- 
sociated exclusively with the left 
hemisphere? The most widely held 
view is that the development of new 
functions In the left hemisphere is to 
be accounted for by the primacy of the 
right hand (which is controlled by the 
left hemisphere) in working activities. 
This view is based on observations 
of the fact that even in the higher 
apes, our nearest animal relatives, one 
of the upper extremities, either the 
right or the left, is seen to be of 
greater importance in performing 
complex motor actions. 
However, this assumption requires 
further substantiation and research. An 
American researcher, RW. Doty, has 
recently discovered that even the 
cerebral hemispheres of rhesus mon- 
keys show a slight disparity in their" 
control of certain complex forms of 
behaviour, if this is so, it is reas- 
onable to suppose that the precondi- 
tions for the functional specialization 
of the cerebral hemispheres were al- 
ready present to some extent in our 
remote ape-like ancestors, 
Whatever the reason for the selec- 
tive evolution of the left hemisphere, 
in all probability at the early stages of 
human development, when verbal com- 
munication was beginning to come into 
existence, this process was already 
associated with the activity of the 
left hemisphere. 
The second aspect of the problem 
may be formulated as follows: what 
would have been the likely consequen- 
ces of the association of the left 
hemisphere with the emergence of 
speech? It is an established fact that 
when a particular portion of the brain 
acquires new and more complex func- 
tions, the old functions which were 
formerly characteristic of this portion 
of the brain are suppressed and be- 
come rudimentary. 
It is obvious that such a process 
must have taken place as verbal com- 
munication was coming into existence. 
In the left hemisphere the functions 
associated with imaginal thinking that 
were inherited by it from our animal an- 
cestors must have been suppressed 
and become rudimentary. 
At the same time, the right hemis- 
phere evolved. But its evolution con- 
tinued and improved on the functions 
which it inherited from our animal an- 
cestors—imaginal thinking became 
more complex and more highly dev- 
eloped. This is the origin of the unequal 
distribution of cerebral activity—the 
functional asymmetry in the human 
brain—and of the emergence of two 
independent thinking apparatuses. 
It is an interesting fact that the pro- 
cess whereby the functions are dis- 
tributed between the hemispheres may 
be observed in early childhood. We 
have already stated that the develop- 
31 
>

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

) ment of the individual organism is es- 
sentially a historical play, a compres- 
sed re-enactment of the entire 
evolution of the animal world. The 
last act of this play is performed before 
our eyes after the birth of the child. 
The child is born with what may be 
regarded as two right hemispheres and 
has as yet no “verbal” hemisphere. 
The findings of two Canadian scien- 
tists, Wilder Penfield and Lamar Rob- 
erts indicate that during the first two 
years of life either hemisphere may 
take this distinction upon itself. Only 
with increasing age does the division 
of “spheres of influence” between the 
hemispheres become established in the 
healthy child. However, this does not - 
occur in all children. The cerebral 
hemispheres of nearly one person in 
three do not acquire a clear functional 
specialization. 
‘We have seen that the occupational 
specialization -of the brain's hemis- 
pheres in human beings is completed 
after birth and that a demarcation line 
between the apparatuses for imaginal 
and abstract thinking becomes estab- 
lished with increasing age. Moreover, 
it appears that a person's individuality 
and psychological make-up depend on 
which of the thinking apparatuses be- 
comes dominant. 
About forty years ago, lvan Pavlov 
wrote of these two types of people: 
“Experience clearly shows that there 
are two categories of people: artists 
and thinkers, between whom there is 
a sharp distinction. On the one hand 
the artists grasp reality in its entirety, 
as a complete, living and indivisible 
entity. On the other hand the thinkers 
divide up reality, temporarily making it 
into a kind of skeleton, and only later 
do they gradually reassemble its parts 
and thus try to breathe life into it..." 
In Pavlov's time too little information 
was available to scientists on the func- 
tional specialization of the cerebral 
hemispheres and his classification of 
people into two types was unsupported 
by anatomical evidence. We are now 
in possession of the necessary infor- 
mation. The “artists” are people 
whose right hemisphere, governing 
imaginal thinking, is dominant because 
it is more active and powerful. The 
“thinkers” are people who have a more 
active left hemisphere, governing ab- 
stract thinking. The American research 
worker Joseph E. Bogen has shown 
that the dominant activity of one 
hemisphere may be caused not only 
by innate factors but also by pecu- 
liarities of upbringing and education. 
So far we have considered the 
activity of each hemisphere in isolation 
as though man had two separate and 
unconnected brains, whereas, in fact, 
normal mental activity implies that both 
hemispheres work together. What do 
we mean by working together? Neuro- 
physiologists formulate this problem in 
terms of hemispheric interaction. 
The “right hemisphere” person 
perceives the world in all its specific 
richness and variety. But as he is 
32 
. tissues of the brain. 
incapable of theoretical thinking he 
cannot analyze his impressions, estab- 
lish a logical connexion between 
them or assign them to particular cate- 
gories; and for this reason the richness 
of his impressions bears no fruit. 
When only his left hemisphere is work- 
ing, the same person retains his capa- 
city for analysis, generalization and the 
handling of logical concepts but is 
unable to use these faculties because 
he has no impressions to analyze or 
from which to draw general inferences. 
It is obvious that only if both hemi- 
spheres are working simultaneously 
and if the mechanisms for imaginal and 
abstract thinking are somehow connect- 
ed can there be any all-round—specific 
and conceptual—grasp of the pheno- 
mena making up the world around. 
But our observations of the “single 
hemisphere” person showed us some- 
thing else. When the right hemi- 
sphere is inactivated verbal activity 
becomes easier, in other words the 
activity .of the left hemisphere in- 
creases. If the left hemisphere is 
inactivated the activity of the right 
hemisphere is thereby increased and 
imaginal perception is enhanced. This 
means that in the normal “two-hemi- 
sphere” state, each hemisphere inhibits 
the activity of the other. 
The two hemispheres are not there- 
fore independent of each other. There 
are complex and paradoxical inter- 
connexions between them. On the 
one hand they co-operate in the work 
of the brain, each complementing the 
abilities of the other. On the other 
they compete as though 
were preventing the other from doing 
its own job. Although the significance 
of co-operative, so-called complemen- 
tary interaction Is clear, the signifi- 
‘cance of competitive or reciprocal ac- 
tivity is far from evident. 
clarify the matter. 
In the nervous system, stimulation 
is always accompanied by inhibition. 
The inhibitory process prevents the 
Let us try to 
‘stimulus from spreading to areas which 
should not be involved in the given 
activity. It reduces the intensity of 
the stimulus, so that it is just strong 
enough for the effect in question and, 
ultimately, damps it down when the 
need for it has passed. Without this 
inhibitory process the activity of the 
nervous system would become chaotic, 
undirected and self-destructive. 
Accordingly, the greater the com- 
plexity of a particular portion.of the 
brain and the more complex its func- 
tions, the more complex is the structure 
of its inhibitory mechanism. It is evi- 
dent that this mechanism is particularly 
important for the higher divisions of 
the brain. Indeed, each hemisphere 
has .its own inhibitory machinery 
(chains of special inhibitory neurons) 
and the hemispheres are also subject 
to the inhibitory activity of the deep 
We are now 
convinced that each hemisphere is 
subject to the inhibitory influence 
stemming from its partner. 
But the mutually inhibitory effect of 
each . 
the hemispheres has one further 
specific purpose. In order to react 
satisfactorily to the changing circum- 
stances and varied situations with 
which the individual is faced in his 
everyday life, it is essential sometimes 
to combine the aptitudes of the right 
and [eft hemispheres and sometimes 
to use the capacities of one or other 
of them to the fullest possible extent. 
When a mathematician is handling 
concepts such as multi-dimensional 
space and imaginary numbers he is 
thinking in a highly abstract way. 
When the same man is faced with a 
sudden emergency while driving his 
car he is able instantaneously to size 
up real space and real objects and to 
avoid disaster by maximizing his ima- 
ginal perception. 
The reciprocal interaction between 
the hemispheres ensures that there Is 
always something held in reserve and 
enables a very subtle and accurate 
balance to be maintained between their 
activities. In this way it is possible 
to preserve the optimum relationship 
at any given moment between imaginal 
and abstract thinking. 
This may perhaps provide a clue 
which will enable us to answer one 
further puzzling question concerning 
the purpose of functional asymmetry 
and the “advantages” which it has for 
the brain. Nature mercilessly sup: 
presses everything which is not an 
advantage for the body but scrupul- 
ously selects and preserves everything 
which is beneficial. As we have Just 
said, there are situations in which it is 
essential to use one or other type of 
thinking to the fullest extent. Obvi- 
ously, to enable the mechanisms for 
imaginal and abstract thinking to be 
used individually, it is essential that 
they be separate from each other and 
be situated in different parts of the 
brain so that an intensification of cer- 
tain abilities does not entail an Inten- 
sification of the others. 
The purpose of complementary inter- 
action of the two hemispheres is to link 
their abilities, while their reciprocal 
interaction ensures that a balance is 
maintained between the abilities of 
each so that, at the required moment, 
one pan of the scales is raised and 
the other lowered. In general, the 
complex, twofold nature of the relation- 
ship between the hemispheres ensures 
the maximum efficiency of mental ac- 
tivity and behaviour. 
Thus, it seems certain that it is 
incorrect to speak of the main hemi- 
sphere and the subsidiary hemisphere, 
the “major” hemisphere and the 
“minor” hemisphere. The right hemi- 
sphere is the basis of imaginal thinking 
and grasps the world of phenomena in 
all its richness and variety. The left 
hemisphere is the basis of abstract 
thinking; it seeks and finds in the 
world a harmonious pattern of causes 
and effects. In order to use one's 
mental faculties to the full the smooth- 
ly equilibrated operation of both hemi- 
spheres is required. 
Wm Vadim L. Deglin

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Computerizing archaeology 
Up to now archaeologists have used a 
jig-saw puzzle approach to piece together 
buildings that time has reduced to stone 
fragments. A Unesco expert, Belgian 
archaeologist Raymond Lemaire, hopes to 
cut down this time-consuming process by 
using a computer to speed up reconstruc- 
tion of the ancient Roman city of Jerash, in 
Jordan, 
 (——— rer SU ok 
BOOKSHELF h 
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS 
HB Getting the Message Across. An 
inquiry into successes and failures 
of cross-cultural communication in 
the contemporary world. 1975, 
214 pp. (21 F). 
BM Race, Science and Society, 
edited and introduced by Leo Kuper. 
(Co-published with George Allen and 
Unwin Ltd.,, London, and Columbia 
University Press, New York) 1975, 
370 pp. (54 F). 
WM The Conservation of Cultural 
Property, with special reference to ! 
tropical conditions. (Museums and 
Monuments Series, N° 11) reprinted 
1975, 86 pp. (56 F). 
MW The Education of Adults : a World | 
Perspective, by John Lowe. (Co- 
published with the Ontario Institute i 
for Studies in Education, (OISE). 
Available through Unesco except in | 
Canada, where OISE is sole dis- 
tributor) 1975, 229 pp. (30 F). 
B A Systems Approach to Teaching 
and Learning Procedures : a Guide 
for Educators in Developing Count- 
ries. 1975, 144 pp. (25 F). 
BW Lifelong Education, Schools and 1 
Curricula in Developing Countries, 
by HW.R. Hawes. (Unesco Institute 
for Education Monographs, N° 4) 
1975, 146 PP. (6 F). y 
BW Higher Education International 
] Trends, 1960-1970 (Statistical Reports 
and Studies, N° 19). 1975, 254 pp. 
(26 F). 
BW Educational Innovation in Indo- 
nesia, by the Office of Educational 
Development (BPP) Ministry of 
Education and Culture (Jakarta). 
1975, 50 pp. (6 F); Radio Study 
Group Campaigns in the United 
Republic of Tanzania, by Lennart 
H. Grenholm. 1975, 51 pp. (6 F); 
Educational Reform in Peru, by 
Judithe « Bizot. 1975, 63 pp. (8 F); 
Establishing an Institution Teaching 
by Correspondence, by Renée 
F. Erdos. 1975, 59 pp. (7 F); Post- 
graduate Teacher Training : a Nige- 
rian Alternative, by HW.R. Hawes | 
and A. O. Ozigi. 1975, 53 pp. (6 F). 
(International Bureau of Education : 
Experiments and innovations in 
education series, N°* 13, 15, 16, 
17 and 20). { 
B® Cultural Policy in Afghanistan, by 
Shafie Rahel. 1975, 49 pp. (10 F); 
Cultural Policy in the German 
Democratic Republic, by Hans Koch. 
1975, 62 pp. (10 F); Cultural Policy 
in Ghana. Study prepared by the 
Cultural Division of the Ministry of 
Education and Culture, Accra, 1975, 
50 pp. (6 F). (All three published in 
Unesco’s “Studies and Documents 
on Cultural Policies” series). i 
  
DY
 
U
l
a
 
I
 
    EK i 
THESED MEVSE00 
 
DEATH OF MR. RENE MAHEU. 
Mr. René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco from 1962 to 
1974, died in Paris on 19 December 1975. Mr. Maheu, who was 
French, joined Unesco in 1946. “It was with profound sorrow 
that | learned of the death of Mr. René Maheu”, declared 
Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, Director-General of Unesco, when 
it was announced that his predecessor had died. 
“Having been associated with his work, as Assistant Director- 
General, | was able to appreciate his great intellectual qualities 
and the remarkable dynamism which he put at the service of 
Unesco and of the international community. His death is a loss 
for the Organization and for the whole United Nations system. 
“Profoundly aware of the evolution of the modern world, moved 
  
Ph
ot
o 
R
o
g
e
r
 
L
e
s
a
g
e
 
- 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
by a desire for justice and human dignity, he spared no effort to ensure that Unesco brought 
its most active aid in the fields of its competence to formerly oppressed peoples who were 
achieving independence. 
“The humanist philosophy which he applied with unfailing ardour aimed at bringing about 
a civilization which, in its respect for the uniqueness of each people, would be—to use an 
expression which was dear to him—a ‘civilization of the universal’. 
“Finally, | wish to pay homage to the courage of the man who, although he knew for many 
years that he was suffering from a grave illness, never gave up his struggle.” 
Cost of saving Borobudur 
The expected cost of saving Borobudur, 
the great Buddhist temple in Indonesia, has 
risen by 53 per cent since the original 1972 
estimate. The new figure is $11.87 million. 
Unesco’s Director-General, Mr. Amadou- 
Mahtar M'Bow, has appealed to the world 
community for the $800,000 needed to 
reach the $5 million Unesco has pledged 
for Borobudur. 
Mongolia’s national park 
Mongolia is to set up a 4,000,000 hec- 
tare (1.5 million square mile) national park 
in the western Gobi desert, reports “Unes- 
co Features”. Endangered species to be 
protected in the park, one of the world's 
biggest, include Przewalski's horse (the 
only known wild horse) the wild ass, the 
wild Bactrian camel and the Gobi bear. 
Unesco world survey 
. on youth and culture 
Unesco has launched a world-wide sur- 
vey among the 15 to 25 age group to find 
out young people's attitudes to culture. The 
survey aims to discover how they view the 
various institutions and activities organized 
to provide culture. 
International book award 
for U.S.S.R. 
The 1975 International Book Award for 
outstanding services to the cause of books 
has been awarded to the national committee 
set up by the Soviet Union for Internatio- 
nal Book Year. The award was announced 
by the International Book Committee, re- 
presenting major organizations of publi- 
shers, authors, librarians, booksellers and 
readers, at a meeting in Moscow. 
Appeal for U.N. University 
Unesco’'s Executive Board, meeting In 
Parls, has called on governments and pri- 
  
vate bodies to contribute to the endowment 
fund of the United Nations University based 
in Tokyo (Japan). Only a substantial fund 
can guarantee the new university an inter- 
national character and academic autonomy, 
declared the Unesco Executive Board. The 
university, jointly sponsored by the U.N. and 
Unesco, will focus its work mainly on pro- 
blems of world hunger, natural resources 
and human and social development, 
Grants to safeguard Venice 
“Iran has made a grant of 30 million lire 
to be spent on restoring the Arsenal of 
Venice. Belgium is also contributing to the 
safeguarding of Venice's monuments 
through the proceeds of a stamp issued in 
a special “cultural series”. 
Unesco 
calendar 
for 1976 
Unesco's calendar for 1976, entitled 
“Habitat”, symbolizes the global problems 
of human settlements, which will be 
examined at a major U.N. Conference, 
“Habitat '76", to be held in Vancouver 
(Canada) from 31 May to 11 June 1976. 
Produced with the assistance of the Polish 
National Commission for ‘Unesco, the 
calendar was designed by a well-known 
Polish artist, Josef Mroszozak. (For orders 
or further information, write to Public 
Liaison Division, Unesco, Place de Fon- 
tenoy, 75700 Paris.)

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
OUR DEBT TO MICROBES 
- Sir, 
As a regular reader of the “Unesco 
Courier” for many years, | have often 
wanted to tell you how much | admire 
the magazine. Your July 1975 issue on 
microbiology gave me particular satis- 
faction since it dealt with a subject 
often neglected in other publications: 
the contribution of microbes to so 
many aspects of human life. . 
| have myself tried to stress this 
fact in a number of books | have written 
about French scientists such as Antoine 
Lavoisier, Louis Pasteur and Claude 
Bernard, and particularly In a collection 
of popular science texts ‘written In 
co-authorship with Jean Salvinien. 
Pr. Ernest Kahane 
La Ferté-Allais, France 
GUIDEBOOK 
TO MICROBIOLOGY 
 
Sir, 
After reading your issue on the New 
World of Microbiology, | now realize 
‘the significance of the magazine as a 
source of useful information on modern 
science. The articles were serious, 
well-written, clear and excellently 
illustrated, The authors deserve com- 
mendation. As a result of their work 
| have now a basic knowledge about 
that field of science. 
Wishing all success to the “Courier” . 
Hussein Ahmed 
Dessie, Wallo 
Ethiopia 
SENSELESS SLAUGHTER 
OF WILDLIFE 
 
Sir, 
As a reader for several years, | 
greatly appreciate the quality and 
variety of the articles you publish. | 
know you have already published a 
good deal on the protection of wild 
animals, but perhaps you should take 
another look at the subject. This would 
be an opportunity to impress on readers 
that the wholesale slaughter or capture 
of wild animals for trade and industry, 
for pseudo-scientific display in zoos, 
and to give “pleasure” to hunters 
continues today. Protection of wildlife 
is an urgent problem in view of the 
scale and in some cases the irreparable 
effects of this carnage. 
Pascal Giral 
Nancy, France 
A WOMAN'S 
 
 
LOST IDENTITY 
Sir, 
- | read your issue “Turning Point for 
Women...” (August-September 1975) 
with great interest. | have always 
followed the question of women's 
emancipation: personally and profession- 
ally (as a writer, lecturer, etc.). Never- 
theless, there is one important point 
which, | feel, is far too often neglected: 
a woman's family name. 
Letters to the Editor 
they are 
 
In most countries, when women marry 
“veiled” by their husband's 
surname. Most married women in 
France, for instance, do not realize that 
they have a right, but not an obligation 
to use their husband's surname and are 
unaware that they are not obliged to 
put their married name on their identity 
cards. “When | got married, | changed 
my name”, they often say. “Maiden 
name” is an Incorrect term, just as an 
equivalent sort of term would be If 
applied to a young unmarried man. 
Women who have been the innocent 
parties in a divorce and who bring up 
their children alone must still do so 
(often at their own expense) under their 
ex-husband's name. 
Finally, the titles “Mrs.” and “Miss” 
reflect an outdated order of things. An 
important aspect of woman's social 
condition is that she should have her 
own “identity”. Bravo for all your 
efforts on behalf of women. 
A woman reader 
* Paris, France 
FAMINE IN THE SAHEL 
 
Sir, 
Congratulations on your issue  ex- 
plaining the problems of drought and 
hunger in the Sahel (April 1975). After 
reading it very carefully | decided to 
write a paper on the subject, which 1 am 
pleased to say my teacher liked very 
much. Thank you again for your 
magazine and for an issue which must 
have been of great Interest to many 
other readers. 
locelyne Lespert 
aged 13 
Chaudrou, France 
POPULATION GROWTH 
 
OR ECONOMIC GROWTH? 
Sir, 
| read your two issues on World 
Population Year (May and July-August 
1974) with great attention. It seems to 
me that the term “population explosion” 
is one of the most widely used to ex- 
plain away hunger, poverty, child deaths 
and underdevelopment. But those who 
emphasize the problem of how new 
mouths are to be fed, disregard the fact - 
that each new life means two new hands 
capable of producing material wealth. 
The demographic problems faced by 
the developing countries create an 
inescapable need for a social transfor- 
mation which will give these countries 
control over thelr own natural resources 
and free them from economic exploi- 
tation and political domination. 
In my opinion the article by the 
Soviet demographer Boris Urlanls is 
the best in the July-August issue. He 
points out that while the reduction of 
birth-rates is today an urgent task for 
certain countries, “with cuitural growth, 
the Increase in the share of women's 
labour, the reduction of infant mortality, . 
the expansion of social insurance and 
the disappearance of vestiges of ‘the 
past, the attitudes of married couples 
will be oriented to small families”. 
Hernan Toledo Sosa’ 
Zaza del Medio, Cuba 
EDUCATION SEEN 
 
IN NEW PERSPECTIVE 
Sir, 
The article on higher education by 
Dragoljub Najman (June 1975) is thought 
provoking. The connexion of the teacher 
of higher education with real life and 
society should be such that he under- 
stands the meaning and purpose of 
life and society as a whole and not 
merely the application of the academic 
discipline he has learnt. 
He should consider himself and also 
be trained as a channel for the trans- 
mission of the quintessence of human 
experience and not merely a particular 
discipline. Education like many other 
things should he considered in the 
evolutionary perspective. So what the’ 
teacher learns as a discipline should 
not be an end In itself but the link in 
a feed-back cycle of human evolution. 
Modern life and society have varied 
problems in different communities but 
the teacher has the unique opportunity 
of drawing upon the experience of 
humanity as a whole and utilizing the 
aid of a galaxy of discipiines in 
furthering human evolution. 
Dr A. Kannan | 
The Theosophical Society 
Adyar, Madras 
India 
  
THE RIGHT TO GROW OLD 
Sir, 
| believe that we shall need to draw 
up a hew Declaration of Human Rights 
giving special consideration to the 
elderly. The fact is that the U.N. 
Declaration of 10 December 1948 fails 
to take into account the now vastly 
increased number of old people living 
alone and neglected in many parts of 
the world. Their special problems are 
underlined in the report of a group of 
experts which met at U.N. headquarters 
in New York in May 1974, 
José Stern 
Mexico City 
Mexico 
WORLD FELLOWSHIP 
OF RELIGIONS 
 
Sir, 
The “Unesco Courier” is a blessing 
and encouragement to us. Your issues 
also enable us to perform our duties 
more comprehensively. Thank you for 
all you are doing for mankind. 
Our purposes are for world religious - 
leaders to know and understand each 
other and to work together as unitedly 
as possible on world problems. 
Our conferences have been held in 
Delhi, Paris, and Teheran and now we 
are planning a conference in Sri Lanka 
in about a year's time. For each 
conference a theme is chosen to 
which the world’s religious [eaders 
devote time, attention and thought. At 
. each of our conferences approximately 
60 world religions are represented. 
Baron Frary von Blomberg 
President, World Fellowship of Religions 
Hampton, U.S.A.   
34 
Im
p.
 
GE
OR
GE
S 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.
 
— 
Dé
pb
t 
lé
ga
l 
C 
1 
— 
Dé
ce
mb
re
 
19
75
 
— 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
FR
AN
CE
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
    
  
  
education in China 
Unesco 
Aspects of 
1975). 
and factories. 
  ie]    
Single issue 9.50 F| Annual subscription 32 F . 
China’s educational 
reforms seen through 
Chinese eyes 
An exclusive report from PROSPECTS 
Unesco’s educational quarterly 
Chinese writers take a first-hand look at educational re- 
form in China in a nine-article “dossier” just published by 
Unesco’s educational quarterly, Prospects (Vol. V, N° 4, 
This unique set of articles describes the facets of educa- 
tion the Chinese themselves consider to be of key impor- 
tance. It gives new details on the way schooling in China 
has been taken out of the classroom and into the fields 
Prospects explores timely and provocative questions 
facing education today, with special stress on edu- 
cational innovation and reform. 
Each issue publishes a comprehensive “dossier” on a 
major theme. Recent ones have examined education in 
the least-developed countries, new roles of teachers, and 
education and women. 
Prospects is also published in French and Spanish lan- 
guage editions. An Arabic edition is also available. 
  
‘Where to renew your subscription | 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National 
Distributor in your country. (See list below; names of 
distributors in countries not listed, along with subscrip- 
tion rates in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
—~ AUSTRALIA. Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. 
Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW; Periodicals: Do- 
minie Pty., Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of Australia, 
Victorian Division 5th floor, 134-136 Flinders St., Mel- 
bourne (Victoria), 3000. — AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg 
Fromme & C°, Arbeitergasse 1-7, 1051, Vienna. — BEL- 
GIUM, "Unesco Courier” Dutch edition only: N.V. Handel- 
mastschappij Keesing, Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne- 
Antwerpen, French edition and general Unesco publica- 
tions agent: Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. 
CCP 708.23. — BURMA. Trade Corporation N° 9, 550-562 - 
Merchant Street, Rangoon. — CANADA. Information Ca- 
nada, Ottawa (Ont.). — CYPRUS. "MAM", Archbishop Ma- 
karios 3rd Avenue, P. O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 (perma- 
nent display}; Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka Prague 
1. For Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag - Publishers, Hurbanove 
_ nam. 6, 893 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — DENMARK Munks- 
gaards Boghandel, 6, Nérregade, DK-1165, Copenhagen K. 
— EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for 
Unesco Publications, N° 1 Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir 
Square, Cairo; Librairie Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, 
Cairo. — ETHIOPIA, National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box 2996, Addis-Ababa, — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatuy, Helsinki. — FRANCE. Librairie 
de I'Unesco, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75700-Paris, C.C.P. 
12598-48. — GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REP. Buchhaus 
Leipzig, Postfach 140, 701 Leipzig or from Internationalen 
Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. — FED. REP. OF GER- 
MANY. For tha Unesco Kurier (German ed. only): 53 Bonn 
1, Colmantstrasse 22, C.C.P. Hamburg 276650. [44 scianti- 
fic maps only: GEO CENTER D7 Stuttgart 80, Post- 
fach 800830. Other publications; Verlag Dokumentation, 
Péssenbacher Strasse 2, 8000 Miinchen 71 (Prinz Ludwigs- 
héhe) — GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd., P.O. 
Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd., P.O. Box 7869, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The Uni- 
versity Bookshop of Cape Coast, The University Bookshop 
of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom. — GREECE. Anglo-Hellenic Agency, 5, 
Koumpari Street Athens 138, — HONG KONG. Federal 
Publications Division, Far East Publications Ltd., 5 A Ever- 
green Industrial Mansion, Wong Chuk Hang Road, Aber- 
deen. Swindon Book Co, 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon, — 
HUNGARY. Akadémiai Kdnyvesbold, Véci u. 22, Buda- 
pest V; AK.V. Kényvtarosok Boltja, Néopkdztarsasdg utja 
16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., 
H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — INDIA. Orient Longman 
Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan 
Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 
2; B-37 Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 1; 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi 
Road, Bangalore-560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda Hyderabad- 
500001. Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 17 Park 
Street, Calcutta 16; Scindia House, New Delhi; Publications 
Section, Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, 72 Thea- 
tre Communication Building, Connaught Place, New Delhi 
1.— INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 29 
JI. Oto Iskandardinata lll, Jakarta; Gramedia Bookshop, JI. 
Gadjah Mada 109, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI. Dr, Sam Ratulan- | 
‘gie 37, Jakarta Pusat. — IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and 
Distribution C°, 229 Daneshgahe Street, Shah Avenue, 
P.O. Box 141486, Teheran. Iranian National Commission 
for Unesco, Avenue Iranchahr Chomali No 300, B.P. 1633, 
Teheran. — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid Street, 
Baghdad: University Bookstore, University of Baghdad, 
P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The Educational 
Company of Ireland Ltd., Batlymount Road, Walkinstown, 
Dublin 12. — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blums- 
tein’s Book-stores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat Ben- 
jamin Street, Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street Jeru- 
salem. — JAMAICA, Sangster's Book Stores Ltd.,, P.O. 
Box 366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston, — JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc., C.P.0. Box 1728, Tokyo 100-92, — KE- 
NYA. The E.S.A. Ltd., P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi, — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 
64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd., 
P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Cen- 
tre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Africa. — LIBERIA. 
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. 
-— LIBYA. Agency for Development of Publication & Dis- 
tribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEMBOURG. Li- 
brairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. — MA- 
LAYSIA. Federal Publications Sdn. Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, 
Jalan Riong, Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. Sapienza‘s Li- 
brary, 26 Kingsway, Valletta. — MAURITIUS, Nalanda 
Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. — MO- 
NACO. British Library, 30, bd des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. 
—~— NETHERLANDS. For the “Unesco Koerier” Dutch edi- 
tion only: Systemen- Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, 
Amsterdam-1007. Agent for all Unesco publications: N. V. 
Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. — 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co. (Nad 
Ant}. N.V,, Willemstad, Curagao,N. A, — NEW ZEALAND. 
Government Printing Office, Government Bookshops at: 
Rutland Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, Oxford 
Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. 
Box 857 Hamilton; Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; 
Mulgrave Street, Private Bd, Wellington. — NIGERIA. 
The University Bookshop of Ife. The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286; The University Bookshop of 
Nsukka; The University Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY, All pu- 
blications: Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl 
Johans-gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only; AS. 
Narvesens Literaturtjeneste, Box 6125, Osfo 6. — PAKIS- 
TAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-e-azam, P.O. 
Box No. 729, Lahore 3; The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., 
Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, G.P.0., Lahore; 
Showrooms: Urdu Bazaar, Lahore, end 57-58 Murree 
Highway, G/6-1 Islamabad. — PHILIPPINES, The Modern 
Book Co., 926 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404. — 
POLAND. All publications: ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i 
Nauki, Warsaw. For the Unesco Courier only: RUCH, ul. 
Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Ltda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — SIN- 
GAPORE. Federal Publications (s) Pte Ltd,, Times House, 
River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOMAU DEMOCRA- 
TIC REPUBLIC. Modern Book Shop and General, P.O. Box 
951, Mogadiscio. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook 
Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. — SRI 
LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam 
Gardiner Mawata P.0.B. 244 Colombo 2. — SUDAN. Al 
Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. 
All publications: AB C.E. Fritzes Xungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the 
Unesco Courier: Svenska FN-Férbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 
150 50 S- 104 65, Stockholm. — SWITZERLAND, All publi- ~ 
cations: Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich. Librairie 
Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236. — 
TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar- 
es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 
Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402, 
Bangkok; Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Ave- 
nue, Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama [IV Road, 
Bangkok. — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Cad- 
desi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — SOUTH AFRICA. All publica- 
tions: Van Schaik’s Bookstore (Pty). Ltd., Libri Building, 
Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pratoria. For the Unesco Cou- 
rier (single copies) only; Cantral News Agency P.O. Box 
1033, Johannesburg. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Statio- 
nery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l,, and Government 
Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Man- 
chester, Birmingham, Bristol. — UNITED STATES. Uni- 
pub, Box 433, Murray Hill Station New York, N.Y. 10016. — 
U.S.8.R. Mezhdu- narodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200. — 
YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Bal- 
grade; Drzavna Zalozba Slovenije, Titova C 25, P.O.B. 50, 
Ljubliana,  

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074818engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

JUNGLE 
Na 
BRAIN TISSUE 
- 
Photo Lennart Nilsson, Life © Time Inc., New Yor 
Exploration of the brain with the aid of powerful scanning electron microscopes 4 
reveals arresting “landscapes” like the jungle glimpsed here through a crack in a 
speck of brain tissue. The human brain has about eleven billion nerve cells or 
neurons, each of which is a sophisticated information-processing centre capable 
of taking split-second action. To enable you to read these words, millions of tiny 
CIE TEIN IVIEEER (EER LIED TS 0 through LUCRER SUIT ETN TE SVT Td SL TTT brain. 
(Seé photo report pages 14 to 19). WA | SE ] — I [ 