# [078285](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

SN 
ince last October, (ES 
in 
er, Manchest 
g signals 
verse which are 
CENT | 
[COT 
instrument, radio or 
powerful and second 
o telescope in ‘south-eastern 
Il Bank near 
ge of any 
T EYE 
is capable of 
ces in the uni 
» in operation s 
I, at present in existence. See 
e world’s most 
d. I 
m distan 
eyond the ran 
GIAN 
i 
- 
RE FNC TLL AAR TO PY [7 
Lis 
  
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

FEBRUARY 1962 
15TH YEAR ‘mCourier 
Contents 
No. 2 
PUBLISHED IN 
EIGHT EDITIONS Page 
English 4 NEMRUD DAGH 
French Mountain-top sanctuary of gods & kings 
Spanish By Pauline Bentley 
Russian 12 FREDERICK DOUGLASS, AMERICAN FIGHTER 
German FOR FREEDOM 
Arabic Human Rights for all—regardless of colour or sex 
American By Benjamain Quarles 
Japanese I5 THE INCAS OF TODAY 
Descendents of a glorious past on the high plateaux of the Andes 
By Alfred Metraux 
22 PING-PONG DOLLS GO TO SCHOOL 
Lessons come alive with Lilliputian “teachers” 
By M. M. Rabecq-Maillard 
26 AUSTRALIA'S GIANT ‘EYE’ ON OUTER SPACE 
A new radio-telescope scans the universe 
By Selwyn Speight 
  
COVER PHOTO 29 LITTLE-KNOWN MASTERPIECES OF BULGARIAN ART 
This giant stone head of 
Antiochus 1, King of Com- 
magene, now lies among the 
ruins of the mountain-top 
shrine he erected 2,000 years 
ago at ghemrud Dagh, In 
present-day Turkey. roug 
his Greek mother, Antiochus 33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
traced his descent from Alex- 
ander the Great and his fea- 
tures as depicted on this 
sculptured head strongly re- 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
semble those of his great 
forebear. (See story page 4) 
© Ara Guler, Istanbul 
Revealed by a new Unesco album of colour reproductions 
By A. Vassilev 
(M. C. 62.1., 166 A) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
it is bi-monthly (II issues a year), in English, French, Spanish, Russian, Ger- 
man, Arabic and Japanese. Sales and distribution: UNESCO Publications 
Center, U.S.A. 801 Third Avenue, New York 22, N.Y,, Plaza 1.3860 (sole 
distributors of the American edition). Second-class mail privileges authorized 
at New York, N.Y. 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER”, plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are tent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
The Unesco Courier [s indexed monthly In The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature, 
  Arabic Edition ; Amin Shaker (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Annual subscription (any edition): $ 5.00; Single copies: 
50 cents. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief in Paris.  

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

NEMRUD DAGH 
for 2,000 years the colossal 
statues of an East-West 
sanctuary have guarded the 
secret of an Anatolian King 
by Pauline Bentley 
Se thousand feet high in the Anti-Taurus 
mountains of Turkey stands Nemrud Dagh, the 
mount of Nimrod. On this parched and stony summit 
there has lain for the past 2,000 years one of the great 
monuments of antiquity, a sanctuary which by its beauty 
outstandingly exemplifies the amalgam of East and West, 
of Persian, Greek and Anatolian cultures. It was raised 
in the first century of our era by Antiochus I, King of 
Commagene, to be a “holy common room of all the Gods” 
and a palace of pilgrimage for his people. 
Hewn from the mountain rock, the sanctuary consists 
of three terraces levelled on the summit and decorated 
with mighty statues of the King and his Gods which 
tower on their bases to the height of a five-storey building. 
Portrait reliefs of the “heroic company of the King's 
ancestors” grace the terrace walls; above these and 
the statues too, Antiochus I caused the rock chippings to 
be piled into a tumulus, a great man-made false peak 
rising in perfect symmetry for 150 feet on the mountain 
top. Is this the King’s burial chamber? Archaeologists 
believe the rocky cairn to be his tomb, but so far it has 
defled exploration. 
Today Nemrud Dagh looks out over an arid land from 
which the ferment of civilization has long since seeped 
away, but 2,000 years ago the little Kingdom of 
Commagene spread in a rich and fertile vista at the foot 
of the Anti-Taurus mountain chain from Cilicia to the 
Euphrates River. It was a tempting, miniature buffer 
state between the great powers of its world. To the 
South and East lay the Parthian Empire, northwards the 
Roman Protectorates of Cappadocea and Armenia, and on 
the Aegean seaboard sprawled the Roman Provinces. 
Well may both Rome and Persia have cast longing eyes 
upon this kingdom which the Roman Consul Strabo once 
described as “exceedingly fertile, though small.” 
Relatively little is known of its history, but it is recorded 
that Antiochus I made treaty with the Roman General 
Pompey in 64 B.C., preserving its frontiers until it was 
finally absorbed into the Roman Empire under Vespasian 
n 72 AD. 
Meanwhile, into Commagene poured the differing 
cultures of Persia and of Greece to mingle with the 
richness of Anatolian history. The capital city, Samsat, 
the Samosata of today, commanded one of the epic 
crossing-points of the Euphrates; the whole kingdom lay 
astride the ancient trade routes of the Orient and the 
West, among lands bearing two of the world’s seven 
wonders. . .the Temple to Diana at Ephesus and the fort of 
Helicarnassus built in memory of the Anatolian ruler 
Mausolus—whence comes the word mausoleum. In these 
regions Xenophon led his 10,000 to their fatal meeting 
with the Persians and the Apostle Paul trod his dusty way 
from Tarsus. Around Edessa, some fifty miles from 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 6 
TWENTY CENTURIES AGO, Antiochus |, 
King of Commagene raised a mighty monument 
to himself and his gods atop Nemrud Dagh (Mount 
Nimrod) in the Anti-Taurus Mountains of present- 
day Turkey. The colossal statues of Antiochus 
and the deities worshipped by his Greek and 
Persian ancestors still stand, but most have been 
decapitated. Fallen heads of Herakles (on left) 
and Zeus (right) are twice the height of a man. 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

© Ara Goler, Istanbui 
 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

   
   
   
THRONE ROOM OF THE GODS. Overlooking 
two vast terraces on ‘“‘the topmost ridge of m 
kingdom” Antiochus | assembled these 29-feet high 
colossi. These deities, whose multiple names reflect the 
Greek and Persian cultures from which they sprang, in- 
clude a sun god (Apollo-Mithra-Helios-Hermes), the 
Commagene fertility goddess (Fortuna), the father of 
the gods (Zeus-Ahuramazda), the god of strength(Hera- 
kles) and Antiochus. Only Fortuna has kept her head. 
Photos © Ara Giller 
    
We
 
 
   
4 
. 
: 
id
 
: 
a 
§ 
Gt
 
“
w
y
 
3 
A
 
a 
Aa 
. 
o
r
 
T
A
 
e
X
 
r
s
 
i 
a
 
a
 
J] 
ih
 
   JG
 
» 
5 
od 
> 
££ 
oy 
ad
 
    
 
* ,, ; { v 
Wiatk 
#.   
WY bo a I / Pe 
1882 and 1883 that Nemrud Dagh first fell to the 
Is Antiochus | buried here? Heehadnosit 
Reports written then on the sanctuary by Turkish and 
German archaeologists in turn fired the enthusiasm of an 
American woman geologist, Theresa Goell (1). After 14 
Nemrud Dagh, there may sometimes still be encountered years of research work and two preliminary visits she led 
a blonde and blue-eyed people, perhaps descended from the her first expedition there in 1953. 
frankish Knights of the first Crusade who later passed Even now the way to the sanctuary is far from easy: 
way. , 
then, it was accessible only by narrow winding donkey 
The stir of history has all subsided and time and erosion tracks. The old processional way of Antiochus I leads 
have done their work. The Turkish Government are 
now launching a land-reclamation programme which is 
  
  
already showing some results in their effort to restore the (1) A personal account by Theresa Goell of her investigations 
region to its former fertility, but so remote and desolate at Nemrud Dagh was published in “National Geographic.” 
did it become across the centuries that it was not until (Vol. 119, No. 3, March 1961.) 
=i . wo... =. BETWEEN TWO CONTINENTS. The small 
& EE EE a rn on RV AE wR = though rich kingdom of Commagene lay astride 
pe be OI . ee £7 4 iad SE ae, trade routes linking Orient to Occident, Gate- 
= me OR SE TNR Sm way to the sacred monuments of Antiochus is 
tet WL LICL | f EN — 5 a be + Ve i LT this well-preserved Roman bridge of Septimus 
ats Gy RRL Phe wn Br Severus (left) onaformer royal processional route. 
ROARING LION (right) carved from sandstone 
guards a relief on the west terrace, depicting 
Antiochus | and the sun god (Apollo-Mithra). 
Lion looks down over barren slopes and valleys 
of once prosperous Commagene. Today, through 
drought and erosion, much of it is wasteland. 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

NEMRUD DAGH (Cont'd) 
MAN-MADE MOUNTAIN PEAK. 
Crowning Mount Nimrod (right) is 
a giant tumulus 150 feet high, raised, 
stone by stone, on the orders of 
Antiochus | as the crowning monument 
of his sanctuary. This may well hide 
the tomb of the monarch, but all 
attempts to dig into the mound have 
been thwarted by avalanches of stones, 
Photos © Ara Guler 
from the remote village of Esikartha, reached by crossing 
the river by the marvellously preserved Roman Bridge of 
Septimus Severus, itself a ‘relic of great beauty (see 
opposite page). 
To the south, lies Karakus, the tomb of the Royal ladies 
of the dynasty of Antiochus. Their tumulus is guarded 
by a limestone eagle, symbol of Zeus, standing on a neo- 
Doric column. The tomb appears to have been pillaged 
but there are still traces of 18 columns, once with statues 
on them, of which ohly two now stand. 
Beyond, lies the Anti-Taurus chain, dominated by 
Nemrud Dagh, with its symmetrical, man-made peak 
rising sharp and clear against the sky, but to the traveller 
from Esikartha the sanctuary itself remains completely 
hidden from view during his journey. He must toil 
upwards on an hours-long arduous climb from the ancient 
Anatolian village with no glimpse of his goal to spur him 
on until it suddenly bursts forth in complete and 
breathtaking splendour high above him. 
The havoc wrought by time, weathering and casual 
vandalism cannot mar the sudden revelation of the white 
cone of stones glittering in the still and blazing light, 
silently guarded by the immense statues still sentinel 
In their mutilation and displacement. 
The Goell expedition settled to the examination of the 
sanctuary on the rocky terrain which made encampment 
a painful hazard and working conditions a matter for 
sheer ingenuity. In the rigorous hardship of a climate 
 
swinging between a daytime 130° and an night-time 
freezing polnt; without nearby water or shade: in dust, 
hail, freak torrential rainstorms and at the mercy of an 
occasional marauding bear, they surveyed the shrine, 
clearing it with difficulty of debris. There was no room 
on the summit to put this and it had to be carried 
painstakingly down the mountain in wooden litters. 
It soon became obvious that Nemrud Dagh warranted 
more than one scason for its thorough exploration. 
Theresa Goell and her team spent five years’ dedicated 
work there, helped by the sponsorship of the American 
School for Oriental Research and with the atd of the 
Bollinger Foundation and the American Philosophical 
Society. Far from being the crude product of some semi- 
barbarian monarch as had been suggested, the beauty of 
the shrine established it as one of the glorles of the 
Hellenistic world. 
Not only the sculptured figures of Antiochus and his 
Gods with their attendant eagles and lions, but also their 
sandstone relief portraits cut into the walls running the 
length of the East and West terraces show the purity of 
form and line of the great classical tradition. 
The ceremonial heart of the shrine is the Persian fire 
altar on the East Terrace. Earlier expeditions had 
described a “mighty stairway” to it, but the Goell expedi- 
tion revealed this to be a double podium cut into the rock 
with inscriptions indicating reliefs cut in its walls. 
Majestically facing the fire altar, with the tumulus of 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 10 
 
  
— 
Y ”n. 
a a, 
2 Ga 
      
N
E
 
\ 
i 
: 
FR ad rT . 2 
bre > a AYR 
5 a FZ YA dl

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

NEMRUD DAGH (Cont'd) 
Mountain-top terrace 
of a king & his gods 
FALLEN HEADS OF DEITIES litter the west terrace of Nemrud 
Dagh (right) giving it the appearance of a huge open-air studio of some 
monumental sculptor with, as a back-drop, the bleak eroded slopes 
of the Anti-Taurus mountains. Though now shattered by earthquakes, 
erosion and vandalism, the deities still seem marvels of engineering 
skill. Upon their platform, they rose as high as a five-storey building. 
FACE OF ZEUS pitted and scarred by weather and erosion (below) 
now stares sightlessly from the west terrace. Other decapitated head 
In rear is that of Antiochus | who built and endowed the sanctuary. 
Headdress worn by Antiochus shows his paternal links with Persia. 
  
   
   
L 
Tp A hy ay 
«ld . ur 
: 
‘4 r - ~ 
A - a 
Vd 
~., / “wh 
rr 
y TAN 
alt Ld 
ow ( Co 
oF 
rw 
r L 
LION HOROSCOPE (be- 
low) was found on east 
terrace. Though a similar 
one was discovered 70 years 
earlier, new information has 
been drawn from stars and 
other engravings. These 
markings on this relief of 
a stylized lion give the date 
of the horoscope as July 61 
or 62 B.C. — possibly 
when the shrine was built, 
ETAT 
BES YR, 
, 2 ) J % 
a
y
 
abl 
  
a
,
 
5 
Bi
v,
 
x
 
E
N
E
 
Ei
a 
\ 
A a * 
w
e
 
¥ 
~
~
 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

   
     
    
BN ee A 
: / / ”d ey Are 4 nt, Spm 
a Th 7 ve } u Ey Nh ae 
   x HX 
rE pe : 
ru © Ara i 
TOMB OF THE ROYAL LADIES 
of the dynasty of Antiochus is at 
Karakus which lies to the south of 
Nemrud Dagh. The burial tumulus 
here is guarded by a limestone eagle 
(right) symbol of Zeus, standing on a 
neo-Doric column. At Karakus there 
are also traces of eighteen columns 
that were once crowned by statues. 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

10 
NEMRUD DAGH (cont'd) 
  
© Ara Gller 
Ra 5 A 
vigil over the monuments and statues of Nemrud Dagh as they have done 
since craftsmen hewed them from the! mountain rock twenty centuries ago. 
The eagle was a familiar motif in ancient Anatolian and Mesopotamian art, 
Heritage of both Greece and Persia 
rock chippings at their back, there still sit, though shaken 
and dismembered by earth tremors, an imposing array of 
25 fo 29-foot high statues reflecting the hybrid culture 
from which they spring. 
First comes the Sun God, Apollo-Mithra-Helios-Hermes; 
then the Commagene Fertility Goddess Fortuna; next to 
her the Father of the Gods, the “Thunder Shaker,” Ahura 
Mazda-Zeus. Next to him sits Antiochus I himself, 
flanked by the Hero God of strength, Herakles-Artagne- 
Ares. All the statues, except the Goddess Fortuna have 
lost their heads across the years, the mighty head of 
Apollo Mithra being discovered when the Goell expedition 
were clearing a trench on this terrace to copy inscriptions 
cut into bases of the statues. 
These Inscriptions give a history of the sanctuary— 
“I, Antiochus,” reads part of them, “have raised this 
place to my own glory and that of my Gods.” They show 
he endowed the shrine with Royal estates, staffed it 
with priests and musicians and decreed “everlasting” 
monthly ceremonies there. The 10th day of each month 
commemorated his accession to the throne, and the 16th, 
his birthday. 
An important discovery by the Goell team on the East 
terrace was a “lion horoscope” similar to the one 
discovered on the West Terrace in 1882 which gained fame 
as the first known Greek horoscope. Professor Otto 
Neygebauer of Brown University, Boston has identified the 
19 stars scattered on and near its body and the conjunc- 
tion of the three planets Jupiter, Mercury and Mars, 
giving the date of the horoscope as July 61 or 62 B.C. 
4 i 
v ~~ 
Fy , 
|) ~ hy 
2% 0 ka i EA 
Wry 
GUARDIANS OF THE SHRINE, these eagle and lion heads keep a faithful 
 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63473: Nemrud Dagh: for 2,000 years the colossal statues of an East-West sanctuary have guarded the secret of an Anatolian king

: 
© Ara Giler 
 
BEARDED HERAKLES (foreground) and handsome Apollo are two heads 
broken off from the mighty statues at Nemrud Dagh, two members of a ruined 
pantheon of the gods. Standing on the court of the west terrace, they look like 
giants whohavebeen buried to the neck in the rocky soil of the mountain sanctuary. 
This may be taken as the possible date of the shrine’s 
foundation and has been of very great value in the dating 
of other Hellenistic monuments. 
Among other valuable discoveries was the sculptured 
head of Antiochus, some 16 feet (5 metres) high, lying 
amidst the fallen heads of his gods and guardian animals 
on the West Terrace. It is of calm and striking beauty, 
and bears a strong likeness to Alexander the Great, from 
whom Antiochus claimed descent on his mother’s side. 
The head wears a Persian headdress to remind us that he 
also claimed descent from the Aechemenid dynasty of 
Persia, through his father. 
The relief portraits on this West Terrace show him, 
adorned with the lion emblem of royalty and guarded by 
a sandstone lion statue, facing Apollo-Mlithra as an equal, 
for Antlochus I claimed not only descent from the rulers 
of Greece and Persia, hut considercd himself immortal. 
One of the Inscriptions in the sanctuary reads “the 
topmost ridge” of the kingdom “is the one in closest 
proximity to the heavenly throne of Zeus.” 
It was this Inseriptlon and the discovery of a rock core 
under the east side of the tumulus which encouraged 
Theresa Goell’s conviction that Antiochus I lies buried 
under the tumulus he raised. Excavations were started 
but they resulted only In avalanches of stone which made 
continuing impossible. Twenty centuries after its erection 
the shrine of Nemrud Dagh has been brought before us 
by description, photograph and film but its final enigma 11 
remains unsolved: the great pile of rock upon its summit 
keeps Its secret still.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 


### 63474: Frederick Douglass: a slave who became freedom's trumpet

FREDERICK DOUGLASS 
  
STILL A YOUTH, Frederick Douglass 
began his campaign for the abolition of 
slavery. He was himself an escaped slave 
from a plantation in the State of Maryland. 
by Benjamin Quarles 
All photos Frederick Douglass 
Historical Association 
PD) cro the four years from 1961 to 1965, 
the United States is observing the one hun- 
dreth anniversary of a hard-fought war between two 
sections of its country, the North and the South. 
According to the man who was President when the war 
broke out, Abraham Lincoln, one of the great goals of 
the struggle was to give to America “a new birth of 
freedom.” To no group in the United States did these 
words mean more than to its Negroes. And to no person 
did these words mean more than to Frederick Douglass. 
Frederick Douglass, the most prominent American 
Negro of the nineteenth century, devoted his life to 
extending the boundaries of freedom for his fellow man. 
He believed that everyone was entitled to liberty: “Man 
was born with it,” said he. And so for half a century, 
from 1845 to 1895, he made himself a spokesman for the 
oppressed and downtrodden. 
Douglass was devoted to the cause of freedom because 
he knew what it was not to be free. For he had been a 
slave. In 1817, when he was born, slavery was a well- 
established institution in the southern section of the 
United States. Slavery had deep roots in America, going 
back almost to the time when the British founded the 
American colonies, beginning with Virginia in 1607. 
When the United States became an independent nation 
in 1783, it seemed as though slavery was doomed to die a 
natural death. But ten years later, a machine was 
invented, the cotton gin, which made it possible to 
separate the seeds from the fibre. In America and in 
Europe there was a great demand for cotton. To meet 
this demand a labour supply was necessary. Negro 
slavery was the answer to this need. 
In being born a slave, Frederick Douglass was like 
hundreds of thousands of other Negroes in the United 
States. But no other slave was destined to become so 
well known. From such humble beginnings as his, very 
few Americans ever went so far. The key to his success 
was his striving for freedom, for himself and for others. 
As a young slave on a plantation in Maryland, Douglass 
was not satisfied with his lot. He held imaginary conver- 
sations with himself, asking himself these questions: 
“Why I am a slave? Why are some people slaves, and 
others masters? Was there ever a time when this was not 
50?” 
To prepare himself for freedom, Douglass wanted to 
learn the alphabet. His masters fried to prevent him from 
learning how to read and write, but Douglass was not 
easily discouraged. His first pennies were secretly spent 
in buying spelling books and in paying other boys to help 
him to understand them. 
In 1838, after twenty years in bondage, Douglass escaped 
from his master and settled in the North, where slavery 
no longer existed. For three years at New Bedford, 
Massachusetts, he worked as an unskilled labourer, taking 
any job he could get—sweeping chimneys, sawing wood, 
driving a coach or walting on table He had a growing 
family to support, having married a few days after his 
flight from his master. 
But his responsibilities as a husband and a father did 
not prevent him from taking an interest in the activities 
of the abolitionists. These were a group of men and 
women who were dedicated to the overthrow of slavery, 
which they considered the greatest evil under the sun. 
They were opposed to slavery for two reasons: for what 
it did to the slave, and for what it did to such eclvil 
liberties as freedom of speech and trial by jury. In 
Massachusetts these reformers were led by two able men, 
Willlam Lloyd Garrisson, editor of The Liberator, and 
Wendell Phillips, one of the greatest orators of the 
nineteenth contury. 
In August 1841 the Massachusetts abolitionists held a 
meeting at New Bedford, and, Douglass, to his surprise, 
was asked to say a few words. He was nervous, but he 
spoke with deep feeling, telling of his recollections of 
slavery. His listeners were impressed by his story and his 
manner of telling it, and they urged him to join their 
ranks as a lecturer and agent. The young Negro gave his 
consent, thus taking a step he never regretted. 
Serooie by the abolitionists, Douglass soon 
became one of their prize speakers. His 
imposing physique, his finely formed head, his flashing 
eyes and the rolling thunder of his voice, all fitted him 
for the public platform. “In listening to him,” wrote a 
contemporary, “your whole soul is fired.” 
Slavery also felt the weight of the Douglass pen. Within 
four years after he had joined the abolitionists, he had 
developed a forceful prose style, direct and vivid. His 
“Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass,” which he 
published in 1845, became a best seller on two continents, 
being translated into French and German. 
This book was a bitter condemnation of slavery, and 
it could not fail to stir up sympathy for those in bondage. 
“I never saw my mother,” ran one of the opening 
sentences, “to know her as such, more than four or five 
times in my life; and each of these was very short, in 
duration, and at night.” 
Following the publication of his “Narrative,” Douglass 
crossed the Atlantic, going to the British Isles. There for 
nearly two years he denounced American slavery before 
large and sympathetic audiences. His success abroad was 
great; British admirers raised money to purchase his 
freedom from his former master, and to enable him to 
start a weekly newspaper of his own. 
In addition to speaking and writing, Douglass took part 
In another of the organized forms of action against 
slavery—the underground railroad. This was the name

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 63474: Frederick Douglass: a slave who became freedom's trumpet

  
IN LATER LIFE, a renowned orator, writer and lecturer, Douglass saw 
his own people freed (1863). In 1877 he became U.S, Ambassador to Haitl. 
glven to the practice of assisting runaway slaves by 
providing them with food, shelter and money, as they 
made their way to Canada. Himself an escaped slave, 
Douglass was strongly in sympathy with those who made 
the dash for freedom. The fees from many of his lectures 
went to aid fugitives. 
His home in Rochester, New York, was a headquarters 
for runaways. When he went to his printing shop in the 
mornings, it was not unusual for him to find fugitives 
sitting on the steps, waiting for him. Such runaways 
traveled at night—during the daytime thelr abolitionist 
friends hid them from prying eyes. Douglass knew where 
to take them, to a sail loft, to an out-of-the-way barn, 
or to the quiet home of a trusted sympathizer. When 
darkness fell, Douglass sped them on their way toward 
the Canadian border. 
Douglass’s interest in freedom included woman's rights, 
a movement in which he was one of the pioneers. In the 
America in which Douglass came to manhood, the women 
did not stand equal to the men in the eyes of the law, 
being denied the right to make contracts, to testify in 
court, and to vote. Douglass opposed these unfair 
restrictions. His weekly newspaper, The North Star, in 
its first issue on December 3, 1847, carried on its masthead 
the words, “Right is of no sex.” 
Seven months later, at Seneca Falls, New York, the 
woman's rights movement In America was formally 
launched. At this historic meeting, Douglass took a 
prominent part, being the only man to do so. Many 
of the delegates to the convention were hesitant about 
asserting that women should have the right to vote, but 
In a stirring address that changed many minds, Douglass 
pointed out that political equality was vital to the 
women’s cause, 
13 
With the coming of the war between the North and 
the South in the spring of 1861, Douglass bent his efforts 
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 63474: Frederick Douglass: a slave who became freedom's trumpet

14 
  
to urging President Lincoln to liberate the slaves. To 
Douglass the war was a crusade for freedom, and he tried 
to impress this point of view on Lincoln on his two visits 
to the White House. The Negro leader was overjoyed 
when, on January 1, 1863, Lincoln issued the Emancipation 
Proclamation, declaring free the slaves in the South. It 
wags, said Douglass, “a day for poetry and song.” 
Too old to shoulder a gun himsef, Douglass became a 
recruiting agent, traveling through the North urging 
Negroes to join the army. The first two recruits he 
signed up were his own sons, Lewis and Charles. As a 
recruiter and as a lecturer supporting the Nothern cause, 
Douglass continued his labours until the South laid down 
its arms in April 1865. 
After the war, Douglass was destined to hold three 
public offices: President Hayes appointed him as Marshal 
of the District of Columbia in 1877; President Garfield 
appointed him as Recorder of Deeds for the District of 
Columbia in 1881; and President Harrison appointed him 
as United States Minister to Haiti in 1889. 
Between these last two appointments, Douglass spent 
one year traveling in Europe and the Near East. He took: 
in all the sights, making it a point while in Paris to see 
the tomb of Lafayette, the general who had helped 
America win her independence. ‘This patriot has two 
countries of his own,” said Douglass, and therefore his 
burial plot was “doubly sacred ground.” Douglass was 
DRIVE TO PRESERVE 
DOUGLASS HOME 
AS SHRINE 
 
Human rights for everyone 
regardless of colour or sex 
especially glad to make the acquaintance of such a 
champion of human liberty as the eighty-one-year-old 
member of the French Senate, Victor Schoelcher, who in 
1848 had framed the decree that freed the slaves in the 
French colonies. 
But whether abroad or at home, whether in office or 
out of it, Douglass never lost his deep concern for human 
freedom. He never stopped speaking and writing on 
behalf of the underdog. Those who were discriminated 
against at the polls or in the job market could depend on 
him to cry out for them. He viewed the lot of the Negro 
not as a race struggle, but as a human struggle. He hoped 
that the day would come when everyone in America would 
have equal opportunity, regardless of differences in 
ancestry, sex, religious beliefs, or skin color. 
Douglass did not live to see that day; he died in 1895. 
But to the making of a free America he gave his best and 
his all. Such devotion to liberty left its mark on his 
generation, and it has its lessons for our own troubled 
times. 
BENJAMIN QUARLES, professor of history. at Morgan State 
College, Baltimore, Md., U.S.A., is the editor of the autobiography 
of Frederick Douglass (Belknap/Harvard University Press, 1960), 
and the author of “The Negro in the Civil War”. 
In this white brick house at Cedar Hill in Anacos- 
tia, a section of Washington D.C., Frederick Doug- 
lass spent his last years. Here, surrounded by 
his papers and books and copies of his abolitionist 
newspaper, The North Star, he died on February 20, 
1895. By 1961, this once beautiful home was run- 
down with unkempt grounds and in dire need of 
repair. The National Association of Coloured 
Women's Clubs (N.A.C.W.C.) launched a nation- 
wide campaign in February 1961 for $50,000 to restore 
Douglass’ home to its original state and preserve 
it as a national historic shrine. In response to 
this appeal, the President of the United States 
wrote the President of the N.A.C.W.C., Mrs. Rosa 
L. Cragg : '‘Frederick Douglass is a part of the 
legend of America. As a successful fighter for 
freedom a century ago, he can give inspiration-to 
people all around the world who are still struggling 
to secure their full human rights...’ The National 
Association of Coloured Women's Clubs numbers 
100,000 women in 1,500 clubs in 40 states. It was 
organized in 1896, just one year after Douglass 
died. Through its national headquarters in Wash- 
ington D.C., the Association is a national clear- 
ing house for nonpartisan information and works 
for better race relations and international under- 
standing. N.A.C.W.C, state federations either own 
or have helped start facilities for under-privileged, 
handicapped or delinquent youth in most of the 
Southern states. Proceeds from an N.A.C,W.C, 
drive for Unesco Courier subscriptions are to be 
used to restore Douglass’ home to its former state.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

©
 
Yv
an
 
Da
la
in
  


### 63476: The Incas of today

THE INCAS OF TODAY 
by Alfred Métraux 
N o civilization ever dies completely. Even If its 
creators disappear, they hand on to their suc- 
cessors some part of their own experience. Thus, as long 
as there are people who identify themselves with the 
original culture, no external pressure has the power to 
erase it. The Indians of the Andes, whose ancestors were 
subjects of the Incas, offer us the most striking example 
of this fact. 
Four hundred years have passed since the day—Novem- 
ber 16, 1532—that Pizarro and his hundred and fifty com- 
panlons, treacherously selzing the Inca monarch Ata- 
hualpa at Cajamarca, destroyed the greatest Empire of 
the New World. 
During these four centurles, life has been hard for the 
Peruvian Indians and they have experienced many 
changes of fortune. Their economy has been uprooted, 
thelr social order transformed and their religion reduced 
to the status of dubious and unpalatable beliefs. Despite 
these ruthless changes and the desperate poverty into 
which they fell, the people have preserved part of their 
cultural heritage almost Intact. The old Inca civilization 
Is not dead. Its roots are still healthy, and it may well 
one day produce new shoots. Under a European veneer, 
there still survive institutions, patterns of behaviour and 
beliefs which the white man has been unable to tamper 
with and spoil. 
The outward signs of the highly developed civilization 
so admired by the Conquistadors when they penetrated 
Into the Andes disappeared a few years after the collapse 
of the Inca Empire. The highways, bordered by low walls 
and shaded by trees, were abandoned or broken up. Sus- 
pension bridges were neglected, the palaces and even the 
towns were destroyed. The marvellous organization ot 
this State, which has been called a “socialist” one, suf- 
fered the same fate. The State granaries were pillaged, 
the relay system of communications was interrupted, and 
the inhabitants were obliged to settle afresh In towns 
and villages of European type. 
Thirty years after the conquest, the population of the 
Empire was reduced by half, If not by two thirds. Yet 
CONT'D ON PAGE 17 
 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63476: The Incas of today

16 
INCAS OF TODAY (Cont'd) 
-~ . te — 
MARKET DAY In a tiny village on the high Andean plateau of Peru brings together Quechua Indians with 
their livestock and vegetables from the surrounding countryside, In the mountains of Peru and Bolivia, the 
Indians have retained much of their ancient systems of social organization. including the ayilu in which small 
groups of families united by a common origin, soil and creed, joined forces to work the land, Today, how- 
ever, these descendants of the Inca Empire are modernizing and developing their farming methods. 
© Paul Almasy, Paris

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63476: The Incas of today

  
Photos © Pierre Verger RELIC OF THE PAST Is this taclla, a metal-pointed staff used for breaking the soil. Indians who live on the 
mountain slopes still use this method but those deep in the valleys use ploughs drawn by oxen, the women 
following to break up the earth clods, Left, Indian boy, carrying his baby brother, rests against a village wall. 
these misfortunes did not break the Indian spirit. Whilst 
it seemed probable in the eighteenth century that the 
Andean Indians would, in their turn, disappear very soon, 
the dentury which followed has produced an expansion 
of such magnitude that today there {s a population oi 
almost six million within the borders of the ancient 
Empire, from southern Colombia to central Chile. In this 
expanding Indian population, the precursory signs of a 
great renaissance are perceptible. The time is therefore 
ripe to see what they have retained of the glorious civill- 
zation of their ancestors. 
Let us first consider language, which is an instrument 
of culture. The language of the Incas, called Quechua, 
fs still spoken by nearly five million people, although 
some Indian groups have adopted Spanish. Yet some 
mestizos (men and women of mixed blood) and even white 
men have made Quechua thelr native tongue. Today, 
Quechua is more widely spoken in South America than 
it was when the Inca Empire was at the helght of its 
glory. It was imposed by the Spanish missionaries on 
tribes which, though formerly under Inca domination, 
had maintained their own national tongues. These same 
missionaries spread it to the tribes of the Amazon region 
and thus the language of the Incas conquered territories 
which had never seen the armies of the Empire. 
Along with the language went a whole folklore of a 
wealth which is only just beginning to come to light. 
Many an old myth, thought forgotten forever, has sur- 
vived in the memory of the country people. Patlent 
research may enable us to discover the vestiges of legend- 
ary cosmogonies and cycles assumed to have been lost 
beyond recall. 
In the mountains of Peru and Bolivia, the Indians have 
remained faithful to their anclent social structures. The 
ayllu, or small groups of famlilles united by a common 
origin, soil and creed, which formed the multiple cells 
of the Empire of the Incas, have resisted all efforts to 
disperse them. They became the nucle! of the “commu- 
nidades,” which succeeded in regaining a legal status 
and around which the life of the Indlans was reorganized. 
Although, today, the “communities” no longer carry 
out an annual distribution of collectlvely-owned lands, 
they continue to exploit common land and refuse to sur- 
render any property belonging to the community. Mutual 
assistance between families is still a strict obligation; 
each must help in tasks performed for the common good 
and must take part in religlous rites honouring the pro- 
tectlve Saints who replaced the pagan gods. They defend 
the frontiers of their community as flercely as they did 
in the old days, when the Incas had not yet incorporated 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
 
DANCING MASKS are frequently ceremonial trappings 
which long ante-date the Indians conversion to Christianity. 17 
The many festivals of the Catholic liturgy have served as 
a pretext for rich and varied forms of religious expression.

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18 


### 63476: The Incas of today

INCAS OF TODAY (Cont'd) 
Furopeanized clothing 
& centuries-old fabrics 
them in a single state. Village patriotism is still ardent. 
As in the past, it finds expression in a rivalry which 
should be turned to good account. 
Some of the “communidades” have taken the initiative 
of modernizing themselves, but without renouncing thelr 
old system of organization. Many of them have founded 
extremely prosperous agricultural co-operatives and large 
amounts of communal money are deposited in banks. 
This is a very modern aspect of the old community spirit 
of the ayllu of four centuries ago. 
On the other hand, economic life has greatly changed 
since the Conquest. To the flocks of llamas and alpacas 
which the Indians put to graze on the puna, or high pla- 
teaux, sheep have been added and most families own a 
bull or a cow, and often mules or donkeys. 
Nowadays cheese has become a basic food item whereas 
formerly the Indians knew nothing of milk products. 
Maize and potatoes are still staple foods, but barley, corn 
and beans are now grown wherever the climate allows. 
O: the mountain slopes, as in the days of the 
Incas, the Indians are still to be seen breaking 
up the soil with the faclia, a metal-pointed staff. Deep 
in the valleys, however, the old Roman swing-plough, 
drawn by oxen is followed by women whose task is to 
break up the clods of earth with stone mallets. Although 
the plough may be Spanish, the festival atmosphere at 
seed-time with the songs and dances of the labourers, is 
essentially Indian. 
Travellers tend to imagine that the Indians of today, in 
their picturesque costumes, outwardly resemble their 
ancestors. In fact, this is not true at all. The native 
costume has changed considerably since the Sixteenth 
century. In appearance, a present-day Indian woman 
would only be distinguishable from a Spanish peasant by 
the wide, brightly-coloured belt round her walst and the 
shawl covering her shoulders, held in place by a silver pin 
on the breast. 
As for the men’s costume, it Is entirely Europeanized: 
trousers. waistcoat, jacket and felt hat. The woollen 
bonnet and the poncho, which are generally considered 
to be Indian survivals, were unknown before the Colonial 
period. However, as In the days of the Incas, the women, 
whether seated or walking, never stop their spinning. 
Their spindle has not changed: it is a wooden stick, 
weighted by an earthenware spindle whorl. The loom 
has not altered, either, with the passing of time; it always 
consists of two wooden bars, one of which is attached to 
the weaver’s waist, and the threads of the warp are 
stretched between them. 
The designs of the woven fabrics of today recall those 
embellishing the materials found in tombs. When I 
was in the Indian village of Chipay, the Indians were 
astonished that I was collecting old and very dirty 
fabrics, not realizing that the specimens they were exa- 
mining, and which they thought I had bought from one 
of them, had actually come from prehistoric tombs. 
Nevertheless, even in a sphere where traditions dle hard, 
Spain has left its mark. One of the favourite designs 
with which the Indians decorate their tissues is none 
other than a stylized version of the two-headed eagle of 
the Hapsburgs. 
Despite the merciless suppression of idols and idolaters 
by the Spanish missionaries, the Indians, outwardly good 
Catholics, have by no means abandoned their prayers 
and sacrifices to the ancient Andean deities. These are 
still worshipped on the mountain peaks, where strange 
structures suggest equally strange rites. On the hill- 
tops, the motorist passes cairns, each surmounted by a 
cross, to which the Indians, seeking an escape from 
weariness and a means of placating the local spirits, make 
CONT'D ON PAGE 2f 
 
’ : é 1 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63476: The Incas of today

  
TB I 
b - NT 
2S ed 
» w 
-lvil » “5 
oT — 
wt In am 
Ce 
= 
- 
A 
- 
ar ha 
a 
~ ’ 4 " E — 
nl Ll ” 
SN L ” = , — in 
» » = » TS 4 . c - 
— Ls : $d 
‘a . £6 ~ - - PT 2 > 
—- BLEAK. ROAD TO “TOWN ~ Against a pan drama of eroded ; 
"pinnacles, gffock’ these Indian women lead their Mules and’ un 
~ sheep to a market own high on! the Bolivian plateau La Paz. o 
is . Ye NE ‘3 a — Aimasy, Paris 
ad 
»- ar JB at a =e | 
. ’ ge : - «=F . a a 
- Ad " eC LAs > : io ~~ “3 rie Pe 
- - EE LT -~ -. « Cy bg 
ae ~~ - - m — -, wt - - - . - i : - vg - —. ~ . 
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63476: The Incas of today

     
      
 bi 
bs 
 
§
 
ho
n 
w
e
 
© H. Reichlen 
Photos © Pierre Verger 
MIGHTY RAMPARTS of fortress 
near Cuzco in the Peruvian Andes 
(above left) proclaim architectural 
and building skill of the ancient Incas. 
Using manpower on a vast scale, the 
Incas raised their walls and buildings 
with stones of prodigious size weighing 
many tons. No mortar or other bind- 
ing material was used and such was 
the Incas’ skill in cutting and fitting 
the blocks together that even today 
a knife blade will not slide between 
the joints. (Above right), mountain- 
girt ruins of another Inca city, Macchu 
Picchu, which remained unknown to 
the outside world until 1911. Since 
then, rich archaeological discoveries 
have produced a revealing picture of 
the remarkable civilization whose 
empire spread over much of western 
South America. Many present-day 
Indians in Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru 
(like those on left, wearing diversi- 
fied headgear and ponchos) are des- 
cended from the Incas. In moving 
photo (right) a Peruvian Indian father 
greets his daughter. Woollen garments 
are woven in ancient Inca designs, 
but man’s hat is of Spanish origin.  

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

\¢ 5 
vr - 
Ya f eA 
. 
wv 
XG 
“ry ] 
“ 
A Y » 
a 
1 
y 
LA 
A 
NM 
Nr   
      “lm 
Wy N 
. » 
ayy " ¥. 


### 63476: The Incas of today

INCAS OF TODAY (Cont'd) 
On the high plateaux 
of the Cordillera 
ritual offerings of stones or quids of coca. Among the 
deities of the Inca Panthéon, only the Earth-Mother, the 
Pacha-Mama, and the Lightning-God have kept all their 
prestige. The Indian cherished the Pacha-Mama above 
all supernatural beings, and in the prayers which he 
addresses to her, he identifies her with the Virgin, calling 
her “Santa Maria Pacha-Mama.” 
There 1s no church or chapel so poor as to lack a 
statuette of Santiago (Saint James), the warrtor saint, 
patron of Spain and the Conquistadors. Portrayed as a 
seventeenth-century knight, in cape and feathered hat, 
he brandishes his sword and crushes the devil under his 
horse's hooves. For the Indians, Santiago is the lord of 
lghtning—Apu-tlliampu. It is in his honour that llamas 
are sacrificed at places struck by lightning. Iluman 
beings who are struck by lghining and survive are, 
morcover, called “sons of Saint James,” and are invested 
with mystical powers which turn them {nto maglelans and 
sorcerers. 
| N addition to these great deities, the Indians 
continue to worship countless spirits, dwelling 
in the mountains, rivers, pools and lakes. Iouses are 
placed under the protection of a spirit which takes the 
form of a wild cat or a hawk, and recelves blood sacrifices. 
The religion of the Incas does not hide its face in 
shame in remote valleys or the hamlets of the high plat- 
caux. It stalks boldly abroad in the large towns of the 
interior. Thus, one sees blackish stains on the walls 
of modern houses In the capital of Bolivia: traces of 
blood-offerlngs made to the local god and to the Pacha- 
Mama. Similarly, at the entrance to the towns, quids of 
coca are stuck to the walls of the outlying houses; these 
are proplitiatory offerings made by the Indians to the gods 
worshipped by ancestors before they came to llve among 
the white men. 
The many festivals of the Catholic liturgy have served 
as a pretext for rich and varled forms of religlous express- 
fon. The date of the popular festivals which corres- 
pond to those of the great ceremonies of the Inca Empire 
have given secondary festivals primary importance. In 
this way, Corpus Christ! has replaced the inti-raymi, the 
great festival of the Sun-God. The Feast of the Invention 
of the Holy Cross (May 3), which coincides with the agri- 
cultural celebrations once held at the beginning of the 
harvest, Is a pretext for dancing and rejolecings which the 
nature of the feast itself does not justify. The costumes 
of the religious brotherhoods for the cult of the saints 
are often simply survivals of the trappings worn by the 
dancers of the pagan age. 
The Indians have not forgotten thelr ancient sovereigns. 
They speak of a mysterious personage called Inca-ri, who 
founded Cuzco and was murdered by a rival. “lis head,” 
they say, “was buried at Lima. For some years past, it 
has been growing a new hody, and soon Inca-rt will come 
back and bring good fortune to the Indians.” It is in 
this nalve and mythological way that the Indlans express 
thelr obscure hope of sceing better days. 
Whilst everywhere clse in South America the Indian 
tribes are doomed to extinction or will merge with the 
remainder of the population, there is still, in what was 
once the Empire of the Incas, in Ecuador, Peru and Boli- 
via, a vital element which must be reckoned with. In 
some of these countries it represents over half the 
population. These people, as they become more educated, 
look to their glorious past and discover in it grounds for 
their confidence in the future. 
ALFRED METRAUX, noted anthropologist, is in charge of 
“Human Rights” in the Department of Social Sciences of 
Unesco. Iis newest book, Les Incas (Editions du Seuil, Paris) 
will be published this spring. Ile is a frequent contributor to 
Tie Uxesco COURIER. 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 
  
M == scientific discoveries, the appearance 
of new nations on the world political stage 
and the Internationalizing of economic or social problems 
—all these have made a radical impact on school curricula 
which are becoming progressively more cumbersome and 
indigestible. 
Faced with the painful necessity of cramming more and 
more knowledge into young heads, educators have been 
resorting to mew pedagogical methods. Some of these 
“new” techniques, many people will be surprised to learn, 
were actually used centuries ago—the homework of the 
children of the French royal family was printed long 
before the virtues of a school printing press were recog- 
nized. Others, however, are quite original and one of 
these 1s the method used by a French educator, Mrs. P. 
Poinsart-Chasson, to teach her pupils a wide range of 
subjects. 
Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson, who studied under Jiri Trnka 
and Hermina Tyrlova (two famed Czech puppet masters) 
is now an official of the French Ministry of Public Health. 
But she has always been an artlst and an educator by 
vocation and she became a convinced believer of “active” 
methods of teaching long ago. Determined to make 
lessons attractive, she had the idea that dolls, so beloved 
by little girls the world over, might serve as friendly links 
between children and school subjects like history, geo- 
graphy, hygiene, civics and others. 
One fine morning (mornings are always fine in fairy 
tales and this story has some overtones of fairy enchant- 
ment about it) she arrived at St. Anne’s school in Mar- 
seilles, to try out her idea, with the approval of the 
school’s headmistress. 
She took a ping-pong ball from her bag and, with a 
few strokes of a brush, transformed it into a little round 
face similar to those of Trnka's marionettes. Then, 
continuing her demonstration, she showed wide-eyed 
little girls that this face could wear a number of expres- 


### 63504: Ping-pong dolls go to school

PING-PON 
GO TO SC 
sions. In turn, the ping-pong ball became gay, sad, 
amazed, frightened and hilarious. ’ 
A few fragments of rabbit skin glued in the right places 
lent red hair or black mustaches to these faces. A sponge, 
nipped in by a stout thread in its middle, produced a 
reasonable image of a slim-waisted young lady. The same 
sponge, pinched slightly in the back was then transformed 
into a portly gentleman. After that, wire could be used 
to connect heads to bodies. Soon, under the guidance of 
Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson, pupils became skillful enough to 
create expressions themselves and to concoct dolls that 
were gay or melancholic. 
Then Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson reached the second stage 
of her experiment. She read to her pupils a Chinese story, 
“The Wise Man's Sigh” and suggested that they might 
illustrate it by building scenery and reproducing its 
characters. The girls enthusiastically began to work. 
But soon they realized that they had to know how the 
Chinese dressed, what food they ate, where this food 
came from, what sort of houses they lived in, how they 
decorated these houses, how they lived and so forth. 
Soon, an intensive hunt for books, magazines and 
newspaper articles about China had begun. Pupils 
brought Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson a tremendous variety of 
documents and materials for making costumes and 
scenery. Some girls became so enthusiastic about their 
research that, they used spending money to buy art books 
instead of sweets. 
Then, in October 19, 1958, their work was done and the 
dolls made their bow at the Regional Educational Docu- 
mentation Centre in Marseilles. This exhibition was so 
successful that the French television network made a 
documentary film about it (the film was half-animated) 
which was shown on TV screens in France. It is easy 
to imagine the pride of its authors, and also the enthu- 
siasm with which twenty-one little French girls between 
twelve and fourteen started to work on a second film, this 
one aimed at fighting alcoholism and entitled “Dolls Go 
to School in Good Health.” 
A new teaching method was born. Like many others, 
its first aim is to arouse the interest of pupils, but what 
really distinguishes it is the immediate appeal it makes 
to the ever-awake imagination of children. Of course, 
many educators in France and elsewhere had already 
accepted the smiling presence of dolls on hitherto dark 
and unattractive classroom desks. Implicitly, then, they 
have given official recognition to dreams, accepting the 
existence of that irrational and marvellous world which 
awakens a child's creative powers fo a point few adults 
suspect.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 63504: Ping-pong dolls go to school

G DOLLS 
HOOL 
by 
Marie M. Rabecq-Maillard 
Curator, Museum of the History of Education 
National Institute of Pedagogy, Paris 
At the National Pedagogical Institute in Parls, for 
example, exhibitions had already been held on the theme 
of Christmas, in which kindergarten children gave free 
rein to their imagination. One exhibit in which they 
reconstructed the picturesque Rue Mouffetard, a busy 
shopping centre on the Left Bank In Paris, with its old 
houses and shops and its bustling crowds, revealed remark- 
able artistic talents which amazed grown-ups and won 
the admiration of leading French poets. 
Both In Paris and in Marseilles, children had created 
dolls and exhibited marionettes. But, behind the remark- 
able work of the Ilittle kindergarten youngsters, the 
shadowy impression of the baton and the inspiration of 
an orchestra leader could still be felt. The children had 
remained in their own little universe—a delightful one too. 
Mrs. Polnsart-Chasson, however, had gone further by 
enabling children to participate In an adult world and by 
ralsing them to a higher level while stil allowing them 
to express themselves freely. 
Nor had anyone else in France thought of using manual 
work to approach ‘each subject on the curriculum. Civics 
and dry and theoretical cthics became alive. Mrs. Poln- 
sart-Chasson's puplls produced a short film on anti- 
alcoholism and succeeded in making adults think—and 
perhaps In convincing them—by such hard-hitting slogans 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
DRESSMAKERS AT WORK: Four young girls put the finishing touches on the clothes designed for a collection 
of their colourful dolls which help to illustrate lessons in history and geography in a way not found in textbooks. 
  
  
 
Al
l 
ph
ot
os
 
co
ur
te
sy
 
P.
 
P
o
i
n
t
a
r
t
-
C
r
a
s
s
e
n
 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63504: Ping-pong dolls go to school

24 
PING-PONG DOLLS (Cont'd) 
Lessons come alive 
with Lilliputian ‘teachers’ 
as: “Little glasses of wine grow up into big glasses of 
tears.” 
You really have to know your history and geography if 
you want to dress Chinese characters, and illustrate thelr 
homes, thelr ways of life and their customs. Sewing, 
drawing, modelling, embroidery and sculpture—often 
tedious for children who feel no aptitude for them— 
became fascinating because they were part of the flim 
production. 
Besides, those few hours devoted each week to manual 
work gave a child a chance to express a hidden persona- 
lity, rich in all kinds of possibilities but often suffocated 
by timidity or environment. The character chosen by a 
child is already quite revealing. The face a child gives 
to a doll often resembles its own face. In Mrs Polnsart- 
Chasson’s method, there are opportunities for self- 
expression which have enabled real talents to be 
recognized. 
Thanks to this method, too, a child comes into contact 
with such techniques as sound-recording or stage direction 
which may not be “in the school programme”, but which 
certainly awaken Interest because they are very much 
in the news. This means that education can shed its 
abstract and bookish nature. The child plunges Into a 
real world apparently reserved to adults—and, therefore, 
all the more attractive to a young mind. 
At the same time, working as a team develops a sense 
of community living. Hunting for materials and evaluat- 
ing them sharpen a taste for research and a critical sense: 
here, the search Is for precise, accurate information, 
Then, too, there 1s that development of taste, Ingenuity 
and inventivemess which are the obvious offshoots of the 
method used by Mrs. Polnsart-Chasson. No doubt others 
before her have proved the value of focussing children’s 
interest. Ever since St. Jerome, educators have sald that 
teaching should be attractive. While she deserves credit 
for bringing dolls into schools and, with the dolls, a great 
part of the realm of childhood with Its marvels and its 
colourful and charming visions, she struck out in a new 
direction by enabling her pupils to participate in the very 
conception of demonstrations which, up until now, have 
often been too abstract. 
When will we have an international exhibition to bring 
together all the world’s dolls in a children’s dance of 
friendship? 
FULL RANGE OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS 
on pingpeng dolls was captured by a young girl 
of twelve who painted this set shown below. 
Calm Amused 
 
  
  
Hurt

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63504: Ping-pong dolls go to school

  
A PING PONG BALL attached to a wire (above) becomes the head of doll with a little paint and rabbit fur (right). Above left, the indispensable materials—wire, pliers, scissors, glue—and the dolls them. selves in various stages of development. Left, a young boy concentrates attentively on creating a doll. 
       
A CHINESE FAIRY TALE will incorporate these two dolls, above left. To faithfully copy costumes, halrdos and 
facial expressions, the children had to read and study and think about Chinese customs, costumes, and life. The, 
finished product shows their research time was well-spent. At right, dolls help to teach a history fesson. This 
scene from ancient Gaul shows a sod hut and a Gaul verifying the vertical lines of the home he has built, 
All photes courtesy P, Poirsart-Chasson 
Contemptuous Disgusted Afraid Admiring Doubtful 
    25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63506: Australia's giant eye on outer space

AUSTRALIA'S 
GIANT EYE ON 
OUTER SPACE 
by Selwyn Speight 
All photographs Australian 
News and Information Bureau 
   
TINIEST CREVICES in the dish structure 
of Australia’s giant radio telescope were 
sprayed with aluminium paint to stop rust 
forming which interferes with reception. 
    
       HIGH AS AN I18-STOREY 
BUILDING and 210 feet 
= 
ARID, across its parabolic dish, the \ 
telescope here swung into a Lt 
horizontal position makes a par 3 3 LS A : 
space-age umbrella for a hha we 4 . 
grazier and his flock of sheep. R5 bop geil int) An 0d 
Ba ae NY par NE 23 
Wea ESB SAE SE 7% eX - A poe radio “eye” designed to look ten 
I £0 5 J times as far into the universe as has ever SL A 1 Rh" SE 
been possible before, has now come into operation in 
south-eastern Australia thus opening a new chapter in 
the exploration of outer space. A huge radio-telescope, 
of the steerable “dish” type, it is the most efficient and 
versatile instrument of its kind in existence, able to scan 
vast expanses of the cosmos. 
The instrument, a glittering giant, stands on the plain 
near the town of Parkes, about 200 miles west of Sydney. 
The structure overall is as high as an 18-storey building, 
and its movable saucer-shaped aerial system which forms 
its effective “eye” measures 210 feet across. 
The new telescope has been built for the Australian 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (C.S.I.R.0.) at a cost of about £800,000 (half 
of which has been provided by the Rockefeller Foundation, 
the Carnegie Foundation and private donors in Australia). 
There is only one other comparable instrument in 
existence: the big radio telescope at the Jodrell Bank 
Experimental Station of Manchester University, in 
England. The English instrument is slightly larger—250 
feet across the dish—but the Australian one, according to 
its design specifications, will be more precise and powerful. 
Although its position on the earth’s surface enables it to 
examine part of the northern sky, its main task will be 
to search the southern heavens. Together, the two great 
radio-telescopes open up a new era of scientific investi-  

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63506: Australia's giant eye on outer space

- “ 
~ AM 7 5.3 
=»  Bt oF i sk da 
WAN ee 
gation and research into the structure of the universe. 
In the exploration now going on within the solar system, 
the new Australian radio-telescope can play a significant 
part (as the English one already has). If an “instrument 
probe” is sent to land on the moon, and if the device 
reports back by radio, the Parkes instrument almost 
certainly will be better, able than any other to pick up 
these weak signals. If, during the next few years, similar 
probes are sent to Venus or Mars, or to any other planet, 
the best information may well come through Parkes. 
However, this is not the principal task for which the 
C.S.LR.O. instrument was conceived and designed. Its 
main purpose is simply to look further and more clearly 
into the universe than has ever before been possible. 
The essential role of a radio telescope is to detect the 
strength and source of radio waves which reach the earth 
from outer space. Some idea of the scale over which the 
instrument has to work—the distances and times—can be 
grasped from the following information given by Dr, E.G. 
Bowen, chief of the Radio-Physics Division of C.S.I.R.O., 
and one of the world authorities in his fleld: he was a 
member of the British team which developed radar in 
World War II. 
A radio wave, Dr. Bowen explained, goes round the 
world seven times in a second. It would take eight 
minutes to reach the sun; 100,000 years to go across our 
local galactic system; and more than a million years to 
reach the nearest external galaxy. It would take up to 
Vo 4] 2, y A = vit 
v 3 v ff! : .- , 
hh wl 4 bai At, LAIN 
9,000 million years to reach some of the distant radio stars 
we are watching. 
To call the telescope a radlo eye is not straining a 
metaphor. The Instrument “sees” a band of waves in the 
electro-magnetic spectrum. 
To be efficient, to “see” the picture clearly and in sharp 
focus, the radio eyes must not only be very precise, but 
also very big, the bigger the better, within practical limits, 
and the Australlan instrument is getting near the limit 
with existing structural materials and techniques. The 
instruments are most useful when they can look in any 
desired direction, just as human eyes do. 
The design of the C.S.L.R.O. glant has thus been a major 
enginecring problem. The great steerable ‘“‘dish” which 
forms the effective eye must be able to watch and keep 
watching automatically whatever Is under observation— 
a galaxy, the sun, the planets, the moon, or a man In 
space. To do this, {t must move very smoothly and 
exactly, compensating automatically for the spinning of 
the earth on its own axis and for the earth’s orbit round 
the sun, and compensating also for the movements of the 
object being watched. It must also be able to scan 
continuously a given portion of the sky, noting anything 
of interest. 
The big dish must be strong enough to withstand the 
flercest gales, and stiff enough to keep an almost perfect 
parabolic shape. It must shed rain without trouble and 
withstand the corrosive effects of the weather. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 63506: Australia's giant eye on outer space

GIANT EYE (Cont'd) 
Probing the secrets 
of the universe 
Another problem faced by the engineers and 
manufacturers—a London firm and a German factory in 
Augsburg—was to control the direction of the big dish very 
precisely. The solution adopted was to place a small 
master control device at the centre of motion of the whole 
telescope. The small master can be “aimed” at any one 
‘part of the sky or made to track any celestial object with 
a. high order of accuracy; and the big dish Is a “slave” 
ingeniously linked to it and controlled by it. 
The radio signals collected by the dish are reflected on 
to one point, a small receiving aerial, at the focus of the 
dish, and then amplified by electronic means so that they 
may be examined. To avoid losses in transmitting these 
faint signals, a special preliminary amplifier has been 
placed at the focus in a cabin supported high above the 
dish by three tubular steel legs. 
This posed a physical problem for the designers: how 
to give easy access to the aerial cabin from the ground. 
The answer was not only ladders, but a lift big enough for 
one man: it will work inside one of the tripod legs. But 
the lift itself posed problems: most lifts have simply to 
run up and down; this one has to run in almost any 
position. 
The telescope, which stands in central New South Wales, 
on a bare and level plain in the Goobang Valley, about 
15 miles from Parkes, is to be only one component in the 
whole complex of radio astronomical devices planned for 
the area. The C.S.ILR.O. has chosen a site which it hopes 
will become, for several decades, the chief centre for this 
kind of work in the southern hemisphere. 
The area near Parkes had some obvious advantages. It 
was comparatively free from radio interference (as 
hampering to radio astronomers as a city’s bright lights 
are to optical astronomers) and it had few weather 
eX remes (severe weather variations can also have serious 
effects). 
Here, eventually, will be a big range of radio-physical 
instruments intended for the study of the heavens, with 
ancillary equipment, and installations of many kinds— 
workshops, living quarters for the permanent staff, a 
small airfield (a landing strip is already in operation). 
A second and smaller radio telescope (60 feet across the 
dish), which can move over miles of rail track, will work 
with the big one. 
The fact that Britain and Australia have taken the 
lead in radio-astronomy is, in Dr. Bowen’s opinion, the 
result of radar experience and training during the war. 
“The Russians and the American,” he said, “have put a 
great deal of effort into nuclear research, into research 
into rockets and putting vehicles into space.” Neither of 
these two countries possesses the most efficient equipment 
for picking up signals for the rockets they are using in 
space probes. Thus the collaboration of all concerned, 
thanks to achievements which complement each other, will 
remain an essential element for progress in the explora- 
tion of space. 
Australia’s radio-telescope is the only one working in 
the Southern Hemisphere. In the Northern Hemisphere, 
other radio-telescopes are due to come into operation, 
like the one at Nancay in France whose first stage of 
construction has now been completed. These new instru- 
ments are being designed to carry out specialized tasks. 
Questioned about the problems which the new radio- 
telescope may help to solve, Dr. Bowen had this to say: 
“We don’t know whether the universe is bounded or 
whether it reaches to infinity in every direction; whether 
it has a beginning and will have an end, or whether it has 
a perpetual existence; whether there are intelligent beings 
on other planets... There are any number of theories and 
hypotheses about these things but very little evidence of 
a factual kind. These are the ultimate problems we are 
trying to solve... We hope that with the giant radio- 
telescopes—ours and others—we’ll get some way towards 
the answer.” 
HUGE DISH of radio-telescope is three-quarters of an acre in size and able to receive radio waves from the outer- 
most fringes of the universe, 5,000 million light years away. The “dish” rests on a rotating turret supported by 
a massive concrete tower and can be pointed at any area of sky, Diagram, right, shows parts of the telescope. 
jorbo y RE SW 
I ah Eada fh | i 
ame, wt oo al ay 
~ ix o RES x3 A 
: Fore EOTR0n : 
MT ara 
~ Height, 186 ft. 6 in. 
v “a. above ground level 
very short wave lengt hd jgrount Jey ; 
= == 
e 
/ 2 Brn fc 
  
Te Cy ar 

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 63508: Little-known masterpieces of Bulgarian mediaeval art

LITTLE-KNOWN MASTERPIECES 
OF BULGARIAN MEDIAEVAL ART 
  
by 
Assene Vassilev 
The religious frescoes executed 
in Bulgaria from the 12th to the 
15th Centuries to decorate small 
chapels or country monasteries 
have survived although secular 
painting from the same period, 
whose existence is mentioned by 
contemporary chroniclers, has 
unfortunately vanished with 
time. Today, a * Unesco Art 
Album " has given us an oppor- 
tunity to judge these rare marvels 
and to appreciate the evolution 
in all its subtle turnings, o 
an art form strongly marked by 
Byzantine influences but still 
expressing its own originality. 
  
Striking mosaic figure of St. Theo- 
dor now in the Preslay Museum. 
owARD the end of the 7th century, the Proto- 
Bulgarians, coming from the East, entered the 
Balkan peninsula and founded their nation between the 
Danube and the Balkan mountains. The first Bulgarian 
empire encompassed all the Slavic tribes living In the 
region. From then on, a new culture was superimposed 
upon old traditions inherited from the Thracians, the 
Greeks and the Romans. The Proto-Bulgarians were 
remarkable goldsmiths and skilled sculptors. As for the 
local Slavs, their mastery of decorative themes—textiles, 
embroideries or wood-carvings—was to exert a deter- 
mining influence upon Bulgarian art itself. 
The first Bulgarian kingdom preceded the Carolingian 
dynasty whose empire later spread to the frontlers of 
Bulgaria. 
Monuments of the culture created between 631 and 1081 
(the date of the Byzantine conquest of Bulgaria) were 
destroyed during subsequent centuries, particularly during 
the period of Turkish domination. Nevertheless, a large 
number of objects, unearthed during the past 100 years, 
point to the great achievements of the Bulgarians, 
   
Official Bulgarian photo 
wnether in architecture or ceramics. In addition, des- 
criptions by contemporary writers give us an idea of the 
Bulgarian capital and {ts cultural apogee during the 
Upper Middle Ages. 
From documents, we learn that, as early as the 9th 
century, the palace at Pliska, the first Bulgarian capital, 
was decorated with frescoes. Later, the capital was 
moved to Preslay and, according to contemporary ac- 
counts, the splendour of thls city, which existed until 
the end of the 10th century, dazzled all foreigners. Build- 
Ings were decorated with carved stone and painted wood- 
work. Palaces with thelr vari-coloured marble were 
incomparably beautiful. 
Virtually nothing remains of the works of art of this 
era—palaces, churches, frescoes and wooden icons— 
because Preslav was destroyed and burned in 967. At the 
Patellna monastery, painted enamelled tiles dating back 
to the 10th century have been found with the image of St. 
Theodor. A large number of kilns and fragments of 
ornamental tlles bearing traces of human faces lead us 
to believe that Bulgarian painting was already highly 
CONT'D ON PAGE 31 
 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63508: Little-known masterpieces of Bulgarian mediaeval art

  
  
 
   
   
       a . 
Eh 
THE NATIVI 
    
TY OF THE VI IN. 
from the Monastery of Kremikovts. As 2 
RG A 15th century frieze 
composition it is typical of the Bulgarian 14th century tradition; it reveals a more realistic, popular style: 
the earrings and hair styles are those worn by the women of 15th century Bulgaria and the distaff with 
ly by Bulgarian peasant women. 
which the little 
ctly the same as that used until recent 
girl is spinning is exa 
 
RIEL (left) detail from 
ARCHANGEL 
GAB 
“The Annunciation”. titled 
THE 
a mural at Boyana en 
ROM JUDAS’ 
Zemen (1350). T 
asting strong 
DETAIL F 
monastery of 
folklore influence, contr 
: 
T
o
 
pi
nt
 
N
e
,
 
r
s
 
A
O
 
g 
” 
y
y
 
T
e
 
b
a
 
4 
% 
- 
a 
a
i
d
 
: 
‘“ 
AL. 
3 
Th
 
a
 
A 
be 
Te
 
TP
E 
| 
e
o
 
) 
) 
: 
—
 
C0 
2 
" 
; 
, 
SR 
Ha
 
v 
o
e
,
 
a 
. 
3
 
= 
i 
R
N
R
 
D
R
 
7
5
5
g
 
wv. 
My
 
E]
 
i 
% 
" 
a,
 
%
 
=
 
p
o
 
i 
A 
> 
. 
y 
% 
  
po
 
L
s
 
Ws 
a
 
d
i
 
y 
% 
ty
 
- 
,
 
30 
 
BETRAYAL, from the 
his work shows a strong 
ly with earlier works. 
     

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63508: Little-known masterpieces of Bulgarian mediaeval art

   
  
   
  
        
  
Mad. 2 : a hat * " 29 
hey ’ : po v R . A 
t- 0 hs : fs reer ; - RY. ] a Te 
ol ”» / 
i! oh po & . of » 
8 Ln LL     
iL 
pT8y -— a, 
" 4 fm “4h 
The frescoes of Boyana, executed in 1259 in Bulgaria, occupy a special place in 13th century European painting 
as examples of developed art of portrait painting. Above, Princess Dessislava, who, with her husband, Prince Sabas- 
tokrator Kaloyan, founded the Boyana church. Below, the emaciated face of Saint Ephraim, monk and ascetic, 
Second only 
to Byzantium 
Blue an 
developed. However, it is impossible to retrace its various 
stages during the period of the first empire. 
At the beginning of the 11th century, Bulgaria came 
under Byzantine domination. She recovered her inde- 
pendance only in 1187. Though the influence of Byzantine 
art was felt more strongly, Bulgarian artists continued 
to follow their 10th century traditions. Later the casting- 
off of a foreign yoke gave national Bulgarian art a strong 
stimulus. Tirnovo, the capital of the second empire, 
became the second-ranking cultural centre of the Balkans 
behind Constantinople. Its art schools contributed to the 
development of the nation’s art. Thanks to Bulgarian 
painting of this period, we have a more precise grasp of 
religious painting in Byzantium. Frescoes from the 13th 
and 14th centuries surpass the general level of Byzantine 
art. It must also be noted that they offer some purely 
national traits. 
  
Despite barbaric devastation during the Ottoman J 
conquest, some paintings escaped destruction. Among " 
them were the justly celebrated frescoes of the church at 5 
    
      
Boyana; and frescoes from the chapel at Berende, the 4 PW ed 3 ary 
rock chapels of Ivanovo and the church at Zemen. All ~R oe oo 3 
dating from the second Bulgarian empire (1187-1396), Wa eT 
All photos © Unesco, Album : Bulgaria, Mediaeval Wall Paintings 
IWR nt 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63508: Little-known masterpieces of Bulgarian mediaeval art

BULGARIAN ART (Cont'd) 
Avant-garde painters 
of the 13th century 
they are among the masterpleces of medieval art in the 
Balkans. 
The Boyana frescoes are remarkable because of the 
innovations which a Bulgarian artist brought here to 
Byzantine art. Their style enables us to state that they 
preceded the new concepts of the first period of the 
Italian Renalssance. The master artist of Boyana, 
working in the 13th century, broke away from the tradi- 
tions of painting in his time to create remarkable works 
whose execution was technically perfect. Various images 
of Christ, the angel in the “Annunclation,” the “Descent 
into Hell,” the “Last Supper,” the “Crucifixion,” *Christ 
Among the Doctors,” the “Ascension” and several other 
compositions, including images of St. Euples, St. Eustrate, 
St. Damien, St. Ephraim and varlous saintly warriors and 
deacons are painted so realistically and so sensitively that 
they cannot be compared to anything executed during 
this era. National elements, borrowed from daily 
Bulgarian life, were used to bring out religious subjects. 
Here are also found four portraits: Kaloyan, the local 
feudal lord; Dessislava, his wife; King Constantine and 
Queen Irene. The anonymous artist, trained in some 
studio at Tirnovo, succeeded remarkably in expressing 
the individual characteristics, physical as well as spiritual, 
of his subjects. These portraits stand as true master- 
pleces not only of art in the Balkans but of European 
art In the 13th century. 
Foucomno the Boyana frescoes (1259), Bulga- 
rian painting continued to develop for 150 
years until the conquest of Bulgaria by the Turks in 1396. 
Some very interesting frescoes from the 13th and 14th 
centuries have been preserved in several rock chapels near 
Ivanovo on the banks of the Russenski-Lom, one of the 
branches of the Danube in eastern Bulgaria. The compo- 
sition of these scenes is remarkable and their colours, in 
which gilded ochre predominates, have a charm of their 
own. Though the artlst followed Byzantine style, his 
original talent and his new conception of painting are 
revealed in his treatment of forms and in his achievement 
of a third dimension through gradual shading of colours, 
as well as in his expression of subtle psychological mean- 
Ings. Among various compositions whose subjects were 
taken from the life of Christ, we should mention “Judas 
Throwing the Thirty Pieces of Silver,” “Players Mocking 
Christ” (a very rare subject in religious iconography), the 
“Kiss of Judas,” and “Christ Before Ann and Caiaphas.” 
Also worth noting are two scenes from the life of St. John 
the Baptist—the judgement and the beheading. 
Frescoes In the Zemen monastery in the valley of the 
Struma also date back to this same period, the 14th 
century. Here, all the walls of the church were decorated 
by frescoes. The forms of bodies and faces were brought 
out by outlines and the artist did not attempt to stress 
a third dimension. Light, pleasant colours and well- 
executed details make this style particularly attractive. 
Certain scenes are unknown in iconography—for example, 
the forging of the nails used in the Crucifixion. Gripping 
portraits are to be found of the donors; Deyan, a local 
lord, and his wife Doya. They have not been stylized in 
the same manner as the religious compositions and 
darker colours were used. 
With the Renaissance, the decline of the mystical and 
religious ldeals of the Middle Ages became marked, but 
nothing was to alter the basic characteristics of Bulgarian 
painting—although architecture evolved considerably 
during the period of Turkish domination. Up to the 18th 
ol 
X
i
 
+ 
P
a
 
of 
H 
+ 
’ 
i 
. 
<3 
” 2] 
f > 
: 
| 
4 
qo 
1 
v
3
 
b
l
e
 
|, 
S
e
 
L
T
 
T
T
T
 
- 
v 
a
 
.  
© Unesco, Album : Bulgaria Mediaeval Wall Paintings. 
century, that strange balance between skilled composition The deacon Lawrence. One of a row of saints 
and realistic detall achieved by palnters during the painted at the foot of the walls of the Boyana 
second empire continued to guide Bulgarian artists. Church, set beneath scenes of the Life of Christ. 
v3] UNESCO WORLD ART SERIES ALBUM, ‘* BULGARIA : MEDIAEVAL WALL PAINTINGS”, (NEW YORK 
GRAPHIC SOCIETY, 95 EAST PUTNAM AVENUE, GREENWICH, CONN., U.S.A.) PRICE $18.00. 

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

WHAT ABOUT THE WHALE? 
 
Sir, 
In THE Unesco Courier I read how 
many valuable and interesting species 
of birds and other forms of wild life 
have become extinct through the fault 
of man, and that measures have now 
been undertaken to protect wild life 
on a world scale. I should like to 
know how at a time when Norway, 
a country poor in natural resources, is 
greatly reducing her whaling industry, 
other countries that are rich in natural 
resources are engaged in whaling on a 
tremendous scale which may lead to 
the extinction of some varieties of 
these mammals since they do not breed 
very rapidly and are already greatly 
reduced in number. What has world 
scientific thought to say about whaling? 
. Trokhim Korzun 
Guiva, Zhitomir Region 
Ukrainian S.S.R. 
THE H. G. WELLS SOCIETY 
Sir, 
An H. G. Wells Society has recently 
been founded, composed of persons 
interested in the life and work of this 
distinguished author, who are anxious 
to encourage a wider understanding of 
his writings and ideas. The Society 
publishes .a bi-monthly journal, “The 
Wellsian”, has local branches in Lon- 
don and Manchester, and intends to 
carry out an ambitious programme of 
study, research and dissemination of 
the works of one who made such an 
outstanding contribution to modern 
thought. 1 would be most grateful if 
any of your readers who may be inter- 
ested in the Society would kindly 
contact the undersigned, from whom 
further details can be obtained. 
J. R. Hammond 
39, Rugby Road, West Bridgford 
Nottingham, England 
CIVILIZATION REDUCED TO SIZE 
 
Sir, 
Professor Nougier’s “yardstick” 
“Homo Sapiens is Ten Minutes Old” 
(THe UNEsco CouRIER, March 1961), is 
interesting. Of more immediate con- 
cern: to those with UNESCO's ideals at 
heart is the application of this same 
“gimmick” to “Homo Sapiens’ ” own 
history. 
James Harvey Robinson, in his “The 
Mind in the Making” (Travellers Li- 
brary), compresses the history of civi- 
lization into. fifty years. * Again there 
is the long induction period—49 years 
when man was merely a wandering 
hunter. Robinson's summary of the 
last six months concludes: “Within 
the last few hours they would have 
learned to sail in the air and beneath 
the waters and have forthwith applied 
   
letters to the Editor 
their newest discoveries to the prose- 
cution of a magnificent war on the 
scale befitting their high ideals and 
new resources”. 
He was, of course, referring to the 
first world war! 
A graph showing the history of 
civilization compressed in this way 
would doubtless interest and, perhaps, 
terrify your readers! 
D. A. Spencer 
Loudwater, England 
ESPERANTISTS HELP UNESCO 
 
Sir, 
The Esperanto movement is today 
contributing greatly to UNEBSCO’s 
Major Project for the development of 
mutual appreciation of cultural values 
between Orient and Occident. The 
Universal Esperanto Association sends 
speakers to talk about their countries 
and cultures in other countries of both 
the Orient and Occident. A programme 
comprising Esperanto translations of 
25 literary works—five cach from 
Europe, Asia, Africa, North America 
and South America—is under way, 
and a work by Tagore has already 
appeared. Local groups of Esperantists 
have organized evening - meetings 
dealing with different countries’ of 
Occident and Orient (In the French 
town of Angers, last winter's pro- 
gramme covercd ]0 countries of the 
Orient). The 1961 Universal Esperanto 
Congress held in London included a 
special international cultural week on 
the theme “Orient-Occident”. Finally, 
long-established contacts by corres- 
pondence between the two world 
areas been intensified. 
G. Perra 
Lyons, France 
11 El 
4 wal; 3    
The number of letters received by The 
Unesco Courier each day (photo shows 
only one of four daily mail deliveries) 
makes it Increasingly difficult to reply to 
all of our correspondents. Please keep 
writing to us but do try to be brief! 
PLASTIC SURGERY AIDS 
VICTIMS OF LEPROSY 
 
Sir, 
I was very interested to read your 
article on “World Leprosy Day” by 
Raoul Follereau (January 1961). 1 
myself am interested in the surgical 
rehabilitation of leprosy patients and 
} should like to point out the fallacy 
of an unfortunate remark made in the 
last paragraph of the article. It says 
that “The crippled and maimed. Those 
whose faces, for example, will per- 
manantly bear the mark of the disease, 
need special homes set up in the 
form of small villages where they will 
live together, with every measure being 
taken to cuse their lot and help them 
forget the past. Though the dumage 
done to them can never be repaired, 
they remain none the less human 
beings; and society which came too 
lite to their aid, owes them its respect 
and a friendly helping hand”. 
I should like to point out that 
Dr. Puul Brand, of Vellore, has been 
reconstructing the deformed hand in 
leprosy for over fifteen years and that 
} have been doing 1econstruction of 
the face in leprosy for over three 
years. It is almost always possible to 
completely reconstruct the face 
however badly deformed the patient 
may be, 
N. H. Autia 
Bombay, India 
A TRIPLE REQUEST 
Sir, 
As a teacher, 1 want three things 
from Tue UNLsco CourlLR—more 
statistics covering world facts, e.g. 
percentage increase in production, 
population and books 1959-61; issues 
devoted entirely to one topic, e.g. 
Archacology, the [Far North; and 
better writers, or an instruction to the 
contributors not to pad their articles 
with verbiage. 
John C. de V. Roberts 
London, England 
WORLD'S BEST HOPE 
 
Sir, 
I have found THe Unrsco Courikr 
absorbing and informative but mostly 
I have found it encouraging. Being 
unable to believe or trust most of the 
international news I have seen, heard 
and read, I have read your magazine 
eagerly and hungrily. Every issue, 
whatever subject it covers, has given 
me hope that through scientists, men of 
letters and people of good will, this 
crazy, mixed-up world may yet grow 
together in peace and understanding. 
I pass my copies on to my brothers. 
I would like to think a copy or two 
was being sent to every secondary 
school and university in every land. 
Informed, educated people seem to be 
our best hope for a good world. 
Olive M. Cobban 
Ontario, Canada 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
  
From the Unesco News 
  
  
  
 
  
EXTRA TIME TO SAVE ABU SIMBEL 
HE agreement on operations to lift the temples of Abu Simbel in Egyptian Nubia 
T out of reach of the waters of the Nile once its level has been raised by the 
completion of the new Aswan High Dam need not be concluded until November 1, 
1962, instead of January 1 of this year as previously stated. This means that 
Unesco has nine more months in which to guarantee to the United Arab Republic 
international participation in the cost of the project. However, certain preliminary 
studies of the Abu Simbel project must be made before that date. 
This decision was announced by Unesco’s Executive Board during its 60th session in 
Paris last December. It was also stated that, in response to Unesco’s appeal asking 
governments to contribute sums on the scale of their participation in Unesco’s ordinary 
budget, 18 countries have indicated their willingness to contribute in some form 
or other. They are: Cyprus, Ecuador, France, Greece, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, 
Libya, Luxembourg, Monaco, The Netherlands, The Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia, 
Tunisia, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia. In addition, Qatar and the Holy See, which are 
not members of Unesco, have offered financial assistance. 
During the Executive Board session, pledges given by Morocco and Italy were also 
announced. The Italian Government has promised a contribution much larger than 
the $1,450,000 which Unesco had proposed as its share. Further, the United States 
have indicated that, aside from the sum of $4,000,000 already voted, a proposal to 
appropriate $6,000,000 to ensure the safety of the temples on Philae will de discussed 
by Congress, when work round the island begins. 
Individual contributions to save the monuments of Nubia may be sent to Unesco, 
Place Fontenoy, Paris-7Te, or to a bank in your own country, the name of which can 
be supplied by your National Commission. Cheques should be made payable to 
Unesco (Nubia Account). Donations may be made in any currency.     
BB urvEsE BOOKWORMS ARE 
GIRLS: In Burma, girls are keener readers 
than boys according to survey on reading 
interests carried out recently. Nearly 
twice as many girls as boys read a daily 
newspaper regularly, it was found, and 
girls do more general reading too. The 
Burma Translation Society made the 
survey in connexion with UNEsco’s pro- 
gramme for the production of reading 
materials in Burma, Ceylon India, Pakis- 
tan and Iran. 
m TELEPHONING VIA OUTER 
SPACE: Telephone calls and telegraph 
messages relayed from a satellite more 
than 22,000 miles above the earth are 
planned by U.S. scientists carrying out 
space flight research, A 50-Ib experi- 
mental space craft is to be launched 
this year in an orbit synchronized with 
the rotation of the earth, that is, it 
will circle the earth every 24 hours. 
The satellite will carry equipment lo 
re-broadcast the messages it receives 
instead of bouncing them back as in 
past experiments. 
I NTERNATIONAL PLAYWRIGHT’S 
CONTEST: A contest for playwrights, 
organized by the International Theatre 
Institute (set up under UNESCO’s auspices 
in 1948) is now under way on a grand 
scale in Latin America. Firstly, national 
competitions will select one play in each 
of nine participating countries: Argentine, 
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, 
Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela. An inter- 
national jury will then select the best 
among the nine finalists later this year. 
Mexico is offering a prize of 10,000 pesos 
($800). The top prizewinner will have 
his work translated into several languages 
and it will be offered for production to 
theatres throughout the world. 
HW PEACE TREATY 4,500 YEARS 
OLD: The world's oldest known 
peace treaty, a chunk of baked clay 
shaped like a rugby ball and covered 
with tiny cuneiform signs was recently 
on display at an exhibition of Yale 
University’s Babylonian Collection in 
New Haven, U.S.A. The treaty ended 
500 years of border warfare between 
the Sumerian states of Lagash and 
Umma. 
Q TAPLE FOOD WITH A HISTORY: 
A museum which traces the history of 
man’s staple food, bread, from the earliest 
civilizations to the present day has been 
set up at Ulm, Germany. Its collection 
includes books and documents on the 
history of bread-making and equipment 
used in its preparation. It also displays 
works of art in which bread is the central 
theme. 
  \ 
mm UNESCO SCIENCE BESTSELLER: 
Two new editions, in Singhalese and 
Tamil, have recently been issued of 
Unesco Source Book for Science 
Teaching which, since it was [first 
published in 1956, has become one of 
UNEscO’s best sellers. The handbook 
aims to help science teachers in all 
parts of the world by showing them 
how to improvise scientific apparatus 
from simple everyday objects. It has 
already appeared in eight languages and 
is due to be published in 15 more. 
L IGHTNING CALCULATIONS: 
Two impressive performances have just 
been chalked up by Euratom electronic 
computers. Scientists fed the text of the 
Lord's Prayer in 150 languages to a 
machine which, within a few minutes, 
classified the versions according to 
linguistic and geographical categories. 
Philologists had taken several years to 
make the same classification. Another 
machine rapidly described how trade was 
conducted in 1900 B.C. in Cappadocia 
(today a province of Turkey). 
NEW YORK’S DRIVERLESS 
TRAIN: The first completely automatic 
passenger train in the United States 
is to run under the streets of New 
York on the city’s subway. Carrying 
150 people it will shuttle between Grand 
Central Station and Times Square. It 
starts and stops and doors open and 
close without any driver or conductor 
operating the controls. The train 
receives orders through electric impulses 
transmitted through the rails. 
T HE BIGGEST ‘MILK ROUND’ 
As a practical way of celebrating Inter- 
national Milk Day, sponsored by the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
milkmen working for dairies all over the 
United Kingdom raised money by making 
a house-to-house collection on their rounds. 
This will be spent on dried milk powder to 
be sent to undernourished children in 
many countries. A similar campaign was 
organized by the milkmen of Ireland. 
m LEARNING FROM TOYS & 
GAMES: A fascinating exhibition 
which highlights the educational role of 
toys and games down the ages is on 
view (until March 10) at the National 
Pedagogical Institute in Paris. Entitled 
“Toys and Games of Other Days”, it 
has been organized by the curator of 
the Museum of the History of Education, 
Madame M.M. Rabecq-Maillard (au- 
thor of the article on page 22). Among 
the many antique objects and curiosities 
loaned by museums in Germany, Hol- 
land, England and France are chess 
pieces that belonged to Charlemagne, 
Louis XV’s toy elephant, and some 
playing cards used by Louis XVI. 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S,

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Just published : 1962 Edition 
~ Study 
Abroad 
   
“ln, t tos Py, ey bopes Woden optar a opt il) fo)" Whey, reg ’ Eiversitarios nach al) Ping, Tplitudes perso- pals. Se dark pref a d 
Fi Mytmicos y los estudien  antropolo 
“hy . “de Res, due se relacionadas con 
cultura hisphnion, 
  
a . é Cubre guatos del vi 
tranger he la Td a aig desde Nueva Orledt 
de 20. a 45.0) Org be. g 1 sesidn de verano 
| Seonomiques ol Sourritiie, Lo. To 8ra gfe) 0% 0 0d a te, Agosto). 
| de reehershe et als charg, thay! th, a Lorie Led 8) 4 0. 
Ie RB Season of ly 59. thy, The “Heps © 4 io, gra Secretario de la K 
ulturel de Roya: 16 juillet’ ok : 
  
   
  
   
Uy," pr Oe, Any, ‘8 [ TA vg Ply Phy, Cy, es » 
mo Attaché Craig, es 2 
sade de 
   
       
 
    
ER pre 
uber ' 
clones requeridas 
universitanos 
é Oubre  dGnloamente 
ontricula 
2 1 afo scadéemioo. 
#2 No determinado, 
MW Universidad Cents 
Departamento de 
rules, Quito. 
International By: 1 
Documents Service J ne bE 
New York = GRSUES 
los ecuntoriones 
Talo o ua grado 
ulvalente, conferido por uns escucls 
esional. A su regreso al Ecuador, 
#4 ilpr wunladla. 
« ador Jutversid 
al monde n ack 
yy we rednan 
dan pare ou 
Lb i aalammenits 
This handy guidebook contains all the information 
you need to take advantage of international 
educational opportunities. 
 
ORDER FROM : 
 
  
NOW YOU CAN GO ABROAD TO STUDY 
  
Many countries now provide funds for Amer- 
icans to study abroad. This unique book 
lists over 100,000 scholarships and fellow- 
ships at leading universities throughout the 
world. More than 800 pages cover a wide 
choice of academic subjects. Programs des- 
cribed range from two weeks to cight years. 
Complete with lists of organizations offering 
practical advice and help. Excellent classi- 
fications system lets you find all details easily. 
(Compiled by UNESCO experts In education). 
THE UNESCO PUBLICATIONS CENTER 
801 Third Avenue 
New York 22, N.Y. 
INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTS SERVICE 
Columbia University Press 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27, N.Y.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078285engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

. 
h
a
 
S
A
R
 
hi
 
ah
 
R
F
 
% 
hos
 
+ 
a
L
 
a
 
 
 
  
% 
| 
1 7 
Elie [00g 
: 
- » 
0 
[} 
1 
ny: 
ef 
  
CPT EEE y 
117) 
ho 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"4 
WP | 
i 
  
  
 
Y 
# 
} 
rian ETT 
"n 
y dh 
1a 
  
1] 
h 
bd 
the hig! 
  
ry ate: A 
   
nC) El