# [081616](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf) 12

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

| 
Publication Yo. $86 
VOLUME lll — N° II PRICE : 10 Cents (U. S.), 6 Pence (U. K.), or 20 Francs (FRANCE). DECEMBER 195¢Q 
  
Ra ‘ 
.» on . ; 5 op ye : a . hPL x 
Toe Wa | Aha 5 SA - 9 
a NT 3 od i " - 3 ‘ A oh ~ SF r 3 vu. 
: Sa. r y EN 
Ls iy. bc i Lr WER AR | ell Lo-¥ er fm NN ot AE 
a Aes he 
or 
ve 
» 
- 
er 
. 
  [1] J PRE = “ yi = i z Cre 3 ¥ Jd +7 {yg — " et - > : i. ; 
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW : July 26, 1856 — November 2, 1950 
His issue of the “Courier” is dedicated to the Universal Declaration oi What Shaw called “the incident of death” came to him after a life in Human Rights, adopted December 10, 1948. It is also the first to appear which he said: 
since the death of (George Bernard Shaw, at the age of 94. The relation “This is th : <a ys . . 
between one of humanity’s noblest documents and the life and work of one as a mighty © trie joy Jn life, ihe Deing used for bat Pose recognized by yourself of history’s literary giants is certainly complex and certainly controversial, scrap heap; the being a ce of Nature instead of a feverish a Re] le the but—just as certainly—it exists. We merely note that Shaw is the man who of ailments and grievances complaining that the world will not Sievote “ite said © ted col to making you happy.” 
o improvement is founded on tolerance...” . . . . . . 
“Religion is the only real motive force in the world; but what you fellows Shaw wrote in English and his works were read in Arabic, Spanish, Italian, don’t understand is that you must get a man through his own religion and French, Polish, German and Russian; Turkish and Chinese; Hindi, Bengali, 
not through yours...” Urdu, Gudjerati, Tamil and Punjabi and many others. In all of those lan- 
“A day's work is a day’s work, neither more nor less, and the man who guages, men and women will have their own way of sayi i 
does it needs a day’s sustenance, a night's repose, and due leisure, whether he of a departed friend: Y ying What Shaw said 
be painter or ploughman.” “It’s too bad of him to do this. ” 
"3 PE OCCASION CE HGR 5. A UNITED NATIONS POSTER GIVING L 
Ls NORTE Ph rire bk 
CY Rd i. ) - J        
   
  
OURIER IN THIS ISSUE PRINTS ON PAGES 4 THROUGH 9 NEWS AND UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ADOPTED BY THE UNITED TICLES ABOUT WORLD-WIDE EFFORTS TO DEFEND AND EXTEND HUMAN | NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY IS BEING DISTRIBUTED

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=2) 3

### 81646: UNESCO plans work to aid U.N. programme in Korea

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
\ 
‘DECEMBER 1950 
  
NESCO’S Executive Board, meet- 
l ing in Paris, last month, unan- 
imously re-affirmed that the 
Organization, within its field of 
competence, will give all possible as- 
sistance to the action of the United 
Nations in Korea, and authorized 
Mr. Jaime Torres Bodet, the Director- 
General, to continue to participate in 
this action, including the work of the 
United Nations Specialized Agences, 
who may be called upon to frame a 
long-term reconstruction plan for 
Korea. 
The Board authorized Mr. Torres 
Bodet to incur the expenditures in- 
volved in giving effect to this pro- 
gramme and to furnish, at the request 
of the United Nations, such services, 
advice and any other types of aid as 
may he required by the Unified Com- 
mand or any United Nations mission 
in Korea. 
. The Board at its previous meeting 
had approved the opening of an initial 
credit of § 175,000 for the re-establish- 
ment of teaching in Korea and for an 
educational programme specifically de- 
signed to make known the work of the 
United Nations and the principles of 
collective security. 
The Director-General, in his report 
to the Board, made reference to 
Unesco’s support of United Nations 
action in Korea. 
Educational experts are collaborat- 
ing on special pamphlets which will be 
published in three editions—English, 
French and Spanish. Different pam- 
phlets will be issued to three separate 
age-groups: 1) secondary school; 
2) university students; 3) adult educ- 
ation classes. 
‘¢« ONE WORLD ”’ MAP 
HE Bureau of Current Affairs in 
London has drafted two projects 
for school wall charts accom- 
panied by explanatory leaflets. The 
first is a world map on a projection 
NEW PRICE FOR COURIER 
IN U. S. AND CANADA 
Due to increased costs, the 
subscription price of the Courier 
in the U.S. and Canada will be 
increased from $1 to $1.50, effec- 
tive January Ist. 1951. The single 
issue price will correspondingly 
be increased from 10 cents to 15 
cents.     
  
cation, science and culture. 
French Francs. 
get them to suscribe too, 
lombo .I 
Colombia : 
Cuba : 
vidual sales.) 
Hungary 
Nigeria : C. M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 
Quiapo, Manila. 
Union of South Africa : 
Artigas 1320, Montevideo.   * Under negotiation. 
  
The UNESCO COURIER is an international periodical devoted to the work 
of UNESCO and to activities and developments throughout the world in edu- 
full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 US., or 5/- or 200 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris-16¢, France, 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana, S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos Aires. 
Australia : H A. Goddard Ltd., 255a George Street, Sydney. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27 Graben, Vienna. 
Barbados : S.P.C.K. Bookshop (Regional Office Caribbean Area), Broad Street, Bridge- 
town. : 
Belgium : Librairie Encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Brussels IV. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio de Janeiro. 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, Rangoon. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, Toronto. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd.,, Co- 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. ) 
* China : The Commercial Press, Ltd, 211 Honan Road (c), Shanghai. 
Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 9a, 1781, Bogota. 
La Casa Belga, René de Smedt, O'Reilly, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Narodni 37, Prague I. 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6 Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan, Fournisseur de la Cour, 118, Rue Emad el Dine, Cairo. 
* Ecuador : Casa de Cultura Ecuatoriana, Quito. 
France : Maison du Livre Frangais, 4, rue Félibien, Paris (6°). (Booksellers only.) 
UNESCO, Sales Unit, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris (16%). 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens, 
: “Ibusz”, Akademia-u, 10, Budapest V 
India : Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Israel : Leo Blumstein, Book and Art Shop, 35 Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Italy : Messaggerie Italiane, Via Lomazzo, 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Universelle, Avenue des Frangais, Beirut, Lebanon. 
* Liberia : Pahama and Co, 70, Broad Street, Monrovia, 
Malaya and Singapore : Peter Chong and Ce, P.O. Box 135, Singapore. 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, México D.F. 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout 8, The Hague. 
New Zealand : Whitcombe and Tombs, Ltd, G.P.O. Box 1526, Wellington, C.I. 
agos. 
7. Oslo. 
Pakistan : Thomas and Thomas, Fort Mansions, Frere Road, Karachi 3. 
Peru : Libreria Internacional dal Peru, S.A., Giron de la Union, Lima. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., Inc., Corner Tanduay and Vergara Streets, 
$2, Milan. 
Portugal : Uniao Portuguesa de Imprensa, 198 Rua de Sao Bento, 3¢ Esq., Lisbon. 
Sweden : A.B. C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2; Stockholm. 
Switzerland : French speaking cantons : 
mont, Fribourg. German speaking cantons : 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. . 
Van Schaik’'s Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : H.M. Stationery Office : York House, Kingsway, London {Retail 
Counter Service), or P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l1. (Orders by post). 
United States of America : Columbia University Press, 2960 Broadway, New York 27, 
N.Y 
Librairie de l'Université, 22-24, rue de Ro- 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacion Cientifica para la America Latina, Unesco, Bulevar 
* Venezuela : Editoria “Andres Bello”, Caracas. 
AMME 1 
designed to show the idea of a united 
world; the second is a graphic repre- 
sentation of the problems of maintain- 
ing peace and the ways in which 
various specialized agencies of the 
United Nations are striving to promote 
conditions favourable to peace. These 
maps are flexible in design and can be 
adapted not only to educational needs 
and to methods of teaching in dif- 
ferent countries, but also to changes 
in world conditions and events. 
In response to the Executive Board’s 
appeal to Member States, to National 
Commissions and to non-governmental 
organizations, Unesco has received 
numerous indications of support. 
The Swedish government and the 
Swedish Committee for Unesco broad- 
cast the Board’s appeal to arouse pub- 
lic interest and to obtain assistance 
and contributions to the action of 
Unesco on behalf of the Koreans. 
~ INTERNATIONAL 
¢« HELPING HANDS” 
MONG the non-governmental in- 
‘ternational organizations which 
responded to the Board’s appeal, 
the Boy Scouts International Bureau 
announced that it will endeavour fo 
re-establish its Korean branch which 
was very active before hostilities. 
The International Congresses of 
Modern Architecture expressed its 
wish to collaborate with Unesco and 
will provide a list of the most qualified 
architects in Japan for the work of 
reconstruction. This organization has 
also declared its willingness to help 
Unesco in all general matters that 
pertain to Korean aid. 
The International Union of the Ca- 
tholic Women’s Leagues has asked its 
various organizations to help the civ- 
ilian population of Korea. 
The World Organization for Early 
Childhood Education proposed to 
provide both material aid, in the form 
of educational material, toys, etc., and 
technical aid in the form of expert 
advice on teaching, school reconstruc- 
tion, training of teachers, etc. Its 
various national committees have been 
notified and a request has been made 
to send in all data and suggestions 
that might help the Koreans. This 
organization has also authorized a 
Korean specialist in pre-school educa- 
tion to furnish a report on the edu- 
cational needs of his country. 
The Director-General, in his report 
to the Board painted a vivid picture 
of the state of teaching in Korea and 
its history. 
Educational problems, he declared, 
   
HE people of Germany will be able 
T fo play an increasingly active part 
in Unesco’s work and make a 
greater contribution to international co- 
operation in the fields of education, 
science and culture through the forma- 
tion of a German Committee for Unes- 
co activities, in Frankfort, last month. 
Germany thus becomes the first non- 
member state of Unesco to set up a 
representative group whose composition 
and functions compare with those of 
the National Commissions formed in 
member states of the Organization. 
Although the German Committee will 
not have the official international sta- 
tus of a National Commission, it will 
nevertheless be able to contribute effec- 
tively towards the achievement of Unes- 
co's aims, and its work will be watched 
with interest in other countries. 
  
Tél. : Kléber 52-00. (Indi- 
c 
Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Ziirich.   


### 74472: Committee for UNESCO activities established in Western Germany

COMMITTEE FOR UNESCO ACTIVITIES 
ESTABLISHED IN WESTERN GERMANY _ |   
The sixty members of the Committee 
include prominent men and women and 
representatives of organizations in the 
fields of education, science and culture, 
representatives from the federal and 
state governments and from women's 
organizations and trade unions. A simi- 
lar committee for Western Berlin was 
also set up last month. 
Three International Centres 
HE constitution of the new German 
Committee, whose president is 
Professor Erbe, Rector of the Uni- 
versily of Tubingen, pledges its mem- 
bers—representatives of all the large 
and influential German organizations— 
to work towards the accomplishment of 
Lnesco’s aims. 
Among the projects for Germany, 
which Unesco has prepared for 1931, 
are the setting up of three international 
centres—for the Social Sciences, for 
vouth activities, and for pedagogical 
work, The newly formed German Com- 
mittee should be able to give substan- 
tial help in co-ordinating the work of 
the three centres. 
Tt is planned to finance the project 
by contributions from private and pu- 
blic funds in Unesco member states— 
outside normal Unesco budget contribu- 
tions—as well as from German sourees. 
The first contribution for this work has 
already been made by the Lebanon. 
The international character of the 
three institutes will be reflected in the 
choice of staff, the composition’ of the 
governing bodies and in the types of 
roblems with whieh they will deal. 
"heir activities will include the organi- 
zation of studies, conferences, exhibi- 
tions and seminars and they will work 
particularly to help German youth in 
overcoming the many problems facing it 
oday. 
will probably be as difficult as any 
others that the Republic of Korea and 
the United Nations will be called upon 
to solve, but a solution must be found 
if this country is to return to its 
normal way of life and continue its 
development. Present-day teaching in 
Korea is the result of forty years of 
Japanese rule. It was planned so that 
no more than a few fortunate Koreans 
could continue advanced studies or 
receive training as teachers, while 
major benefits were provided for the 
Japanese who were living either tem- 
porarily or permanently in Korea. 
SCHOOL SYSTEM 
RE-ORGANIZED 
N 1945, when the Allied military 
I government took control of educa- 
tion, Japanese was the only lang- 
uage spoken in the schools; the 
administrative personnel, the college 
heads, the principal teachers and 
inspectors were, almost without ex- 
ception, of Japanese nationality. 
The military government, during 
its four years control of Southern 
Korea instituted various radical 
educational experts and adopted by the 
government of South Korea only a few 
months before hostilities broke out. 
Since 1945, the percentage of the 
national budget devoted to education 
has increased from 3.6% to nearly 10%; 
the number of children attending 
primary schools has risen from ap- 
proximately one million and a half to 
two millions and a half, and the num- 
ber of pupils attending secondary 
schools, from 62,000 to 225,000. 
Upon the outbreak of hostilities, 
there was a serious lack of teachers 
and qualified administrative personnel, 
the number of teachers available for 
training being quite insufficient; books, 
particularly books in Korean, were in 
very short supply, since almost all the 
printing works were in North Korea. 
Mr. Torres Bodet emphasized that 
the havoc and destruction of the 
present war have probably destroyed 
all the progress made during the last 
five years and that the Korean Repu- 
blic, unaided, would be in no position 
to re-organize its system of teaching, 
least of all to develop or improve it. 
One thing is clear, he pointed out, 
that only an action undertaken on a 
large-scale by the United Nations can 
help the Koreans to restore their 
- educational life. 
[— NINETEEN NATIONS SIGN —] 
UNESCO-SPONSORED TRADE 
PACT AT LAKE SUCCESS 
s this issue of the Courier 
A went to press, 19 nations 
had signed the Unesco- 
sponsored agreement removing 
customs barriers to the move- 
ment of books, newspapers and 
a wide range of educational and 
scientific materials across their 
borders. 
These signatures were obtain- 
ed at Lake Success on November 
22, wwhen the pact mwas opened 
for signature. 
The agreement will promote 
“a better understanding and mu- 
tual respect between states,” said 
U.N. Secretary-General Trygve 
Lie.   
tograph of the drawing reproduced 
here from Miss Clarice Johnstone, 
tady Principal of Nelson Girls’ Coliege, 
Nelson, New Zealand. 
Miss Johnstone wrote: '‘Early this year 
you published an Indian Folk Tale, ‘The 
Making of the First Peace Pipe’, | used 
this in a peace talk to the girls of my Col- 
lege on Anzac Day, April 25th. The story 
inspired one of them, Angela Grace 
(16 years) to attempt a ‘black and white’ 
illustration. As you published the story 
which, incidently, made a deep impres- 
sion, | wondered whether you would care 
to print the picture in the Courier.” 
The story published in the Courier was 
one of a series— ‘Children’s Stories for 
Peace''—coliected from all parts of the 
world by Unesco’s Radio Division, Its 
theme was that the best way to settle dis- 
putes is to sit down and talk things over. 
The drawing made by Angela Grace is 
an appropriate illustration for the message 
of United Nations Day this year—'"There 
Shall Be Peace''—and is reproduced here 
in the hope of promoting just such feelings 
as the young artist has so well expressed. 
T HE Courier recently received a pho- 


### 74473: The Making of the first peace pipe

  
THE MAKING OF THE 
FIRST PEACE PIPE 
- » 
. mm. 
- = 
   

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=3) 3

### 74477: Prominent American educator to become new Deputy Director-General of UNESCO

  
T
I
 
T
N
 
E
R
 
T
E
 
E
E
T
 
A
 
p 
- 
S
h
 
-
 
TT
 
_
-
"
 
- 
E
E
 r
e 
S
e
 
T
E
 
F
e
 
R
S
 
SS
E 
F
E
N
N
 
ET
 
F
Y
 
V
E
R
T
 
e
T
 
EE 
_
—
_
—
_
—
 
\ 
F
e
 
A
 
E
y
 
I
 
a
 
C
u
 
ta
: 
14x
 
THE
 M
e
™
,
 


### 81617: UNESCO plans $20,000,000 education programme; Executive Board approves project for world network of training centres

### 74499: The Universal Declaration of Human Rights

      
EXE) recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and 
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation 
of freeddm, justice and peace in the world, 
EXE disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in 
barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and 
the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of 
speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed 
as the highest aspiration of the common people, 
EXIEIES it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, 
as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human 
rights should be protected by the rule of law, 
EXIXIES it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations 
among nations, 
EXITS) the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed 
their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of 
the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have 
THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION 
or Human Rights 
determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in 
larger freedom, 
KIIXESE Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co- 
operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect 
Jor and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
KIX « common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of 
the greatest importance for the full realisation of this pledge, 
AND SRN ATH HA THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
rrocrams this Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common 
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that 
every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration 
constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote 
respect for these rights and freedoms-and by progressive measures, 
national and international, to secure their universal and effective 
recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States 
themselves and among the peoples of territories under their jurisdiction. 
[(xmics 1 ]— All human beings are born free and equal in dignity 
and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience ond 
should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood. 
[A%GE 3 |—1, Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms 
set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as 
race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, 
notional or social origin, property, birth or other status. 
2. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the bosis of the 
political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or 
territory to which a person belongs, whether this territory be on 
independent, Trust or Non-Self-Governing territory, or under any 
other limitation of sovereignty. 
[Armas s |— Everyone has the right to life, 
liberty and the security of person. 
[Axnci + J—No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery 
and the slave trode shall be prohibited in oll their forms. 
[Axnax’s =o one shall be subjected to torture 
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 
[ARTIF ¢ J Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere os 
a person before the law. ; 
[(3xncs 7 |— All are equal before the law and are entitled with- 
out any discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are en- 
titled to equal protection against any discrimination in violation of 
this Declaration ond against ony incitement to such discrimination. 
[AxmGE & | Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the 
competent notional tribunals for acts violating the fundamental 
rights granted him by the constitution or by low. 
[Ames | —No on  shell be subjected 
to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile. 
[Amis 10 |—gvaryone is entitled in full equality to a fair and 
public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the 
determination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal 
charge ogainst him. 
[ama 11 ]—1. Everyone charged with a penal offence has the 
right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law 
in a public trial ot which he hos had all the guarantees necessary 
for his defence. 
2. No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account of 
any oc or omission which did not constitute o penal offence, 
under national or international law, at the time when it was com- 
mitted. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that 
wos applicable of the time the penal offence wos committed. 
[Anas 17 |= No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference 
with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks 
upon his honour and reputation. Everyone hos the right to the pro- 
tection of the law against such interference or attacks. 
=1. Everyone has the right to freedom of movement 
and residence within the borders of each state. 
2. Everyone hos the right to leave any country, including his own, 
and to return to his country, 
[ona i Jy, Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in 
other countries asylum from persecution. 
2. This right may not be invoked in the case of prosecutions gen- 
vinely arising from non-political crimes or from acts contrary fo the 
purposes and principles of the United Nations. 
[meas 15 1. everyone has the right to a nationality. 
2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality nor denied 
the right to change his nationality. 
[4x72 16 |-1. Men and women of full age, without any limita- 
tion due to roce, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and 
to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights os to marriage, 
during marriage and at its dissolution. 
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent 
of the intending spouses. 
3. The fomily is the natural and fundamental group unit of society 
and is entitled to protection by society and the State. 
[Amma 12 ]—1. Everyone hos the right to own property alone 
as well as in association wi h others. 
2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property. 
[nai 18 |—Everyone hos the right to freedom of thought, 
conscience ond religion; this right includes freedom to change his 
religion or belief, ond freedom, either alone or in community with 
others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in 
teaching, practice, worship and observance. 
[sma 19 | gveryone hes the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without 
interference and to seek, receive and impart information ond ideas 
through any media and regardless of frontiers. 
[ats 25 1-1. Seung hax the voht vo romdom 
: assembly ond association. 
2. No one may be compelled to belong to an association. 
[Amat 21 ]—1. Everyone has the right to take part in the 
government of his country, directly or through freely chosen 
representatives. 
2. Everyone hos the right of equal access to public service in his 
country. 
3. The will of the people shail be the basis of the authority of gov- 
ernment; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elec- 
tions which shall be by universal and équal suffrage and shall be 
held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures. 
[aticax 12. 1 evaryans, ano member of soxiety; has the vght te 
social security and is entitled to realisation, through national 
effort ond international co-operation and in accordance with the 
organisation and resources of each State, of the economic, social and 
cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free develop- 
ment of his personality. 
[max 55 J—1. Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of 
employment, to just ond favourable conditions of work and to pro- 
tection against unemployment. 
2. Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right 
to equal pay for equal work. 
3. Everyone who works has the right to just ond favourable remuner- 
NITED NATIONS 
ation insuring for himself ond his fomily on existence worthy of 
human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by other means of 
social protection. 
4. Everyone hos the right to form and to join trade unions 
for the protection of his interests. 
[xmicix 34 | — Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including 
reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with 
pay. 
[Axmicix 35 1. Everyone has the right to a standard of living ade- 
quate for the health ond well-being of himself and of his fomily, 
including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary 
social services, and the right to security in the event of unemploy- 
ment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of 
livelihood in circumstances beyond his control. 
2. Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and casis- 
tance. All children, whether bom in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy 
the same social protection, 
[Mamas 2] —1. Everyone has the right to education. Education 
shall be free, af least in the elementary and fundamental stages. 
Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and profes- 
sional education shall be mode generally available and higher 
education sholl be equally accessible to oll on the basis of merit. 
2. Education shall be directed to the full development of the human 
personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms. It shall promote understanding, toler- 
ance and friendship among all nations, racial or religious groups, 
and shall further the activities of the United Nations for the main- 
tenance of peace. 
3. Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education 
thot shall be given to their children. 
[AKTIGLE £7 |—1. Everyone hos the right freely to participate in the 
cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in 
scientific odvancement and its benefits. 
2. Everyone hos the right to the protection of the moral and material 
interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production 
of which he is the author, 
[xmas ss |—gveryone is entitled to © social and Intemational 
order in which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration 
con be fully realized. 
[Axnce® 1. Everyone has duties to the community in which 
olone the free and full development of his personality is possible, 
2. In the exercise of his rights and freedoms, everyone shall be sub- 
ject only to such limitations as are determined by low solely for the 
purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and 
freedoms of others and of meeting the just requirements of morality, 
public order and the general welfare in o democratic society. 
3. These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary 
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. 
[xmas 30 J Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as 
implying for any State, group or person any right fo engage in 
any activity or to perform any oct aimed of the destruction of any 
of the rights ond freedoms set forth herein. 
Adeprad wy Ba Grmed Matar General Rusamiig ot in TInt mewtog haid in Pavle on 10 December, YOO 
ond by U0 nd 
DISTRIBUTED BY THE UNESCO COURIER 
DECEMBER 1050 
  
Imp. Georges Lang, 11, rue Curial, P ris. 19 
wie Or Tad SENG Rh 3 ARN reat ant ES 5  

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 81618: Genocide Convention opens new era in the law of nations

DECEMBER 1950 
  
   
UNESCO PLANS § 20,000,000 EDUCATION PROGRAKN 
‘Executive Board Approves Project for World Network of Training Centres 
  
‘““The Start of a Great Mission ”’ 
  
Extracts from an address delive- 
red by M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
Director-General of Unesco, on the 
occasion of the fifth anniversary 
of the proclamation of the Unesco 
Charter, on November 16. 
and I have asked you to join 
Ura is five years old today, 
the with us in celebrating 
anniversary.. 
In a human life, the first five 
years reach only early childhood. In 
historical time, they are but a brief 
episode. Yet for Unesco, they have 
been the start of a great mission, the 
beginning of a task which affects 
millions of men not only throughout 
their lives but unto the lives of their 
children and their descendants yet 
unborn. And it has been with faith 
and determination that we have 
made a contribution, which we hope 
will be lasting, to the progress of 
the world. 
Ignorance was our first and great- 
est enemy. Even now, millions of 
illiterates still make up a majority 
of the world’s population. To con- 
quer mutual misunderstanding by 
spreading knowledge was and still is 
our major battle. 
We sought the lessons of ex- 
perience. Thus the pilot project of 
the Marbial Valley in the island of 
Haiti was launched. Hope seemed 
banished from this valley: poverty, 
illness, ignorance reigned there. But 
now schools, hospitals and local in- 
dustries have been created, and 
among the inhabitants the will to live 
has replaced resignation to fate. 
And the experience permitted us 
to work out and apply a tried and 
tested technique applicable else- 
where. a . 
To Remove Mutual Ignorance 
OWEVER, at another stage of the 
H votution of the problem, mu- 
tual tolerance and mutual res- 
pect among men depend upon the 
removal of mutual ignorance; and 
the first step is providing opportun- 
  
   
HE appointment of Dr. John W. 
Taylor, President of the Univer- 
sity of Louisville, Kentucky, in 
the United States, as Deputy 
Director - General of Unesco was 
announced last month by M. Jaime 
Torres Bodet, Director-General of the 
Organization. 
Dr. Taylor, who will take up his 
duties with Unesco on January 1, 1951, 
replaces Dr. Walter H.C. Laves, who 
left the Organization last June. 
Dr. Taylor, a distinguished Ameri- 
can educator, who was born in Co- 
vington, Kentucky, in 1906, has had 
wide international experience. He 
spent six years in Europe, between 
1925 and 1937. In addition to Co- 
lumbia University, New York City, 
where he obtained the degree of Doc- 
tor of Philosophy, he studied at the 
Universities of Paris, London, Berlin 
and Vienna. 
His career as a teacher included 
posts at Teachers College and New 
College, Columbia University ; Louisia- 
na State University ; and the Kaiser 
Friedrich Realgymnasium, Berlin- 
Neukolln. He was also director 
of foreign study at Columbia. He has 
been awarded the United States Le- 
gion of Merit and the French Legion 
of Honour. : N 
Pioneer Work In Community 
Education 
R. TAYLOR has been President of 
the University of Louisvilie since 
1947. Under his administration, 
the University was the first in any of 
PROMINENT AMERICAN 
TO BECOME NEW DEPUTY 
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF UNESCO 
ities for the meeting of those who 
are or who will be their intellectual 
guides. Thus we have fostered the 
creation of study groups or seminars 
which from time to time bring 
together or into relationship with one 
another either teachers or the re- 
presentatives of all mental activities. 
On the same plane of ideas, we 
have drawn up under the title 
“Study Abroad” an international 
directory of scholarships and ex- 
changes of persons. And on a 
higher plane, in order to make 
available universally the advantages 
of research everywhere, we have set 
up in various parts of the world six 
regional centres of scientific research, 
which regularly exchange the results 
of their work. 
But in order that the life of the 
mind might become a link leading to 
the universal fraternity which is our 
aim, we also had to make sure that 
no prejudice would at the very start 
contradict this hope. Therefore, last 
July, the most eminent biologists, so- 
ciologists and geneticians, brought 
together by Unesco, solemnly affirm- 
ed that “racial discrimination has no 
scientific foundation in biological 
fact.” The welcome given to this 
proclamation of equality was univer- 
sal. 
IND, alas remains dependent 
M upon matter, and when condi- 
tions of existence are too bad, 
it is vain to advise men to educate 
themselves. We cannot close our eyes 
to certain of these conditions of exis~ 
tence, and we must undertake to 
change them even while we, at the 
same time, make knowledge accessi- 
ble. That is why we have participat- 
ed, to the extent of our competency 
and our means, in the great plan of 
technical assistance to which the 
United Nations is devoting 
$ 20.000.000. 
In this connexion, we are sending 
to countries whose governments re- 
quest them missions of experts to 
teach the techniques which lead to 
improvement. of the material and 
  
Dr. JOHN W. TAYLOR 
the American southern states to sup- 
press the racial barrier to the admis- 
     
   
moral condition of the disinherited. I 
shall mention as examples of our 
work in this field only the activities 
of our representatives in India and 
Ecuador, and call attention to the 
fact that twelve other countries have 
already asked our help. 
A Door To The Future 
HE perspectives which I have 
T just shown you are not illusory. 
I have merely lifted a corner of 
the veil that hides the future. These 
ideas have already taken on subs- 
tance. : 
Indeed, our last General Con- 
ference adopted a resolution which, 
I hope, will open a door to the future. 
Here it is: “The General Conference 
resolves that the Director-General 
be authorized to develop over and 
beyond the regular programme of 
Unesco certain extraordinary pro- 
jects capable of making a large-scale 
contribution to world peace and se- 
curity, in the hope that such major 
projects might become of Such 
consequence as to warrant special 
financing from sources outside the 
regular budget.” 
On the basis of this resolution, we 
got to work and, profiting from the 
experience we have acquired, we 
elaborated a big project which puts 
into effect the fundamental ideas 
which I have set forth to you. 
This project was given preliminary 
approval by our Executive Board 
which has just finished its meeting. 
It will be submitted for final 
approval to our General Conference 
which will meet in Paris next year. 
(Details of this world-wide fun- 
damental education project are 
given elsewhere on this page). 
At the end of this road which we 
are tracing and in which others will 
follow after us, there is the immense 
hope that exists in every man, in 
every family, in every nation, the 
hope that men’s reason and in- 
telligence, finally mature and en- 
lightened, will be able to transform 
into reality — peace among men. 
EDUCATOR 
sion of students. Negro students were 
admitted to the graduate and profes- 
sional schools of the University ; and 
under-graduate students will also 
accepted at the end of the present 
academic session. 
Under Dr. Taylor's guidance, the 
University has carried out important 
pioneer work in the field of com- 
munity educational development, and 
adult education in “Neighbourhood 
Colleges”. This included the establ- 
ishment, in co-operation with the 
Louisville public school system and 
public library, of a radio station which 
broadcasts educational and cultural 
programmes for general and class- 
room listeners. Subsequently, the Uni- 
versity Theatre of the Air was created 
in co-operation with a major national 
broadcasting company. Six other 
American universities joined with 
Louisville in a network linked with 
150 radio broadcasting and television 
statlons in various parts of the United 
ates. 
KOREA AND THE 
action in the Korean question during the period Tune 25 to Septem- 
ber 7 has now been retold in “Korea and the United Nations” recent 
ly published by the U.N. Department of Public Information.. 
TT history of the United Nations Security Council's debates and 
This publication gives an overall picture of United Nations action in 
support of collective security as it was described in articles which appeared 
each fortnight in the United Nations Bulletin. 
UNITED NATIONS 
    
  
Pag: 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
   
  
by progressive stages over a 
period of 12 years, for the 
creation of a world network of 
Fundamental Education Centres (1) 
was approved by Unesco’s Executive 
Board last month. 
The plan is part of a worldwide 
drive against illiteracy and low living 
standards. It calls for the establish- 
ment of a network of six regional 
centres in five of the areas of the world 
where Unesco’s Member States are 
seeking help in their efforts to eradi- 
cate illiteracy. 
This scheme, which is to be financed 
by private and government funds out- 
side Unesco’s regular budget, will be 
submitted to the Organization’s 
General Conference for final adoption 
next summer. 
The centres are to be established in 
Equatorial Africa, Latin America, the 
Far East, India and the Middle East. 
For the benefit of the countries of each 
region, they will carry out: 
A $ 20,000,000 plan, to be carried out 
 
(above) 
were organized in the Marbial Valley, on 
the island of Haiti, as part of a pilot pro- 
Fundamental education classes 
ject launched by Unesco, “Hope seemed 
banished irom this valley : poverty, illness. 
ignorance reigned there. Now, schools. 
hospitals and local industries have been 
created. and among the inhabitants the will 
to live has replaced resignation to fate.” 
1 Research to determine the real needs 
of the area and experimentation into 
new methods and media of fundamental 
education suited to these needs. 
2 Training in each centre of 100 spe 
cialists, teachers and field workers for 
a year, or a total of 5,400 specialists in 
the six centres by the end of 12 years. 
3 Production of locally adapted teaching 
materials, - including literacy texts, 
reading matter, guides to teachers and field 
workers, filmstrips and films, and radio 
recordings. 
4 Mobile missions of experts to go into 
the field to help local governments to 
involved, and the apply the techniques 
their literacy materials produced, to 
campaigns. 
“Training By Chain Reaction” 
HE centres have been conceived 
not merely as training schools or 
production units but as nuclei of 
experimentation. One of the novel 
features of the Unesco scheme has 
been referred to as “training by chain 
reaction”. A large proportion of the 
5.400 specialists, who will have been 
trained in fundamental education me- 
thods at the end of 12 years, will 
return to their countries in teams to 
establish national or local training 
centres ; thus the number of trained 
personnel resulting directly or indi- 
rectly from the work of the regional 
centres will be multiplied through 
the establishment of these branch 
agencies. 
Of the six centres, one will be spe- 
cially equipped with a field unit for 
the production of model educational 
films. Another will be set up to 
provide special research and training 
in the production of radio programmes 
for fundamental education. 
The Unesco scheme for setting up 
the fundamental education centres 
will make a positive contribution to 
the vast plan of Technical Assistance 
for Economic Development recently 
launched by the United Nations and 
its Agencies. It will make available 
specialists trained in new educational 
methods and the tools needed to con- 
vey to the masses of people in these 
areas the rudimentary knowledge and 
skills without which they cannot 
achieve a higher standard of living. 
  
(1) Fundamental Education is a term 
coined by Unesco to describe that kind of 
minimum and general education which 
aims at the preparation of children and 
adults deprived of proper schooling for a 
better participation in the economic and 
social progress of their community and of 
mankind as a whole.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=5) 2

### 81624: December 10, 1950: world figures greet second anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights

### 74478: To help all men forsee a future

UNESCO COURIER — Pag: 4 
       
    
       
OPENS 
ERA 
N 9 December 1948, in Paris, th2 
General Assembly of the United 
Nations unanimously approved 
a Convention on Genocide, 
under which the nations solemnly 
undertook to prevent and punish the 
crime of genocide, whether committad 
in time of peace or war. 
The following are the three main 
articles, in which genocide and the 
actions incurring international penal- 
ties are described: 
« Article II. Genocide means any of 
the following acts committed with intent 
to destroy. in whole or in part, a natio- 
nal, ethnical, racial or religious group 
of human beings : 
(a) killing members of the group: 
(b) causing serious bodily or mental 
harm to members of the group: 
(c) deliberately inflicting on the 
group conditions of life calculated to 
bring about its physical destruction in 
whole or in part; 
(d) imposing measures intended to 
prevent births within the group: 
(e) forcibly transferring children of 
the group to another group. 
Article III. The following acts shall 
be punishable : 
(a) genocide ; 
(b) conspiracy to commit genocide : 
(c) direct and public incitement to 
commit genocide: 
(d) attempt to commit genocide :- 
 (e) complicity in genocide. 
Article IV. Persons commiting geno- 
cide or any of the other acts enume- 
rated in Article III shall be punished, 
whether they are constitutionally res- 
ponsible rulers, public officials or pri- 
vate individuals. » 
A Courageous Proclamation 
HERE are two extreme views on 
the subject of this Convention. 
Some regard it as a praiseworthy 
but ineffective gesture—a mere ideo- 
logical “pointer”—serving no other 
purpose than to indicate the lines of 
future reforms and of future institu- 
tions to be established. 
Others see in it a most courageous 
proclamation of the primacy of inter- 
national morality over individual 
sovereignty. 
Holders of the first view maintain 
that, by refusing to include political 
minorities in the groups to be protect- 
"ed against extermination, the Assem- 
bly failed to carry out the essence of 
its task. They also affirm that the 
mention of an “international penal 
tribunal”, which is not yet in being, 
strengthens the impression of futility 
created by the Convention. Its value 
is, this school says, confined to the 
ethical sphere. It is only the expres- 
sion of a desired aim and not an 
achievement. 
Holders of a more positive view 
attack such criticism as being symp- 
tomatic of the permanently sceptical 
attitude of those who under-estimate 
the dynamic value of principles and 
written instruments. They recall that, 
at the outset, neither the 1789 Decla- 
ration of the Rights of Man and the 
Citizen, nor the Communist Manifesto 
of 1848, nor the ‘United Nations 
Charter itself were anything but 
documents enshrining principles. Yet 
who can be blind to the growth of 
concrete achievements from these 
documents? 
A document of this type will be of 
historic value if men translate its aims 
into action. In the meantime, the 
great importance of the Genocide 
Convention is that it has been una- 
nimously agreed to by 55 countries 
which in other matters are gravely 
CONVENTION 
NEW 
IN 
THE LAW OF 
NATIONS 
Pierre de LANUX 
 
‘to by over 20 countries. 
and a number of others. 
   
divided. It places legally in the 
wrong any persons who try to repeat 
the experiment of systematically exter- 
minating an entire group of human 
beings. . 
Examples of the extermination of 
whole populations—a town, a tribe or 
or a sect—are only too frequent in 
history. In the earliest times, the 
victor doubtless often found it more 
convenient, and safer, simply to anni- 
hilate the vanquished. Periods re- 
corded by history on the other hand, 
if carefully studied, show that the 
result of a victory was more often the 
subjection than the total extermin- 
ation of the defeated party. 
Conquering empires were more con- 
cerned to increase their wealth and 
the number of their subjects and 
slaves than to make deserts of the 
lands they had overrun. Alexander, 
Caesar, and even Attila, sought first 
and foremost to collect allies and 
vassals; and Caesar, when there was 
a revolt against him, sold the rebels as 
slaves. Only when the subject peoples 
were permanently rebellious were the 
guilty” massacred. 
With the growth of fanatical reli- 
gious passions, like that inspired by 
Islam in its first period of expansion, 
or by the Christianity of the Cru- 
sades, it became a general practice to 
exterminate “infidels”. This practice 
was adopted not only by lawless 
~INDUS- 
TRY". Under the Nazi occupation, millions 
of human beings were slaughtered on such 
WHEN GENOCIDE BECAME AN 
grounds as : “The final solution of the 
Jewish question means the complete exter- 
mination of all Jews in Europe.” Extermi- 
nation “facilities — camps where men, 
women and children were tortured, starved 
and worked to death — were organized on 
a scale large enough to accomplish the 
plan of exterminating or permanently weaken- 
ing entire racial and national groups of 
Europe. Ovens were built to burn the 
bodies of the victims (above). Only the 
victory of the United Nations forces in 
Europe and Asia put an end to these crimes 
against humanity; but not until 12.000.000 
men, women and children had been done to 
death by order of the German and Japanese 
authorities. 
N January 12, the United Nations Convention on the Prevention and 
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide—the deliberate mass extinction 
of human groups-—will come into force, having been ratified or acceded 
The Convention will give legal effect to important principles of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights for it can be linked not to one, but to many of the 
Declaration’s articles; such articles, for example, as the one which enjoins men to 
act to one another in a spirit of brotherhood, that which provides for equality of 
treatment for all peoples, that which guarantees for ail men the right to life, liberty 
and security of person, that which. prohibits torture, cruel or inhuman treatment 
The Convention on Genocide, therefore, fits well into the great task undertaken 
by the United Nations to ensure basic human rights and freedoms to every human 
being and to establish a world rule of law.     
soldiery but, as part of a deliberate 
policy, by princes and religious author- 
ities themselves. 
The -earlier massacrings of rebels, 
from the time of the slaughter of the 
Albigenses and of the victims of 
Saint Bartholomew’s Night in France 
“up to that of the pogroms in Eastern 
Europe and the Killing of the Arme- 
nians, were due to blind fanaticism or 
pitiless policy. But it is only in our 
own days that we find cold-blooded, 
. systematic, total extermination, on a 
scale never before practised. 
Crimes Against Humanity 
HE number of men, women and 
children-—~mainly Jews and Chin- 
ese—done to death by order of 
the German and Japanese authorities 
has been officially put at 12,000,000 (1). 
After the victory of the United Na- 
tions, the principal war criminals re- 
ceived the punishment that was de- 
manded by outraged public opinion 
the world over. But the legal appa- 
ratus set in motion to deal with these 
“crimes against humanity” was more 
than a mere expression of the world’s 
anger. What was new was the solemn 
statement that henceforth there were 
certain acts that could be excused 
neither by necessities of war nor by 
the plea that they were carried out 
as a result of formal orders received. 
In future there would be a human law 
overriding any instructions issued by 
national authorities, and individuals 
no less than heads of States would 
have to answer for any atrocities com- 
mitted. 
This innovation of capital import- 
ance establishes the duty of refusing 
obedience on grounds of loyalty to the 
elementary principles of humanity. 
It is part of a tremendous movement 
in contemporary thought in the di- 
rection of restoring the primacy of 
personal rights which were introduced 
two centuries ago by the founders of 
modern democracy, but which con- 
siderations of collective efficiency and 
achievement of the maximum “results” 
had gradually destroyed. The Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human Rights, 
adopted on 10 December 1948 by the 
General Assembly of the United 
Nations, is one of the signs of this 
rehabilitation of the essential princi- 
ples of all civilized society. 
Crusader Against Genocide 
TH Nuremberg and Tokyo tri- 
bunals, however, were only com- 
petent to deal with crimes com- 
mitted during the war. They refused 
(1) As regards the Jews, statistics for n 
total of some 15 European countries are as 
follows : 
Jewish population in 1939 : 8,301,000. 
Killed between 1940 and 1945 © 5,978,000. 
The number of killed thus amounted lo 
72 % of the whole. In Poland there were 
2,800,000 victims (85 9% of the Jews) ; in 
occupied Russia, 2,100,000, etc. (Pamphlet 
C/o Dr. Jacob Le¢tchinsky, published by the 
World Jewish Congress, in English and 
French, February-June 1946.) 
-obligations 
DECEMBER 1950 
THE CONVENTION ON THE 
AND PUNISHMENT OF GENOCIDE has now 
received the necessary numbers of instru- 
ments of ratification or accession .to enable 
PREVENTION 
it to be brought into force. Shown above 
are representatives of states who ratified the 
Convention on October 14. They are : 
(seated, left to right) Dr. John P. Chang, of 
Korea; Dr. Jean Price-Mars, of Haiti; Ambas- 
sador Nasrollah Entezam of Iran; Ambassa- 
dor Jean Chauvel, of France and Mr. Ruben 
Esquivel de la Guardia, of Costa Rica. 
Standing, left to right : Dr. Ivan Kerno, 
Assistant Secretary General for the Depart- 
ment of Legal Affairs; Mr. Trygve Lie, Secre- 
tary-General of the U.N.; Mr. Manuel Four- 
nier Acuna, of Costa Rica and Dr. R. Lem- 
kin, crusader for the Genocide Convention. 
to deal with the flagrant persecution 
that took place before 1939, when the 
totalitarian regimes were extending 
their power. Yet the danger of so- 
called “undesirable” minorities being 
exterminated is almost as menacing in 
time of peace as in time of war. It 
was intolerable that agts of this type 
should be protected by the institution 
of national sovereignty, and that the 
civilized world should continue to have 
no legal remedy against atrocities that 
regimes subject to no control might be 
temptei to commit. 
A certain man decided to vindicate 
the idea of setting up some inter- 
national legal authority to punish and, 
more important, to prevent such acts 
of total extermination, no matter when 
committed or attempted. Ever since 
1933, Professor Lemkin, of Yale Uni- 
versity, a Pole by origin who was a 
legal adviser at the Nuremberg trials, 
had devoted himself to this cause. To 
him we owe the term “genocide, 
meaning the killing of persons who 
have committed no other crime than 
to belong to a given race or group of 
human beings. Thanks to the grue- 
some revelations of 1945, he finally 
achieved his aim. 
At the General Assembly of the 
United Nations in 1946, the delegates 
of Panama, India and Cuba agreed to 
move a resolution against genocide. 
This resolution has been, and is, 
respected by the overwhelming major- 
ity of States. It has on occasion, as 
we know, been violated. But in the 
period from 1919 to 1939 international 
were respected by 60 
sovereign states, and violated by 
only 3. This small minority was suc- 
cessful, for the time being, in evading 
their obligations only because the 
penalties prescribed for such action 
were not applied. More recent hap- 
penings, however, show that to-day 
the United Nations are less tolerant 
towards breakers of undertakings. 
And perhaps it is not altogether vain 
to hope that, should the crime of 
genocide threaten to re-appear, the 
governments and peoples will succeed 
in using the clear and stringent terms 
of the Convention to prevent any 
fresh essays in mass extermination. 
Thus not only the “good pleasure” of 
princes, but also that of States, has 
had to yield ground in favour of the 
rights of the human person and, 
indeed, of the rights of Law. 
CORRECTION 
In a story published in the last 
issue of the COURIER, relating to 
the work of Unesco in efforts to 
improve and rationalize the com- 
plexities of international copyright 
law. it was stated : 
“ This work... is intended to 
- unite intermational conventions 
now in force into a single 
convention...” 
It _should be made clear that 
the intention is not to replace or 
supersede any present conven- 
tions on copyright, but only tc 
supplement them.     

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 81625: UNESCO exhibition-album to show man's unending fight to gain his rights

DECEMBER 1950 
"WORLD FIGURES GREET SECOND ANNIVERSARY 
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
OF THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
  
  
  
“Jo help all 
men forsee 
a futenre 
Message From 
M. Jaime TORRES BODET 
Director-General 
Of UNESCO 
wo years ago the General 
| Assembly of the United 
Nations, meeting in Paris, 
adopted the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. 
Can we say that the existence 
of the Declaration has in any way 
changed our mode of life during 
these two years? Some people 
will point out regretfully that it 
has not prevented breaches of 
the law, nor the resort to 
violence, nor the stagnation of 
certain political and social con- 
ditions. Undoubtedly, the crili- 
cism is Justified. But is it 
reasonable to expect that any 
Declaration, however nobly ins- 
pired, could at once solve all 
problems? 
The main role of the Declar- 
ation is, in fact, to help all men 
foresee a future toward which 
the governments can guide their 
activities in a common endeavour. 
If at times the cruel irony of 
events makes us doubl the sin- 
cerity of the Declaration as a 
splendid affirmation of princi- 
ples, let us mot forget that it 
provides the basis of the concrete 
activities already undertaken by 
the United Nations on behalf of 
Human Rights. Let us bear in 
mind that it has played a part in 
the judgment of not a few courts 
of law; and that inevitably ils 
influence on morals and opi- 
nions, already great, will be 
more and more directly felt, even 
in the field of law-making. 
Human Rights Covenant 
HE United Nations is now 
working on an Interna'‘ional 
Covenant of Human Rights 
which, unlike the Declaration, 
will have binding force on all the 
signatories. This Covenant will 
be the [first document of wuni- 
versal scope to establish a com- 
mon pattern for the altitude of 
States toward private citizens. 
Naturally, therefore, its import- 
ance will be enormous. But we 
should not be led by this fact to 
forget the great value inherent in 
the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. 
There are, no doubt, some peo- 
ple who may be tempted to be- 
lieve that the Declaration should 
have begun with a strict defi- 
nition of the minimum commit- 
ments which states should and 
could undertake, instead of with 
an affirmation of principles. 
But, had this minimum been 
fixed, the states might have con- 
tented themselves merely with 
showing the boundaries beyond 
which barbarism could not pass. 
A proclamation of the ideals 
which clearly and positively 
establish the frontiers of civiliz- 
ation might have been postponed 
until a remote future. . 
Chart For The Future 
OR example, would a simple 
agreement on commitments 
have included articles on 
social security, on the right to 
education and culture; and 
would it have given them coer- 
cive force? How many countries 
would have been able to under- 
take such commitments? Let us 
not forget that all nations have 
not reached the same stage of 
economic development, nor have 
they all the same cultural and 
social traditions. 
Let us bear in mind, too, that 
this Declaration, which charts so 
bright a future for mankind, was 
adopted on the morrow of atro- 
cities whose barbarism awakened 
our generation from its mood of 
complacency. To proclaim Hu- 
man Rights was to propose a 
positive civilization: it was to 
affirm that mankind has enough 
confidence in such a civilization 
to overcome the difficulties in its 
path, and to survive. 
(elo BRI 1V]0 Je] NJ Ye]: 
 
  
“ DECLA- 
RATION 
HAS 
ALREADY 
HELPED 
THE 
CAUSE 
OF HUMAN RIGHTS?” 
AM very happy to have this 
opportunity to say that I feel 
the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights has already helped 
us to progress in the observance of 
human rights in many parts of the 
world. Both the Constitution of 
India and that of Indonesia bear 
the stamp of acceptance of these 
rights and there are an increasing 
number of people who refer to the 
Declaration in their speeches and 
even though it is not a legally 
binding document, it has been 
referred to in court decisions. 
I realise that it will take some 
{ime for the education on the real 
meaning of human rights and res- 
pect for the human personality to 
be accepted in the same way 
throughout the world, but I cannot 
help feeling that we have already 
moved ahead a long way. 
There is much more to do and 
nobody can afford not to be 
concerned about the future work on 
human rights and the actual change 
in human nature which must take 
place before these rights are fully 
implemented, but we have made a 
beginning and I believe we are 
moving forward. 
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT 
Chairman of the United Nations 
Commission on Human Rights. 
* 
“UNITED 
NATIONS 
GAVE 
HUMAN 
RIGHTS 
MESSAGE : 
A NEW FORCE ”’ 
F ROM the very beginning of the 
French Revolution in 
when the Declaration of the 
Rights of Man and the Citizen was 
proclaimed, not only the liberties of 
French nationals were defined, but 
those of every person in every 
nation of the world. 
Its message was universal and 
overcame all frontiers. 
Though widely circulated and 
rousing the deepest interest among 
all peoples during that period of 
almost fanatical fervour, it was not 
until a century and a half later— 
150 vears of continual sacrifice— 
that this appeal on behalf of Man 
  
and his liberties became truly 
universal. 
The United Nations gave the 
message a new force. Their 
Declaration, now {wo years old, 
not only reaffirms the rights of all 
the members of the human family 
but clearly states, in the light of 
all the trials and warring of nations 
and men, the conditions of human 
dignity on all social levels and the 
most noble aims of twentieth 
century civilization, 
As long as these rights and these 
liberties are accorded universal 
respect, the peoples will be freed 
from war, ignorance, fear and 
misery. In other words, the 
nations who have solemnly reco- 
gnised these rights and liberties, 
have no greater nor more urgent 
task than to ensure that they 
become living, sincere and effective 
realities. 
M. VINCENT AURIOL 
President of the French Republic. 
1789 
‘““ WORK 
FOR THE 
FUTURE” 
I’ a world. 
which is full 
of conflict 
and hatred ana 
violence, it be- 
comes even 
more necessary than at any other 
time for us to have some anchor 
to our faith in human destiny. 
The solemn proclamation by the 
United Nations of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights 
provides such an anchorage, if 
only we hold on to it. I welcome, 
therefore, the celebration of the 
second anniversary of this Declar- 
ation and 1 hope that it will 
revive in peoples’ minds all over 
the world that there are certain 
positive values in life which we 
must respect and hold on to, if life 
is to be made worth living. The 
present may be bad, but the present 
passes, giving place to the future. 
If the future we work for is full 
of hope for humanity, then the ills 
of the present do not matter much 
and we have a justification for 
working for that future. 
So I welcome this anniversary of 
an event important in man’s history 
and I send greeting to all those who 
work for the realisation of those 
human rights which we have 
proclaimed. 
  
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
Prime Minister of india. 
x 
“THE 
WORLD 
HAS NOW 
SPOKEN ” 
JIEW people 
now contest 
the opinion 
that the Univer- 
sal Declaration of Human Rights is 
one of the historic documents of 
our epoch. Already in scores of 
significant international as well as 
national encounters it has been 
appealed to in authoritative justifi- 
cation of certain causes or com- 
plaints. A growing body of 
jurisprudence is building up 
around it. As an objective standard, 
the Declaration serves at once as 
a potent ferment of ideas, as a 
disturber and judge of actual 
practice, and as a solid ground to 
which movements of reform can 
anchor themselves. 
That organized humanity was 
able after three years of responsible 
debate to arrive at this impressive 
definition of what belongs to man 
as man, without a single opposing 
voice in the final voting, was a 
tremendous event. The world has 
now formally spoken for the first 
time as to what constitutes the 
proper dignity and worth of man. 
For the thoughtful student, the 
debates that attended the elabora- 
tion of the Declaration would 
prove perhaps more important than 
the Declaration itself. It was in 
these debates that the dialectic of 
idea and attitude among the 
effective cultures of the present 
world became manifest. 
The present elaboration of the 
Covenant. the next stage beyond the 
Declaration, is meeting with some 
difficulty. But no matter how 
much the nations, whether 
understandably or not, fight shy 
of a strong binding Covenant, the 
Declaration, which has already 
been debated and decided on by 
them, will forever [ 
goading reminder of the ideals to 
which they have already solemnly 
pledged themselves. 
CHARLES MALIK 
Minister of Lebanon.in the United 
States and Rapporteur of the 
Commission on Human Rights. 
«THE FREEDOMS 
serve as a | 
FOR 
WHICH 
WE 
STAND 
ow, when 
it is more 
than evel 
necessary to def == - 
end those freedoms for which we, 
in the community of the United 
Nations stand, we welcome the 
opportunity which is given in these 
columns of the Unesco Courier to 
re-affirm our belief in the Declar 
ation of Human Rights on this 
second anniversary of its signature. 
MR. GEORGE TOMLINSON 
Minister of Education 
for England and Wales. 
* 
   
  
“FOR 
AN 
OPEN 
WORLD ” 
N the Univer- 
sal Declar- 
ation of 
Human Rights 
aspirations are ~=ct forth which 
unite all humanity in spite of the 
deep - rooted divergencies which 
exist in the world to-day as to how 
common ideals can best be realized. 
In order that these divergencies 
shall not prevent the fulfilment of 
the hopes embodied in the estab- 
lishment of the United Nations 
Organization, it appears most 
urgent that efforts be undertaken 
from all sides to encourage a free 
exchange of information and ideas 
hetween nations without which 
co-operation in true confidence 
cannot be achieved. : 
In an Open Letter of June 9th, 
1950, to the United Nations, dealing 
with the challenge to civilization 
presented by modern developments 
of science and technology I have 
tried to stress this point, and at 
the present occasion I would like 
to quote the following passages : 
“An open world where each 
nation can assert self solely by 
the extent to which it can contri-- 
bute to the common culture and is 
able to help others with experience 
and resources must be the goal to 
be put above cverything else. Still, 
crample in such respects can be 
effective only if isolation 1s 
abandoned and free discussion of 
cultural and social developments 
permitied across all boundaries. 
“Within any community it is 
only possible for the citizens to 
strive together for common welfare 
on a basis of public knowledge of 
the gencral conditions in the 
country. Likewise, real co-opera- 
tion between nations on problems of 
common concern pre-supposes free 
access to all information of im- 
portance for their relations. Any 
argument for upholding barriers 
for information and intercourse, 
based on concern for mafivnal 
tdeals or interests; must be 
weighed against the beneficial 
effects of common enlightenment 
and the relieved tension resulting 
from opcnness. 
“In the scarch for a harmonious 
relationship between the life of the 
individual and the organization of 
the community, there have always 
been and will ever remain many 
problems to ponder and principles 
for which to strive. However, to 
make it possible for nations to 
benefit from the cxperience of 
others and to avoid mutual 
misunderstanding of intentions, 
free access to information and 
unhampered opportunity for ex- 
change of ideas must be granted 
creryihere. 
Professor NIELS BOHR 
Danish Physicist.  

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 
  
    
  
uman rights, as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration adopted by the United Nations General 
H Assembly on December 10, 1948, are the outcome of a struggle that has been going on since 
the dawn of history. The scope of the Declaration’s thirty articles cannot therefore be 
properly understood without some knowledge of the great efforts and sacrifices they reflect. 
As part of its collective campaign of education and information aimed at showing both chil- 
dren and adults the help they can derive from the Rights and the corresponding duties they must 
fulfil in return, Unesco is publishing and will distribute a special Human Rights exhibition-album. 
On these pages, the Courier is reproducing a few of the album’s 276 illustrations which depict 
‘struggles and victories in the history of human rights as well as brief extracts from an accom- 
panying 40-page booklet from which teachers can supply the historical background that throws 
light on the meaning, circumstances and scope of the events to which the illustrations refer. 
The illustrations, and corresponding texts, which are taken from the Human Rights Exhibition 
organized by Unesco in Paris last year, have been selected so as to form miniature reproduc- 
ticn of large sections of this exhibition. 
Nearly 12,000 copies of the album are being published. A number of these are being sent to 
Unesco Member States and National Commissions for use in schools, libraries and adult education 
centres. Other copies will be obtainable from the Unesco Sales Agents, listed on page 2 of this 
issue, as from next january, priced at $3, or 16/ - or 800 French francs. 
THE ABOLITION OF SLAVERY 
T the beginning of the nineteenth cen- 
A tury slavery was still a basic institu- 
tion in a number of great and other- 
wise highly civilized countries. In 1835 it 
flourished in the colonies of all the great 
European countries, and in North and 
South America. Immense economic inte- 
rests and a complete social system were 
based on it. The supporters of abolition 
were treated as dangerous Utopians, when 
they were not prosecuted and punished as 
criminals. 
Yet within half a century slavery was 
everywhere abolished. 
The history of the abolition, in a rela- 
tively short space of time, shows that an 
idea which is apparently Utopian but is 
basically true can be speedily translated 
into fact when men who are at once cou- 
rageous and discerning will take a hand 
in public affairs. It is on this that the 
authors of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights have based their reasoned 
opes. 
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT 
CCC VERYONE has the right to freedom 
E of movement and residence within 
the borders of each State. 
“Everyone has the right to leave any 
country, including his own, and to return 
to his country.” : 
So states Article 13 of the Universal De- 
claration. Like many other articles, it 
lays down principles that, though readily 
acknowledged in theory, are far from 
being put into practice everywhere. It 
might even be said that, in the twentieth 
century, freedom of movement has suffer- 
- ed a setback, despite the tremendous de- 
velopment of the material facilities of 
transport from one part of the globe to 
another. 
It would seem that the first fourteen 
years of the twentieth century marked the 
“apex of man’s freedom of movement on 
earth. Not only were time, cost and in- 
security then reduced to a minimum, but 
the obstacles placed in the way of travel- 
lers by States had almost entirely vanish- 
ed. In 1913 one could travel without a 
passport in all Europe, with the exception 
of Russia and Turkey. : 
But after the 1914-1918 war, human 
obstacles to freedom of movement increas- 
ed; passports, formalities and restrictions 
reappeared. The New World was partially 
closed to immigrants. After the 1939-1945 
~ war, difficulties became general, and were 
added to by financial regulations. Today, 
. despite marked improvements in aircraft 
= TW ATS 
and automobiles, the delightful freedom of 
movement of 1913 is no more than a 
memory. 
Freedom of movement is a perfect 
example of a principle that men are at 
one in proclaiming but render nugatory in 
practice. Only international agreement 
based on firm, clear-cut undertakings, will 
suffice to remove, for the benefit of the 
majority, the present obstacles which 
profit scarcely anyone. 
THE ABOLITION 
OF INHUMAN TREATMENT 
HE revival of torture on a vast scale, in 
our own times and in countries pos- 
sessing a high degree of culture, proves 
that our advances in civilization are not 
too sure, and that constant vigilance, aid- 
ed by clearly defined laws and the means 
to see that they are enforced, is the only 
way of preventing nations from returning, 
with terrifying ease, to the worst practices 
of the dark ages. 
Article 5 of the Universal Declaration is 
‘short and categorical in this matter: 
“No one shall be subjected to torture 
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treat- 
ment or punishment.” 
The history of the world is only too full 
of examples of atrocious tortures applied 
to punish actions, beliefs, or utterances 
that today we regard as harmless, legiti- 
mate or even, on occasion, praiseworthy. It 
is remarkable that so many great men 
should have suffered torture in the name 
of some law that now seems absurd to us: 
Savonarola, Macchiavelli and so many 
others, not counting innumerable “here- 
tics” and “witches” who were simply burn- 
ed alive, from Joan of Arc and John Huss 
in the fifteenth, Michel Servet and Gior- 
dano Bruno in the sixteenth, to the 
“witches” of New England in the seven- 
teenth centuries. 
It was by a slow, very slow process, 
that civilized humanity finally abandoned 
these practices. 
PROTECTION AGAINST 
ARBITRARY ARREST ; 
EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW 
brief examination of ancient laws 
and customs will reveal the state of 
personal insecurity and social injus- 
tice in which our fathers lived. The con- 
quest of the rights of the person is a mo- 
dern enterprise, far from complete and 
constantly threatened with setbacks. The 
progress so far made, however, justifies 
the further efforts that are incumbent on 
the men and nations of today. 
iC NOVA » 
FO 
  
o REPERTA. 
et 
  
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT. For a jong period, widely separated civilizations developed in isolation, 
unaware of each others existence. During the Renaissance, the discovery of America, commemorated 
in this engraving (above), and the first voyages round the world brought these different civilizations into 
contact. in the 20th century, freedom of movement has suffered a setback due to '' human’ obstacles: 
passport visas, formalities and restrictions. Only international agreement can remove, for the benefit 
of the majority, such obstacles. 
 
  
Sh 
Ny 
1 
  
THE DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN 
is one of the world’s historic human rights’ docu-- 
ments. Produced during the first summer of the 
French Revolution, it maintained that men are 
born free and equal, and proclaimed freedom of 
speech, security and defence against oppression. 
It was one of the chief sources of inspiration to 
other peoples also struggling to achieve freedom. 
In contrast with the brutal and unjust 
practices that still subsist in many parts 
of the world, we may quote the following 
passages from the New Constitution of 
India which is now in force, and frees all 
citizens from the fear of arbitrary arrest 
and wrongful interference at the hands 
of the State : 
“The people of India, solemnly resolved 
to constitute India as a sovereign and 
democratic Republic, undertake to gua- 
rantee to all its citizens: 
“«Social, economic and political justice; 
“Freedom of thought, expression, opi- 
nion, faith and worship; 
Equality before the law and access to all 
rights; it further undertakes to promote 
among all men 
“Fraternity, which ensures the dignity 
of the individual and the unity of the 
nation.” 
These words show us how far the fun- 
damental ideas as to human rights have 
progressed throughout the world. 
THE DIGNITY OF LABOUR, 
AND SOCIAL SECURITY 
NTIL a very short time ago, no matter 
how much suffering or inequality 
was caused by unemployment, differ- 
ences in wealth, the misuse of power, 
or other circumstances, it was generally 
considered that each man had to “shift 
for himself” to find work, and protect his 
interests as best he could. It was only 
when faced with the new economic and so- 
cial conditions of the nineteenth century 
that legislators were torced to acknow- 
ledge that, where labour was concerned, 
the absence of regulations led to new privi- 
leges, fresh oppression, and an increasing 
risk of disturbances and violence. In other 
words, the task of freeing the human per- 
son remained unfinished so long as the 
fundamental principles formulated for 
citizens in general had not been legally 
applied to the protection of the worker as 
such. To put it more briefly still, what 
good were theoretical freedom and equa- 
lity, if the only choice open to a man was 
“misery or revolt”? 
The progress achieved, or still to be 
achieved, in this matter follows logically 
upon the civil and political progress made 
during the last 150 years. It has been made 
possible only by the establishment of un- 
restricted universal suffrage, which is an 
application of-the basic democratic princi- 
ple of equality. This conquest of universal 
suffrage has been largely due to the con- 
stant and strenuous efforts of labour orga- 
nizations themselves. 
STANDARD OF LIVING, 
AND ASSISTANCE 
ERTAIN articles, the more daring, of the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights have impelled many people to 
exclaim: “But this is Utopian! Unfortu- 
nately, the world hasn't reached that 
stage!” 
True, the world has not yet reached 
that stage. But the world is in process 
of evolution, and that evolution depends 
on men. We have seen slavery, a well- 
DECEMBER 1950 


### 81625: UNESCO exhibition-album to show man's unending fight to gain his rights

UNESCO EXHIBITION-ALBUM T 
UNENDING FIGHT TO GAII 
established institution, disappear from. 
English, French, Russian and American . 
soil within a quarter of a century (1838- 
1865). It may be that, in another twenty- 
five years, nothing Utopian will be seen in 
Article 25 of the 1948 Declaration: 
“Everyone has the right to a standard of 
living adequate for the health and wel. 
being of himself and of his family, includ- 
ing food, clothing, housing and medical 
care and necessary social services, and the 
right to security in the event of unem- 
ployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, 
old age or other lack of livelihood in cir- 
cumstances beyond his control.” 
During the last hundred years, nume- - 
rous laws have improved the living con- - 
ditions of the less favoured classes 
throughout the world. Hospitals have 
been modernized, and social welfare enter- 
prises have increased. The world has be- 
come accustomed to the idea that a nation 
is fully responsible for the lot of each of 
its citizens, no less than to the democratic 
principle that each citizen must assume 
some responsibility in public affairs. 
THE PROTECTION 
OF FAMILY LIFE 
AND OF PROPERTY 
s the idea of the rights of the person 
A has developed, rights that we now 
regard a true criterion of civilization, 
the status of women and children has 
evolved in the direction of an ever greater. 
freedom to determine their own fate. 
Legal or customary restrictions, which in 
early times were very severe, are tending 
to disappear. i 
This development is illustrated by Artid 
  
cle 16 of the Universal Declaration of 1948, 
which states that “men and women... with- 
out any limitation due to race, nationalit: 
or religion, have the right to marry and 7, 
found a family. They are entitled to equé: 
rights... Marriage shall be entered into 
only with the free and full consent of the 
intending spouses.” 
To us, there is nothing revolutionary in- 
these stipulations; but they would have 
seemed so in the past. The novels and, 
plays of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
century alone show us the lengths te 
which family and social tyranny could 
proceed in such matters. . 
The notion of property, one of the ideas 
most hotly discussed in our day, is dealt 
with in Article 17 of the Declaration of 
Human Rights, at least in a negative form: 
“No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of . 
his property.” 
In former times a prince simply confis- 
cated the property of some of his subjects: 
as Louis XIV did in the case of the Pro. 
testants. In modern times, many a new 
régime has done as much with the pro- 
perty of individuals or social groups that 
have fallen from power; Hitler, for inst-, 
ance, confiscated the property of Jews. I 
will always be difficult to draw the lint 
between arbitrary spoliation on the on¢ 
hand and legal expropriation (if the pu- 
blic interest demands it) accompanied by 
fair compensation, on the other. 
In the last resort, only the conscience, 
of citizens can and must determine when" 
a legal act becomes an abuse of power. Ii 
may even be said that this distinctios 
denotes the difference between a true an: 
a false democracy. 
THE EMANCIPATION 
OF WOMEN 
HE story of women’s rights is a fas- 
T cinating one. They have been subject, 
throughout history, to extraordinary 
vicissitudes. 
There have been periods of total eman 
cipation, and periods of enslavemen 
beyond all hope of deliverance. Some 
times men have placed women in a posi: 
tion of eminence; at other times, woinen 
have had to win their own rights at the 
cost of a long struggle against the dis- 
trust, fear and derision of their contempos. - 
raries. In Ancient Egypt, woman, thougt 
for a time enslaved to man, very soot 
attained complete equality with him. 
In Ancient Greece, especially with the 
Boeotians and the Spartans, society long 
adhered to the primitive law that regard- 
ed women as veritable beasts of burden. 
The great Renaissance, which began at 
early as the twelfth century in Mediter~ 
ranean countries, was accompanied by a 
great advance in women’s emancipation. 
We cannot recount the history of wo- 
men’s emancipation as it developed in 
every country, but most nations have re- 
cognized the principle of equal rights for 
both sexes. There is therefore nothing ir 
the Universal Declaration of 1948 that if 
revolutionary nor Utopian, as would hav: 
been the case fifty years ago. It simpl 
lays down, for the whole world, principle: 
that have been established by differen: 
civilizations after centuries of effort anc 
the gradual elimination of many injustices

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=8) 2

### 74489: Films: a universal medium to propagate a Universal Declaration

### 81629: UNESCO filmstrips aid world-wide teaching of human rights principles

Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER DECEMBER 1950 
O SHOW MAN'S 
N HIS RIGHTS 
FREEDOM OF RELIGION 
HE right to freedom of conscience and 
T religion is an achievement of modern 
times. This right has conflicted less 
with material interests than with deep 
and traditional beliefs. From time im- 
memorial, men convinced that they possess 
the truth have thought it their duty to 
impose it, by law or by force, on other 
men whose idea of the truth was different, 
and those who serve one god have called 
those who serve another god “infidels.” 
It was to the eighteenth century, 
essentially the century of the emancip- 
ation of the human person, that fell the 
“honour of fighting religious intolerance 
unremittingly and defeating it almost 
everywhere, at least legally. 
The 1948 Universal Declaration of 
Rights was not content, in its Article 18, 
merely to reassert the individual's right 
to freedom of thought, conscience and 
religion, and his right to freedom to 
change his religion or belief. It explicit- 
ly added “freedom, either alone or in 
community with others and in public or 
private, to manifest his religion or belief 
in teaching, practice, worship and observ- 
ance.” 
We should not however forget that, if 
the spirit of persecution is declining in the 
matter of religious beliefs, it has never 
been more aggressive in the political and 
the social sphere. In various places in 
this respect, the final conquest of the 
rights of the human person in our world 
of today, is far from having been 
achieved. 
that it is a sign of strength in authorities 
to grant all citizens a wide measure of 
freedom of discussion and that to suppress 
that freedom is a sign of fear and there- 
fore of weakness, Article 19 of the 1948 
Declaration will readily find its place in 
national legal systems. 
THE RIGHT TO EDUCATION 
HE right of every human being to 
education is, of all the rights affirmed 
by the United Nations Declaration of 
1948, one of the least contested. 
Article 26, which deals with the right 
to education, was adopted unanimously 
with two abstentions. The terms of the 
article are couched in no uncertain lan- 
guage, although nations and families are 
given all reasonable freedom in inter- 
preting it: elementary education must be 
free and compulsory, technical and profes- 
sional education must be made generally 
available, and higher education must be 
equally accessible to all, on the basis of 
merit. 
This is the culmination of a century 
and a half of effort made in almost all 
countries with a view to a truly demo- 
cratic distribution of education. A 
hundred years ago the idea of making 
education accessible to all appeared, to 
many, to be dangerously Utopian. 
In our times, whole continents, where 
lower standard of living seemed insepar- 
able from an equally low standard of 
education are now adopting popular 
education, accessible to all. This, as Jef- 
ferson said, is essential to any democratic 
régime based on popular endorsement. 
  
- FREEDOM OF THOUGHT 
AND OPINION 
T all periods, the progress of civiliz- 
A ation has been retarded by lack of 
freedom in the dissemination of 
ideas and opinions. An idea cannot be 
killed by censorship or prohibition, but its 
advance can long be delayed. For whole 
centuries, intellectual life and social pro- 
gress have been checked and sometimes 
paralysed by the concerted will of 
churches and princes, closely united to 
maintain a status quo favourable to their 
privileges. ‘The invention of printing in 
the fifteenth century placed a formidable 
‘weapon in the hands of innovators and 
reformers, whose resources increased with 
the spread of pamphlets and, later, pe- 
riodicals. 
While with the press, the film and the 
radio there has been an increase in the 
means of propagating ideas, the means of 
controlling and checking this propagation 
have also become much more refined. In 
the past, authorities were, in a way, 
powerless against ideas communicated 
from man to man. Today, great news- 
papers are more vulnerable than were the 
slim pamphlets of the past, and the polic- 
ing of frontiers has everywhere become 
far more effective. 
There is no doubt that, in certain parts 
of the world, freedom of information is 
in retrogression. On the other hand it is 
noteworthy that the new Republic of 
India has through its Constituent Assem- 
bly proclaimed the right to freedom of 
speech and expression for all its citizens. 
When it comes to be generally admitted 
PARTICIPATION 
IN CULTURAL LIFE 
HE right to education is completed by 
that to “participate freely in the cul- 
tural life of the community”, a right 
stated in Article 27 of the Universal De- 
claration of 1948. Works of art and the 
benefits of scientific progress should be 
accessible to all. It would be difficult, in 
this regard, to lay down strict laws, 
applicable in all cases and to all persons. 
But what the Declaration seeks to estab- 
lish is quite clear. It is equally clear what 
it seeks to prevent — that cultural life 
should be made the privilege of certain 
groups ; that material or financial obsta- 
cles should come between a work of art 
and men of good will who wish to 
approach it; and that the results of 
scientific progress should be monopolized 
for the profit or enjoyment of a few. 
At all periods, culture has been demo- 
cratic in some of its manifestations, e.g. 
games and athletic competitions, popular 
songs and dances, and performances at 
which the people were at once spectators 
and actors. 
But the outstanding cultural feature of 
modern times is the diffusion of the 
printed word. Gutenberg’s invention (of 
which the Chinese were the forerunners) 
greatly increased the individual’s oppor- 
tunities of acquiring culture without 
depending upon collective manifestations. 
Books are not expensive, and this has 
made the personal conquest of knowledge 
possible, without reliance on the rather 
exclusive schools of the past. Books have 
been the great liberators of modern man. 
 
WHEN HUMAN RIGHTS WERE VIOLATED. Under Hitler's rule in Germany, human rights were syste- 
matically violated, all individual liberty was suppressed and ail questions affecting morality, human rights 
and human dignity, were subordinated to the lust for power of a so-called '* master race ''. Aggressive 
diplomacy soon led to war. Frontiers were violated, provinces annexed, peoples enslaved. Nearly all 
nations were involved in the conflict. The war took a total of forty million lives—the civilian victims of 
mass murder in concentration camps (above, right), and the soldiers who left their homes to fight and die 
(above, lefty so that enslaved countries might be liberated. 
FREEDOM OF CREATIVE WORK 
RTICLE 27 of the Universal Declaration 
of 1948, which deals with the right 
of everyone to participate in cultural 
life, also mentions everyone’s right to “the 
protection of the moral and material in- 
terests” resulting from “any scientific, 
literary or artistic production of which he 
is the author”. 
The application of this principle is ob- 
viously less extensive than that of the 
rights of all readers, listeners or specta- 
tors, i.e. everyone as a whole. Here, only 
the actual creators, writers, artists or 
scientists, are concerned. But their pro- 
tection means the defence of all civiliz- 
ation, and thus, indirectly, everyone pro- 
fits by it. 
The creator, as ¢ man, must enjoy to 
the full those rights that belong to all, 
including the right to choose his place 
of residence and his occupation, and to 
be guaranteed a standard of living that 
ensures his dignity (Articles 13, 23, 24 and 
25); thus protected, it is for him alone to 
bring his available thought and effort to 
bear upon the work he has chosen. The 
less the rest of mankind intervenes in 
this choice, the sounder and purer this 
choice will be. 
The better a civilization understands the 
place occupied in its destiny by thinkers 
and artists, the greater the number of 
recognized creators there will be, and the 
greater will be the facilities offered them. 
THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE 
IN GOVERNMENT 
HE civic rights of the individual under- 
lie all other rights, because they make 
it possible to obtain those other rights 
peacefully. 
They also guarantee them against the 
arbitrary action of authority. 
This is stated by the 1948 Universal 
Declaration in its Article 21, which jis of 
fundamental importance: 
“Everyone has the right to take part in 
the government of his country, directly 
or through freely chosen representatives. 
“Everyone has the right of equal access 
to public service in his country. 
“The will of the people shall be the 
basis of the authority of government; this 
will shall be expressed in periodic and 
genuine elections which shall be by uni- 
versal and equal suffrage and shall be 
held by secret vote or by equivalent free 
voting procedure.” 
One hears in these words the echo of 
principles affirmed at the end of the 
eighteenth century, at the time of the 
American and French Revolution, prin- 
ciples underlying the national constitu- 
tions of all democratic countries, that is, 
the majority of modern nations. The 
peoples now know what it costs to be 
deprived of such rights; it is to be hoped 
that the cruel and disastrous experiment 
of the twentieth-century dictatorships 
~ will not too soon be forgotten. 
* 
E have seen that the Universal De- 
claration of Human Rights, adopted 
by the Third General Assembly of 
the United Nations, sets a milestone of 
progress in two respects. 
First, it lays obligations upon f{forty- 
eight eountries, whose official representat- 
ives approved it. If it leads to an inter- 
national Covenant, the position b»f 
hesitant States will become more and 
more difficult to justify and to maintain. 
Second, the Declaration courageously 
states certain ideas that are only of recent 
origin; as regards these, it has shown that 
the world was further forward than many 
people imagined. 
Still one justifiable question must be 
answered: “So much for rights, but what 
about duties?” : 
The answer is simply that the De-’ 
claration of Human Rights tacitly in-- 
cludes a complete Declaration of Human 
Duties; there is, indeed, no right that does 
not imply a duty for others to respect and 
defend it. And all the duties are foreseen 
and defined by the recognition of the 
rights of others. 
Many of these duties, admittedly, are 
negative : “Thou shalt not deprive others 
of their liberty,” “Thou shalt not per- 
secute others on account of their opinion,” 
“Thou shalt not arbitrarily exploit the 
work of others.” But what a progress it 
would be, in this world of ours, if all men 
practised their negative duties! 
If and when the rights of the individual 
are fully applied, every man will be faced 
by a supreme responsibility, that of direct- 
ing his own fate. He will have lost but 
one right, that of regarding himself as a 
helpless victim in a world where freedom 
of decision does not belong to him. There 
are still men who prefer irresponsibility, 
and have proved it. All men are not yet 
ready for so full a measure of liberation, 
but their children will become accustomed 
o it. : 
 
ABOLITION OF INHUMAN PRACTICES. Vengeance, first regarded 
as a right to be freely exercised by the individual, was later replaced 
by public vengeance. The law of an eye for an eye and a tooth for 
a tooth was the source of much cruelty in the penal system and 
prison conditions, as illustrated in this 17th century engraving of a 
cell in the Bastille. Reformers have succeeded in driving home 
the idea that prison is not enough; a criminal needs re-educating, 
THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATION IN CULTURAL LIFE. Books 
are a link between man and man for they enable people to share 
in the whole cultural heritage of mankind." In ancient times libraries 
were rare and only the priveleged had access to them. Today 
travelling libraries like this Canadian one (above) make regular trips, 
bringing books within reach of those who live far from cities. 
UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE. The attainment of Universal Suffrage for 
men and the elimination of property requirements for the right to vote 
was a long and difficult process. The struggle was only half won, 
however, until the right to vote could also be extended to the other 
half of humanity — women. 
during our own century. Japanese women (above) obtained this 
right after the Second World War. 
The victory was only generally achieved

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 81632: What are electrons?

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 
 
  
  
TO PROPAG 
FILMS — A UNIVERSAL MEDIUM 
ATE A UNIVERSAL DECLARATION 
RT lk 
a EE + BET 
of man — and all the art and skill which can extend those powers. To 
the man or woman who shouts the truth from the housetops, the mega- 
phone, the microphone and the tape recorder are handy things — sparing the 
throat for future use and multiplying the voice a millionfold. The man who 
expresses truth with pen or paintbrush is not baffled by the use to make of 
typewriters, printing presses or cinema cameras. Now the motion picture, 
which speaks so powerfully to the mind and heart, is increasingly devoted to 
the heroic themes of human rights. Along with nobly conceived commercial 
films, there are a number of documentaries. Several of these have been 
produced by or in consultation with the United Nations. Stills reproduced 
T good fight to gain and defend human rights calls for the full powers 


### 81630: The Scientist and human rights

10 December 1950 
ANNIVERSARY OF THE 
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION 
OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
Message from M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
Director-General of Unesco 
(Continued from Page 5) 
+ HE Declaration charts a long and 
hard road. It is significant thas 
it upholds, side by side, civil 
rights, political rights, social and cul- 
tural rights, for in ‘practice there can 
be no separation among them. Does a 
people have political freedom if it can- 
not gather the profits of a prosperous 
industry and agriculture? Can a people 
develop its economy and improve its 
social organization if its children 
remain illiterate, and its resources of 
leadership inadequate? The domain 
of Human Rights is indivisible. It is 
the whole problem of the improvement 
of the lot of human beings that calls 
us to action. 
No one can any longer be tempted to 
complacency by the illusion of security 
and of uniformity. One people may 
seem to enjoy most of the rights set 
forth in the Declaration. But can such 
a people really have the rights if its 
neighbours lack them? Can it be sure 
of keeping them if it fails to take an 
active part in the common struggle for 
the recognition of the rights of all peo- 
ples? There is no human event which 
does not affect the whole world. No 
“one can live outside history; and the 
history of our time is the crisis of man- 
kind in the throes of achieving its mate- 
rial and moral unity—of mankind 
which will know neither peace nor res- 
pite until man’s elementary aspiration 
to the universal recognition of his dig- 
nity is satisfied. 
A Hope Drives Man Forward 
HEN we live in a time fraught 
with so many dangers and face 
a future full of so many new 
perspectives; when it is so plain that 
man will find his salvation only by 
subordinating to his ideal of justice the 
prodigious conquests that now threaten 
to dominate him, how can our clarity of 
intelligence yield to the temptation of 
discouragement? The proclamation of 
Human Rights takes up- the cry of the 
victims, of the enslaved, of the hungry 
and the workless; it reveals the pre- 
sence in man of a hope that drives him 
forward on a path where rest would 
be the accomplice of death. No doubt, 
the centuries before ours were wrong 
to believe that uninterrupted progress 
would be easy. Mankind does not 
advance without setbacks, without re- 
treats, without grave crises. No doubt, 
we pay dearly for the power given to 
man, for the achievements of technique 
the increase of wealth, the attainmen: 
by all peoples of self-determination, the 
birth of a real human community; but 
if we succeed in solving the problems 
that beset us, we shall be able to build 
upon them a civilization at long last 
truly universal. 
The Leaven Of Universality 
Hus an appeal which bursts from 
the very heart of reality calls us 
to this struggle. Let us conduct 
ourselves in a way that will make every 
body share in the struggle; let us create 
a militant state of mind throughout the 
world. Let us enlighten men’s con- 
science. Let us speak to men of their 
rights, and also of the duties which will 
make them worthy to enjoy the rights. 
Let us show them that no selfish claim 
is enough, that the conquest of rights is 
a struggle in the name of all men and 
carries within itself the leaven of uni 
versality. Above all, let us teach them 
the ugliness of injustice, of violence and 
of oppression. Let us tell them that 
these dangers threaten us more then 
ever; but that also more than ever it 
depends upon man, and only upon man, 
to defeat them and gradually to estab- 
lish an order which fulfils our aspira- 
tions in conformity with the circum- 
stances of our epoch. We shall then 
have played our part in the achievement 
of that ideal which is made the more 
glorious by the obstacles it must over- 
come; and in hastening the advent of 
a policy in which peace and progress 
are inseparably linked. 
  
DECEMBER 1950 
 
above were chosen from two such films. (1) The United Nations film “Of 
Human Rights”, for example, shows how lack of tolerance can cause open 
hostility among the children of a small town. Living on opposite sides of a 
river, two groups had previously regarded each other as “different” and 
carried on a traditional “war”. At left, editor of the local newspaper acts as 
peacemaker between them and tells them about the Universal Declaration oi 
Human Rights. (2) “Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate 
for the health and well-being of himself and his family...” (Article 25, Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights). “Au Carrefour de la Vie” (The Crossroads of 
Life), a film produced for the United Nations by Henri Storck, shows how bad 
living conditions become the root cause of juvenile delinquency.   
UNESCO FILMSTRIPS AID WORLD-WIDE 
TEACHING OF HUMAN RIGHTS PRINCIPLES 
o help propagate the principles of the human rights, Unesco has produced 
and is distributing a series of six filmstrips on themes sug ested by the 
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, for use in schools and 
in adult education. 
The first, Milestones, is a general study of the historical development of the 
concept of human rights and each of the other five—dAbolition of Slavery, Eman- 
cipation of Women, Freedom of Thought, The Right to Education, and Arts and 
Life—deals with a single article in the Universal Declaration. 
Unesco is distributing them with explanatory notes in English, French, Spanisi, 
Arabic and German. These include practical instructions in the use of filmstrips, 
a copy of the Preamble to the Universal Declaration and a sentence or paragraph 
of explanatory exposition linked with cach of the thirty visual frames of each of 
the six filmstrips. 
Six hundred prints of each filmstrip have been made and are being disiri- 
buted to Unesco Member States, Unesco National Commissions and to Ministries of 
Education or other Government departments. Additional copies, obtainable from 
Unesco, cost $3, £1 or 1,000 French francs for a set of six, while individual film- 
strips are available for 50 cents, 3/6 or 200 francs. Next vear jt is planned to 
supplement the series with titles dealing with other aspeels of human righis, 
  
  
 
- / -» 4 HE 
- - © CVE = 
- AE [EE 
= - - : 3 
” - - & hy ® 
=m o™ - a -» 
- - . | = 
- -» - ~ 
- » © - 
- - - - 
- - - " 
- - ©® - 
- m™ 5 - 
. I A = ” 
- - - = 
n - . « 
- - “ - 
- =» = 
», net - LL =   
THE ABOLITION OF SLAVERY. Ekxiracts 
from a Unesco filmstrip: 1. Conditions on a 
slave trading ship were appalling. For every 
negro torn from his native place who arrived 
safely at his journey's end, four died because 
of maltreatment. 2. Slaves had no rights. 
They were sold by auction in the slave market. 
Their owners had the power of life and death 
over them. 3. Whether the slave was to be 
well or ill-treated depended entirely on his 
owner. 
FREEDOM OF COMMUNICATION. Extracts 
from a Unesco filmstrip: 1. The invention of 
the printing press in the 15th century was one 
of the most important developments in the 
communication of ideas. 2. The seizure and 
destruction of the press of “Le Temps” was 
one of the causes of the Revolution of 1830 
which ended the Bourbon dynasty in France. 
3. In our own time, the Nazi regime in Germany 
revived the burning of “dangerous” books as 
a measure of repression.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 81635: André Honnorat (1868-1950): in the service of peace

DECEMBER 1950 
    
F the 30 Articles in the 
Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights, 
several are concerned in 
various degrees with the 
freedom of science. Dr. Bart 
J. Bok, Associate Director of 
the Harvard College Obser- 
vatory and former Chairman 
of the U.S. National Research 
Council’s Committee on 
Unesco, has examined this 
question in a pamphlet 
“Freedom of Science”, pu- 
blished in French by Unesco 
and shortly to appear in 
English. 
In this pamphlet, Dr. Bok 
points out that scientists are 
especially conscious of their 
rights and freedoms. For 
example, the scientist in his 
laboratory desires freedom 
in the selection of research 
topics and wants guidance 
rather than orders. He 
should have access to the 
publications of other workers 
in the field and he should 
have the right to publish 
freely the results of his own 
investigations. He wants to 
have no restrictions upon his 
freedom of travel and of 
correspondence, 
Further, scientists want to 
exercise their rights as free 
citizens; they should be free 
to participate in the cultural 
and intellectual life of the 
community, and to parti- 
cipate in government and, if 
necessary, to criticize it. 
“The community which 
restricts the freedom of its 
scientists as citizens will lose 
in the end. In modern 
society, government at all 
levels is constantly faced with 
policy decisions involving 
complex scientific and tech- 
nological matters. Wise de- 
cisions must rest, in part, on 
the advice of civic-minded 
citizens, and useful advice 
will hardly be forthcoming if 
scientists are not free to 
exercise their civic responsi- 
bilities”, declares Dr. Bok. 
A TASK FOR ALL MEN 
1 N discussing how the free- 
dom of science can be 
preserved, he says that 
scientists must be made to 
realize that their freedom 
can only be retained if they 
are willing to react against 
all infringements of this 
freedom. “They must learn 
to take mo freedom for 
granted... scientists cannot 
accomplish this task alone. 
They need sympathetic 
support from mnon-scientists 
in all walks of life and in all 
professions. The freedom of 
science cannot be maintained 
unless there is, in. world 
opinion, a climate favorable 
to it.” 
Dr. Bok refers specifically 
to Articles 12, 13 and 19 of 
the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights (protection 
 
HOW ELECTRONS MOVE 
THROUGH A WIRE. A cur-- 
rent of electricity passing through 
a wire may be compared with a 
number of boulders rolling down- 
hill through a forest. The trees 
represent the atoms in the metal 
of the wire, and the bouiders are 
electrons which are continually 
bumping into them, then moving 
on again. So tiny is an electron 
that severai millions of millions 
pass through an ordinary electric 
lamp each second. 
    * 
CIENTIST Al 
against arbitrary interference 
and attacks, freedom of 
movement and freedom of 
opinion) which he states are 
the minimum that must be 
guaranteed if there is to be a 
freedom of communication. 
If a scientist is to work 
effectively, he needs as much 
as anyone the rights ex- 
pressed in Articles 20 to 26. 
These include : freedom of 
assembly, the right to take 
part in the government of his 
country, to social security, to 
free choice of employment, to 
rest and leisure, to an ade- 
quate standard of living and 
to education. 
Article 27 (participation in 
cultural life and protection of 
scientific, literary or artistic 
productions) is especially 
important for the scientist. 
But, says Dr. Bok, referring 
to Article 29 (Everyone has 
duties to the community...) 
these rights and freedoms 
are meaningless, unless they 
entail certain duties and res- 
ponsibilities, 
A GUARANTEE 
FOR FREEDOMS 
R. Bok recognizes that 
scientists can be consi- 
dered as prototypes of 
world citizens but that inter- 
  
NE of mankind's most ver- 
O satile and obedient helpers 
in the world of practical 
affairs turns out to be the lightest 
particle of matter known to 
science — the electron. Within a 
few decades of its discovery it 
succeeded in claiming as its own 
an astonishing number and variety 
of tasks, giving rise to an entirely 
‘new art called electronics. 
Electrons attain their greatest 
usefulness when freed from 
matter and made to fling them- 
selves through a void inside a 
glass tube. This they do in 
various forms of apparatus. In 
the photocell the liberation comes 
through the gentle caress of ‘a ray 
of light ; in the X-ray tube and 
in the radio tube (or valve), 
electrons are literally boiled out 
of a hot wire. 
Thomas Edison, the American 
inventor, observed the latter efféct 
as long ago as 1883, but it went 
almost unnoticed, and twenty 
years passed before Sir John 
Fleming fashioned a practical 
device on this principle. Shortly 
thereafter, Lee Deforest na- 
tented the radio tube in what is 
essentially its modern form. 
Today it is difficult to name any 
of the sciences or practical arts 
that has not found use for this 
“device. 
The first indications of the 
existence of electrons were obtain- 
ed after the middle of the last 
century when clever experimenters 
found it possible to coax subtle 
“radiant matter” from ordinary 
substances hy passing current 
from a spark coil through a glass. 
tube from which most of the 
hindering air had heen pumped. 
  
‘of matter. 
nationalism in science is at 
present subject to many con- 
trols. He comments that 
scientists know from every- 
day experience how close we 
are to “one world" of science 
and they have, therefore, a 
special responsibility to work 
for the removal of all un- 
necessary barriers. 
He refers also to a Charter 
for Scientists prepared by the 
Committee on Science and its 
Social Relations (CSSR) ot 
the International Council of 
Scientific Unions, drafted in 
1948. There has been much 
discussion about this but hc 
can see tremendous gains ii 
individual scientists in suffi- 
cient numbers were to decide 
simultaneously and volunta- 
rily to attach their signatures 
to the Charter. 
Dr. Bok expresses the upi- 
nion that : : 
“As long as science is free, 
scientists are almost automa- 
tically joined in a world bro- 
therhood and it is fervently 
hoped that the scientists of 
the world will realise that in 
the Universal Declaration uf 
Human Rights lies the pro- 
mise of a guarantee for their 
cherished freedoms and that 
it is their responsibility to 
join the forces that must lead 
in achieving the universul 
adrntion of the Declaration, 
ND HU!         
, 2 
hv 
 
[AN RIGHTS 
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
A CLOCK FOR THE ATOMIC AGE. In a radical departure from ali 
conventional methods of measuring time, an atomic clock—invariant with 
age and for the first time independent of astronomical observations—has 
been developed by the National Bureau of Standards in Washington. Based 
on a constant, natural vibration frequency of atoms in the ammonia molecule, 
the atomic clock is a scientific achievement which offers an entirely new 
primary standard of frequency and time. Its principlepromises to free man from 
age-old methods of fixing time by the daily rotation of the earth on its axis, 
.as it revolves around the sun. The primary standard, the earth, is very 
gradually slowing down and, in addition, unaccountable fluctuations in the 
rate of rotation have sporadically lengthened and shortened the day. The 
new method offers an invariant master clock against which the variation in 
timekeeping of the earth could be measured. his photo shows Dr. E. U. 
Condon, Director of the National Bureau of Standards, (left) and Dr. Harold 
Lyons, inventor of the clock, in front of the panels which control it. Dr. 
Condon is holding a model of the ammonia molecule whose absorption of 
radio energy provides the invariant frequency upon which the principle 
of the clock is based. 
WHAT ARE ELECTRONS ? 
by Ira M. Freeman 
The decisive experiments that 
revealed the nature of this 
“radiant-matter” (more conven- 
tionally called cathode  riys) 
were the work of the mild- 
mannered and gifted English phy- 
sicist John Joseph Thomson. He 
found what others had looked for 
without success—that the cathode 
“rays could be swerved from their 
normally straight path by means 
of electrical and magnetic forces. 
Bending Cathode Rays 
ROM the observed direction 
and amount of the bending 
Thomson concluded = that 
the cathode rays consisted of 
charges of negative electricity 
carried by pirticles of matter. 
The astonishing feature of the 
result was that such a particle 
turned out to be almost two 
thousand times less massive than 
an atom of hydrogen — up to 
that time the lightest known bit 
Thus, in 1897, 
science came to Know that 
something even simpler than the 
supposedly immutable atom exist- 
ed in Nature. 
Thomson’s experiment by itsell 
was not capable of disclosing the 
amount of electricity carried by 
each cathode ray particle, or 
electron, but in his laboratory and 
elsewhere investigators set about 
to devise new experiments 10 
determine this quantity. 
Among the many scientists who 
worried about the problem was 
a young professor at the Unl- 
versity of Chicago, Robert Milli- 
kan. He devised, in 1909, an 
apparatus in which oil Is sprayed 
into the space betl- 
ween two flat metal 
plates and a single 
drop is kept under 
observation in a mi- 
croscope. Such a 
droplet is small, per- 
haps a tenth of a 
hair’shreadthindiam- 
eter, and so instead 
of plummeting down- 
ward like a stone, it 
falls through the air 
at a leisurely and’ 
constant rate which 
is readily measured. 
If, now, the metal 
plates are connected 
10 an electric battery 
the drop will usually 
he observed to alter 
it once its rate of 
fall, or to remain 
  
     
La
 
  
— : 
O
 
y 
      [
T
7
1
7
1
]
 
  
 
- 
PUTTING ELECTRONS TO WORK — THE ELEMENTS OF AN ELEC- 
TRON (RADIO) TUBE. Electrical impulses applied to the grid act to 
control the passage of electrons from the hot wire to the plate. In a radio 
receiver, these impulses are produced by the waves sent out from the broad- 
casting station. 
suspended motionless, or even to 
begin to move upward. The 
reason is that the process of 
spraying the oil has wrenched 
electrons loose from some of 
the atoms and given the excess 
to others. As a consequence, 
a drop will generally possess a 
resultant electric charge, either 
positive or negative, and so will 
be urged upward or downward by 
the electrical force existing het- 
ween the charged metal plates. 
Atomicity Of Eleetricity 
ILLIKAN’S apparatus was 
thus an extremely inge- 
nious weighing machine, a 
million times more accurate than 
the most refined mechanical ba- 
lance ever coustructed. 
Frorh the observations it was 
possible to compute the amount 
of electrical charge residing on 
each droplet, with the significant 
result that these charges in- 
variably are whole-number mul- 
tiples of a certain smallest value 
—— the so-called charge on the 
electron. Millikan’s experiment 
showed, then, that electricity, 
like matter, possesses a kind of 
atomicity, and that the electron is 
the basic smallest unit of electri- 
fication. that can exist by itself, 
This speck of “radiant matter” 
discovered hy Thomson, this 
particle carrying a dab of electri- 
city, turns out to be one of the 
fundamental tonstituents of the 
atoms of all kinds of matter 
throughout the universe. 
Just before the war, the 
American scientist, G.R. Harrison 
wrote : ‘ Putting electrons to 
work has put men to work. That 
four great industries—the 
telephone, the radio, the phono- 
graph, and the motion picture in- 
dustries—rest directly on the 
_ vacuum tube and could not exist 
on s0 vast a scale without it, is 
usually ignored when new devices 
are blamed for technological une 
employment.” Today, television, 
radar, electronic computers, the 
electron microscope and several 
other highly important applica- 
tions might be added to thé above 
list, and the potentialities of the 
tiny yet mighty electron are 
seemingly without end. 
(If you would like to read 
further on this topic, write to the 
Division for the Popularization of 
Science, UNESCO, 19, avenue 
Kléber, Paris=16¢, France, request= 
ing a free copy of “References on 
Electrons”.)

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=11) 2

### 81640: Indonesia plans expanded education programme

### 74496: It happened in December...

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 DECEMBER 1950 
 
   
P ARISIANS in the early twenties 
were somewhat loath {to 
take their visitors on a tour 
of the city’s southern borders. A 
muddy street was all that separ- 
ated the pleasant “parc Montsou- 
ris” from the dismantled forti- 
fications where, amidst rubble 
and debris, the vacant lots of 
suburbia aimlessly awaited the 
speculators and their blocks of 
tenement houses. Beyond, midst 
the smoke and dirt of factories, 
lay the “red belt” as Parisians 
called it, a mass of corrugated 
iron or tarred makeshift hovels, 
sunk in the pitiless depths of 
misery. 
To this barren waste a man 
sometimes came to ponder, a 
distinguished-looking man whom 
passers-by took to be an architect 
or a poet. In point of fact he was 
the Minister of Education. Yet 
the passers-by were not mistaken, 
for André Honnorat was both a 
poet and a builder. He used to 
wander through the brambles and 
the rubble, a tall figure under the 
heavy skies. His gaze seemed to 
miss the ruins and the hovels ; 
in their stead he saw a spacious 
city, with buildings bordering on 
tree-lined avenues, on wide sports 
grounds. Down these avenues, 
through the broad gateways, came 
groups of young men and women, 
laughing, talking together in 
every known tongue. 
An Instrument Of Peace 
his was André Hennorat’s dream: 
a city planned entirely for stu- 
dents, the pupils of the world’s 
most cosmopolitan school — th> Uni- 
versity of Paris. Striding over the for- 
tifications with a friend, the Minister 
was no longer a mere dreamer; he 
became a prophet: Honnorat could 
almost count the students and mapped 
his “cily” down to the last detail 
In the centre, he planned to build 
an International House, and a vast 
Hall-Library to replace the humble 
11th century church, traditional 
meeting-place of the “nations” of 
Paris University, which the mediae- 
val students in their poverty had 
dedicated to Saint Julian the Pauper. 
The thousand year old Sorbonne 
never failed to arouse the Minister's 
enthusiam : his first gesture upon 
taking office had been to restore 
to the University the autonomy which 
Napoleon had abolished. The Sor- 
bonne of which he dreamed was more 
than a seat of learning and research, 
it was to become an instrument of 
peace. The future of peace... the idea 
obsessed Honnorat; he dwelt upon it 
in all his speeches, at every meeting: 
“Do you believe that all the problems 
which war has brought before the 
human conscience can really be solv- 
ed by Government action alone? Is 
not the best solution to teach the 
peoples to understand each other; 
and to teach such understanding, 
what better way can be found than 
to bring the élite of the younger 
generation into contact with one 
another?” : 
Enthusiasm Stimulated 
Friends And Benefactors 
Fe the general public the Minister 
of Education was little more than 
a respected politician. His career 
was fairly typical of that of many 
French public servants. Coming of a 
poor family, he had started life as a 
journalist and later had been secretary 
to several ministers. For forty years 
he represented his native ‘“départe- 
ment", the mountainous Basses-Alpes, 
first in the Chamber and later in the 
Senate. Yet his friends knew Honno- 
rat to be an extraordinary man. He 
was simple, loyal, sincere. These 
IN THE SERVICE OF PEACE : 
Andre HONNORAT 
(1868-1930) 
% by Georges FRADIER 
  
  
oo COLLEGES DEI NATIONS & [awww Us & Pon 
    
LA CITE UNIVERSITAIRE, as André Honnorat visualized it and as it exists today : a city 
planned entirely for students, the pupils of 
University of Paris. Key to plan : 1. 
3. International House. 
Institite, of Agronomy Foundation. 
Foundation. 10. Swedish Students House. 
dation, 13. Argentine Students House. 
de la Meurthe Foundation. 
nian Students House. 19. Dutch College. 
House, 
qualities alone would probably not 
have distinguished him. But the 
nobility of his character, the warmth 
of his human sympathy and his power 
of vision were truly exceptional. 
This creative imagination, which of 
all human gifts is perhaps the most 
- rare, might. have been enough in itself 
to account for the statesman’s extra- 
ordinary achievements. .A University 
City in the heart of the “red belt”! 
The very idea dismayed “serious” 
people. Yet, in the space of a few 
years, the dream was to come true. 
By 1925, the now famous “found- 
ations” were being erected. They 
were to house hundreds and later 
thousands of students. Gardens had 
replaced the rubble and debris, and 
sports grounds were planned. 
The venture owed a large measure 
of its success to André Honnorat's 
gift for making friends. He never 
once applied for Government subsi- 
dies. His enthusiasm was such that 
he was always able to stimulate 
generosity in others and the Cité Uni- 
versitaire came into being in much 
the same manner as the mediaeval 
cathedrals, thanks to the donations 
of countless benefactors: Jean Bra- 
net, David-Weil, Emile Deutsch de la 
Meurthe, to name but a few of Hon- 
norat’s close collaborators. Finally, 
in 1936, an imposing International 
House was built; it owed its existence 
to another friend of the founder, 
John D. Rockefeller Jr. 
Such an undertaking would have 
been the lif>-work of any ordinary 
man, but it was only one of Honno- 
rat’s many and varied activities. 
These included th: imprevement of 
public health and social insurance, 
the promotion of international cultu- 
ral relations and of historical research. 
As member of Parliament, he worked 
to give his constituency roads, post 
offices and power plants. 
  
THE INTERNATIONAL HOUSE, 
which inspired (André Honnorat—*“to teach understanding, what better way can be found 
than to bring the elite of the younger generation into contact with one another”. 
Administrative Building. 
4. United States Foundation. 
7. Japanese House. 
11. College of Bpain. 
14. Canadian Students House. 
16. Monaco Foundation. 
20. Indo-Chinese Students House. 2l. 
22. Greek Foundation. 
  
the world’s most cosmopolitan school—the 
2. Medical Building. 
5, Belgian Students House. 6. National 
8. Danish Students House. 9. Swiss 
12. Franco-British Foun- 
15. E. and L. Deutsch 
17. French Provinces House. 18. Arme- 
Cuban 
23. Sports Field, 
It was at his instigation that, in 
1915, the French Parliament voted the 
first sums for the anti-tuberculosis 
campaign and it was thanks to his 
efforts and to those of Léon Bourgeois 
that the first anti-tubercular dispen- 
saries were organized. As president 
for many years of the National 
Committee of Defense against tuber- 
culosis, he launched the well-known 
stamp campaign. This undertaking, 
which came under heavy criticism, 
raised 175 million francs last year for 
French sanatoria and dispensaries. 
“He Lived Intensely ” 
GREAT lover of history, Honnorat 
undertook the task of preparing 
the ground for future historians. 
He could not bear to think that com- 
ing generations should be hampered 
in their research by the lack of indis- 
pensable data, and he therefore set 
about assembling and distributing to 
competent bodies a heterogeneous 
collection 0of contemporary objects, 
including books, papers, catalogues, 
statuettes and even toys and oil lamps 
— which would be of vital interest 
to future historians. 
“He lived inlensely”, said one of 
his friends, “poised between past and 
present”. It can therefore be readily 
understood that he had a particular 
fondness for the Society of History 
of the Great War and for the library 
which he founded in 1916 and which 
is called today the Bureau of Inter- 
national and Contemporary Research. 
International... the word recurs 
again and again in each of Honnorat’s 
ventures. The smallest undertaking 
served him as a pretext for preaking 
down frontiers and for overcoming 
some new obstacle on the path of 
international exchange. At his instig- 
ation, the Government adopted mea- 
  
“heart” of the University City and symbol of the idea 
  
founder of the 
The word 
“international” can be used to quality 
ANDRE HONNORAT. 
“University City”, in Paris. 
his every endeavour. Even the small-. 
est undertaking was an occasion for 
him to overcome some obstacle in the 
path of international exchange.   * 
sures to enable the children of French 
immigrants in Mexico to complete 
their education in France. This led 
him to plan wider cultural exchanges. 
He was responsible for the Franco- 
Norwegian school at Rouen, the 
Franco-Norwegian and Franco-Danish 
Associations in Paris, and was instru- 
mental in setting up special bodies at 
the Sorbonne for the study of Ger- 
manic, Italian and Japanese civiliz- 
ations. Finally, it was on his initia- 
tive that the National Foundation for 
the Study of Foreign Civilizatio 
and Sciences was created. 
“ You Have 
A Responsibility” 
HEN came the war of 1939, and 
André Honnorat saw the tempo- 
rary destruction of many of his 
achievements. Living in retirement, 
he continued to work and hope, aided 
by his wife and a few friends. With 
the liberation of France he returned 
to Parliament and to tasks too heavy 
for his age and health. His life's 
work was once more a living reality; 
yet Honnorat was not content to rest. 
He felt the urgency of strengthening 
and enlarging his accomplishments. 
The Cité Universitaire, which had 
been closed for five years, was reopen- 
ed and students from thirty nations 
filled its 22 houses. 
Honnorat now sought to expand the 
University of Paris, hemmed in by its 
old walls. For this new project he 
demanded 160 acres of land. Replying 
to parliamentary critics who consider- 
ed his proposals premature, he said: 
“If, in 1840, you had been asked to 
appropriate land for the Pasteur 
Institute, you would have refused. 
You have a responsibility towards the 
scholars of a hundred years hence. 
How Je you going to accomodate 
em?” 
André Honnorat was now an old 
man of failing health, and the bur- 
den of public office proved too heavy 
for him. He was obliged to abandon 
many of his official duties. Though 
he no longer had the strength to make 
history, his power of vision was as 
strong as ever. Courteous, sensitive, 
understanding, he still made friends 
wherever he went. 
H: was now over eighty but he 
worked, as he had done all his life, 
from four c¢’clock in the morning to 
midnight. 
Faith In “ These Men” 
ARLY in the summer of 1950 his 
health failed and the doctors 
ordered him to rest. But from 
the room which he had finally accept- 
ed at the Cité Universitaire he con- 
tinued to watch over the freedom, the 
welfare and even the finances of his 
foundation. The war in Korea affect- 
ed him far more than his own suffer- 
ings. “This world is mad”, he said, 
“these men want to die’. Yet he 
never despaired of “these men’. He 
- never lost faith in the United Nations 
and international organizations and 
tried to help them to the end. One 
of the last things he said to his doc- 
tor, between two painful attacks, was 
this: “You know, the more I think 
about the World Health Organization, 
the more I realize it must succeed”. 
He died on the 24th of July. Two 
months earlier, disregarding all 
advice, he left his sick-bed to receive 
the Queen of Holland at the Cité 
Universitaire. He wanted to talk once 
again to “his students”, to talk of 
peace — “lrue peace, to which all 
men aspire is mot born of written 
texts alone, it must come from a new 
attitude of mind... from new links 
between the young minds of all 
nations”. -

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 81641: Wherever there are sixteen children

DECEMBER 1950 Page 11 — UNESCO COURIER 
INDONESIA PLANS EXPANDED EDUCATION PROGRAMME 
pili 
—— 
aha 
HIE 
  
27, 1949, Indonesia became an 
independent state and, as the 
Republic of the United States of 
Indonesia, took its place among the 
family of nations. During the previous 
decade, large parts of it had been cut 
off from normal contact with other 
countries and had suffered heavy 
destruction through the war. Indonesia 
was therefore in urgent need of reha- 
bilitation and technical assistance in 
education, public health, agriculture 
and in general, of what its Premier, 
- Mohammed Hatta described as “social 
engineering”. 
Facing up to such needs and recog- 
nizing that the prosperity of a 
country depends on the qualities and 
abilities of its people, the Indonesian 
Government is today seeking to provide 
the country with an efficient system of 
education and training. 
Unesco, whose Fifth General Con- 
ference admitted Indonesia as a 
Member State this year, has already 
takzn an active part in helping these 
efforts. Last May, a Unesco represen- 
tative was among the members of the 
United Nations Joint Technical Assis- 
tance Mission sent to consult with the 
Indonesian authorities on their existing 
plans for economic development and to 
determine in what fields assistance was 
most needed. 
Today, Indonesia is one cf the 12 
countries which Unesco is helping 
under the first part of its technical 
assistance programme. An education 
team is setting in motion a training 
programme for teachers who will be 
needed in re-settlement areas and as 
part of a joint United Nations mission. 
Unesco is drawing up a fundamental 
education demonstration project and a 
teachers’ training centre for schools 
which will be needed in those areas. 
Unesco will also help the Indonesian 
Government to establish an adequate 
primary school system. (At present 
only 25 per cent of the country’s school 
age children receive instruction and 
the adult illiteracy rate is estimated at 
from 50 to 90 per cent.) 
Aw a year ago, on December 
  
fh
e 
P
e
 
 
* UNIVERSITY 
 
©® Young students studying in the art library which is 
being established at the University of Indonesia, encouraged 
by gift books from Unesco. @ Microtomic work being 
carried out at the laboratory for pathological anatomy—pait 
of the Medical Faculty situated at Djakarta. @ The “Divine 
Master” and his Indonesian “pupil "—a student of archae- 
a
a
 
i
g
 
LIFE IN 
ciation. 
INDONESIA 
ODAY, Indonesia is stimulating and encouraging all forms of higher education to ensure the 
training of the experts it will need in every held of its future economic development. The main 
centres of higher education are two universities, the “Gadjah Mada” University, a national found- 
ation established in Djogjakarta, and the University of Indonesia, established in 1946 at Djakarta. In ad- 
dition, there are seven academies and institutes providing instruction in political sciences, forestry, 
meteorology, physical culture, mathematics, chemistry and physics, drawing and economic science, as 
well as a teachers’ college, all of which are attached to one or other of the universities. 
Some aspects of the life and work of Indonesian university students are shown in the photographs 
published on this page, which were taken from an album prepared by the Indonesian Government as . 
a gift for Unesco and presented to M. Jaime Torres Bodet, the Director-General, by H. E. Mr. Nazir * 
Satuk Pamontjak, Indonesian Ambassador in Paris. 
ju. 
Ra 
* 
  
ology at the Faculty of Literature and Philosophy. @ The 
observatory at Lembang which has been put at the disposal 
of the University of Indonesia by the Astronomical Asso- 
This observatory's telescope is of unique impor- 
tance because of the sector of the sky it covers—the transit 
of the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. 
  
EN have not yet won all the 
M rights stated in the Universal 
Declaration ; and even those 
which seem most secure were not 
come by easily. Leaders were needed 
to define each of our liberties and 
men with open and generous minds 
were especially wanted to formulate 
them. Among the anniversaries for 
this month of December some names 
have been chosen here which sym- 
bolize the age-long struggle of 
humanity for tolerance, peace and 
justice. 
MICHEL VOROSMARTY. 
“Every individual is entitled to a nation- 
ality.” But when this Hungarian poet 
was born on Ist December 1800, his people 
had not the right to claim Hungarian 
nationality. Vorésmarty helped by worthy 
colleagues, worked all his life to arouse 
his country from somnolence and servitude. 
He wrote an epic, “The Flight of Zalan” 
to celebrate the .heroic conquest of the 
plains of the Tisza and Danube by the 
ancient Magyars, He revealed Hungarian 
letters to the world, translated Shake- 
speare, and adapted the French Roman- 
tics. As a deputy in the 1848 Revolution, 
he fought till the last day for liberation 
and, after his country’s defeat, spent two 
years in prison. His funeral was the 
opportunity for a national protest against 
the Hapsburg domination and his centen- 
ary was feted gloriously throughout all 
Hungary. 
« THE ADVANCE OF HUMAN 
THOUGHT ”. 
Without real hope for the future advance 
of society it is doubful whether men 
9¢ happened 
in Decembon... 
would fight very hard for their liberties 
and their rights. A certain optimism is 
needed. On 11th December 1750, Jacques 
Turgot, spoke in Latin at the Sorbonne on 
“The successive stages in the progress of 
human thought” : 
“The language and the writing.... from 
all the special branches of learning 
create a common treasure that one gener- 
ation passes on to the next. so that the 
heritage is constantly increasing.” 
“Even in the midst of havoc... people 
become more civilized. the human mind 
becomes enlightened. isolated nations 
come closer together, commerce and poli- 
tics finally unite all parts of the globe, 
and mankind as a whole continues to move 
forward through alternate periods of calm 
and trouble. Progress may be halting. but 
it is always towards greater heights". 
« EVERY PERSON HAS THE RIGHT 
TO WORK...” 
... To free choice of employment... to 
protection against unemployment...” (art. 
23). To help make these rights a reality 
is the responsibility of the International 
Labour Organization which four years 
ago, on l4th December 1946, joined forces 
with the United Nations. But, the Or- 
ganization, under a slightly different 
name, had already been in existence 
27 years and had never ceased fighting 
for the principles that the United Nations 
  
were to restate in the Universal Declar- 
ation. Since 1913, the Organization has 
continued to declare that work is not mer- 
chandise; that freedom of expression and 
assembly is essential to progress; that the 
wretched plight of workers in one country 
threatens the prosperity of workers in all 
other countries, that the fight for just and 
favourable conditions of work requires the 
joint efforts of all governments and all 
workers. 
ARSENE D’ARSONVAL. 
When d'Arsonval died on 30th Decem- 
ber 1940, more than one journalist hesit- 
ated before the long list of this learned 
man's works. It seemed scarcely credible 
that one man should have been respons- 
ible for so many discoveries. He worked 
with Claude Bernard and Pasteur, but he 
was also distinguished as an electrical 
scientist. He invented the galvanometer 
with a mobile circuit, used in canalyzing 
the electric currents of the brain. Noted 
as one of the founders of endocrinology, 
he was also known as the designer of one 
of the earliest cliders and as the inventor 
of a battery for submarines. But his chief 
fame rests in work which led to the in- 
vention of an ‘electrical bistoury”, «a 
scalpel for surgeons. All his work was 
deveted to giving a concrete meaning to 
this “right to health” about which men 
would know so little, if learned men did 
not work to make it a reality. 
“ PROMOTE UNDERSTANDING 
TOLERANCE AND FRIENDSHIP 
AMONG ALL NATIONS.” 
Three hundred and fifty years ago « 
poet died whose work and life give ad- 
mirable evidence of the philosophical and 
religious tolerance which made sixteenth 
century India so noteworthy. Work went 
beyond mere “tolerance” and contributed 
to Dadu’s mutual understanding of the 
highest kind, ‘Some say he was born into 
a Brahman family; others that his father 
was Moslem, but all agree that this mys- 
tic belonged to the Hindu faith during his 
life. This did not deter him from his 
affection for the great Moslem poet Kabir : 
“The words of Kabir are as true to the 
spirit as they are pleasant to the ear. They 
bring me happiness”. He spent his life in 
travelling across the Indian empire and 
composed his poems in Hindi, in Pujani, in 
Sanskrit... As was true of Kabir's work, 
Dadu’s poems transcended all the bonds 
of orthodoxy. Dadu continually stressed 
the universality of love : “The world is 
full of divine truth” he used to say. He 
died at Naraina, in the Rajputana, mur- 
muring one of his poems : “Spirit, O my 
spirit, for the love of your Lord, you have 
shaken off all seeming...”  

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/081616engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 12 - 
  
“WHEREVER THERE ARE 
SIXTEEN CHILDREN ~ 
by Jean KEIM 
   
DECEMBER 1950 
_ nn" | i S 
; 
  
FINLAND 1S A COUNTRY OF THOUSANDS OF ISLANDS AND LAKES — continuous water- 
ways that constitute, especially in the less developed northern regions, the most important 
means of communications. Yet, despite transport difficulties and an extremely scattered 
population, adequate educational facilities are available even in out of the way places 
thanks to a progressive policy which gives priority to the needs of youth. 
  
A TYPICAL VILLAGE SCHOOL IN FINNISH LAPLAND, where there are still about 6,000 Laps. 
Most of the girls in the class are wearing the national head-dress. 
blind”, remarked an official in the Finnish Ministry of Education. 
“But”, he went on, “the blind can read well enough by Braille”. 
As far back as 1686 the Church in Finland had made it compulsory 
for everyone to learn to read. The priests refused to give Confirmation to those 
who were illiterate and marriage by a priest was denied them. It was custom- 
ary for the pastor to hold annual examinations for his flock and the results 
were written down in the parish records. Young folk who refused to go to 
school were put in the stocks on Sunday at the entrance to the church. Kivi, 
the great Finnish writer who founded the theatre and the Finnish novel, gives 
a vivid account in “Tke Seven Brothers” of a battle royal between a Rector 
and seven boys who refused to learn to read. 
“1 N our country, everyone can read except small children, idiots and the 
In the year 1866 the Church relin- 
quished its role of educator and 
teaching became the responsibility of 
the municipal authorities. The law 
of compulsory schooling, however, 
only dates back to 1921, the year 
when the Republic of Finland came 
into being. To-day, though the 
population is extremely scattered, 
with only eight inhabitants to the 
square mile in some regions, illite- 
racy is non-existent. 
By Boat And Reindeer 
CHOOLING presents unusual problems 
S in country areas where many 
families live in lonely mountain 
valleys, far removed from their 
nearest neighbour. By law, however, 
a school must be built in any region 
where there are sixteen children of 
school-going age. Attendance is com- 
pulsory for all who live within a 
radius of approximately three miles. 
The children arrive by bicycle, on 
foot, and in wintertime on skis; 
sometimes special buses are provided, 
and in districts where the terrain is 
difficult, there are omnibus-boats. 
In North Lapland, Finnish children 
go to school each morning in sledges 
drawn by reindeer. All day long the 
reindeer wait quietly in the snow, till 
the time comes to take their small 
masters back home. 
The children eat their Iunch at 
    
 
   
  
| TT | SP 
: LU se RAR a Sk i 
) Nd el ae Rai 
MARY HAD A LITTLE... REINDEER. In North Lapland, Finnish children go to school in 
sledges drawn by reindeer. All day long the reindeer wait quietly in the snow till the 
time comes to take their small masters back home. : 
  
 
THE NUMBER OF SCHOOL CHILDREN IN FINLAND amc.:is 2 
Subjects taught in elementary state schools are being increase 
One free meal a day is provided in every state school. 
elementary school in Helsinki, the capital. 
household tasks. 
school. Finnish authorities believe 
their country was the first in the 
world to pass legislation requiring all 
schools to provide a free midday meal 
sufficient to satisfy healthy young 
appetites. 
Books and general school require- 
ments have been supplied without cost 
for many years. Boarding schools are 
provided for children who live more 
than three miles from school. In 
villages where such an arrangement 
is impracticable, free board and lodg- 
ing is found in a neighbour's home. 
Local authorities control education 
and all school activities. A school 
committee of five persons, including 
at least one teacher, is elected by the 
Municipal Council. The administr- 
ation of each school is in the hands 
of a group of seven people, six of 
whom are parents of the pupils and 
one a representative of the teaching 
faculty. 
Holiday On Skis 
HE State Education Department 
acts in an advisory capacity. 
According to the wealth of the 
community and its inhabitants, gov- 
ernment aid plays a greater or lesser 
role; but in no case does it cover all 
the expenses. The State pays 
teachers’ salaries and provides 20 % 
of the finance for the building of new 
schools and 40 % for maintenance. 
Government loans are also granted 
and the State reimburses two-thirds 
of the money paid out for equipment 
and financial aid to poor children; in 
each case the State contribution is 
generally proportionate to the size of 
the school. 
A child spends eight years at pri- 
mary school. There are 36 school 
weeks in a year broken by the Christ- 
mas and summer holidays. The chil- 
dren are also given a special week's 
holiday just before Spring — during 
the bast skiing season. 
Hygiene plays an important part in 
school life. Even the most remote 
schools have nurses, who also serve 
as welfare officers. The children are 
vaccinated and receive special eye and 
dental care from visiting doctors at 
regular intervals. 
I paid a visit to one of these coun- 
try schools, a large one-storey house. 
Fair-haired healthy children were 
hurrying out across the verandah. 
The classroom was spacious, clean and 
well equipped. Some explanatory 
notes from the previous lessons still 
remained on the blackboard. A blaz- 
RSE WE Ea WS 
TSUZL.y LG. I milaCl. 
to inciude cooking and 
Above, a modern 
ing fire roared in the big stove. It 
was one of the happiest and pleasant- 
est schoolrooms I had ever visited. 
Youth Has Priority 
INLAND, to-day, with 4 million in- 
F habitants, has nearly 16,000 teach- 
ers in its primary schools which 
serve more than 500,000 children 
between the ages of seven and 
fifteen. Ninety-two per cent of these 
schoolchildren learn Finnish, 8 % 
learn Swedish. Both these languages 
are officially recognized, and this 
creates numerous difficulties in giving 
instruction in the langnage requested 
by the parents. 
It is astonishing to note the great 
extent to which children develop their 
fondness for reading at school. Out 
of the 2,000 new books published in 
Finnish every year -—— a surprisingly 
high figure for such a small popul- 
ation — more than 10 % are books 
for children. These books are usually 
well illustrated not only with their 
own national heroes but also with the 
great figures found in children’s 
books all over the world. 
Finlanders love their children and 
want to ensure that their future will 
be a bright and happy one. The pre- 
sent generation was compelled to 
endure several wars in order to win 
and keep its freedom. Normality is 
gradually being restored. The needs 
of youth have priority in Finland: 
for, in the words of the Finnish poet, 
Elmer Diktonius: “As long as chil- 
dren smile, the Universe will continue 
o live”. 
 
Courier 
EDITORIAL OFFICES ; 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. 14 
* 
Editor : PETER DU BERG 
English Language Editor : R$. FENTON 
* 
All reproductions authorized 
* 
rorimerie GEORGES LANG 
1, rue Curigl, Para 
UNESCO Publication 856    