# [078179](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
BRUARY 1961 
BEALE 171) NE 
Price : 1/-stg. (U.K.) 
~~ 30 cents (U.S.) 
i . 
4 
0,70 NF (FRANCE) | | 
aN | 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
 
    
BRAIN TEASERS FOR AFRICANS. The Univer- 
sity of Accra in Ghana has devised a series of 
special group tests used to determine the 
capabilities of potential leaders sorely needed by 
the new countries of Africa. See story page 24. 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
> aad a ' 
) y RE 
. alae SF 58 88 UT 
RE ‘Hh pan 
ET AR - Te Eo 
Wong 7 Xo . 
ir TR, NIN BERS 
-- 
RT URE < TN 5 0 Da 
© Oe - ~ - . .y 
~ EN - i A 3 F aa » 4 
BA he Fae a : 
a Pies ANA - 3 Suh -

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Contents 
No. 2 
For reasons beyond our 
control this issue appears 
later than usual, We wish 
to apologise to our rea- 
ders for this delay. 
  
COVER PHOTO 
 
Sixteen Independent Afri. 
can states took their seats 
for the first time at the 
recent Unesco General Con- 
ference (See page 4). Photo 
shows Mrs Madeleine Sar, a 
Senegal delegate, during an 
interval between meetings. 
© Willy Ronis, Paris 
mC Courier 
Page 
FEBRUARY 
14TH YEAR 
4 A TWO-YEAR PLAN FOR WORLD ACTION 
17 
18 
21 
28 
30 
32 
33 
34 
By Daniel Behrman 
ROVING CAMERAMAN IN UNESCO HOUSE 
Candid shots of a conference 
AN AFRICAN LOOKS AT THE WORLD 
By F.I. Ajumogobia 
THE CHANGING FACE OF AFRICA 
AFRICA 1961—A SPECIAL MAP 
22 countries have gained independence in five years 
NEW SCHOOLS FOR AFRICA 
By Georges Fradier 
SIX MEN WITH A PROBLEM 
Obstacle course to leadership 
TOWARDS RACIAL HARMONY 
Unesco’s |5 years of efforts against bias 
By Alfred Métraux 
VELAZQUEZ A LA PICASSO 
| 3 versions of Las Meninas 
THEY CALL THEIR TELESCOPE ‘BIMA SAKT/I 
Indonesia’s eye on the Milky Way 
By Victor M. Blanco 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
Gordon R. Behrens 
Associate Editors 
German Edition : 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin   
Published monthly by 
The United Nations Educational, 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Célia Bertin 
Spanish Edition : Amparo Alvajar 
Russian Edition : Yeniamin Matchavarianl| 
Hans Rieben 
Arabic Edition : Amin Chaker 
Scientific and Cultural 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7¢, France 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly (exceptin july and August when 
it is bi-monthly) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German and Arabic, In the 
United States of America it is distributed by the UNESCO Publications Center, 
U.S.A. 80 Third Avenue, New York 22, N.Y., Plaza 1-3860. Second-class mail 
privileges authorized ac NewYork, N.Y. (M.C, 61,1.155 A). 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed arucles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
Annual subscription rates: © 3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 New 
Francs or equivalent. Single copies I/-stg. 30 cents 
(U.S.); 0.70 New Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief. 
1961 
 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

© Willy Ronis, Paris 
SE 


### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

98 NATIONS CHART 
A TWO-YEAR PLAN 
FOR WORLD ACTION 
3 
    
+ 
» 
. 
1) 
"w 
& 
. 
, - 
y 2 
» 
N 
* 
" 
v 
: 
AN 
ba 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
ET, 
I ay rd v 
3 
9 
A 
  
  
The Unesco Courier, — February 1961 


### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

Unesco’s programme of action 
for the next two years is the 
most ambitious since this U.N. 
Agency was created 15 years 
ago. What Unesco hopes to 
achieve in 1961-62 and how its 
programme and budget were 
decided by the organization's 
General Conference last Dec- 
ember are highlighted below 
by Daniel Behrman 
NpER the flowing concrete drapery of a hall 
resembling a timeless temple, a heartening 
and almost unusual spectacle has been enacted 
on a stage for all the world. This stage was 
the Eleventh General Conference of the United Nations 
Educational, Sclentific and Cultural Organization in 
Paris, and its actors were the delegates—some in business 
sults, others in flowing robes—from ninety-eight nations 
scattered over the face of the earth. 
What was unusual about this spectacle was that it 
produced a harmonious finale—even though It overlooked 
none of the realities and the facts of international life 
upon which agreement has yet to be found. Such issues 
as racism, disarmament, colonialism, and neighbourly 
relations were faced squarely during some lively sessions 
which led to Important resolutions (1). But from this 
stage, where conflicting interests met and compromised 
with each other, has emerged a two-year programme for 
Unesco which Is both the most ambitious and the most 
realistic in the history of this United Nations agency. 
It is ambitious because it Is by far the biggest series of 
undertakings which Unesco has ever been called upon to 
carry out. Corresponding to these obligations is a budget 
of $32,513,228 for 1961 and 1962, the highest ever voted 
by a Unesco General Conference. It is realistic because 
It faces squarely some of the world’s major needs, parti- 
cularly in education and more particularly in Africa, that 
sleeping giant of a continent now awakening with dra- 
matic speed. 
Symbolically, the Conference met for five weeks in 
November and December under the presidency of a 
representative of Africa, Mr. Akale-Work Apte Wold of 
Ethiopia. Africa also accounted for 16 of the additional 
(1) One calls on Member States “to encourage and support... utiii- 
zation of the means of information as a contribution to better mutual 
understanding between peoples and thus lo counleract any altemnpls 
to use press, radio, televison, cinema and other means of Information 
for propaganda which deliberately or insidiously incites violation of 
peace or acts of aggression”; a second states “that colonialism in ail 
tts forms... must be speedily abolished and that accession lo freedom 
and independence must nol be delayed on the false pretext that a 
particular territory has not reached a sufficient ¥ high standard in 
econemic, social, educational and cultural matters’; a third resolution 
calls on Usesco Member States “to include in their educational pro- 
grammes provisions for bringing up the rising generation in the 
spirit of peaceful und neighbourly relations und mutual international 
understanding and co-operation”; a fourth condemns “an display of 
intolerance among the different races or peoples as a violation of the 
high principles which prompted the creation of the United Nalions 
and of UNesco.” 
  
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

PLAN FOR WORLD ACTION (Cont'd) 
Re © — a ot a TI —— ET rT 
  
Above, vast hall of Secretariat building, main artery 
leading to delegates’ lobby and Conference building. 
Below, delegates at a committee meeting; in fore- 
ground, Mr. Mahmoud Haju Ahmed, Director of Edu- 
cation of Somalia, one of the new African nations. 
: : REA SSE ERE SS 
  
       
 
  
IN TERMS OF EDUCATION 
NONE OF US IS RICH 
countries which have become members of UNEsco since 
the last General Conference in 1958, attended by repre- 
sentatives of 81 natlons. 
To carry out the programme adopted in Paris, UNEsco 
will not only have its regular budget, but additional 
resources in 1961-62 from two other sources : $12,000,000 
from the United Nations Technical Assistance programme 
and $11,000,000 from the United Nations Special Fund. 
Impressive though it may sound, this total of more than 
$55,000,000 would have to be spread very thinly to cover 
UNEsco’s obligations in the world. 
That is why the General Conference wisely decided to 
place a priority on education. Schools, schooling and 
schoolteachers have failed to keep abreast of the present- 
day rate of progress. This is true In countries with old and 
established systems of education, but it is nothing less 
than tragically true for new nations where the urgency 
of needs Is equalled only by the paucity of resources. And 
it takes on dramatic proportions in Africa where the ink 
has barely dried on a dozen declarations of Independence 
and nationhood. 
The immediacy of this problem brought forth a healthy 
reaction from the conference: a reaction of universalism 
which was stressed by UnEsco’s Director-General, Mr. Vit- 
torino Veronese. It was universalism in deeds as well as 
words. The director-general of Unesco had the pleasant 
and almost startling experience of submitting a budget to 
98 nations and having it rejected as... too low. UNESCO 
Member States first raised this proposed budget by one 
million dollars and then pledged more than another 
million dollars in a moving display of solidarity. This was 
universalism in action: an international gesture by the 
rich, the not-so-rich and the poor alike to further the 
progress of education, particularly in Africa. 
This priority on education is reflected in a resolution 
unanimously adopted at the conference. It states that 
priority should be given to education in UNEsco’s pro- 
gramme and that the United Nations and its speclalized 
agencies should place the same stress on education for 
the less-developed countries as Is placed on economic 
development In a more narrow sense. 
Delegates from all nations emphasized the need for 
more and better teachers, schools, universities and tech- 
 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

~ Above, General Conference Session in progress in 
Plenary Hall, seen from one of booths used by simul- 
taneous interpretation staff. Above right, delegates 
~ meet in committee room donated by Switzerland. 
~ Eight other countries have furnished and decorated 
rooms. Many other gifts have been made to the 
Unesco H.Q., and during the General Conference, Iran 
presented a magnificent carpet for delegates’ lobby. 
nical colleges in their own countries. Their plea was 
summed up by Sir David Eccles, British Minister of Edu- 
cation, and head of the United Kingdom delegation, who 
stated : 
“In these fields, we are all underdeveloped. In the field 
of education, we are all poor and some are poorer than 
others. UNEsco stands for Education In the broadest sense 
as WHO stands for Health and FAO stands for Agri- 
culture. We have the right and duty to proclaim the 
urgent needs of education and to press these claims 
on our own goverments and on the whole family of the 
United Nations.” 
Specifically, UNEsco’s education programme for the next 
two years consists both of studies and services for the 
general advancement of education, along with activities 
aimed at helping countries develop their own educational 
systems. In both cases, an accent is placed on educational 
planning and regional development. 
These trends are to be seen in the services UNEsco is 
rendering to national systems of education. According to 
decisions taken by the General Conference, it will be in 
a position to offer assistance in these malin fields: 
— Improvement of teacher training programmes and 
school curricula. 
— Development of methods for teaching science and 
modern languages. 
— The use of audio-visual aids. 
In this last respect, mention might be made of a Confer- 
ence resolution calling upon UNEsco to explore the possi- 
bilities of using the most recent advances in electronics 
and communication in order to bring education to the 
widest possible audlence—an audience limited only by 
the range of television transmitters and Hertzian cables. 
At present, the idea of man-made satellites girdling the 
earth and beaming school television programmes to 
hundreds of thousands of classrooms is still in the realm 
of science fictlon. But it may not stay there very long. 
In all, Unesco will send out more than 200 international 
specialists to its member states to work in national 
systems of education. Obviously, a “system of education” 
runs from the kindergarten to the graduate student work- 
ing towards his doctorate. Just as obviously, UNEsco 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
  
Photos ©) Willy Ronis, Paris 
Delegates converse between Picasso mural and one 
of six giant gracefully-shaped concrete pillars which 
support the Conference building roof at its centre, 

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

    
SILHOUETTES IN THE NIGHT 
Formal session and informal talk are framed in these photos by windows of Unesco's 
Conference Building. Below, conversation piece against window of delegate’s 
lounge. Far right, peeping into Commission Room, night-roving camera finds 
delegates in session. Right, activity on three levels, from press rooms (bottom) 
to committee room with its “halo” lighting over round table for delegates. 


### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

  
PLAN FOR WORLD ACTION (Cont'd) 
could not hope to span the full range of education without 
diluting its efforts. 
This is why stress 1s being placed on primary and 
secondary education, both technical and general, in 
reglonal programmes for Africa, the Arab States and 
Latin America. Universal primary education is the target 
in Asia. Here, UNEsco Is to create a regional education 
office and two regional centres for research in school 
buildings and for the training of school administrators. 
The same goal is to be found in Latin America where, 
since 1957, UNEsco has been operating a ten-year major 
project for the extension of primary education. In the 
Arab states, it is planned to set up a network of associated 
teacher training colleges. 
Pressing though needs may be in these regions, the 
situation in Africa is nothing less than an emergency. 
Here, UnNEsco’s education department has to become a fire 
department. As one example of the calls made upon its 
resources, it must recruit several hundred teachers for 
secondary schools in the Congo Republic (Leopoldville) as 
well as numerous experts in education and school admin- 
istration. This emergency assistance is being financed by 
the U.N. under its programme of ald to the Congo. 
But the call of the new Africa for education is being 
heard elsewhere as well. UNEsco plans to move ahead with 
assistance In school constructions, the production of 
teaching materials, the providing of teachers, the sur- 
veying of educational needs and the awarding of fellow- 
ships. 
Even before the General Conference ended, nations 
made a number of generous offers. The United States of 
America pledged to donate up to $1,000,000 for assistance 
to Africa. The Federal Republic of Germany announced 
a contribution of £100,000 to this programme. And, within 
a few hours, representatives of a dozen countries offered 
130 fellowships to Africans while ten more delegations 
promised to make specific offers known in the near future. 
This priority on education will also see an increase in 
the scope of UNESco's activities in technical and vocation- 
8 
Photos © Willy Ronis, Paris. 
  
77 
  
al education during the next two years. Here, thanks to a 
financial transfusion from the United Nations Special 
Fund, Unesco will be able to participate in the founding 
or the operation of a number of technological Institutes 
throughout the world. 
Among other measures—in the field of education—too 
numerous to list here—was the adopting by the General 
Conference of the text of an international convention 
and recommendation against discrimination in education. 
This convention is intended to implement one of the 
fundamental principles In the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights: the right to education. It defines discri- 
mination as any factor which “has the purpose or effect 
of nullifylng or Impalring equality of treatment in 
education.” 
Turning to the natural sciences, the General Conference 
approved an international plan of action to cope with 
scientific problems of an urgent and worldwide nature 
over the next ten years. These problems include the ex- 
ploring of the world’s oceans—about which it has been 
sald we know less than we do of the moon—and the 
rational harnessing of science and technology to indus- 
trialize the world’s developing countries. (See UNEScCo 
Courier July-August 1960.) 
Perhaps the most dramatic aspect of UNesco’s work in 
the natural sciences will be its collaboration in the Inter- 
national Indian Ocean expedition organized by the Spe- 
cial Committee on Oceanographic Research. This expe- 
dition will see twenty oceanographic research vessels from 
fourteen nations at work in what is both the world’s 
least-known ocean and perhaps its most important one 
in terms of the needs of the hundreds of millions who 
live on its shores. 
Through its collaboration in this expedition and 
through its own programme, UNESCO hopes to be able to 
assist in the training of oceanographers. In addition, 
the Conference voted to set up an Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission with headquarters at UNEsco. 
On land, UNEsco’s programme for the development of

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

  
natural resources will see the continuation of its work in 
such vital fields as the humid tropics and the world’s arid 
regions. In Arid Zone research the next two years will 
see a gradual transition from UNEsco’s Major Project 
which ends in 1962 to greatly Increased national activities. 
A perfect example of the type of problem which no one 
country can hone to solve on its own is to be found in 
seismology. Without “discrimination” by border or 
region, earthquakes have struck harshly in recent years 
in the Middle East, North Africa and South America. No 
one can predict when an earthquake will occur, but a 
great deal can be done to reduce its devastation through 
earthquake-proof construction and precise mapping of 
selsmic zones. This year and next, Unesco will send 
missons to earthquake zones in the Andes and in the 
Mediterranean basin. 
The earth’s crust is also the subject of another UNEsco 
plan of action aimed at taking an up-to-date inventory 
of all the many methods now used in prospecting for 
natural resources. At the same time, steps will be taken 
for a long-term study of that most precious of all 
resources, the soil itself. 
Another Important phase of UNESco’s science pro- 
gramme concerns the role of science and technology in 
the Industrialization of new countries. Here, UNESCO 
has been called upon by its member states to prepare an 
international conference to be held in 1963 or 1964. 
The purpose of this meeting will be to take stock of the 
lessons of the past for countries which are now changing 
over to an Industrialized soclety. In particular, a study 
will be made of the delicate problems of helping agricul- 
tural countries to make this changeover without paying 
the price of social and economic maladjustment. 
Industrialization of developing countries is one of three 
UNEsco priority flelds in science laid down by the General 
Conference for the next decade. The two others are the 
exploration of the earth’s resources and the co-ordination 
of sclentific action on national and international levels. 
Education and science were the two most prominent 
features of UNEscO’s programme as it was carefully 
discussed by the General Conference. But UNESCO'S 
mission goes even further than this. 
For example, under the heading of cultural activities 
in the programme adopted by the General Conference are 
to be found specific and practical tasks in such fields as 
research in the humanities, the spreading of knowledge 
of art and lterature, the safeguarding of cultural heri- 
tages and the development of museums and libraries. , 
For the next two years, the most important of these 
cultural activities will be the continuation of the Interna- 
tlonal Campalgn for Bafeguarding the Monuments of 
Nubia, those priceless architectural and artistic treasures 
of ancient Egypt which will be threatened by the rising 
waters of the Nile once the new Aswan Dam has been 
completed in the United Arab Republic (See UNESCO 
CouRrliER Feb., April 1960). During the Conference, plans 
for preserving the temple at Abu Simbel, the largest of 
these monuments, were presented. 
In Southeast Asia, UNEsco’s cultural activities depart- 
ment will meet a problem which crops up everywhere as 
a result of mass literacy campaigns for adults and more 
schools for children. The “new literate” often tends to 
become a “new illiterate” fcr a very simple reason: he 
has nothing to read. Books and other publications are 
either not readily available In his own language or else 
they are offered at prices which he cannot afford. 
This Is why Unesco will assist national book centres 
and publishing associations in Southeast Asia, mainly in 
Burma, Ceylon, India, Iran and Pakistan. Included In 
this assistance will be production of reading materials at 
a regional centre in Karachi and the awarding of prizes 
for authors and illustrators. 
UNEsco’s major project for the mutual appreciation of 
Eastern and Western cultural values will also be conti- 
nued during the next two years. Here, UNEsco plans to 
undertake studies in co-operation with Institutes in 
Japan, Indla and Lebanon while research will continue 
on the civilizations of the Orient and the Occident. 
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

PLAN FOR WORLD ACTION (Cont'd) 
UNESCO TO SUPPLY STAFF FOR 
KEY POSTS IN NEW NATIONS 
Distances between cultures and distances between men 
are also being shortened by the social sclences, which 
represent an Important sector In UNEsco’s activities. 
Here, two malin fields are to be stressed: the teaching of 
the soclal sclences and fundamental research; and the 
study of problems resulting from economic and soclal 
development. This latter theme will lead to studies on 
urbanization and population problems in South Asia and 
Africa. Research Is to be conducted by two UNEsco cen- 
tres: the Latin American Regional Centre for Soclal 
Science Research at Rlo de Janelro and, at Delhl 
University in India, the Research Centre on Economic 
and Soclal Development Problems in South Asla. 
At the same time, UNEsco’s soclal sclences department 
will continue its work on the question of race relations 
and on the study of discrimination between men and 
women. After studying the nature of prejudice In past 
years, It will now take up deep-seated causes of outbreaks 
of raclal hatred, particularly among youth. (See page 28.) 
In mass communication, Unesco Is to concentrate upon 
three malin tasks lald down by the General Conference: 
ald to countries In developing or Improving thelr 
information medla (newspapers, radio stations, etc.}; 
use of mass communication techniques in education; 
the use of mass media to promote international under- 
standing. 
In this respect, It should be mentioned that The UNEscO 
CouRIER, which 1s now appearing In six languages— 
French, English, Spanish, Russian, German .and Arablc— 
will soon be published In seven. A Japanese edition Is 
scheduled to appear in April, 
1,700 fellowships offered 
during next two years 
NDER the programme adopted by the General Confer- 
| ence, UNEsco will continue to operate Its two interna- 
tional centres for higher studies in journallsm (one 
at Strasbourg, France, and the other at Quito, Ecuador), 
but it will also extend its assistance In the training of 
qualified professionals for the press, the cinema and the 
rado to South-East Asla. Assistance will also be offered 
Aslan countries in the study of news agencies and the 
problems of news transmission. 
One Important aspect of UNEsCo’s programme Is Its 
international exchange service which will administer more 
than 1,700 fellowships during the next two years, In- 
cluding 1,200 financed directly by Unesco. Another Is its 
financial ald, amounting to nearly one million dollars, to 
non-governmental organizations working along lines 
parallel to Its own. 
Finally, the General Conference approved a plan to 
enable UNEsco to supply developing countries with top- 
level officials in education and science. Known as “ope- 
rational or executive personnel” they will be civil servants 
of the goverments which have requested them, although 
Unesco will be responsible for paying part of their 
salaries. The United Nations has been operating a 
similar service for several years in public administration. 
Here, In summary form, we have endeavoured to pre- 
sent the highlights of Unesco’s programme for 1961 and 
1962 as approved by an international assembly of virtually 
none hundred natlons. 
A speaker at the Eleventh General Conference stressed 
the awakening of UnEsco’s member states to the needs of 
Africa. Africa was the symbol of this conference, it was 
pointed out. But Africa, perhaps, was also the symbol of 
an even wider awakening by the nations of the world to 
the fact, as stressed by Director-General Vittorino Vero- 
nese, In his final remarks to the Conference, that “man 
does not live by bread alone” and that ignorance In the 
most remote corner of the globe represents a blight on 
the sum of human knowledge and must be eradicated if 
humanity Is to survive. 
10   
  
 
Ground level view of a corner of the hall in the Conference 
building taken from beneath the overhead passage leading 
to committee rooms. On far wall, section of Picasso mural,

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

The Unesco Courter, — Ffebruory 1961 
    y C4 B) \ H 3 
” - 
| dh 
| A = \ / i fs 
: £ ~ he’! 
vat ey > 
Alvan WU AR Eo fi le hy : 
: , 
¥ 8% 
    
J aed yey ge 
rail ee, 
  
{ Tt TC 3 hae re 
  
£0 ; Photos © Willy Ronis 
5 
i 
3 81 
% 
'Y 
2 
   
  
   
   
   
     
Right, a delegate from one of the new 
African states and another from Asia at 
work during pause between meetings 
in one of the sound-proof booths of the 
Conference building hall. With their 
benches upholstered in black leather, 
these small hexagonal booths are used 
by delegates for private talks. Left, 
delegates’ lounge with stairway and 
terrace leading to committee rooms 
decorated by Switzerland and the 
U.S.A., and lower stairway to basement.  
Above, in foreground, are basement windows of Conference 
building in which press room, radio and TV studios and 
committee rooms are housed. Lighted windows in centre 
of photo are those running along wall of delegates’ 
lobby leading from the Conference building to Secretariat, 
  
  
  
  
  
  
¥     
b ’ A . yi - +, - - : : "AN
- LR N - - hn. 
I. J ] A Ly 
f ~~ oy - 
il I EL A RE 
- - Er 
aaia nw Sin Wg 
-~ Pda . qgmy 
’     
 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

IN THE CORRIDORS... | 
     
   
  
N
E
E
C
Y
 
lounge and main hall of the Unesco Conference building. (1) Head of Moroccan delegation and Unesco Executive Board 
member Mohamed El Fasi. (2) Two Liberian delegates admire photo-exhibition of flood-menaced Nubian monuments. (3) 
G.P. Malalasekera (left) head of Ceylon delegation and ambassador to Moscow with Indian poet and writer Baldoon Dhingra. ‘ 
(4) Two delegates from India. (5) Senegal delegate, Mrs. Madeleine Sar (with hat), (6) Austrian delegate, Alexander 
On these pages our candid camera photographer has caught delegates as they chatted informally between sessions in the ‘o 
; 
Philippovich (dark suit). (7) Head of Ghana delegation and Minister of Education, A.J. Duwuona-Hammond (draped gown). 

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 63762: 98 nations chart a two-year plan for world action

     
    
CAMPAGNE 
INTERNATIONALE 
POUR LA SAUV™ 
Photos © Willy Ronis. 
  
  
a 
ho 
WS 
917% 
2x 
es 
ERI 
T
N
s
 
...AT THE CONFERENCE 
MESSAGE FROM DWIGHT 
D. EISENHOWER 
Dedicated to broadening man's 
understanding of himself and the 
world about him, Unesco encou- 
rages the peoples of many lands to 
open wide the doors of educational 
opportunity. Achievement of this 
goal will speed the progress of 
mankind and strengthen the foun- 
dation for a just and lasting peace. 
In this critical hour, as nations 
press forward to assure the highest 
development of their peoples, 
Unesco can provide an outstanding 
service for all... 
NATIONALISM 
The age of nationalism has gone 
-—it belongs to the past, even if 
there are still people who do not 
know it yet... Nationalism is but 
one of the forms of self-centredness 
which makes us blind to other 
human beings, other nations, other 
social and cultural systems... For 
the first time no single nation can 
~~ any more afford to neglect the 
sorrows, the difficulties, the needs— 
political, economic and cultural— 
of any other nation. 
Arnold BERGSTRAESSER 
German Fed. Rep. 
BOOKS NOT GUNS 
Unesco must do everything to lay 
the foundations of true peace based 
on a profound intellectual and moral 
renaissance of mankind. Such an 
enterprise will, of course, be a costly 
affair since it implies that the entire 
population of our planet will be en- 
sured of the basically needed school- 
ing at all levels. But how much less 
costly will this be in the long run 
compared to the ever-rising and un- 
productive expenditure on modern 
armaments. 
Paulo CARNEIRO, Brazil 
THE NEGRO’S NEW ROLE 
Whatever well-being we have 
received from the cultures of modern 
countries... let us make no mistake: 
a new society is emerging in which 
we, as negroes, will have a far from 
minor role. 
A. RAKOTO-RATSIMAMANGA 
Malagasy Republic 
MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
If Unesco wants to go ahead, it 
must take account of the fact that 
in our changing world its first 
mission is to adapt its structure and 
activities to the imperatives of the 
times, to grasp the importance of 
the great contemporary problems 
and to contribute as best it can to 
their solution. It must cast aside 
all prejudices and fearlessly tackle 
the question number one of our 
time: understanding between peoples, 
mutual knowledge and international 
co-operation through education, 
science and culture. 
Mihai RALEA, Rumania 
MESSAGE FROM 
NIKITA KROUCHTCHEY 
« All peoples are fundamentally 
interested in the prevention of war, 
in the rapid abolition of the ab- 
horrent colonial system, and the 
consolidating of the principles of 
peaceful co-existence in international 
relations Unesco, the United 
Nations Agency which deals with 
education, science and culture, can 
make a considerable contribution to 
a lofty aspect of the creation of a 
world without war, without arms, 
of a world without oppressed and 
enslaved peoples. It Is only under 
a stable peace that really fruitful 
collaboration of scientists, scholars 
and educationalists of all countries 
is possible—collaboration aimed at 
discovering solutions to many prob- 
lems of importance to humanity... 
FRATERNITY OR DEATH 
One is nonplussed that, despite 
so much unhappiness and so many 
catastrophes, men still cannot realize 
that they are racing towards an 
abyss and that in the face of all 
the forces of nature they are in the 
process of unharnessing their only 
chance of salvation is not to fight, 
but to unite... 
Never has it been more obvious 
that humanity is being driven inexo- 
rably to the inescapable alternative 
—fraternity or death. 
Jean BERTHOIN, France 
MEN’S MINDS EMANCIPATED 
Culture is nothing more than a 
perpetual attempt to eliminate 
prejudices, to emancipate the 
minds of men from all kinds of 
prepossessions. 
Sir Sarvepalli RADHAKRISHNAN 
India 
FABLE OF THE ELEPHANT 
In a world in which men's minds 
are shrouded in the darkness of 
collective and individual vanities no 
one can claim to see clearly. Seven 
centuries ago one of our great 
thinkers told the tale of a group of 
people who, through curiosity, 
penetrated a very dark room in 
which an elephant was shut up. As 
it could not be seen, each member 
of the group tried to find out what 
is was by feeling it. But each one 
could only touch a single part of 
the enormous body. So a discussion 
took place in the dark. One thought 
that the elephant had the shape of 
a column, another that it looked 
like a trump, a third that it 
resembled a great leather bag, and 
SO on. 
Similarly, in the obscurity of our 
own time, whenever we hear diame- 
trically opposed definitions or 
interpretations of the words, Peace, 
Freedom, Democracy and Justice, 
we should remember the story of 
the elephant. 
G.A. RAADI, Iran 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 63765: An African looks at the world

  
AN AFRICAN LOOKS AT THE WORLD 
An educator from one of Afri- 
ca's newly independent coun- 
tries raises challenging issues 
which affect all men everywhere 
by F. I. Ajumogobia 
Federal Ministry of Education, Nigeria 
IIAVE heard the year 1960 described as Africa's 
year. I am not sure that I agree with the 
description, for in my view, no single year 
can be properly described as the year of des- 
tiny of any people. Human evolution, whether 
biological or sociological Is a gradual and continuous 
process; and so, significant as the year 1960 may appear 
to be in the history of Africa, I would regard it as merely 
the beginning of the many changes that must inevitably 
follow the great wind which is now blowing through the 
continent. 
During the year we have seen new States emerge in 
Afrlea: but we have also wltnessed, and are still 
witnessing, an emergency in Africa, 
In 1945 a world war, which like all wars had generated 
its own momentum, ended. Men were sick of war and 
there was general talk of peace. And men of goodwill 
from many lands said that never again should this evil 
thing happen. It was in that atmosphere that this great 
organization for peace, for education, for science and 
culture was born. But memory appears to be short. 
However, according to the Constitution of Unesco the 
Governments of the States Parties on behalf of their 
peoples declared: “That since wars begin in the minds 
of men, it Is in the minds of men that the defences of 
peace must be constructed; that ignorance of each other's 
ways and lives has been a common cause, throughout the 
history of mankind, of that suspicion and mistrust 
between the peoples of the world through which their 
differences have all too often broken into war”... 
The greatest means at our disposal is education, and 
I am using the term in its widest sense. There can he 
no peace In a world of Inequality and of unequal oppor- 
tunities and prejudices, whether of race, colour, religious 
persuasion or ideology: I believe too that wide differences 
in the provision of educational facilities may well lead 
to discontent and hence to disharmony and Instability 
in the world, For there can be no true peace In a world 
in which one part is living in ignorance, in poverty and 
stricken with disease, while the other part Is living In 
plenty, In comfort, utilizing all the amenities that modern 
science has placed at man’s disposal. 
All of human knowledge 
is indivisible & universal 
UT true knowledge is indivisible and universal and 
B should remaln so. For example, what does it matter 
if we give credit for the discovery of the calculus 
to Sir Isaac Newton or to Dr. Leibnitz? To my mind what 
matters is the fact that a great and powerful tool has 
been hequeathed to mankind. Surely a gas thermometer, 
whether constructed in a well-equipped laboratory in the 
jungle of Tropical Africa or constructed In a modern 
laboratory in Europe or America is fundamentally the 
same instrument, and if suitable correction factors are 
avallable it can be used in Africa with the same preci- 
sion as it can be used in Europe or America or Asia. 
Agaln, it 1s just over 60 years ago that the electron was 
discovered In the famous Cavendish Laboratory of 
Cambridge University by the eminent English scientist, 
Professor J.J. Thompson. The follow-up work by I.ord 
Rutherford and others in the United Kingdom and 
elsewhere In the next years led to the splitting of the 
atom. No longer do elementary science teachers describe 
the atom as the smallest, indivisible particle of matter. 
The atom has been split and what a tremendous source 
1 4 
of energy Is at man’s disposal? But what a pity that the 
first use to which the knowledge was put was in war, and 
that the common man first came to hear of the atom In 
terms of the atom bomb. One is not so sure that modern 
man is altogether fit to use the tools nature is revealing 
to him, no doubt through his own inquiry. Nuclear 
power is a challenge of our times. 
I believe that UNEsco has a great role to play in world 
peace. I agree with the head of the delegation of the 
United States of America that UNEsco Is the most 
promising organization for world peace. I also agree with 
the quotation of Tolstoy given us by the head of the 
delegation of the Unlon of Soviet Soclallst Republles: 
“preparation and arms for war are as bad as wars them- 
selves”. : 
In our shrinking world 
we must unite or perish 
E have heard great and forceful words spoken in 
\X/ the name and the cause of peace. One can only 
hope that these beautiful words have been spoken 
not merely from the lips but from the hearts, and that 
all leaders everywhere will spare no energy or effort in the 
pursuit of peace and harmony in the world. How many 
of us can genuinely repeat the wise words of the great 
Mahatma Gandhi: “I cannot derive any pleasure from 
living in a world which is not united”? In UNEsco 
we presume to be united. All our efforts should be 
directed to strengthen that unity. 
The chief weapon in the cause of peace is education 
and the Unesco provision for educational projects in the 
underdeveloped countries Is most gratefully appreciated 
by the peoples of those countries; but the needs are so 
great that the present efforts do not even scratch the 
surface. The whole of UNEsco’s programme and budget 
for 1961-1962 is just over $31 m. We have been told that 
some countries spend many times that amount on their 
national education and at least as much as that for aid 
In the territories dependent on them. It is obvious that 
the resources of Unesco are at present very limited since 
they depend almost entirely on contributions from 
member states and assoclate members. 
Most of the countries of Africa, especially Tropical 
Africa, are In various stages of transition from. tradi- 
tional economies based on subsistence agriculture. But 
they are, by and large, the important suppliers of 
primary products which serve the machines of the 
industrialized countries. Africa, for example, supplies 
about 20% of the world’s output of copper and manga- 
nese, about 25% of the world’s antimony, over 50% of 
the world’s gold and cobalt and about 90% of the world’s 
diamonds. Tropical Africa supplies over 60% of the 
world’s cocoa and about 75% of the world’s vegetable 
oil, principally palm oil and palm kernels. 
The wheels of the world’s machines would turn rather 
slowly If these primary products were not supplied by the 
countries of Africa and Asia. We live in a world In 
which the countries are interdependent: our world is 
rapidly shrinking, in time if not In space. No one section 
of the human race can now afford to be independent of 
the others. We so much depend one on another that 
unity Is necessary for our survival, 
This article is an abridged version of an address delivered by 
Mr. F. I. Ajumogobia, of the Nigerian Delegation, to the Unesco 
General Conference on November 25, 1960.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 63765: An African looks at the world

The Unesco Courier. — February 1961 
vl TNT BIER. °C ETT | dT BW ATE TI TTY SE TREES TT “a eR Er TW (Pe i ————— v | 
i 
Young couple from Dahomey. 
  
Fon a 
BE y TW ES ee SE 
LE i Sa 
© Dominique Darbois, Paris 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63768: The Changing face of Africa

FACE OF THE EDUCATOR 
Education has great priority In all of 
Africa's many newly independent countries. 
Educators, like this headmaster of a com- 
munity training centre (photo above), are 
the men of vislon and purpose who work 
to establish and maintain the schools 
which will train tomorrow's leaders. 
FACE OF THE SCIENTIST 
The great importance given to science in 
the modern world has not been overlooked 
by Africa's newly independent countries. 
Young scientists (photo above right), many 
of them trained in their own universities 
and technical schools, are taking their 
places in government and private labora- 
tories in all parts of the continent. 
FACE OF THE DOCTOR 
Modern and well-equipped hospitals are 
now staffed and run by Africans themselves. 
Such up-to-date operating rooms as this 
one (right) In the University College of 
Ibadan, Nigeria, form a nucleus from which 
young doctors and nurses now in training 
will go out to take their full part in 
raising the health standards of their people. 
16 
  
   es or a 
O
h
 
A
 
lh
 
W
O
R
M
 
  
w
a
s
 
   
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — Februory 1961 


### 63768: The Changing face of Africa

JE THE CHANGING 
A ef } FACE 
ZF OF AFRICA 
ow 
       
Most boundaries have remained the same, but 
independence has brought new recognition to 
African states. The map published on the two 
following pages will assist you in pinpoint- 
ing the continent’s twenty-two new countries. 
A
,
 
ow well do we know our African geogra- 
rd phy? Everyone could identify a map of 
3 the world's second largest continent, 
~~ and with a little help from school days, 
point out within a layman's distance such places 
as Cairo, Dakar or Addis Ababa. Most of us would 
have a vague knowledge of the continent’s topo- 
graphy with the vast desert to the north, the 
rolling grasslands of the far south and the dense 
tropical forests which lie between. 
But when it comes to political boundaries, our 
knowledge fails. Only a few years ago, the school- 
boy, glancing at his map of Africa, would know 
that the red areas designated a territory belonging 
to this country, the yellow, to another and the blue 
to still another. 
Suddenly all that has changed. In the past five 
years 22 new countries have achieved independence 
in Africa. It is not that they have been moved 
around or simply sprung up from nowhere, but 
that up to now, we have been in the habit of think- 
ing of them as part of this territory, or that terri- 
tory, and not as separate political entities with 
their own lawmakers, heads of states, courts of   
  
CONT'D ON PAGE 20 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 63768: The Changing face of Africa

  
73 MAURITANIA 
28-11-1960 
eo Nouakchott 
418,000 sq.m 
730,000 inh 
e Lagos 
350,000 sq.m 
35,280,000 inh 
© caeon 
e Libreville 
108,000 sq.m 
410,000 inh 
© conco 
eo Brazzaville 
132,000 sq.m 
800,000 inh 
7-8-1960 
[5-8-1960 
hs CENTRAL AFRI- 
CAN REPUBLIC 
13-8-1960 
e Bangui 
200,000 sq.m 
1,150,000 inh 
Oo CHAD 
e Fort-Lamy 
488,000 sq.m 
2,610,000 inh 
© NIGER. 
eo Niamey 
459,000 sq.m 
2,800,000 inh 
1 1-8-1960 
3-8-1960 
© oaHomEY 
1-8-1960 
e Porto-Novo 
45,000 sq.m 
2,000,000 inh 
(9) UPPER VOLTA 
5-8-1960 
e Ouagadougou 
106,000 sq.m 
4,000,000 inh 
© IVORY COAST 
7-8-1960 
e Abidjan 
127,000 sq.m 
3,100,000 inh 
e Mogadishu 
250,000 sq.m 
1,370,000 inh 
(12) CONGO 
30-6-1960 
e Léopoldville 
905,000 sq.m 
13,700,000 inh. 
(13 MALAGASY 
REPUBLIC 
26-6-1960 
e Tananarive 
227,000 sq.m 
5,200,000 inh 
@ rau repuBLIC 
20-56-1960 
e Bamako 
465,000 sq.m 
4,300,000 inh 
AFRICA 1961 
TWENTY-TWO COUNTRIES HAVE GAINED INDEPENDENCE 
   
  
   
A : 
hy NR 
Rk CERES TR 
AE TESTER ERA ; 
2 ANSLR #5 0 . {= \ eH 1H Re 3 
ARTE \ \o\ HIER 
Ghana 
  
Somalia Congo Mali Morocco 
    
hii} 
. Hig 
  
 
Kumasi, Ghana Ibadan, Nigeria 
OTHER TERRITORIES — 28) ALGERIA, (including Saharan territories) @ Algiers. (Fr.) 29) SPANISH WEST AFRICA eo Villa 
Cisneros, GAMBIA @ Bathurst. (Br.) €]) PORTUGUESE GUINEA e Bissau. €F) SIERRA LEONE e Freetown. (Br) €) SPANISH 
GUINEA e Bata. UGANDA e Entebbe. (Br. KENYA e Nairobi. (Br.) £1) RUANDA-URUNDI e Usumbura. (Bel. Tr. Terr.) 
TANGANYIKA e@ Dar-es-Salaam. (Br. Tr. Terr) 38) FEDERATION OF RHODESIA & NYASALAND @ Salisbury. (Br. 
€) BECHUANALAND e Mafeking. (Br) ) ANGOLA @ Luanda. (Por) (J) SOUTH-WEST AFRICA e Windhoek. (U.S.AL Mandate) 
&) BASUTOLAND, ® Maseru, (Br.) 43) SWAZILAND e Mbabane. (Br) 44) TMOZAMBIQUE ee Lourengo Marques. (Por.) 45} FRENCH 
SOMALILAND e Djibouti. (46) BRITISH CAMEROONS @ Tiko. : 
IN FIVE YEARS 
eo Dakar 
76,000 sq.m 
2,600,000 inh 
Oo TOGO 
| 27-4-1960 
e Lomé 
21,000 sq.m 
1,100,000 inh 
® CAMEROUN 
1-1-1960 
e Yaoundé 
167,000 sq.m 
3,200,000 inh 
(18) GUINEA 
2 
e Conakry 
95,000 sq.m 
2,800,000 inh . 
© cHana 
® Accra 
8-9-1958 
6-3-1957 
91,800 sq.m 
4,900,000 inh 
(20) TUNISIA 
20-3-1956 
e Tunis 
48,000 sa.m 
3,850,000 inh 
MOROCCO 
2-3-1956 
e Rabat 
175,000 sq.m 
10,330,000 inh 
(22) SUDAN 
1-1-1956 
e Khartoum 
965,000 sq.m 
11,400,000 inh 
* 
(23) LIBYA 
22-12-1951 
e Tripoli 
676,000 sq.m 
1,200,000 inh 
(24) UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (Egypt) 
eo Cairo 1922 
386,000 sq.m 
25,000,000 inh 
(25) UNION OF SOUTH 
AFRICA 
1910 
e Pretoria 
473,000 sq.m 
| 5,000,000 inh 
e Monrovia 
37,000 sq.m 
1,500,000 inh 
€) erHIOPIA 
e Addis Ababa 
463,000 sq.m 
21,000,000 inh

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63768: The Changing face of Africa

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63768: The Changing face of Africa

THE CHANGING 
FACE OF AFRICA 
(Cont’d from page 17) 
law, and, to be sure, their own representatives taking their 
places In the world councils. 
Political independence has changed the names of two 
or three of these new countries, but the countries them- 
selves, thelr inhabitants, towns and villages did not 
radicaily change overnight. Neither are their frontiers 
entirely new. You'll find most of them In an old atlas. 
Gabon, Congo, Nigerla, Senegal, Guinea, Togo and Came- 
roun are certainly not newcomers. There are a few 
unfamiliar names such as Central African Republic 
(which means exactly what it says), Mall and Ghana, 
both romantic sounding names recalling great African 
kingdoms of the past (1). 
If we look at the continent as a whole, we are struck 
by the pattern of Its various boundaries. They are not 
without significance and many of them have a story 
to tell. Some boundaries have, of course, evolved naturally. 
The island of Madagascar is an obvious example, and the 
Republic of Somalia with its homogeneous population Is 
another. 
But many of the boundaries appear to have been 
worked out arbitrarily with T-square and ruler as if some 
statesman or military leader had tried to avold complic- 
ations. The sharp geometrical boundaries of Kenya, Chad 
and the Sudan are examples. 
It may be some time yet before we know what shape 
the boundaries of east Africa between the Zambezi and 
Congo rivers will take in the atlases of the future, but, 
on the west coast the less regular jigsaw shape of 
boundaries testifies to a chequered history. The legacy 
of ancient alliances, kingdoms, and the influence of 
successive dominant peoples have all left their mark. 
I- results of this penetration into the Interior have 
left their traces on boundary lines all along the coast. 
From the Congo to Guinea, we find a dozen countries 
lying side by side, each with its strip of coast, extending 
inland to the humid forest, on to the shrub-covered 
zrasslands and sometimes as far as the savannahs. 
None of these countries on the Atlantic seaboard 
stretches as far inland as the desert. There, the arid 
Sudan region extends in a broad band from the Senegal 
River all the way to the Nile. Shepherds and their flocks 
have always moved freely through this part of Africa 
as have the traders’ caravans and many civilizations of 
the past. This is also true of Mauritania which lies 
between Senegal and the Atlas mountains, 
There are virtually no impassable natural barriers on 
the African continent. With the exception of those 
majestic eastern ranges which extend from the Abyssian 
highlands down to the snowclad peaks of Kilmanjaro, 
and those in the Sahara region, there are no mountains 
which compare with Europe's Alps or North America’s 
Rockies. Africa's mountains traditionally are neither 
impassable barriers nor savage regions held in dread by 
a peaceful population. On the contrary, the mountains 
of Kenya and Guinea provide good pasture lands, and 
those of the Cameroun are covered with lush coffee 
and banana plantations. If there are some highland 
areas which are sparsely populated it is not because of 
geography but the plague of the tsetse-fly. 
Even the deserts of Africa have not always been 
regarded as natural barriers. They have been used for 
centuries as highways of commerce and communication. 
Nor have the great virgin forests of tropical central 
Africa completely cut off the north from the south. 
Dense though they may be in certain regions, they 
cannot be compared with the Impenetrable Amazon 
jungle with which they are sometimes confused. 
While the African continent has few natural barriers 
which prohibit the movement of its population, it does 
lack good, navigable waterways. Rivers are comparatively 
few for such a large land mass. Whereas the Nile River 
20 
played a distinct role in the development of a civilization, 
not only along its banks but for half the ancient world, 
as did the Euphrates River in Asla Minor, one cannot 
say that the Zambezl, Congo or Niger Rivers were essen- 
tial factors in the rise of the civilizations of central Africa. 
The old empires of Ghana, Mall and Gao which lay 
astride the Senegal and Niger River valleys brought their 
Sahel culture from the savannah. The most stable king- 
doms of that era revolved around agricultural and 
religious centres, seldom following the course of water- 
ways. One might even conjecture that this lack of 
natural water highways long hindered the bullding of 
great states in Africa. 
Road and rail networks will be among the most im- 
portant developments in Africa’s future. It Is fifty 
years since the first man-made highways and rail lines 
began to criss-cross the continent and they are continually 
being expanded. 
As for maritime transportation, tropical Africa owes 
its great ports to external factors. Dakar, Abidjan, Lagos, 
Leopoldville and Nairobi were developed to a great 
extent by the world's great merchant navies, industries 
and more recently aviation. On the other hand, the: 
great towns of the tropical region which are purely 
African in origin grew up from regional market places, 
often the site of huge fairs. They remain essentially 
centres of agriculture and artisan trades. Ibadan Is a 
striking example. 
N addition to the geographic and political features of 
Africa, we must not overlook the continent's vast eco- 
nomic resources and its complex pattern of peoples, tribes 
and languages. In the fleld of resources we are on more 
familiar ground. 
Everyone knows about the gold mines of South Africa 
and the considerable amounts of this precious metal 
found in all regions north of the equator. Congo’s copper 
and uranium deposits are world famed. Diamonds bring 
to mind Angola and Tanganyika ; iron-ore, Liberia, Mau- 
ritania and Guinea. Both Guinea and the Cameroun also 
have large deposits of bauxite, the raw material from 
which aluminium is made. 
There are the phosphates of Senegal, the palm and 
peanut oils, and that appetizing favourite, cocoa, a source 
of prosperity for African planters in Ghana and the 
Ivory Coast. Add to these, coffee—pride of Ethiopia—and 
the famed cattle herds of the Masai and Peuhls in 
east and west Africa. 
Most of us know about these African resources, but 
this knowledge can also be a bit embarrassing. It concerns 
a phantom Africa which we identify with the produce’ 
of its soil and the wealth of its mines. We mever think 
of the people of Europe, Asia or the Americas exclusively 
in terms of their crops, mines and factories. 
3 AcH country has a special personality of its own, 
shaped by its history, its role in world affairs and its 
contribution to mankind. It is only now that we are 
beginning to think of African nations in this same way. 
Here is the very heart of the change which an inde- 
pendent Africa is having and will continue to have on 
the face of that continent. Until now we have tried to 
study, explore and explain Africa from the outside. 
Henceforth, we must see her with new eyes and listen 
to her new voice. Africa will write her own history, will 
produce her own philosophy, will interpret her religions 
and will unravel the tangled skeins of her many 
languages. As a part of the international community of 
nations, she will make her contribution to the fields of 
science, economics, politics and art. She is ceasing for 
all time to be an object of curiosity, of pity, of greed, of 
special interest. She will, herself, make known the great 
vital forces and human qualities which will bring a 
change and a new significance to the map of Africa. 
(1) See The Unesco Courier, October 1959: Special issue on “Africa's 
Lost Past: The Startling Rediscovery of a Continent.”

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63770: New schools for Africa

NEW SCHOOLS FOR AFRICA 
faa  -_"" ny ’ 
} ME SN lr SE nln ane - 
- 
  
By 
Georges Fradier 
oT Ah * ; 
ET PCE BE URE 
ar, pd 
a. 
  
a
E
 
T
a
 
  
w 
| 
ee ] 
w 
Vas drial &F " Le es Peal 
Unesco-Paul Almasy, Paris 
ULTRA-MODERN GIRLS' SECONDARY SCHOOL AT AKUAPIM IS ONE OF SEVERAL BUILT UNDER GHANA'S NEW EDUCATION PROGRAMME 
HE face of Africa has changed. Its rhythm 
has changed. When we look at this huge 
continent with its sharply contrasting 
countries there is no single yardstick by which 
to measure their dimensions, their resources, 
and their history. The nations of tropical 
Africa range from the old empire of Ethiopia to the 
smaller territories on the west coast which were carved 
out In the course of colonial partitions. They have 
striking social, industrial and cultural differences 
depending on whether they were influenced by Europe or 
the Arab world. Yet despite all the differences, every 
one of these countries Is today launched on an extra- 
ordinary undertaking—the provision 
of full education to hundreds of 
Nowadays few persons are likely to be surprised by the 
fact that there are currently 112,000 boys and girls In 
Nigerlan secondary schools and teacher-training schools, 
that 1,600 pupils entered the secondary school sixth class 
last year In Guinea and that there are 20,000 secondary 
pupils in Madagascar. But what is significant is that 
most of these schools were hardly dreamt of a generation 
ago. The visitor to an African university llbrary or 
scientific laboratory or trade training centre Is struck by 
the fact that everything Is new; had he come to Africa 
10 years ago he would have found very little. Today 
he Is confronted with a sudden burgeoning; he sees not 
a mere advance in education but an acceleration so 
dynamic that it Is virtually a crea- 
tion from the ground up. 
thousands of children whose fathers 
never so much as saw a school. 
Nowhere at any time has there 
been so rapid a development in the 
field of education. In 10 years the 
number of schools and pupils in cer- 
tain regions has increased by 300 per 
cent. At the end of the second world 
war it would have been hard to 
foresee that an independent republic 
called Ghana would have more than 
600,000 pupils at school by 1960; or 
that there would be 130,000 school- 
children in Senegal and Mali.   Fifteen years ago, eyebrows would 
This explains why African educa- 
Unesco has carried out a tional authorities are ready to 
survey of educational prob- 
lems in 22 countries of Africa. 
In this third and concluding 
article on education in Asia, 
the Middle East and Africa, 
Georges Fradier our roving cor- 
respondent, sums up his own 
as well as Unesco’s findings. 
discuss freely and optimistically the 
problem of the number of children 
still not attending school. In cer- 
tain cases the figures are gigantic. 
In Ethlopla, Somalia, Mali, the Niger 
and the Upper Volta, it is not yet 
possible to provide primary educa- 
tlon for even a tenth of the school- 
age children. Schooling is available 
for fewer than three chlldren in ten 
in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Dahomey 
and Tanganyika.   Even those countries which, edu- 
have been raised at the suggestion 
that Addis Ababa would possess a 
great university college and that the equipment of the 
lecture rooms, libraries and laboratories of the univer- 
sities of Ibadan, Accra, Leopoldville, Fourah Bay and 
Dakar would put that of some European cities to shame. 
Today, students at these African universities are hardly 
aware that their countries were forced to do without any 
universities at all up until a few years ago. 
cationally speaking, are the richest 
and most favourably placed will 
have to take Seven-League-Boot strides to reach the goal 
of education for all children in any way comparable to 
that of Europe and America. At present all the schools 
of the Federation of Nigeria, for example, have a total 
enrolment of 2.7 million pupils of which primary schools 
alone account for 2,6 million. But Northern Nigeria, a 
vast region of 18 million inhabitants, lags far behind the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 63770: New schools for Africa

NEW SCHOOLS FOR AFRICA (Cont'd) 
VAST UNESCO ENQUIRY SURVEYS 22 COUNTRIES 
rest of the country in education with almost 4 million 
children growing up uneducated. 
Thus, although the countries of tropical Africa may see 
their problems in similar terms, they can hardly be sald 
to be In a position to solve them In the same manner, 
within the same length of time or with the same ease. 
The fact is that between the different regions of the 
continent the disparities are enormous, and they are no 
less so within each individual country. 
The largest cities of Africa compare favourably with 
equivalent cities elsewhere in terms of comfort, amenities, 
architecture and transport. Generally speaking, there is 
no shortage of schools In these capitals or rather there 
is a shortage only to the extent that the cities grow too 
fast: it is not easy to provide for the education of shanty- 
town children. 
Yet Africa remains and will continue to remain rural: 
the vast majority of its people will continue to live and 
work in Innumerable villages which seem all the more 
scattered on account of the scarcity of roads. When, as 
often happens, a school is bullt In one of the markets 
which spring up by the roadside, its influence extends 
for only a short distance around. Education Is still 
Impossible for most young Africans unless they are ready 
to travel great distances or quit thelr homes altogether—a 
solution which is accepted as a last resort for boys but 
rarely for girls. 
The situation is particularly serious in sparsely populat- 
ed regions. In a large part of Ethiopia, in Somalia and 
in the huge semi-arid plains which stretch from the Nile 
to the Atlantic between the Sahara and the forest zone 
there are less than five inhabitants per square kilometre. 
No heating problems and 
no window panes needed 
NDER-POPULATION Is disastrous in its effect on the 
development of an effective and complete network 
of schools. It may be said that the percentage of 
African children attending school is always related to the 
density of the population. Educational authorities, 
however limited the funds available, are always ready to 
provide a school and teachers If asked to do so by a town 
with a population of 10,000, but they admit their helpless- 
ness when asked to provide the same facilities for 50 vil- 
lages of 200 inhabitants. 
These 50 villages are not demanding that someone be 
sent at great expense to bulld schools; most of them are 
quite ready to build the school themselves and even to 
build a home for the master. In most African countries 
a school bullding can be of a very modest type: there is 
no heating problem and the windows can easily be left 
without glass. 
During the conference of education ministers and 
directors which was organized by Unesco at Addis Ababa 
in February 1960 (1), the representative of Somalia 
declared: “Let us leave aside the bullding problem. If 
necessary, a tree is enough to prop a blackboard up and 
provide a little shade. It is the teacher who makes the 
school, not the building. The real problem is the problem 
of teachers.” 
Textbooks on African 
history, people needed 
F one considers the requirements in qualified staff for 
Africa as a whole, the question of resources inevitably 
assumes disturbing proportions. Some idea of what is 
involved was given by the Emperor of Ethiopla in opening 
the Addls Ababa conference: to provide the millions of 
young Africans who still lack schools with the education 
they are entitled to “more than 345,000 teachers” must 
be trained, provided with accommodation and given the 
means to live properly in the course of the next few years. 
Thus the regional co-operation which several African 
nations have decided to institute should give priority to 
teacher training. This co-operation, to which the inter- 
national aid factor should be added, can also help to solve 
the problem of textbooks. 
Even when there are enough books they are not always 
(1) The following countries took part: Republic of the 
Congo, Belgium, the French Communily (represented 
by Dahomey, France, Madagascar and the Mali Federa- 
tion), Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra 
Leone, Somalia, United Kingdom. 
The tiny villages ot Africa are as eager as larger towns to have schools. But 
education authorities admit they are often helpless to do anything about it. Most 
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris 
LJP Lr NEL 
< : ROEM - ir PRET : 
  
  
    
villages though are ready to build their school themselves. Below, village council 
ai at Sit 4 ol i ) 
a 
  
35 
1»
 
S
E
 
  
: 
- 
’ 
» 
" 
5 
y 
"~e
 
} 
~ 
. 
   
      
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

suited to the pupils’ real needs. There are African publish- 
ers and textbooks—at least in East Africa—but books are 
mostly imported from Europe. Designed for children with 
a completely different social and geographical back- 
ground, they present young Africans with an additional 
problem: the mastering of texts which, though excellent 
according to English or French pedagogic standards, are 
not designed for African needs. 
Accordingly, all African educationalists urge that, at 
least for certain subjects, publishers should produce books 
which take Into account the history and the national and 
ethnic characteristics of each country. Some action 
along these lines has already been taken, notably In 
Ghana, Nigeria and Guinea. 
Adapting textbooks for primary school children ralses 
another vitally important question, the need for language 
reform and unification. Today, all the nations of 
Africa Irrespective of size face this problem of the Babel 
of tongues. There Is not a single country In troplcal 
Africa where the same language is spoken by all the 
Inhabitants, for in each country the different peoples and 
provinces all speak different languages. No African today 
can hope to make himself understood by all his fellow- 
countrymen when speaking his native tongue. 
In some countries children starting school begin by 
learning to read In an African language which is not 
necessarily their mother tongue but which Is the most 
common In their district or province. This language 
introduces them to the basic rules and teaches them that 
signs on paper represent sounds, pictures and ideas. In 
other countries they learn to read and write in their own 
language much later (and If they particularly wish to): 
from the first year, reading is taught in French or, 
elsewhere, in Spanish, English or Portuguese. 
In any case, those who begin by spelling out stories and 
poems In Asante-Twl, In Yoruba, in Ibo, in Lingala or in 
Ki-Swahill know that the real medium of instruction will 
be a European language and that unless they learn it, 
they will only have at best four year’s primary education. 


### 63770: New schools for Africa

Visiting new schools, 
a startling experience 
NE of the most serious problems of African education 
is the lag in secondary education. It is a rather dis- 
concerting experience to visit some secondary 
schools in Africa. They range from venerable ones 
like Mfantsipim on the Cape Coast or King's College in 
discussing such a project. About 17,000,000 children in Africa have no chance to go 
The Unesco Courier. — February 1961 
Lzgos to the new and luxurious Queen's College at Yaba 
(245 young ladies are given a finished education at a cost 
of £60 a year to their parents and £250 to the govern- 
ment). There are the modern schools of striking architec- 
ture such as the Gabré Mariam Secondary School of Addis 
Ababa and the stark, almost {ndustrial institutions like 
the excellent secondary school of Conakry. 
Everything here is “like In Manchester” or “lke in Tou- 
louse”, just as on crossing one frontier, schools and their 
appearance, the curriculum, the regulations and atmo- 
sphere—indeed the whole life of these schools recalls 
Liége or Cadiz. The only difference Is that the pupils 
are African. In exceptional cases as many as 30 or 40 per 
cent of the teachers and administrators are African, but 
usually the proportion Is closer to one per cent. Sec- 
ondary education In Africa depends in the malin on the 
foreigner. Civil servants, missionaries, representatives of 
“voluntary agencles”, and teachers, come from Europe, 
America or Asia (In Ethiopla and on the East coast many 
teachers from India are to be found). 
Only one child in twenty 
reaches secondary level 
LL this is to the good—and the work accomplished by 
these institutions cannot be ininimized. They have 
, helped Africa to take its place in international life 
and it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that it is 
in the lycées, In the secondary and high schools that the 
independence of the young African nations was born. 
Today the whole educational system of the new States still 
relles on these schools and will do so for a long time to 
come. Nevertheless, they are inadequate: there are too 
few of them and, except in a few countries, their develop- 
ment would be extremely difficult. 
A Unesco Inquiry carried out In 22 countries of troplcal 
Africa has shown that In 17 of them the proportion of 
secondary to primary school puplls is less than 5 per cent 
and In only four countries 1s the proportion higher than 
T per cent. Yet even this does not mean that out of 100 
pupils more than seven complete a secondary course and 
can pass the examinations corresponding to the British 
General Certificate of Education or the French baccalau- 
réal. There are approximately 5,000 Africans in Kenya 
secondary schools against 580,000 in the primary schools, 
yet of these, In 1959, only 605 boys and 49 girls obtained 
the Cambridge Oversea School Certificate, which must be 
followed by another two years’ school before it is possible 
to enter a university or technical college. 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 27 
 
to school. As Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia recently explained, one of the 
reasons is that “more than 345,000 teachers” are lackingand musturgently be trained, 
 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63773: Six men with a problem: obstacle course to leadership

   
‘Obstacle Course To Leadership ; 
SIX MEN WITH A PROBLEM 
   
¥; F ee 3 ~ £4 ba EY oy TN ou. 
“All the young nations of Africa are today on the lookout for suitable candidates er Saran arith 
to fill key administrative jobs. In Ghana, the Institute for Education at the Uni- Nl... IS 
‘versity of Accra has drawn up a series of group tests to assess the leadership | 
      
~ qualities of students and persons from private and official bodies. Photos show = A AN 
~ six candidates undergoing two of these tests. Each test poses a problem which RE 
can only be solved by collective action, careful thought and preparation. To 
find the right solution and carry it out demands intelligence, initiative, clear- 
sightedness and organizing ability as well as energy and physical skill. Itisleftto 
‘one man to assert leadership over others. A jury notes individual performances. 
th edt bl TE . : At [EE oe . & pt Ei i 
C
a
m
m
 
C
L
U
E
 
       
   
0 
Tara OW ARR — 7            
   
     
Ae a aaa a 
hs 
   
9 Tt 
wv. 
   
  
- 3 “| : 3 Ar, 
’ <0 4 ee 8 ~ OS € 
Ca Ea We 
a J | = mud 
. , . 5 vs vy = ’ ~~ . 
Ya 1:01:10 8 
‘Leadership problem posed to six : rT ee ye 
young Africans is shown in diagram La We 
(above). Men must cross from A 
‘to B over an imaginary precipice C 
~ taking with them a heavy iron pipe 
and a large metal drum. They are 
allowed to use three tyres as sup- 
ports hanging over the “preci- i 
pice.” The men put their heads 
~ together and one of them, Amissah, 
comes up with an idea for the solu- 
“tion which he explains to the others. 
~ Amissah’s idea is to use a rope to 
pull two tyres to point A, then use 
these to “launch” one man to the 
third tyre and thus to point B. 
~ But the attempt fails (photo left) 
for this was not the correct solution, 
and the man who tried to get across 
could easily have fallen into the 
“precipice.” Amissah has shown 
rashness in risking the lives of the 
‘others, and the jury notes down: 
“Not enough sense of responsiblity. 
a pl 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63773: Six men with a problem: obstacle course to leadership

’ 
REE Sa 
SUCCESS 
Another member of the group, 
Dunyoh, comes forward with a 
new idea: “If we push the pipe 
through the tyres it will act as a 
bridge along which we can take the 
drum. When we have all crossed 
to the other side, all we need do is 
pull the pipe after us and the 
problem is solved.” Above and 
below, Dunyoh’s idea worked—he 
scores highly for the initiative and 
‘organizing ability he has CIEE TL
4 
  
 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63773: Six men with a problem: obstacle course to leadership

  
EE LE 
A NEW TEST, far more difficult than the first, now 
~ faces the six candidates. This time the iron pipe has 
to be transported from one high wooden barrier to 
another over an imaginary precipice. The team is 
given a rope with indications as to the limits of what 
they can do with it. Unlike in the first test, there 
Are no helpful supports hanging over the “precipice”. 
lL ro 
Everyone agrees that the rope, : 
~ tied with a running knot, must be 
~ thrown over and hooked to the 
~ post on the far side and this is 
IRCVCU TEN] AR CT TR of TET TY IR TY 
try to snake their way over the 
© rope, but one falls into the “preci- 
~ pice” and is eliminated from the test. 
i= Gf I} 
PI ® Pau 
One of the men now comes up with 
a new idea. Stretching himself 
full-length along the rope, he takes 
~ the iron pipe on his shoulder for 
support and slowly inches across. 
This feat calls for considerable skill, 
determination and physical stamina. 
i OW BS mee a 02 
is is the only correct approach to 
the problem. In the final scene we 
see the pipe and the last men 
successfully reaching the far bar- 
“rier. The pipe, it should be noted, 
is heavy and awkward to handle. 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63770: New schools for Africa

NEW SCHOOLS FOR AFRICA 
(Cont’d from page 23) 
The existing secondary schools would probably be 
sufficient to train suitable candidates needed for higher 
education. But it is a mistake to regard secondary 
education merely as as preparatory stage for college and 
to assume that only as many students are needed as can 
be absorbed by the universities, medical schools and 
technical institutes. 
Secondary education must be conceived rather as a 
type and level of education on Its own, even when it does 
not necessarily lead to higher education. As African 
leaders point out, it has an important part to play in 
raising the cultural level of a nation as well as in promot- 
ing economic, social and political development. 
Secondary education Is a necessary qualification for 
those who hold many posts in trade and the civil service 
and in the rural development programmes which are so 
vital to Africa today. The need Is growling everywhere 
for administrative and technical senior officials, for 
skilled and semi-skilled workers, but this need cannot be 
met by the present rate of secondary school graduates. 
Even more serious is the lag in technical education on 
the secondary level. Ghana, for example, with more than 
500,000 pupils at school In a population of five million, 
has been unable thus far to set up and maintain a single 
technical school. And this despite its many other second- 
ary schools and shop training centres (like those of the 
Cocoa Board), despite its 500 students at Accra Univers- 
ty and almost as many at the Kumasi! School of Technol- 
ogy and despite its admirable school radio system. 
It is not difficult to discover the reasons for these 
shortcomings. Few people believed that Industrial deve- 
lopment would take place so rapidly in the independent 
African nations. Then too, it has always been easler to 
find good foreign teachers in languages, mathematics, 
Latin grammar and similar subjects than in mechanics, 
foundry techniques or electricity, industrial design or 
applled science. 
] material are arriving much faster than the 
teachers. Already in general secondary as well as 
in technical education, the lack of qualified teachers has 
created an alarming situation. Teachers are needed by 
the hundreds for science, mathematics, English, French 
and, in such countries as Somalia, even Arabic. It is to 
be hoped that all nations in a position to send teaching 
staff abroad will heed the appeal for help that the 
countries of Africa have made. 
Machines arrive faster 
than do the instructors 
opay, the equipment, the machines and the 
But in the Iong run, this help, however generous it may 
be, will not be enough. So long as independent Africa 
has to rely entirely, or just about, on outside aid, it will 
not obtain the complete educational system it needs and 
wants. At best this will only keep education at its 
present level. Future bilateral or multilateral assistance 
would best be devoted primarily to the training of African 
secondary teachers for general and technical education. 
In all of tropical Africa there was only one training 
college for technical and vocational teachers as of 
January 1961. As to teachers of literature and science, 
they must come from the universities, which are only 
now beginning to provide the graduates needed for indus- 
try, hospitals, the big plantations and the civil service. 
Of the thousand students at the Ibadan university, 600 
are studying science, medicine and economics; of the 
remaining 400 there are many who will not become 
teachers. 
This Is only one example but it is typical of most of the 
countries in Africa. It Is therefore urgent that teacher 
training be speeded up by every possible means if a very 
serious crisis in secondary education, and in education at 
all levels, is to be avoided. 
The Unesco Courier. — February 1961 
There was full awareness of this situation when the 
Ministers and Directors of Education of the countries of 
Troplcal Africa met in Addis Ababa last February. They 
made an urgent appeal to Unesco for help in the creation 
and operation of regional teacher training Institutions, 
chiefly for secondary schools. 
UNEsco has answered this appeal. Its programme for 
1961-1962 provides for the creation in Tropical Africa of 
two regional centres which wlll train educators for future 
teacher-tralning colleges and also to carry out educa- 
tional research. 
Furthermore, through the United Natlons Special Fund, 
UNEsco will be able to help in the development of second- 
ary education. For example, in Nigeria it Is proposed 
to set up a federal teacher-training college for secondary 
schoolteachers, with the fund contributing $800,000 and 
the Nigerian Government $1,800,000. 
Most people simply do not realize the scope of the 
glgantic tasks confronting the countries of tropical 
Africa. Many belleve that once the basic essentials are 
achleved everything in the garden wlll be rosy—that 
education will develop automatically and quickly with the 
smoothness of a well-oiled machine. The truth is that 
most of the countries of Africa are going to be at their 
wit’s end to provide teachers for the thousands of schools 
that need to be built. 
Girls will go to school 
when Dad is convinced 
OR can it be sald that the children currently at 
school are really receiving adequate primary 
instruction. Attendance figures are somewhat 
misleading. Out of a thousand pupils in a given town or 
district, how many will actually complete their primary 
schooling? Ilow many will give up after two or three 
years in the lower classes? 
Even for those who do go on unt!l graduation, the use- 
fulness of the education provided is often placed in doubt. 
This Is particularly the case for girls. Relatively few 
girls go to school-—except In two or three countries, they 
account for barely 30% of the attendance. This is some- 
times due to cultural, religious or traditional obstacles, but 
Is more often economic in origin. Parents see the mate- 
rial advantages which education can bring to a boy, who 
can thus obtain well-paid and socially desirable jobs: but 
they have no such hope regarding thelr daughters, and 
besides there 1s useful work that they can be given to do 
at an early age. 
Worse still, some familles tend to feel that they are 
making a useless sacrifice In sending thelr daughters to 
school. What Is the use, they say, of bookish knowledge 
requiring four to six years of study at the age when young 
African girls are preparing for marriage a few years off? 
And what good will it do them later, they add, when they 
do assume the tasks and responsibilities of womanhood? 
If the education of girls is to gain wide acceptance, parti- 
cularly In farm areas, it must first prove {ts usefulness, 
economically and soclally. Once it 1s felt that because 
they have gone to school women are better housckeepers, 
better mothers, and even more prosperous shopkeepers, 
then and only then will we see girls as numerous as their 
brothers in the classroom. 
No better investment than 
money spent on education 
NDEPENDENCE In Africa has seen the new countries 
buckle down to the problems of education without 
delay. The governments are perfectly aware that edu- 
cation, in the present circumstances of their national life, 
calls for the same effort and vigilance as social stability 
and economic prosperity and they do not hesitate to say 
So bluntly. It may be trite and hackneyed to say that the 
future of each country depends on the education given 
the younger generation, but in Africa today it Is being 
sald with firm insistence. It would indeed be a pity it 
the states or organizations responsible for the aid offered 
to these countries were to think of development only In 
terms of Industry, equipment and finance and were to 
overlook the fact that there is no better.investment than 
expenditure on behalf of education. 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 63780: Towards harmony between races

TOWARDS HARMONY 
BETWEEN RAGES 
by Alfred Métraux 
The special issue which THE UNESCO 
Courier published last October on 
“Racism” has had broad repercussions 
around the world. Many people 
: have raised questions concerning 
UNEsco’s past activities and expressed 
' interest in the organization's future 
plans to fight the virus of racism. 
In attempting to present the 
picture of UNEsco’s action in this 
fleld, I should like, first, to clear up one misappre- 
hension which seems to be widespread. UNEsco is not a 
political body. It is an international organization for 
selence, education and the arts, and can act only in those 
flelds which are within its competence. It directs itself 
to the “minds of men”; it is in the minds of men that it 
seeks to construct the defences against war and racism, 
leaving to other bodies action in the sphere of politics. 
UNEsco’s Constitution denounces the “doctrine of the 
inequality of men and races”, but Unesco’s struggle is 
aimed not only against the “racist doctrine” but also 
against the attitudes and ways of thinking which are 
at the root of this doctrine. UNEsco’s first task, there- 
fore, was to dispel the many false notions and easy ste- 
reotypes which are the basls and framework of racism. 
It is surprising to see how ignorant the public at large 
and even more educated groups often are on these 
matters: one can even go so far as to say that there is 
a gap of at least half a century between science and 
public opinion on the facts of race. 
HM The very idea of “race” often breeds confusion. Ten 
years ago, UNEsco commissioned two groups of scientists 
to draw up a Declaration on Race in which they set forth, 
In “clear and simple form”, the present state of our 
knowledge of the problem of raclal equality and of the 
unity of .the human species. This declaration was only 
a brief summary of the results of the work carried on 
for many years in research centres and laboratories. 
To make avallable to the public information on various 
aspects of this problem and on the scientific facts behind 
the Declaration on Race, UNEsco published a series of 
booklets entitled “The Race question in Modern Science.” 
For this series, specialists from various countries who had 
distingulshed themselves by their research on the race 
problem were invited to expound their own conclusions 
and those reached by other scientists as well (1). 
The race problem involves human nature as a whole. 
Consequently, it concerns many branches of science, both 
the natural as well as the soclal sciences; no single branch 
has the answer to all the questions.—Thus, the psychol- 
ogist made his contribution by “pulling the rug” from 
under certaln tests designed to prove the inferiority of 
one race as compared to another, by exposing glaring 
errors of method used in these tests. The geneticist 
produced a new definition of the notion of race in the 
light of modern biology. The sociologist analysed the 
nature and the forms of Inter-racial conflict. The role 
of the cultural anthropologist was to bring out the deci- 
sive influence of social environment upon the shaping of 
personality. And only a specialist in physical anthropo- 
logy was qualified to expose the absurd notion which so 
many persons still have about the so-called harmful effect 
of racial mixtures. 
All these numerous facets of the same problem were 
treated competently and objectively in the dozen booklets 
28 
Brazil is a striking 
example of a country 
in which men and 
women of different 
racial groups live side 
by side in harmony.  
published in the series already mentioned. The scientists 
who wrote them were careful to avoid any assertion of 
an emotional or ethical nature. They concealed neither 
our ignorance nor our doubts. However, they all felt that 
they had to speak out, for, if the sclentist himself 
remained silent, it must have appeared that totally false 
ideas and brutal doctrines were undisputed truths. That 
is why it was important to impress on the public the fact 
that no branch of science offers the slightest argument 
in support of racism. 
The Race booklets have met with considerable sucess, 
and have now been translated into eleven languages, of 
which the English edition runs to almost 250,000 copies. 
The great interest shown by the public in the race pro- 
blem is reflected in the popularity of the UNEsco Series. 
The many articles that have appeared in newspapers and 
periodicals based on these studies, the group discussions 
which the booklets have inspired—all these have combined 
to bring the facts on racism, formerly avallable only to 
the specialist, to a broad international audience, and have 
thus been instrumental in reducing bias and prejudice. 
|| The problems raised by racial prejudice and its 
resulting discrimination are not only of a scientific 
nature. It would be absurd to think that one could put 
an end to racial conflict and its tragic consequences 
merely by debunking the false ideas and stereotypes of 
racist thinking. Racism is also a problem of conscience. 
And it is for this reason that various religions and philo- 
sophies have expressed definite views on the problem. 
To its collection “The Race Question in Modern Science”, 
Unesco therefore added a new series entitled “The Race 
Question in Modern Thought”. It comprises a group of 
essays defining the attitudes adopted by the great world 
religions towards the diversity of the human family.

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 63780: Towards harmony between races

T
E
 
T
T
 
£ 
iC 
E
E
 
  
S
E
 |
    
© Pierre Verger. 
In the volumes published thus far, great theologlans 
and philosophers have discussed the attitude toward 
racism adopted by the Catholic Church, the Protestant 
churches, Buddhism and Judaism. The authors are dist- 
inguished not only for their scholarship but also because 
of their position in the religious movements of our time. 
While all world religions agree in condemning racism 
and all proclaim the equality of mankind and human 
dignity, they do so at times in different terms. It Is 
because these differences of approach all lead to the same 
conclusion that the cause of anti-racism is strengthened. 
HM Few persons would deny that deep-rooted prejudices 
and stereotypes—those which are hardest to get rid of in 
adults-—are acquired at a very early age. This means 
that, to be truly effective, educational measures must 
begin at school. As the UN Agency for education, UNESCO 
has therefore carried its campaign against racial bias 
Into the classroom. But realizing that the school curri- 
culum is already over-burdened In most countries, and 
that the addition of a separate subject would be difficult, 
it has sought to reach the student through the teacher, 
by providing the latter with the most up-to-date findings 
of modern science for incorporation in normal lessons. 
With this purpose in view, UNEsco commissioned two 
textbooks: Cyril Bibby’'s Race, Prejudice and Education 
in English (See THE Unesco COURIER, October 1960) 
already translated into German and Hebrew, with other 
language versions foreseen ; and Professor Juan Comas’s 
La Educacion ante la Discriminacion racial (Education 
and Racial Discrimination), intended for school-teachers 
in Latin America. A small illustrated pamphlet for 
schools entitled What is Race? has also been published. 
Parallel with this publishing venture, Unesco launched 
a serles of original research projects on race relations. 
An enormous amount of research on this subject had of 
The Unesco Courier. — February 1961 
course already been done by groups In many countries, 
but UNEscO’s Investigations were focused on a relatively 
little-studied aspect—harmonious race relations. 
The fact of the matter is that the meeting of races is 
not necessarily marked by conflict or prejudice—as some 
people maintain. There are areas and regions where men 
of different skin colour live side-by-side in perfect har- 
mony and are mutually enriched by thelr respective cul- 
tural backgrounds. 
HM The U.S. State of Hawali and Brazil are typical exam- 
ples of multi-racial lands where people get along very 
well with each other. Since race relations In Hawai] had 
already been extensively studied, Unesco decided to carry 
out its research In Brazil. The task was entrusted to 
teams of soclologists and psychologists who studied the 
race situation in different regions of the country, both 
in rural and urban environments. The results of this 
work were set forth in several hooks, of which two were 
published by Unesco (2) and the others by Brazillan Ins- 
titutlons and publishing houses. 
Along similar Ines, Unesco organized other research 
projects In countries where ethnic minorities were in 
process of assimilation. Mexico, the French West Indies, 
the United States and Yugoslavia offered research sub- 
jects of great Interest. The conclusions of these research 
projects have been published by Unesco under the fol- 
lowing titles: Contacts de civilisation en Martinique et 
Guadeloupe by Michel Lelris (in French only): Racial 
Equality and the Law by Morroe Berger, an excellent ana- 
lysis of American legislation to achieve racial equality. 
A book prepared by Unesco but published by the Colum- 
bia University Press in the United States summarizes 
field studies In the New World: Minorities in the New 
World by Charles Wagley and Marvin Ilarrls. 
| The rapld development of African socleties and the 
growing number of Africans who are becoming prominent 
in fields hitherto considered the prerogative of the white 
race offer powerful arguments against theories of racism 
and “raclal pessimism”, which are Invoked all too often 
to justify discriminatory attitudes and measures. It was 
doubly Interesting for Unesco, therefore, to make a sclen- 
tific analysis of the process of modernization in Africa 
which, far more effectively than any theory, proves the 
aptitude of all ethnic groups to benefit from progress. 
Soclological research on the new leaders who are spring- 
ing up In Africa was carried out by Unesco in Dahomey, 
Ghana and Nigeria. These studies were recently supple- 
mented by research on African women who, having 
broken with their traditional environment, have now 
Joined the cultural revolution sweeping thelr countries. 
Up until now, UnEsco’s attention has been concentrated 
upon the positive aspects of race relations. But the 
recent racist manifestations which have spread like wild- 
fire throughout the world have led Unesco to turn to the 
question of raclsm and its influence on modern youth. 
A large-scale international Investigation of a psychologi- 
cal and soclological character is now belng prepared 
by Unesco to determine the depth of raclal prejudice 
among youth, its causes, its persistence and methods of 
fighting it. 
Furthermore, UNEsco's last General Conference recently 
adopted a draft convention and recommendations 
concerning discriminatory measures in education, and the 
adherence of Member States to this convention can hardly 
fall to result In measures which are bound to counteract 
racial prejudices. 
| Finally, there are prospects that an international orga- 
nization will be set up to act as a permanent documenta- 
tlon and research centre on race relation problems. 
Unesco Is now studying the conditions under which it 
can help such an organization to get started, 
These are some of the maln activities which UNEsco 
has undertaken or {s preparing to undertake to fight the 
“soclal cancer of our time”. UNEsco Is well aware of the 
responsibilities which, as a member of the U.N. family, it 
has assumed in this fleld and it will not shirk them. 
(1) A collective volume of these publications “The Race Question 
in Modern Science”, is now in preparation and will be published 
jountly by the Tuttle Company of Tokyo and Unesco, Paris. "A special 
U.S. edition witl be published by the Columbia University Press, 
New York. 
(2) “Race and Class in Rural Brazil™ by Charles Wagley, and “Les 
élites de couleur dans une ville brésilienne” (The coloured Flite in a 
Brazilian Town) by Thales de Azevedo (French only). 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

Prado Muzeum, Madrid 


### 63797: Velazquez à la Picasso

   
  
   
   
  
VELAZQUEZ A LA PICASSO 
When he was 14 years old, Pablo Picasso visited the Prado in Madrid with his father 
and saw for the first time the famous painting, ‘Las Meninas’’ (Ladies in Waiting), 
masterpiece of the 17th century Spanish artist, Velazquez (see special issue UNESCO 
COURIER, December 1960). It was an experience he never forgot. The memory 
of this court scene with its wealth of detail and the engaging figure of the tiny Infanta 
haunted him for years. “What a picture,” he once remarked to a friend. “What 
realism!... What a marvellous achievement.” Inthe autumn of 1957, Picasso brought 
to artistic fruition years of pent-up feelings about Velazquez’ great work. For two 
months he shut himself away from his friends and created a series of 45 paintings 
in which he took for his theme the whole or parts of ‘* Las Meninas.'' The largest 
canvas, 6 feet by nearly 9 feet, painted in monochrome (below centre) incorporates 
all of the main features found in the original. Many of the series are innumerable 
variations of aspects of the original, particularly those studies of the Infanta which 
reveal Picasso's remarkable versatility and his audacious treatment of the work. 
  

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63797: Velazquez à la Picasso

The Unesco Courier. — February 1961 
    
    Photos Pic @© Editions Cercle d'Art, Pans 
3]

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63805: They call their telescope 'Bima Sakti'

They call their telescope 
  
Java's puppet hero, they say, was so tall he 
straddled the Milky Way... What better name for a by 
telescope in Indonesia's modern Bosscha observatory 
b - on the western hills of the island of 
N | Java, with a semi-dormant volcano as a 
Ly backdrop, lles the Bosscha Astronomical 
~ Observatory, a unique nstitution in South- 
- East Asia. There amid meticulously kept 
gardens rises a monumental dome-shaped building 
housing two of the large refracting telescopes of the 
world. The telescopes, manned by young Indonesian 
scientists are actively helping to widen man’s scientific 
horizons. The publications of the Bosscha Observatory 
are read and collected in hundreds of scientific centres 
throughout the world. 
The Republic of Indonesia, while struggling with some 
of today’s most difficult socio-economic problems, 
maintains the observatory. This shows that Indonesia 
has in sight high cultural goals for its youth. The 
Bosscha Observatory is a symbol of the opportunities that 
the Republic envisions for its young scientists. Thousands 
of students of all ages visit it every year. Astronomy 
often awakens a child’s first scientific curiosity. 
The observatory is thus not only a symbol of future 
goals but a busy centre of present-day popular education. 
This role is ntensified by the visitors from the city of 
Bandung that flock to the observatory during holy days. 
Bandung, a city of nearly one milllon inhabitants, is 
spread like a carpet in a valley twelve kilometres distant 
from the observatory. From the spacious lawns at 
Bosscha, the public can view a striking panorama while 
enjoying the cool mountain air. 
The geographic position of the observatory, seven 
degrees south of the equator, is important from the 
astronomical point of view. Bosscha’s telescopes can 
sweep across some of the most important constellations 
in the sky. The nucleus of our galaxy or Milky Way, for 
example, lles in Sagittarius, a constellation that can not 
be observed to advantage from the northern hemisphere 
where most of the large telescopes are concentrated. 
‘The solutions to many problems regarding the life 
history and distribution in space of stars, such as our 
own sun, involve studies of the nuclear regions of our 
galaxy. Besides geographic convenience, Bosscha Obser- 
vatory "enjoys a remarkably steady atmosphere. Astro- 
nomers ;who must study a star's light from the ground 
are keenly aware of the vagaries of the atmosphere and 
how often these spoll their viewing. 
J The observatory owes its origin to the financial help 
of a tea plantation owner, Karel A.R. Bosscha. The 
principal instruments were installed in 1928 and 1929. 
From the time of its founding and up to World War II, 
several distinguished Dutch astronomers worked there. 
The war and subsequent conflicts were disastrous to the 
observatory. Not only did three leading members of the 
staff perish, but the various military occupations resulted 
in plundering and all-round deterioration of the 
observatory’s facilities. 
The rehabilitation work started in 1947 and still 
continues. In 1950, UnNEsco joined the Indonesian 
government in the acquisition of a new telescope for the 
Bosscha Observatory. An optical design developed by the 
German optician Bernhard Schmidt (1879-1935) was 
selected. A Schmidt-type telescope would be particularly 
advantageous at this location, benefiting greatly from 
the geographic position and good observing conditions. 
32 
Victor M. Blanco 
This project developed during the last decade, and it 
involved the co-operation of astronomers, opticians, and 
engineers from Indonesia, the Netherlands, and the United 
States. The optical parts for the telescope were donated 
by Unesco and were prepared at the Yerkes Observatory 
of the University of Chicago. The mechanical parts were 
contracted for by the Indonesian government with the 
engineering firm of Rademakers in Rotterdam. In the 
spring of last year the glass or optical components of the 
telescope met the metallic parts for the first time. The 
assembly, adjustment and testing were completed by May 
28 when the telescope was officially inaugurated. 
An instrument of this kind requires the utmost delicacy 
of adjustment in order to operate properly. Mechanical 
difficulties were to be expected in the assembly work. 
Fortunately the Bosscha Obervatory has a well-equipped 
machine shop staffed by able specialists, and thanks to 
them the difficulties were ironed out as they arose. It 
was not always easy to obtain the materials required by 
the machinists. However, in the city of Bandung there 
are numerous junk shops where with luck one can find 
suitable supplies. Some of the aluminium pieces for the 
new telescope were carved out of wartime airplane 
propellers. The UNEsco optics are supported in the tele- 
scope’s mounting with pads of sheet lead originally 
intended for household plumbing. 
Mi The optical parts donated by Unesco for the new tele- 
scope Include a delicately polished mirror twenty-eight 
inches in diameter. The mirror is used to converge the 
rays of starlight to the focus. Telescope mirrors are made 
by depositing on polished glass a thin layer of an alloy 
of aluminium. For this purpose the aluminium alloy Is 
vaporized inside a vacuum chamber sufficiently large to 
contain the glass, and the vapour then coats the glass, 
giving it high reflectivity. The coating tarnishes with 
time, however, and in normal use such mirrors must be 
periodically re-aluminized. 
Fumes from the nearby volcano Tangkuban Prahu, 
whose crater is only five kilometres from the observatory, 
may cause the new telescope mirror to tarnish or deterio- 
rate more rapidly than. is normal, or desirable. This 
problem had to be solved during the assembly of the 
telescope. Consultations between the astronomers, the 
geologists and the chemists of the Bandung Institute 
of Technology resulted in the building of an air purifying 
system. This system frees the air of its sulphurous fumes, 
pumps clean air into the sealed telescope and thus pro- 
longs the mirror’s life. 
Early in the planning, the new telescope was named 
Bima Sakti. Bima Sakti, whose initlals are also those 
of Bernhard Schmidt, is one of the heroes of the Javanese 
wayang or puppet plays, which are based on the great 
Hindu epic Mahabharata. In Javanese mythology, Bima 
Sakti is so tall that when he stands with feet resting on 
opposite sides of the earth his legs form the arch across 
the sky that we know as the Milky Way. The name of 
this ancient hero is thus particularly appropriate for a 
telescope that will be devoted to Milky Way observations. 
The new telescope is regarded with endearment by the 
staff and workmen of the observatory. One might say 
that some of the anclent hero's personality has rubbed 
off on the telescope. Bima Sakti, who fought against 
evil In the old epics, is thus active again, helping to 
advance science in Indonesia.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

PITOA & ITS PEN-FRIENDS 
 
Sir, 
I was especially pleased to see the 
article on “Pitoa pilot school in a 
Cameroon village” in your Septem- 
ber issue because I have always follow- 
ed with interest the devoted efforts 
of Roger Lagrave. You might like to 
know that there is a booklet telling all 
about the letters exchanged between 
Lagrave's pupils and those of other 
French teachers. It is No 366 in the 
“Bibliothéque de Travail” - Edition de 
I’Ecole Moderne Frangaise; Techni- 
que Freinet, and is entitled “L'Enfant 
africain vu par l'enfant blanc” (The 
African child as seen by the European 
child.) 
So the work you describe is not an 
isolated case. Such exchanges often 
take place (though perhaps with less 
success) and are the fruit of the 
“Ecole Moderne” methods. My own 
class exchanged letters with a class in 
Tunisia in 1954, in Casablanca In 
1955 and with a class on Reunion 
Island in the Indian Ocean. All these 
exchanges were achieved—Ilike that of 
Lagrave—under the aegis of the Frei- 
net educational techniques (Ecole Mo- 
derne} and we are convinced that if 
such activities were generalized they 
could do much to serve the cause of 
peace and help to banish the affliction 
called racism. 
M. Nadeau 
Azur, Landes, France 
Sir, 
I was happy to see Lagrave's work 
in the Cameroons described in a fine 
article. I hope it will be followed by 
another explaining that this pen-friend 
activity to bring better understanding 
between peoples is not an isolated in- 
cident, but is being repeated thousands 
of times between regions and between 
nations. 
Thirty children from a school in 
the Loiret Department came to live in 
our village in Calvados and the peo- 
ple here were delighted. We, in turn, 
will go to visit them in the Loiret. 
Links have been formed which I am 
delighted to see maintained by my for- 
mer pupils and among adults too. 
This year our school was making con- 
tacts with Egypt. 
And so it goes on around the world 
as people make use of the Freinet edu- 
cational methods to build bonds of 
friendship. 
M. Baucé 
Sept-Fréres, Calvados, France 
Sir, 
I read with much interest your 
feature—remarkably well illustrated— 
on the contacts between the Cameroons 
school children and children in rural 
France But it is a pity that you failed 
to speak of the thousands of “Ecole 
Moderne” classes which practise this 
correspondence in France and else- 
where in the world, thus working for 
a better understanding and friendship 
between peoples. 
R. Rufet 
Lochrist, Morbihan, France 
Sir, 
I was so deeply interested in the 
article on the Pilot School in a Came- 
roon Village. The exchange of let- 
ters between the little African child 
and the French boy and, in fact, the 
whole article is not only delightful but 
most interesting. 
Elsie Smith Costello 
Board of Christian Education 
The United Presbyterian Church 
in the U.S.A. 
Philadelphia 7, Pennsylvania 
BELA BARTOK & FOLK MUSIC 
Sir, 
Today Béla Barték is universally 
acknowledged as one of the greatest 
men of our century. In his papers on 
Folk tunes and Folk music he showed 
the momentous importance of compa- 
rative research work in this field, 
especially in certain territories such as 
Greece, Turkey and Central Asia. 
He stressed the fact that this job must 
be done with no delay, modern times 
everywhere revolutionizing the way of 
life of the peasants and thereby de- 
stroying indigenous music. And, as 
Bartok said, once perished, this pre- 
cious heritage of ours will be gone for- 
ever, never to be retrieved. He realiz- 
ed that only a powerful international 
organization can carry through the 
rescue work to be done on a large 
scale. 
May I suggest to you to dedicate 
one of your next issues to this worthy 
subject by publishing excerpts from 
Barték’s and Kodaly's writings (with 
pictures!) and by stating UNESCO's 
position in regard to the problems in 
question and by reporting on its acti- 
vities in this field. 
W.A. Schocken 
Tel Aviv, Israel 
THE EQUALITY OF PEOPLES 
Sir, 
By your untiring and purposeful 
work you contribute towards a matur- 
ing of consciences which should bring 
into being a universal humanism. 1 
am a coloured man and by this fact 
I believe that the equality of peoples, 
nations and races is not a “fiction”. 
It is said that this equality is true 
before God, and I say that if it does 
not exist in fact it is because that 
The Unesco Courier, =— February 1961 
Letters to the Editor 
there are men who still believe in the 
superiority and supremacy of certain 
nations. [ think the author of “Plain 
spoken or rose coloured” [a letter 
published in the May 1960 issue] is 
one of these people. 
I believe that despite our great his- 
torical leeway we shall never place 
the Papuan tom-tom on the same level 
as Mozart for the simple reason that 
we are well able to distinguish bet- 
ween different shades and values. 
Frantz Chalonec 
Fort-de-France, Martinique 
MORE FOOD OR FEWER PEOPLE 
Sir, 
1 was very pleased to read of the 
great work of FAO in the world cam- 
paign against hunger, in your Septem- 
ber 1960 issue. I look forward to 
reading more about this important 
work in a future issue of Tur UNLsco 
COURILR. I cannot agree with the 
views expressed by your Amsterdam 
correspondent in his letter, headed; 
“Millions more mouths to feed.” 
Family planning is not the answer to 
population difficulties, People who 
advocate it are surely going right 
against the facts. The scientists who 
are concerned with the actual work 
of producing food and finding new 
ways of increasing food supplies tell 
us that the carth can supply plenty of 
food for all. The real problem we 
are facing in the world today is that 
of distribution, nor overpopulation. 
A campaign (with all the money that 
family planning advocates desire for 
their purposes) to solve this problem 
would be a far greater and more cons- 
tructive contribution towards coping 
with food difficulties than family 
planning. After all, 10 use a homely 
cxample, if ten people need hats and 
there are only eight hats available, the 
common-sense solution is to get two 
more hats from somewhere, not to 
cut off two people's heads! 
T. McNicholas 
Nazeing, Essex, England 
PERILS OF THE TV VIEWER 
 
Sir, 
I should like to see in the columns 
of Tne Unesco Couricr a detailed 
article answering the following ques- 
tions: 
Is it harmful to watch TV broad- 
casts? 
How does television affect the ner- 
vous system and the eyes of the view- 
er? 
If there are harmful effects from 
television, how are they to be avoided? 
S. Voroshilovskaya 
Kishenev, USS.R. 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
From the Unesco Ne 
N UBIA’S TREASURES ON FILM: 
A 41-frame colour filmstrip depicting some 
of the monuments of Nubia in Egypt and the 
Sudan threatened by the waters of the new 
Aswan Dam has been issued by UNEsco. 
Designed for public screening, the filmstrip 
is one element in the campaign which 
Unesco is waging to safeguard these an- 
cient monuments. It can be obtained, toge- 
ther with a descriptive booklet, including 
commentaries on each frame, from UNEscO 
distributors in Member States. Further in- 
formation may be obtained from the Radio 
and Visual Information Division, Mass 
Communication Department, UNESCO, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris (7°) 
Hm JAPANESE ART IN HAIFA: The 
people of [laifa, Israel, now have ex- 
ceptional facilities for studying and 
appreciating Japanese art from among 
the 4,000 items—paintings, prints, 
drawings, metalwork, lacquer ware 
and ceramics—owned by a museum 
which opened there last year. Displays 
are changed monthly to harmonize 
with season or special occasion, only 
a few objects being on display at one 
time. 
A rrican DESERT INSTITUTE: 
The Republic of Niger has offered to create 
with UNESCO assistance an international arid 
zone institute for African countries south 
of the Sahara, particularly in the Sahel re- 
gion encompassing Mali, Niger, Mauritania 
and the Chad. The proposal was by 
Dr Francis Borrey, of the Niger delegation 
to the recent Unesco General Conference. 
He suggested that it should be located in 
the region of Agades where it could be in 
contact with Saharan areas of North Africa. 
It would serve as a centre for research, 
training, teaching and exchange of informa- 
tion. 
mH HIDDEN FACE REVEALED: An 
atlas of the moon's hidden face contain- 
ing 30 hitherto unpublished photographs 
taken by “Lunik 1V" has been publish- 
ed by the Soviet Academy of Sciences. 
From these photos it has been possible 
to identify 500 features of the relief on 
the moon's surface which are described 
in the catalogue included in the atlas. 
The hidden side of the moon does not 
KINGDOM OF THE OCTOPUS 
Attention is called to the article by 
Frank W. Lane, “The Kingdom of 
the Octopus”, which appeared in 
our January 1961 issue. This 
article Is copyright and may not be 
reproduced without prior per- 
mission.      
34 
  
  
 
show any of the large, dark hollows 
known as “seas” which cover a large 
area of the visible surface. 
ViLLace FOR YOUTH: Young 
refugees coming straight from camps in 
various parts of Europe are the first inha- 
bitants of a village entirely for children 
which has been founded in a rambling old 
English manor house with 175 acres of 
ground at Sedlescombe in Sussex. Even- 
tually 300 children of different nationalities 
will live in the village which will be run 
on similar lines to those already set up in 
Switzerland and elsewhere. At first the 
children will be kept in national groups so 
that their own culture is preserved. Later 
they will live in international groups to 
“fit them as world citizens”. 
m CROPS FROM SAND AND SEA- 
WATER: Experiments in the produc- 
tion of fruit and vegetables by a system 
of “mixed hydroponics” using partly the 
techniques of hydroponics (soilless cul- 
ture) and partly traditional agriculture 
are now being made at an experimental 
marine agriculture station at Orinon in 
Spain. The main elements used are 
sand from the beach and seawater. 
Areas are marked out in the sand and 
irrigation canals dug around them into 
which the sea can flow. Areas are 
prepared as in normal agricultural prac- 
tice, using chemical or organic fertili- 
zers, and already crops of maize, pota- 
toes, tomatoes and other vegetables 
have been grown. 
An EASY DISEASE TO PREVENT: 
Nearly 200,000,000 people all over. the 
world suffer from enlarged thyroid, or en- 
demic goitre as it is usually called. Yet 
the World Health Organization, publishing 
these figures, points out that the disease is 
now considered a “public health anachro- 
nism” and is very easy to prevent. The 
great majority of cases are due to iodine 
deficiency, and experiments in mass pro- 
phylaxis with iodized salt show that every- 
where the number of cases falls sharply fol- 
lowing increased consumption of the salt. 
Effects of iodized salt have been marked 
in Switzerland where it was introduced in 
1923, At that time only 42.3 % of school- 
children had a normal thyroid, yet by 1937 
the figure had risen to 99,3%. 
m RETIREMENT OF MR. JEAN 
THOMAS : The retirement was 
announced recently of Mr. Jean Thomas, 
Assistant Director-General of Unesco. 
A Frenchman, Mr. Thomas has been in 
Unesco’s service since its foundation in 
1946, originally as Director of the 
Department of Cultural Activities. He 
has now agreed to become Chairman of 
the Action Committee for Unesco’s 
International Campaign to Safeguard 
the Monuments of Nubia, 
  
 
  
  
THE UNESCO 
PHILATELIC SERVICE 
OR RECONSTRUCTION -
 
x 
= 
-“ 
[ee] 
— 
- 
= 
[=] 
— 
-T 
= 
oc 
hd 
pe 
= 
I
N
I
N
A
d
O
T
3
A
3
0
 
O
N
Y
 
 
UNITED NATIONS 
The work of the International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Develop- 
ment, one of the UN. Specialized 
Agencies, is commemorated in the 
stamp above which was issued on 
December 9 last year by the United 
Nations Postal Administration. 
Multicoloured and printed in 4 cent 
and 8 cent denominations, the 
stamp, the fifth U.N. commemo- 
rative stamp of 1960, depicts a 
double block hoisting an unseen 
cargo, with the United Nations 
emblem superimposed on the centre 
of the block. Below, the second 
stamp issued by the United Arab 
Republic to mark Unesco’s Save 
the Monuments of Nubia Campaign. 
Printed ina 10 M (| piastre) deno- 
mination, it depicts the Temple of 
Nefertari at Abu Simbel. Both 
stamps can be obtained from the 
Unesco Philatelic Service which 
has stamps and first day covers 
issued by many Member States to 
commemorate important events in 
the history of Unesco and the 
United Nations. As the agent in 
France of the U.N. Postal Adminis- 
tration, Unesco’s Philatelic Service 
stocks all the United Nations stamps 
currently on sale. Information on 
items available, their price and the 
methods of payment, will be sent 
on request by the Unesco Philatelic 
Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7<. 
c 
“ 
4 & 
“ 
T
T
Y
    Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

ANNOUNCING: 
  
A NEW ARABIC EDITION 
  * 
THE UNESCO COURIER is proud to announce the launching of 
an Arabic edition, published in Cairo under the auspices of the 
United Arab Republic National Commission for Unesco. The first 
issue has now been published and the second will appear shorily. 
Subscriptions to the Arabic edition from readers living in the United 
Arab Republic should be sent to: National Commission for Unesco, 
6 Shareh Abu Momen, Dekki, Cairo, United Arab Republic. 
Residents in all other countries should send for the Arabic edition 
to Unesco National Distributors (listed below). The price Is at the 
same rates as for other editions. 
Readers now have a choice of six language editions: English, French, Spanish, 
Russian, German and Arabic. A seventh language edition, in Japanese, is scheduled 
ta begin publication in April, 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country. (See list below; 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) 
Payment is made in the national 
currency ; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. — Panuzai, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Ministry of 
Education, Kabul, 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. §, Victoria, (A, 15/-). 
AUSTRIA, — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& Co, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (Sch. 
50.2) 
BELGIUM, = For The Unesco Courier: 
Louis de Lannoy, 22, Place De Brouckére, 
Brussels, C.C.P. 338.000. (fr. b. 100.) 
Other publications: Office de Publicité, 
16, rue Marcq, Bruxelles, C.C.P. 285.98; 
N.V, Standaard-Boekhandel, Belgiélei 151, 
Antwerp, 
CANADA. — Queen's Printer, Ottawa 
Ont, (8 3.00). 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
CHINA. — World Book Co, Ltd., 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA. — Libreria Economica, Pte Zayas 
505-7 Apartado 113, Havana, 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA, — Artia Ltd, 30 
Ye Smeckich, Prague 
DENMARK. — Ejnar Munksgaard Lid. 
6 Norregade, Copenhagen K, (D.kr. 12). 
ETHIOPIA. — International Press Agen- 
cy, P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. {(F,mk. 540). 
FRANCE. — Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris, 7°. C.C.P. 12598-48 
(7 NF.). 
GERMANY. — R. Oldenbourg K.G., 
Unesco-Vertrieb fur Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerstrasse 145, Munich 8. (DM. 8). 
GREAT BRITAIN. — See United Kingdom, 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, 
rue du Stade, Athens. 
HONG-KONG. — Swindon Book Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
HUNGARY, — Kultura, P.O. Box 
Budapest, 62. 
INDIA. — Orient Longmans Private Ltd. 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay |; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyde- 
rabad, |; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2: 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. 
Box 386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depots: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., | 7 Park 
Street Calcutta 16, Scindia House, 
New Delhi (Rs. 6.70). 
INDONESIA. — Bappit Pusat ''Permata", 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Djakarta. 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
IRELAND. — The National Press, 2, Wel- 
fington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-) 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd. 
35, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja- 
min Street, Tel-Aviv (I1£ 4.-) 
JAMAICA, — Sangster’s Book Room, 91 
Harbour Street, Kingston. 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings.(10/-) 
JAPAN. — Maruzen Co. Ltd, 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. (Yen 500). 
JORDAN. ~— Joseph L. Bahous & Co.» 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66 
Amman. 
149. 
KOREA. — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, P,O. Box Central 64, Seoul 
LIBERIA, — |. Momolu Kamara, 69, Front 
and Gurley Streets, Monrovia. 
LUXEMBOURG. — Librairie Paul Bruck, 
33, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE, — Federal Publications 
Ltd., Times House, River Valley Rd., 
Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s library, 26 Kings. 
way, Valetta, (10/.) 
MAURITIUS. — Nalanda Company Ltd, 
30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. 
MONACO. — British Library, 30 Eld des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.) 
NETHERLANDS. — N.V. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. (1 6) 
NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. — 
G.C.T. Van Dorp & C* (Ned Ant) N.V, 
Willemstad, Curacao. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Christ- 
church, (10/-). 
NIGERIA. — C.M.5. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. {(10/-) 
NORWAY. — A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille Gren- 
sen, 7, Oslo. (N. kr, 10) 
PAKISTAN. — The West-Pak Publishing 
Co, Lid, Unesco Publications House, 
P.O. Box 374, 56-N Gulberg Industrial 
Colony, Lahore. 
PANAMA, — Cultural Panamena, Avenida 
7a, No. T1-49, Apartado de Correos 2018, 
Panama, D.F, (Balboas 3.-). 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. 
Inc, 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620, Manila. 
POLAND. —* RUCH" ul. Wilozs Nr. 46, 
Warsaw. 10 (ZI. 50.) 
PORTUGAL. — Dus & Andrada Lda, 
Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, 
Lisbon. 
RHODESIA & NYASALAND, 
Book Centre, First Street, 
S.-Rhodesia. 
SWEDEN, For The Unesco Courier: Sven- 
ska Unescoridet, Vasagatan 15-7, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.5Q)}; other publications 
A/B C.E. Fritezes, Kungl, Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, 
SWITZERLAND, — Europa Verlag, 5 
Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40, ru. du Marché, Geneva, C.C.P. 
1-236. 
Courier” only; Georges Losmaz, I, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. S, 8). 
THAILAND. — Sukiapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
TURKEY. — Librairie Hachette, 469 Isti- 
klal Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA, — Van 
Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri Building, Church’ 
Street, Pretoria (10/-). 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). — 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Paiha, 
Cairo. 
UNITED KINGDOM, — H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.L{10/-), 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 801 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y.{($ 3.00.) and (except periodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. 
U.S.S.R. = Mezhdunarodnaja 
Moscow. G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA. — Jugoslovenska Knjlgs, 
Terazje 27/11. Belgrade. 
— The 
Salisbury, 
Kniga,

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078179engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
  
   
   
     
  
     
  
| PN ORES DETR RFR    
© Willy Ronis, Paris 
TIME FOR REFLECTION: Lights burning in Unesco Secretariat building cast reflections on nearby car—a night scene taken 
during the recent Unesco General Conference. Delegates from 98 countries gave priority to education when they discussed 
and approved the most ambitious programme in Unesco’s history (see page 4). Of the 17 countries which have become members 
of Unesco since the last General Conference in 1958, 16 are new nations of Africa (See special map and article, pages 17-20).