# [078373](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

A window open on the world 
£. 
- i 
  
     
     
Tr 
February 1968 (21st year) — U. K.: 2/-stg ERCLELERR 
N Ee) 
cents - France: 1.20 F jai  
   
  
    
             
 
     
  
    
     
L 
 
    
 
  
   
       
  
   
lis ae i my \ |= i we E al i = Lh a ' IE ® LT ri: ul lg Fr 
0 oh vi 55 es 5d = , i HE . E A & B * Es ¥ Fi Nh - = Hr il an [ds Go 0" ge ml , 1 a 
. 2 a. . = i - 4 By hd Ts i # Hiaw 
hs ge Ca . 4 Ji HAST = } . Be! ary hid 
a= 
= : a = J he v- How hol 
: ' bo ; 
! ia | . a i 
R 
- S| Ea = |  SEIENGE AS CULTURE 
. 
Bd Yo, 
 
  
H
R
 
r
i
e
s
 
Te
k 
5 
3 
  
2 
v 
A
 
a 
a
e
 a
 
L
L
 
—
 
# 
L
g
 
| =
 a
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART & 
> » = ee ’ . 
. : - aw 
Photo © Rapho-Louis Frédéric 
  
Celestial musician 
This flute-playing bronze “Bodhisattva”, or future Buddha, was sculptured 
in the eighth century A.D. on the face of a votive lantern which stands 
in the avenue leading to the great Todaiji Temple in Nara, Japan. The 
ancient city of Nara, 220 miles southwest of Tokyo was an outstanding 
centre of Japanese art. The period of 80 years from when the capital of 
Japan was established in Nara in 710 A.D. until its transfer to Kyoto in 
794, is known as the Golden Age of Japanese sculpture.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
mC Courier 
FEBRUARY 1968 
21ST YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 
ELEVEN EDITIONS 
 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
Hindi 
Tamil 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7e. 
Annual subscription rates: 20/-stg.; $4.00 
(Canada); 12 French francs or equivalent; 
2 years: 36/-stg.; 22 F. Single copies 2/-stg.; 
40 cents; 1,20 F, 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER 1s published monthly, except 
in August and September when it 1s bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year in Englsh, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, Italian, Hindi and Tamil). Inthe United Kingdom 1t 
1s distnbuted by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569 
London, SEI 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER’, plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessanly represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco, Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Pans) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic ~~ Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition: Annapuzha Chandrahasan (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: Sri S. Govindarajulu- (Madras) 
Research and lllustrations: Olga Rodel 
Layout and Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief Ne
 
2 
- 
19
68
 
M
C
 
68
-1
-2
32
 
A 
Page 
  
11 
15 
17 
24 
30 
33 
34   
SCIENCE AND THE CULTURE OF OUR TIMES 
By Laurence M. Gould 
LILACS IN THE COSMOS... 
By Lev Kassil 
SCIENCE AND FUNDAMENTAL 
CONCEPTS OF THINKING 
By Paul Couderc 
UNESCO CREATES MATHEMATICAL MODEL 
TO HARNESS THE MEKONG 
By W.J. Ellis 
THE NEW MUSIC OF THE SPHERES 
Communication satellites 
By Wilbur Schramm 
THE WORLD WE HOPE FOR 
A prize-winning essay from Uruguay 
By Maria Cristina Costa Diaz 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Celestial musician (Japan) 
Photo CSF - Georges Bru 
  
Cover photo 
 
Formerly, science and 
indistinguishable. 
cles pp. 4 and 11). 
condensers—a basic tool 
ratus. 
smaller components. 
culture were 
Today they appear to 
be regaining their basic unity. Both are 
engaged in a pursuit of wisdom that 
transcends the gap, even the feud, that 
has developed between them (see arti- 
Photo shows tiny 
of modern 
science—that until recently were used 
in the manufacture of all electronic appa- 
With increasing miniaturization 
they are being superseded by much

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 58794: Science and the culture of our times

4 
SCIENCE 
AND THE CULTURE 
OF OUR TIMES 
by Laurence M. Gould 
W... modern society 
seems confident that science and 
technology can take care of ali human 
needs, | still think not enough people 
appreciate the magnitude and the vio- 
lence of the scientific technological 
revolution in which we are involved. 
Today, there is no other influence 
comparable with science in changing 
the foundations, indeed, the very 
character of our lives. 
Science and its products determine 
our economy, dominate our industry, 
affect our health and welfare, alter 
our relations to all other nations, and 
determine the conditions of war and 
peace. Everyone who breathes is 
affected, and cannot remain imper- 
vious to them. 
Our very existence is so completely 
dependent upon science and techno- 
logy that it would be impossible to 
materially alter our present methods. 
We have no option. We can’t stifle 
man's curiosity. lt is only from the 
knowledge that we gain by asking 
questions, no matter how terrible, how 
dreadful they are; it is only by these 
questions that man achieves final 
dignity. 
When | was president of the Ameri- 
can Association for the Advancement 
of Science, | attended the Bntish 
Association meetings. | was dumb- 
founded and delighted to hear 
J.C. Dancy, the great classical scholar, 
headmaster of Marlborough College, 
argue “technology and a liberal edu- 
cation, far from being antithetical, are 
not even complementary; some expe- 
  
LAURENCE M. GOULD is former president 
of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. He 1s now 
chairman of the Committee on Polar Re- 
search, US. Academy of Sciences, and 
has taken part in several expeditions to 
the Arctic and Antarctic. He has written 
extensively on Antarctica, the International 
Geophysical Year and international science. 
Readers will recall his article, “Antarctica, 
International Land of Science” which 
appeared in the January 1962 issue of the 
“Unesco Courier”. 
rience in technology is an essential 
ingredient in a hberal education.” 
The Greeks did not scorn techno- 
logy. Classical Greek civilization was 
characterized by a unity between art, 
science, and technology; a unity which 
is the hallmark of all great civiiza- 
tions; a unity which disappeared then 
until Leonardo da Vinci. A historian 
of science might say that the schism 
we now know began then, and yet 
philosophy and science were indis- 
tinguishable until almost the end of the 
18th century. You can date with 
exactness when the split came: when 
philosopher Immanuel Kant said that 
science dealt only with the world of 
appearance, and philosophy with the 
world of reality. Nonsense! 
Nevertheless, a dangerous gap has 
developed. I(t was greatly overstated 
by C.P. Snow. | do not subscribe to 
the idea of two cultures. The gap 
exists, but the feud between science 
and the humanities is without substan- 
ce. It is time it be ended. We must 
have humanists who comprehend and 
include scientific and technological 
knowledge in their dreams of the 
world, else we shall have no world 
at all. We must recover the Renais- 
sance. The pursuit of wisdom must 
at long last be a single enterprise, 
or hberal education has no meaning. 
| studied geology. therefore, I'm a 
scientist and not a humanist? Some- 
body studies philosophy or art and, 
therefore, is a humanist? Nonsense! 
It isn't true at all. To majar in philo- 
sophy does not make you a humanist. 
Don’t you remember the greatest of 
all teachers once said, “Not all who 
cry Lord, Lord, shall enter the King- 
dom of Heaven”? A chemist with 
an omnivorous intellectual appetite 
may be a greater humanist than a 
philosopher whase interest is confin- 
ed to existentialism. 
Part of the problem is semantics. 
Certain words lose their meaning. 
| think humanism has. It implies that 
all else may be something less than 
human. | was delighted when Joseph 
Wood Krutch wrote in a “Saturday 
Review” article, “the trouble is that 
Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited 
‘humanities’, narrowly interpreted, 
ceases to mean much more than the 
polite accomplishment analogous to 
the needlework and flower painting 
which ladies were once supposed to 
dabble in, primanly to demonstrate 
that they were ladies rather than 
something economically and socially 
inferior.” 
Let me state a little more seriously: 
a great disservice has been done to 
the truly humanistic tradition by trying 
to identify it too closely with particular 
fields of study. Many supposed 
conflicts rise from a gross misunder- 
standing of what science is all about. 
Science is not a form of black magic. 
A thousand blind alleys must often be 
explored before a right road is found; 
a thousand amateurs must have their 
fling before a Darwin or an Einstein 
comes along. 
Whenever you hear a scientist say, 
“This is the end of it; this is all of it”, 
that man is no longer a scientist. 
There is no quest for truth in scientific 
research which does not carry within 
itself the possibility, even the proba- 
bility, of error. We respect the find- 
ings of science because they are 
always open to re-examination and to 
question. Scientific truth is dynamic 
and self-correcting and never final. 
When someone asked Einstein how 
he discovered the theory of relativity, 
he replied, “By challenging an axiom.” 
There never was a great scientist who 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6 
  
Though science has long been changing 
the very nature of human life, 
surprisingly little place Is given 
to the great discoveries of science 
in many history books. 
even mention such famous names 
as Galileo, Kepler, Descartes 
and Newton. Photo recalls one of Galileo's 
studies on the laws of bodies in motion 
—his demonstration that bodies of 
different weights fall with equal 
velocities, said to have been carried 
out in 1589 from the Leaning Tower 
of Pisa (in background). 
Certain do not

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 58794: Science and the culture of our times

  
         
    
  
  
  
   
W
L
           
™ 5 
7 ne 
a ES | 
TREN 
  
  
  
Photo © Erich Lessing - Magnum

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 58794: Science and the culture of our times

SCIENCE AS CULTURE (Continued} 
Why not an epic poem on Relativity or DNA? 
did not make bold guesses, and never 
one whose guesses were always right. 
The scientist looks for order. He 
believes in a real world and he 
believes that science 1s a means of 
teaching the truths about that world. 
But stifl, he’s got to make guesses. 
He must invent concepts to make the 
world intelligible. 
So the scientific world never reflects 
completely the real world, but only 
selected characteristics organized on 
accepted assumptions. 
The best definition of science is 
one by George Boas: “Science is 
the art of understanding nature.” 
There 1s no better definition. 
It is oversimplification to talk about 
“the scientific method.” There isn't 
one. There are a thousand, all rational 
methods. But human rationality is 
the most important realm in which 
man can fruitfully lve. 
To me, pure science has been, along 
with religion and art, one of man’s 
great avenues in his quest for truth. 
As Jacob Bronowski points out, “I 
believe the concepts of value in the 
humanities are not as different in kind 
from those of sciences as many would 
have us believe. Both seek to express 
the deep relations between the human 
mind and the world it matches.” 
Coleridge, trying to define beauty, 
always returned to: “Beauty is unity 
and variety.” Well, reverse it—science 
is the search to discover unity in the 
wild variety of nature. 
Both the scientist and the poet seek 
to explore and to understand. It is 
only the form of exploration which 
is different. You cannot enter any 
world of meaning without making 
postulates. In religion we call them 
faith; in ethics we call them norms 
or ideals; in science we call them 
hypotheses or theories; the choice of 
these hypotheses or theories or 
assumptions is always a matter of 
faith. 
There is a fallacious idea that 
science is objective while the human- 
istic studies are subjective. This is 
complete nonsense. Science is always 
the record of someone's personal 
experience. There is no kind of 
experience that can be impersonal. 
No one can have the same experien- 
ces | have had; the best he can do is 
have the same kind, and in no case 
has science reduced the personal 
  
Building has always drawn on 
technological innovations, and 
architecture is as much a science 
as an art. From the use of concrete, 
steel and glass have come new concepts 
of building design and construction. 
Right, a building in Chandigharh, 
capital of Panjab (India), built to the 
plans of Le Corbusier. Ph
ot
o 
©@
 
Le
nn
ar
t 
Ol
so
n,
 
Ti
of
ot
o,
 
St
oc
kh
ol
m 
equation to zero. Science is subjective 
within man’s nature in the same sense 
that the other humanistic studies are. 
if what | say is true, why has not 
science played a larger role in liberal 
education? And though science is so 
all-pervasive, why have scientists not 
become a part of the ordinary citizen's 
experience of knowledge. More stran- 
gely, poets and playwrights have not 
drawn heavily upon science and tech- 
nology. Twentieth century art and 
letters do not have great expressions 
concerning the industrial revolution 
and its science and technology. 
Shelly, in his defence of poetry, 
FIM      
   
  
   
pf | pn Lon of 
  
wr 
said that one of the tasks of the 
Literary artist is to “Absorb the know- 
ledge of the sciences and assimilate 
it to human needs; colour it with 
human passions, transform it with the 
blood and bone of human nature.” In 
other words, literature ought to concern 
itself with the whole of life, including 
science, 
Dante and Milton especially among 
Renaissance writers were inspired by 
astronomy and dealt with it in ther 
own sublime language. When Milton 
was fascinated by the new optical 
instruments of Galileo, and when he 
was portraying his Satan tempting 
    
    
  
|= 
 
— & | 
» 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 58794: Science and the culture of our times

In the 5th century B.C., Pythagorus, the great 
philosopher and mathematician, demonstrated 
the interrelation of music and mathematics, 
that music was “the numeral thing par 
excellence”, as the French musicologist Louis Laloy 
has put it, and that musical intervals are determined 
by whole numbers. Pythagorus showed 
that from a string and the note it produces, 
all the notes of the scale may be obtained by 
lengthening the string according to given ratios. 
In ancient times the Chinese too perceived 
the correlation of music with mathematics. 
Right, illustrations from a famous work, 
“The Theory of Music” (1480), by the Italian 
composer Franchino Gafori, show Pythagorus 
demonstrating the mathematical essence of music 
with the aid of a series of strings (on left) and 
with tubes of different lengths filled with air, 
Christ, he displays to Him the Kingdom 
of this world not in antique fashion 
through the naked eye, but by “optic 
skill of vision multiplied by air or glass 
of telescope.” 
In “Paradise Lost”, Milton wrote 
about Antarctica: “Beyond this flood 
a frozen continent lies dark and wild, 
beat with perpetual storms, of whirl- 
winds and dire hail, which on firm land 
thaws not but gathers heap, and ruin 
seems of ancient pile; all else deep 
snow and ice." No one is writing 
like that about Antarctica today. Yet 
science has given some of the greatest 
epic themes in the history of man- 
kind—the nuclear atom, the chromo- 
somes, and DNA, more beautiful than 
anything man has contrived. 
Oh, | wish Milton could have orbited 
the earth with John Glenn or Gordon 
Cooper! It should have been. 
The general theory of relativity by 
which Einstein renounced absolute 
space and time gave us a picture of 
unity and harmony surpassing any 
that man had ever dreamed before. 
It's probably the finest intellectual 
achievement of our times, and yet the 
only poem that I've ever been able to 
find about relativity is this: 
There was a young lady 
[named Bright 
Who learned to move faster 
[than light 
She set out one day in a 
[relative way 
And came back on the pre- 
[vious night. 
That isn't enoughl 
We need more scientists who are 
literate and articulate, but we need 
more imaginative literature to interpret 
our mechanized existence into noble 
language to reach and inspire us. In 
Shelley's words—"which will trans- 
form it with the blood and bone of 
human nature.” 
How shall we do that? In medieval 
universities, philosophy gave unity to 
the whole. We still have that notion 
preserved in the fossilized expression, 
Ph.D., Doctor of Philosophy. You know 
 
From “Enciclopedia delle grandi scoperte et dell’era atomica,” Tomaselli, Rome 
very well one can have his degree in 
economics, animal husbandry, or even 
geology without ever having been 
exposed to philosophy. There is no 
unifying study in our culture today. 
But let me suggest that history, 
broadly conceived, could provide the 
cultural bridge to bring the disciplines 
of our academic world into order. 
This idea was said more eloquently by 
William James: “You can give human- 
istic value to almost anything by teach- 
ing it historically—geology, economics, 
mechanics are humanities when taught 
with reference to the achievements of 
the geniuses to which these sciences 
owe their being. Not taught thus, 
literature remains grammar; art a cata- 
logue; history a list of dates; and 
natural science a sheet of formulas, 
weights and measures. The sifting of 
human creations is what we ought to 
mean by the humanities.” 
What James is saying is that the 
humanistic content of any subject lies 
in its history. Well, history is built-in 
the humanities. You can't teach art 
or letters without teaching its history. 
But science can be taught; it is too 
often taught, as formulas, weights and 
measures. Yet science is the product 
of historical development. It is the 
one truly cumulative aspect of man's 
history. Science makes history, but 
is largely neglected by historians. 
Bacon conceived of the history of 
all learning and Bacon insisted that 
such history would include the scien- 
ces and the humanities. 
In the 1800s, a young German 
scientist, Liebig, detected phosphate 
and potash in the ashes of burned 
plants and found ammonia in the 
vapours, He tried all three in a 
barren plot of ground. Shortly Darm- 
stadt became a cradle of agricultural 
chemistry. Artificial fertilizers were 
created which doubled the food capa- 
city of Europe almost overnight. | 
have never found any reference to 
Liebig in any historical document. 
Well, | picked up a text used at 
Carleton College called “European 
History, Renaissance to Waterloo,” 
752 pages. Science was mentioned on 
only 33 pages. Even worse, Toynbee's 
600-page “Outline of History” did not 
mention Kepler, Copernicus, Galileo, 
Descartes, or Newton. What kind of 
a history of the world is it that leaves 
out Newton, the greatest investigator 
of all times? 
The historians will think | am pick- 
ing on them, and yet I'm not. In some 
ways we scientists are worse offen- 
ders. Unfortunately for the human 
aspects of science the study of the 
past isn't necessary. You can become 
a first rate research man in physics 
and chemistry without knowing the 
history that produced both. So the 
rich humanistic heritage of science is 
almost as badly neglected by scientists 
as by others. 
We as scientists and technologists 
are so surfeited with information, so 
bogged down with the immediate job 
that we have neither the time nor the 
patience to inquire into the meaning 
of what we are doing. T.S. Eliot 
summed it up, “Where Is the wisdom 
we have lost in knowledge, where is 
the knowledge we have lost in inform- 
ation?” 
Yet you can take any product of 
science and technology, trace it to its 
ultimate origin, and you would see the 
end result of a long and continuing 
tradition embodying parts of man's 
unending record of failures, stupidities, 
and genius. 
Lynn White, remarkable medieval 
historian, said “To be as concrete as 
possible, we shall not have built a new 
liberal education in democratic terms 
until we can give in our colleges a 
course on the internal combustion 
engine as humanly conceived as the 
course on Shakespeare's plays. Both 
are supreme expressions of the mind 
and should be studied as such.” | 
agree. 
But, dedicated as | am, | couldn't 
hold that an internal combustion engine 
is comparable with the works of 
Shakespeare. Nothing that man has 
ever done, no split atom, nor any 
other achievement is comparable with 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

SCIENCE AS CULTURE (Continued) 


### 58794: Science and the culture of our times

The germs of science as old as man 
his words and phrases. Here is man’s 
creativity at its greatest. 
In the 1920s, on a 2,000-mile sledge 
journey in Antarctica, five companions 
and | mapped mountains and glaciers 
no one had ever seen. | wrote in my 
journal: “No work of art of which 
| have stood in awe, no symphony 
| have ever heard, ever gave me the 
thrill that came when | picked up a 
piece of rock and found it was the 
sandstone | had come all the way to 
Antarctica to find." This was true. 
It was one of the great spiritual experi- 
ences of my Ife. 
But, if | had to change that experi- 
ence for the satisfactions of having 
read and reread Hamlet, which is 
surely one of the half dozen wonders 
of the world, | would have to choose 
Hamlet; but, | don’t have to choose. 
Neither do you. Both are part of a 
larger whole. 
In old Europe, scholarship developed 
under an all-covering canopy of truth 
from the church, and force from the 
classics. Both are largely gone. The 
Hebrew-Christian tradition has become 
so tenuous that many theological 
schools say God is dead, and refer to 
our times as the post-Christian era. 
Twenty-four centuries of Hellenic 
domination are gone. Now there is 
no generally accepted view on funda- 
ments as in the Renaissance. We are 
adrift without an anchor in a world of 
shaken beliefs. 
That remarkable classical scholar, 
the late Sir Richard Livingstone, said: 
“We are a generation without either 
illustons or a positive faith, kept from 
collapse by dead convictions which 
still influence the conduct but are no 
longer anchored in our beliefs.” 
My thesis is a simple one: we've 
got to find some stronger unifying 
element in our intellectual life than 
any now apparent. Science, viewed 
‘historically, 1s the great untapped 
reservoir of humanism which can help 
fill the void caused by the decay of 
the classical humanism. 
We have studied Aristotle as a 
great philosopher and metaphysician. 
Do we realize he was one of the great 
figures of science? Are we taught 
he was considered the greatest natu- 
ralist, the father of biology, the man 
who opened inquiry into physiology, 
embryology, comparative anatomy, and 
ecology? Darwin didn't know this, 
Darwin was fairly old before he heard 
of Aristotle. Then, he wrote: “| had 
not the remotest notion what a won- 
derful man Aristotle was.” 
My comment on the lost unity of 
humanist education is an expression 
of profound regret. All the great 
cultures—China, Athens, India—were 
held together by ideas based upon 
spiritual unity, and of all the things 
that are part of our lives, science and 
technology are the most pervasive. 
They diffuse more rapidly than any 
other. Literature and art remain pro- 
vincial. But not science and techno- 
logy. Their product 1s immediately 
understandable to all peoples. Scien- 
tific workers have a sense of world 
citizenship. Discoveries have signi- 
ficance only when communicated to 
other scientists. Scientific knowledge 
is a living, growing thing. Scientific 
knowledge must be used; it doesn't 
keep any better than fish. 
The universal status of science, its 
proudest claim, is also its greatest 
opportunity. In an age charactenzed 
by perfection of means and confusion 
of ideals, the disciplines of science 
which admit no frontiers of race or 
creed, provide a basis for effective 
international co-operation. Science has 
long since made the world one com- 
munity; a statement that cannot be 
made about any of the other avenues 
that man has followed in his quest for 
an orderly world. Today the contend- 
ing forces which make the strongest 
appeal are the national and the 
racialist movements which deny this 
principle of science. 
Science came into being and has 
evolved because man is curious; he's 
relatively intelligent; to become intel- 
lectually enlightened he had to have 
a desire to better understand his world, 
and in the broadest sense, science 
was the first common enterprise of 
mankind. 
My fellow scientists know that 
it takes two or three thousands of 
millions of years to account for me. 
| have a documentary body, | am a 
museum of all hfe, | am a part of all 
that has preceded me; and science, 
like biology, like Iife itself, has grown 
not by revolution, but by evolution. 
The germs of science are as old as 
man. 
When we use the word “science” 
now, we think of only four centuries. 
Yet it began when man got up off his 
front feet and began using stones for 
(Ta W ‘,. 
ee 
. 
tools. Progress was infinitely slow, 
and then came the discoveries of the 
Egyptians, Sumerians, and Babylo- 
nians; and upon these the Greeks 
built their own system of knowledge. 
The historian who follows a single 
people finds them dust and forgotten, 
but their science lives on. 
Science and technology have woven 
unity into our society—and we could 
not escape if we would. Here are two 
examples: the International Geophy- 
sical year began July 1, 1957, and 
ended theoretically, December 31, 
1058. It was the greatest peacetime 
activity in mankind's history, with 
nearly 70 nations, 40,000 scientists in 
4,000 stations from pole to pole 
observing planet earth. There was an 
almost magical quality about it. Inter- 
national barriers were lowered and 
closed doors opened. There was 
simplicity, flexibility, freedom from 
political consideration. At its peak, 
the whole secretariat consisted of 
only eight people. 
It was carried out in a period of 
worldwide unrest, and yet, we dem- 
onstrated that it is possible to engage 
in rational and reasonable conduct at 
the scientific level, and that inter- 
national scientific co-operation is the 
best model for worldwide organization. 
And out of our I.G.Y. co-operative 
effort in Antarctica, the coldest con- 
tinent, came the first thaw in the cold 
war. For from 12 nations there came 
the Antarctic treaty. Hear these 
words: “Recognizing that it is in the 
interest of all mankind that Antarctica 
shall continue forever to be used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes and 
shall not become the scene or object 
of international discord.” 
| believe the Antarctic treaty is a 
breakthrough of international impor- 
tance. It may take its place alongside 
the Magna Carta because for the first 
time a large part of the world is 
dedicated, for the first time, to peace- 
ful purposes. It is a treaty which 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 58794: Science and the culture of our times

= Adv Vol weave mein tS 3 Maser 
EAN ai rr SOE BY a 
  Photos © Frank ) Malina, Paris 
Art and science are combined in the work of Frank J. Malina, who is himself both an 
artist and a scientist. He has made an original contribution to art with his kinetic paintings, 
using electric light and real movement. Unesco recently acquired the work, left, “Ladders 
to the skies Ill", which now hangs in the reception room of the Director-General. Above, 
“Planetscape 1", impression of extra-terrestial landscape (Will Feijer Collection, Chicago).

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=10) 2

### 58795: Lilacs in the cosmos

### 58794: Science and the culture of our times

10 
SCIENCE AS CULTURE (Continued) 
prohibits nuclear explosions; a treaty 
which provides freedom of scientific 
investigation, a treaty which is a prece- 
dent in the field of disarmament, his- 
tory's first test-ban treaty. It is its 
first disarmament treaty. It is the first 
treaty designed to protect a scientific 
programme and then, by some kind of 
magic, the programme is implemented 
by the Scientific Committee which is 
not a government body at all. That 
may be one of the reasons it works. 
As a result of Antarctica’s isolation, 
it's the one continent that has never 
been the home of man, and the flora 
and fauna of Antarctica represent the 
only sizable assemblage of organisms 
anywhere almost uncontaminated by 
man. Neither by accident nor by 
design has man introduced new plants 
and animals into Antarctica. Perhaps 
one tiny part of our earth will remain 
as it was before man started spoil- 
ing it. 
When | retired as president of 
Carleton College in 1962, the student 
body gave my wife and me two round 
trip tickets to Athens. | had over the 
years spoken so often of my fascin- 
ation of classic Greece, that we did 
go to Athens and when we arnved, 
for some reason, | had a great reluc- 
tance to go and see what | had always 
wanted to see. 
In the earliest things that | ever 
read, | became fascinated with two 
people—one was Abraham Lincoln 
and the other one was Socrates. | had 
read so much about the Acropolis, so 
much about the Parthenon that | was 
afraid to go see them. 
Well, a remarkable Greek, Constan- 
tinos Doxiadis—a remarkable man 
who is doing things about pollution 
and many other problems—arranged 
for us to go up the Acropolis. We did, 
and as | stood in the midst of the 
columns of the Parthenon looking out 
over this beautiful city, it was one of 
the most thrilling experiences of my 
life, and | realized this was indeed 
one of the noblest experiences of the 
human spirit. 
The next day when | had lunch with 
Doxiadis and said of the Acropolis, 
“This is the greatest and noblest 
expression of the human spirit | have 
ever seen”, Dr. Doxiadis said, “Yes, 
but remember this. For its time, it 
was also one of the world's greatest 
engineering feats.” 
You see, the technology and the art 
that produced the Parthenon are parts 
of a larger whole. 
Now, | want to quote from another 
philosopher, a friend of mine. He has 
been buried for more than 20 centu- 
ries, but he's more alive than two- 
thirds of us. His name is Plato, and 
he once said this: “What I'm saying 
may not be true, but something very 
like it is.” 
Text published by and copyright, World 
Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc, 
Houston, Texas, U.S.A. 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 58795: Lilacs in the cosmos

  
LILACS 
IN 
THE COSMOS... 
Foe day mankind is gain- 
in new knowledge. | am thinking first 
of the tremendous accumulation of 
new scientific data and the increasing 
flood of information available to and 
enriching modern society. Knowledge 
and achievement in all branches of 
science have developed to such an 
extent and become so highly specializ- 
ed that no one nowadays can hope to 
become an Encyclopaedist like Diderot 
Montesquieu or Lomonossov. The age 
of the Encyclopaedists is long past. 
And as one of our great Russian 
scientists—Timinazev, if | am not mis- 
taken—has so rightly said, in our day 
a really cultured man is one who knows 
everything about a limited field and 
a little about everything. 
Be that as it may, the power of 
world science has increased tenfold, 
penetrating alike into the infinitely 
great and the infinitely small, probing 
the depths of the universe, the atomic 
nucleus and the living cell. And as 
the quality of human knowledge has 
rnsen, so it has increased in volume, 
if we consider the distribution of know- 
ledge among the inhabitants of our 
planet. Yes, undoubtedly mankind as 
a whole is growing more learned, more 
cultured, more civilized. 
But can we say that man is the hap- 
pier for it? Does knowledge alone 
make him more sensitive to the joys 
of ling? 
We know that if we are to be able 
to draw freely from all the springs 
that nourish human feelings, a know- 
  
LEV ABRAMOVITCH KASSIL the Soviet 
writer and journalist has a scientific back- 
ground (physics and mathematics). His 
many articles and books for young people 
are famous in the US.S.R. 
by Lev Kassil 
ledge of physical laws alone is not 
enough. We must also be able to 
see the world in affective terms. 
And here man cannot do without the 
arts. Victor Hugo said very nghtly: 
“L’art c'est moi, la science c’est nous.” 
(I am art, all of us are science.) Ob- 
viously he did not intend by this 
aphorism to lay stress on the specific 
individualism of art as opposed to the 
collective universality and levelling 
effect of science. 
No doubt he meant that science is 
based on objective laws formulated 
after analysis, experiment and research. 
Once these laws have been demons- 
trated, confirmed and not contradicted 
by some new hypothesis or discovery, 
they are adopted in an identical man- 
ner by everyone. 
A work of art, on the other hand, 
however perfect it may be and how- 
ever universal its appeal, permits of a 
certain variety of assessments. More- 
over, generalities apart, the artist's 
creation always expresses something 
of his own personal nature, reflecting 
his aspirations, tastes, sympathies and 
outlook. 
| N any case, these are no 
grounds for antagonism between 
science and art. Nevertheless, from 
time to time there are signs of a 
recrudescence of the sort of debate 
carried on recently in the Soviet 
press. “Physicist or Poet?” was the 
title of this discussion—quite injus- 
tified in my view—which stirred up 
young intellectuals all over the Soviet 
Union where visitors on their first 
trip are often astonished by the tre- 
mendous popularity of art and poetry. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 58795: Lilacs in the cosmos

12 
LILACS IN THE COSMOS... (Continued) 
‘Supersociety’ and the yearning 
for beauty 
It has been argued naively and even 
somewhat crudely that today science 
and technology give prestige to a 
nation, the two enabling us to unravel 
many of the mysteries of the invisible 
world and to carry man far out into 
space. 
As for the arts, it has been maintain- 
ed that nowadays the human spirit 
has little chance of expressing itself ; 
and the advocates of science first 
and last have mockingly exclaimed: 
“Johann Sebastian Bachl... Alexanaer 
Blok! ... Who needs them today?” 
| should Ike to say that this sporadic 
episode met with little success except 
perhaps in a few schools where certain 
students—ill-prepared for their literat- 
ure classes—tried to justify their un- 
preparedness by alleging that it was 
no longer necessary to waste their time 
on literature and the arts. This did not 
save them from failing their course. 
I might add that the very theme of 
the debate—Physicist or Poet—was 
hardly original. In the years following 
the October Revolution, when part of 
the country's youth was tempted to 
join the hordes bent on destroying 
everything connected with the past, 
there were even some who denied any 
value whatever not only to classical 
art but to every form of art. | even 
recall the flippant motto: “Art is the 
opium of the people” and “Peace to 
the chemists, war on the creative 
artists!” (the latter deriving from the 
famous revolutionary slogan: “Peace to 
the huts, war on the palaces!”) 
\ ERY quickly, however, 
Lenin explained to the young that the 
people who had undertaken to build 
a new life could never attain this 
objective except by absorbing all the 
most precious products of human cul- 
ture and in particular by making use 
of the countless treasures created by 
the arts throughout the course of 
human history. 
But the final defeat of these scien- 
tific Savonarolas who proposed to 
establish the primacy of practical 
science over all other human interests 
was completed when the cosmonauts 
themselves—those who we might well 
expect to be the most forthright 
spokesmen of the avant garde trends 
of our age—acknowledged the help 
they had found in the great writers 
of prose and poetry, as they prepared 
their flights into space, and when the 
world learned that during their most 
trying moments, they found encoura- 
gement in music and song. 
And so was born the lovely motto: 
“In the cosmos, too, there is a place 
for a spray of lilac.” After all, science 
gives man knowledge, art gives him 
feeling. If there is a place in Ife 
for knowledge, there is also a place 
for feeling. 
And here | might do well to recall 
the words of Anton Chekhov: “I wish 
people wouldn't see conflict where in 
fact there is none. Knowledge is

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 58795: Lilacs in the cosmos

  
The level and scope of 
scientific knowledge is 
greater today than at 
any time in history. Yet 
the attraction of art and 
” all forms of beauty has 
- in no way been sup- 
planted, and aesthetic 
. education which enri- 
ches the human perso- 
nality flourishes as 
never before. Here, 
happy children hurry 
to their music lesson. 
Photo © Keystone 
+ 
SH - 
always present in the world Ana- 
tomy and literature are equally noble in 
origin. They have common aims and 
a common enemy—the Devil; there 
are therefore absolutely no grounds 
for conflict between them.” 
“There is no struggle for existence 
between them. If a man knows about 
the theory of the circulation of the 
blood, he is rich; if he adds to that a 
study of the history of religion and the 
song 'l| remember a wonderful mom- 
ent’ (1), he becomes not poorer, but 
richer, and this again 1s wholly to his 
advantage. Men of genius have never 
warred with each other and, in the 
person of Goethe, we find side by side 
the naturalist and the poet.” 
It may seem scarcely worthwhile 
to have brought up all this at a time 
when the question, theoretically at 
least, seems to be settled once and 
for all. It is not without value, how- 
(1) Well-known melody by Glinka. 
ever, to recall the efforts to divorce 
knowledge from feeling because in 
practice the answer is still a long way 
off. Can we In fact honestly maintain 
today that the human race, as it gains 
in knowledge, is deepening and refin- 
Ing its appreciation of the beautiful? 
[n this connexion | am reminded of 
two conversations which 1 had with 
people of sharply diverging spiritual 
views, One of them, a devout Christ- 
ian representing a religious brother- 
hood, said to me during one of my 
visits to the United States: “Beauty is 
God. If from youth you teach a per- 
son to see the hand of God and the 
will of God In everything around him, 
he will finally understand the harmony 
of all things, that is, perfect beauty." 
The other, a Communist with whom 
| was talking at home—some time ago, 
it is true, after one of my lectures on 
the aesthetic education of young 
people—cniticized me in the following 
words: 
“Why clutter up their heads with 
that! The important thing is to foster 
a revolutionary conscience in people, a 
proper understanding of the laws of 
social development, to teach them the 
practical elements of social behaviour. 
The rest, including the sense of beauty, 
can come later.” 
B is not my intention to 
enter into a discussion of the factors 
that have led to the great ethical and 
spiritual flowering of the human per- 
sonality. | will simply say that in my 
view the purpose of all education is to 
give the individual the wherewithal 
to find happiness suited to his nature 
and to make his fellows happy. 
As for the notion that our con- 
temporaries can be completely happy, 
in the fullest sense of the term, that is 
to say, appreciating all the wholesome 
joys of life, without having had instill- 
ed in them a feeling for beauty—that 
is quite simply impossible, We are 
speaking here of the education of a 
human being completely and harmo- 
niously developed, able not only to 
master knowledge but also to enjoy 
beauty and to share it with others. 
For this reason, when we seek to 
achieve perfection as regards social 
organization and the distribution of 
material wealth, we must take great 
care, earnestly and in good time, to 
see that the future, does not merely 
hold out the prospect of a high mat- 
enal standard of living and a fair 
sharing of everything indispensable 
for material comfort. We must see to 
it that all society can participate in the 
world of beauty, the aesthetic world, 
the world of art. And this world must 
be accessible to all. We must en- 
courage, foster and strengthen in each 
of us the desire to seek and find real 
beauty. And this cannot be achieved 
with mediocre products or worthless 
substitutes. 
Why deny it: the man who lives in 
material comfort but disdains the 
world of art exhibitions, museums and 
art galleries leads the Ife of blind 
men. Little does he realize the joys 
and beauty he is missing. 
The man who is interested only in 
the popular songs of the day, the 
music of which, though catchy and 
easily remembered, is nevertheless 
extremely hmited, is in fact half deaf. 
For he has not learned to listen to and 
appreciate really great music. 
Again, the man who has never read 
the great authors, the books which 
have moved the hearts and minds of 
millions of readers, If he has not 
learnt by heart a dozen or so lines 
of his favourite poet—if indeed he has 
one—that man 1s condemned to 
spiritual poverty, to live half-hearted- 
ly and to deprive himself of the greater 
part of those joys which spring from 
contact with beauty, 
These contacts with beauty invite us 
to improve our personality and to take 
an active part in creating a life offering 
joy, satisfaction and consolation. The 
man who knows the meaning of beauty 
can reap the reward that dreams afford 
to help him to enjoy today and to face 
tomorrow with serenity. 
This is a far cry from the narrow 
materialistic search for individual com- 
fort. It is a romantic quest, inviting us 
to perfect our lives in all their pleni- 
tude. For the romantic approach is 
the centnfugal force which propels 
ideas and feelings beyond the horizons 
of everyday existence; it 1s the dynamic 
force which translates dreams into 
reality. 
During my visits to the United States 
and Western Europe, | have been 
confronted with most varied manifes- 
tations of modern art. These, | must 
confess, have at times somewhat dis- 
concerted me. Perhaps because it is 
an attempt to protect itself from the 
invading cybernetics of our time, with 
its yes-no and plus-minus responses, 
that art sometimes seeks refuge in 
the obscure realms of the subconscious 
and even logical artificiality. 
B UT years ago Tolstoy 
wrote that the beautiful cannot be 
devoid of meaning. Now that the 
electronic computer is capable of 
translating a book and even of writing 
simple poetry, the artist, if he is a 
true artist, cannot stand by with his 
arms crossed and watch the human 
factor disappear from the arts. On 
the contrary, today more than ever, 
art must reveal itself as in complete 
possession of all potentialities of the 
human spirit. The artist is the last 
bastion of those great gifts of man 
which can never be reproduced even 
by the most complicated electronic 
equipment. 
At the same time it would be stupid 
to pit the power of modern science 
and technology against sensational and 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 58795: Lilacs in the cosmos

14 
LILACS IN THE COSMOS... (Continued) 
exaggerated notions of a “superman” 
which a certain press has popularized. 
True art, inspired by truth and beauty, 
exalts the splendours of the human 
personality, and seeks to help man 
to find his place in life and society, 
rejecting both the myth of the “super- 
man” and of the “supersociety” which 
too often crushes the individual under 
implacable and inhuman laws. 
Aesthetic education, of course, is 
inseparable from ethical education. 
Aesthetics and ethics should go hand 
in hand, both in the private world of 
the individual and in his relations with 
others. This unity must be created in 
infancy and must be talked about at 
home in the family circle. The har- 
mony between the sense of the beauti- 
ful and the sense of right should be 
reaffirmed, strengthened and develop- 
ed at school. 
Unfortunately the time allotted to 
teachers in the school curriculum for 
initiating pupils in the realm of aesthe- 
tics—and above all in literature—is 
not being used to best advantage. 
More often than not the great 
authors included in the Soviet curri- 
culum are not properly studied; they 
are given only cursory examination. 
The children in class simply reel off 
in haphazard fashion the plots of clas- 
sical masterpieces or of the best- 
known modern works. 
|. is all too rare to find 
a schoolmaster, himself an enthusiast 
for his subject, who is able to commu- 
nicate his personal admiration and 
attachment to his pupils so as to 
awaken in them a genuine love of the 
beautiful. Far more often the class 
repeats with indifference conventional 
views with no attempt to penetrate 
the real deeper sense or truth of the 
work. They make no attempt to find 
pleasure in a new experience so that 
under the spell of the author, they 
realize that what they were being 
taught was not boring and being 
forced upon them. Yet there can 
be no true education without educa- 
tion in ethics. 
The Soviet Union has already achiev- 
ed a great deal in the field of aesthetic 
education. We feel however, that 
there is still much urgent work to be 
done. We have an Institute of Aesthe- 
tic Education attached to the Soviet 
Academy of the Science of Teaching 
where many aspects of the problems 
| have mentioned are being studied 
both scientifically and pedagogically. 
Moscow has a Publishing House of 
Children's Books specially created to 
study the requirements of young 
readers, to guide and develop the 
tastes of children, and to assess and 
set aesthetic standards for children’s 
books. We endeavour to ensure that 
radio and television should be not 
the rivals but the allies and sup- 
porters of literature, in a word, the 
auxiliaries of all who are concerned Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ho
lm
es
 
- 
Le
be
l,
 
Pa
rl
s 
O
T
A
 
E
E
 
wa
 
with the aesthetic development of the 
rising generations. 
The Soviet Union comprises a large 
network of amateur artist groups to 
which millions of children and adults 
belong. There are popular theatres, 
literary circles, and art studios. Even 
so, we must admit that the general 
level of artistic taste and aesthetic 
appreciation lags far behind that of 
general technical education in the 
Soviet Union. In this field we still 
have a long way to go. 
Painters, scientists, writers, musi- 
cians and teachers -should combine 
their efforts to enable society not only 
to expand the scope of its knowledge, 
but also to make it possible for every- 
one to take the bold step of explor- 
ing the world of aesthetics and the 
world of the beautiful. 
From the infinitely great to the infinitely 
tiny, science is enlarging the bounds 
of the universe and those of life itself. 
Simultanously it probes the mysteries of 
space and those of the living cell and 
in the process uncovers hitherto 
imperceptible forms of beauty. Below, a 
symbolic model of the molecule of DNA 
(desoxyribonucleic acid). Science has 
shown that these molecules are the 
fundamental building blocks of heredity. 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 58796: Science and fundamental concepts of thinking

SCIENCE AND FUNDAMENTAL 
CONCEPTS OF THINKING 
T. triumph of science 
must ultimately engender peace by 
endowing all mankind with better 
means of livellhood, more leisure, 
more culture and reasoning powers. 
Progress put an end to the age of 
the cave-dwellers; why should it not 
put an end—and the sooner the 
better—to the age of the barrack- 
dwellers? 
The time is not long past when 
science was regarded as suspect and 
frightening. Opprobrium was poured 
on its ruthlessness, on the “cold- 
hearted scientist” and his materialism, 
which was equated, unfairly, with the 
negation of any ideal (instead of being 
contrasted with professions of so- 
pay idealism, as it properly should 
e). 
The “cold-hearted scientist” is one 
of the myths most widely propagated 
by the enemies of science and 
  
PAUL COUDERC, astronomer at the Paris 
Observatory and lecturer in astronomy at 
the Ecole Polytechnique (Paris), has written 
widely on cosmography and the structure 
of the universe. Many of his books have 
appeared in the “Que sais-je 7” collection 
published by Presses Universitaires de 
France (Paris), among them: “La Relativité® 
(1966); “Les Echpses” (1961); "L'Univers” 
(published by Arrow Books, London, as 
“The Wider Universe”, 1960); “Le Calen- 
drier” (1961); “Histoire de {'Astronomie” 
(1961) and “L’'Astrologie” (1957). 
by Paul Couderc 
Winner of the 15th Kalinga Prize for the Popula- 
rization of Science, awarded by an international 
jury appointed by Unesco, the French astronomer 
and science writer Paul Couderc outlines, below, 
his views on the need for impartiality in science, 
and for regular science information to be avail- 
able to everyone. 
especially by the zealots of spurious 
science and occultism. It is obviously 
easier to deceive the multitude when 
one is dealing with those who “respect 
the mystery at the heart of things”, 
who can be fobbed off with pure 
verbalism and who confuse irrational 
belief with reasonable knowledge. 
This bane of scientific illiteracy may 
perhaps have lost its hold; people 
nowadays seem increasingly conscious 
of the handicap of insufficient 
scientific knowledge in the modern 
age. Henceforth, science is a factor 
of vital social importance. It offers 
man the only chance of building a 
better future and breaking his fetters; 
it is the only means of assuring man 
a fonger, easier and happier life. 
In our vindication of science, we 
are not confusing material comfort 
with happiness. The individual rarely 
owes his happiness directly to the 
pursuit of research. Moreover, the 
seat of happiness is in the emotions 
rather than the intellect—the joys of 
the family, moral satisfaction, deep- 
felt emotions aroused by music, 
poetry, literature, films or the theatre. 
Scientists are no more beyond the 
reach of feeling than other men, nor 
do they wish to be. 
But obviously, art and enjoyment 
demand freedom and leisure. When 
prehistoric man spent all his waking 
hours protecting himself and finding 
food, he hardly had time for meditation 
or amusement: this explains the 
extreme slowness of early progress, 
  
contrasted with its remarkable speed 
today. 
Those who belittle scientific achieve- 
ments have forgotten the advances 
made in medicine and surgery, the 
alleviation of pain and sleeplessness. 
The expectation of life has doubled in 
fifty years, and life has become less 
arduous, 
Science moves so fast and has 
become so vast and complex that the 
man in the street can no longer fully 
participate in the hfe of his time 
without some intelligent popularization 
of knowledge. Even the scientist 
needs popularization in fields other 
than his own. 
Popularization aims to make the 
march of science intelligible to the 
layman, in simple, clear, direct and 
if possible vivid, but above all accurate 
terms. The attempt can never be 
completely successful, for over- 
simplification always entails some 
deformation; especially as the pro- 
foundest scientific truths, in nuclear 
physics or cosmology, for example, 
are now becoming so abstruse that 
there is great danger in deviating from 
them even slightly. In any event, the 
popular science writer must take care 
not to slip into sensationalism or 
triviality. The reader must be pre- 
pared to make an intellectual effort: 
he must want to understand. 
Furthermore, the new ideas and 
images of the universe must infiltrate 
education as soon as possible and 
become part of every schoolboy’s 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 58796: Science and fundamental concepts of thinking

16 
CONCEPTS OF THINKING (Continued) 
The star in the suburbs 
stock in trade, to ensure that the gulf 
Is not too wide between ordinary 
thinking and the mental processes of 
the research scientist. We call the 
properties or relationships we learnt 
at an early age “self-evident”. 
If steps were taken to keep 
education up-to-date, everyone would 
start on the same intellectual footing 
in each country, or very nearly so; 
and some inter-communication would 
be possible between the privileged few 
who wrest from nature her secrets and 
the multitude who can now do no more 
than benefit from the applications of 
science. 
The people will become an in- 
exhaustible store of new research 
workers, provided they are informed 
and instructed in a scientific spirit, not 
one of mystery, and are shown the 
hallmarks of real scientific proof, 
instead of the vain pretensions of 
spurious science. From the ranks of 
those still barred from the high schools 
and universities by a selective social 
system that 1s deplorable, many men 
of science might emerge, and once in 
a while a genius. 
Think of the cases (only too rare) 
where a brilliant mind has been 
rescued, by some lucky chance, from 
an occupation with no future. Think, 
for example, of Faraday, the book- 
binder's workman, who fathered the 
prodigy of the present day electrical 
industry; think of Alexander Fleming, 
the son of poor Scottish moorland 
crofters, who worked for five years as 
a clerk in a shipping company, until 
a small legacy enabled him to take 
up medicine; but for that legacy, we 
should probably still be without 
penicillin and the other antibiotics. 
should like to illustrate by 
the example of astronomy how the 
evolution of science can change the 
laws of human reasoning. 
For primitive tribes the world is a 
frightening place. They have an 
affective conception of the umverse: 
they people heaven and earth with 
higher powers, capricious and menac- 
ing, whom they must endeavour to 
placate. Meteorology is confused 
with astronomy, and there is no inkling 
of natural law. 
This was undoubtedly the world of 
prehistoric man. But little by ttle, 
the alternation of day and night, the 
unvarying sequence of the phases of 
the moon, the succession of the 
seasons, provided the primitive peo- 
ples with time units, and led to the 
notion of regular cycles in the 
universe, 
In the sixth century before our era, 
in the Eastern Mediterranean, the earth 
was identified as a celestial body, 
spherical and surrounded by space, 
from the observation of its shadow 
on the moon In eclipse and from the 
progressive change in the field of 
stars visible to the traveller, 
The idea of a single vertical 
dimension, and the notion of up and 
down, were gradually superseded by 
the concept of an infinite number of 
vertical dimensions converging towards 
the centre of the earth, and the possi- 
bility of being able to stand upright 
at the antipodes. What a revolution 
in thoughtl 
Similarly, the concrete reality of 
darkness, with the antithesis of light 
and dark, was superseded by the 
notion of shadow. Only light is real; 
darkness is merely the absence of 
hght. This vital step forward was 
also due to an understanding of the 
eclipses and the phases of the moon. 
N.. the attempts of the 
Greeks to account for the movements 
of the planets geometrically mark the 
final advent of scientific rationalism: 
from then on, it 1s assumed that any 
natural phenomenon can be explained; 
the concept of natural law carries all 
before it, ousting the supernatural and 
fantastic. Mystical needs still have 
their place, but as a thing apart, hardly 
impinging on science. 
Fifteen centuries later, Copernicus 
and Galileo supplied the proof that 
the earth 1s not the centre of the 
universe. This changed the whole 
face of philosophy; the inhabitant of a 
modest planet revolving round the sun 
cannot think along the same lines as 
a privileged denizen of the centre of 
the universe. A study of our galaxy 
now shows the sun to be a star in 
the suburbs of a multitude of hundreds 
of thousands of millions of other stars 
hke it: and the giant telescopes 
reveal that the universe is filled with 
thousands of millions of galaxies 
similar to our own. 
Lastly, these galaxies are running 
away from each other in an expanding 
universe, where space itself is not 
only curved but dilating. What, then, 
is space? Matter? Gravitation? At 
this very time, these questions are 
moving from the metaphysical to the 
scientific plane. Thus, science again 
appears as the “power behind the 
throne™ in our philosophy, returning 
the fundamental concepts of our 
thinking to the melting-pot. 
Astronomy is still in the forefront 
of the natural sciences, and the most 
abstract ideas are invoked in contem- 
porary cosmology. At the same time, 
allying as it does the beauty of the 
stars and the poetry of the heavens 
to infinite scales of time and space, 
it remains a particularly apt medium 
for bringing the conquests of modern 
science within the grasp of the general 
public. 
 
  
  
€ 
- 
x  . xttesres -t 
4 o ”o 0 
bl x CAMBODIA *a\ (or 
4 BANGKOK ~ 
od - 
5 TONLE SAP 
BATTAMBANG 
MSY 
. SX 
» 
[Prex TrNOTR 
1 
GULF fe 
v 
oF ~~ 
NO © 
SIAM hl o* Mr Phuos Yn, 
¥ 
  
 
      
  
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

a 
— . i 
won I —_ Sg. » . 
Set Ce i SC RE BE SE 
by W. J. Ellis 
The Mekong Project, an historic international 
enterprise in river development, seeks to 
make full use of the waters of the lower 
Mekong in terms of hydro-electric power, 
irrigation, flood control, drainage, navigation 
improvement, water management and water 
supply. Map left, shows location of some 
of the Mekong projects in Thailand, Laos, 
Cambodia and the Republic of Viet-Nam. 
Unesco has produced a Mathematical Mode! of 
the Mekong Delta which has already played 
a major role in proving the feasibility of 
building a barrage across the Tonle Sap 
River (Cambodia) and will be used to study 
other projects. Above, a boat race along 
the broad waters of the Mekong at Vientiane 
(Laos). The occasion is the annual regatta 
marking a Buddhist festival in October. 
  
        
Photo USIS 


### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

nesco mathematical model 
to harness the Mekong 
I. 2,600-mile-long  Me- 
kong, one of the great rivers of the 
world, rises at an altitude of over 
16,000 feet in the mountains of per- 
petual snow of the Tibetan plateau. 
It is perennial and flows unrestricted 
through Yunnan Province in China and 
Burma before it enters the Lower 
Mekong Basin, where, in Laos, Thai- 
land, Cambodia and the Republic of 
W. J. ELLIS, of Australia, was formerly direc- 
tor of Unesco's Science Co-operation Offices 
in South East Asia (Manila) and South Asia 
(Delhi). He is now with the Unesco Secre- 
tariat in Paris. Before joining Unesco he was 
a biochemist on the staff of the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization 
in Melbourne, Australia. 
Viet-Nam, it is influenced by the mon- 
soon rains collected mainly from the 
enormous catchment of the Annamese 
Cordillera. Only 14 per cent of the 
river's water has its origin in Tibet 
and China. 
From the Burmese border, the river 
follows a tortuous course for sixteen 
hundred miles before it is lost through 
the great delta into the South China 
Sea. 
It is estimated that the total drainage 
area is 307,000 square miles (800,000 
sq. kms.) and of this, 236,000 square 
miles (600,000 sq. kms.), an area larger 
than France, lies within the four coun- 
tries of the Lower Basin. 
Nowhere in its long journey has 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

Photos © Raymond Cauchetier, Paris 
-_ — 
LIFE ALONG 
THE MEKONG RIVER 
Rice eaten with salted fish or 
a fish sauce rich in protein 
is the staple diet of the 
population in the lower basin 
of the Mekong. River fishermen 
make their largest catches as 
the annual flood waters recede 
along the Tonle Sap, a tributary 
of the Mekong, in Cambodia. 
Improvised markets are set up 
on the river banks to which 
the rice farmers, travelling 
from far afield, bring their 
grain to exchange for fish. 
Opposite, airview of the 
Cambodian countryside reveals 
a mosaic of flooded ricefields. 
The proposed barrage on the 
Tonle Sap would help to control 
flooding, extend the fishing 
season and improve soil fertility. 
Below, countless numbers of 
fish await processing at riverside 
compounds. Left, rice farmers 
encamped by the Mekong 
prepare piles of fish for salting. 
wd 
—" ~ 
-— 
ha 
NY
 
4 kL  

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

sa 
- v A = . 0 : 1 
Set ¥ iso Am : ol . 3 > 2 Bt bof Ale Ava Pagel) BRB, cp r= - oh Dh 
a yp FE - v Pr. Air 5g > AT CR e En 
TAS z= er! Ne > w FAS a : ae em Nh OM i Pe date Ae SE aed N 44 Py A a Hore : 4 ri aw ae 
’ Fd ot eg pt Ft 3 3 “ a Y Lp 
i340 = AE 7 7 5 i tot dh TARE or ie 
- wh or a1 » . Eo) 
JR or ud eo 2 An Y 
20 
  
MEKONG (Continued) 
A 2,600-miles river 
without a bridge 
the river ever been crossed by a bridge 
and at no time until recently has any- 
thing been done to derive greater 
benefit from the river or to control 
its many and unpredictable idiosyncra- 
sies, though these cause great losses 
to the already over-taxed economy of 
this area. 
The Mekong has an annual cycle, 
with a dry season from November to 
June and then a regular flood which 
usually reaches a single peak. 
When the floods come, over 15,000 
square miles (38,000 sq. kms.) in Cam- 
bodia and the Republic of Viet-Nam 
are inundated. Herein lies the major 
problem, that of introducing some 
control over this yearly phenomenon. 
One of the special features of the 
flooding is that by the time the 
enormous volume of water reaches 
Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia, 
sometimes reaching a height of thirty 
feet, the head developed by the 
Mekong is sufficient to reverse the 
flow of one of its principal tributaries, 
the Tonle Sap. This river flows back- 
wards into the Great Lake of Cam- 
bodia. 
Thos it may be seen that 
the daily life of the inhabitants of the 
Mekong basin has always revolved 
around the vicissitudes of the mon- 
soon and the river. Over the centu- 
ries they have learned after a fashion 
to adapt their way of life and their 
livelihood to these difficult conditions. 
It has therefore been necessary to 
bear well in mind that any develop- 
ment plans call for careful co-ordi- 
nation of all factors concerned and to 
ensure that what is planned will not 
disrupt the present economy and the 
whole ecology of the region. Since 
rice and fish constitute the daily diet 
of such a large proportion of the 
population, even a brief interruption of 
supplies could have serious conse- 
quences. 
Of all the projects considered or 
planned for the Mekong the most pro- 
mising and most complicated one is 
the Tonle Sap project. Here, it is 
proposed to build a great barrage, and 
planning for it has called for the deve- 
lopment by Unesco of a mathematical 
model. 
Over the past seven years Unesco 
and the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) have been engag- 
ed on this highly sophisticated research 
project—the creation of a theoretical 
model in the form of a computer and 
programme of the Mekong River Delta, 
as distinct from a physical model 
which 1s built to scale and which is 
usually used for the study of hydro- 
logical problems of this sort. In the 
present instance the term Mathema- 
tical Model is used by the specialists 
and it has been made possible by the 
use of an electronic computer. 
While this model has made a special 
contribution to basic studies of a 
number of development projects being 
undertaken in the Mekong Flood Plain, 
it has also led to fundamental scientific 
advances in the field of hydrology and 
hydraulics. 
This project is an example of inter- 
national scientific collaboration at its 
best. Born out of a spirit of co-opera- 
tion between the United Nations and 
 
Photos USIS 
the four countries, Cambodia, Laos, 
Thailand and the Republic of Viet- 
Nam, which are most closely concern- 
ed with the Mekong, the new techni- 
ques developed will serve other states 
far distant from South-East Asia. For 
example, the study of many of the 
flood problems of Italy may well be 
assisted by the application of the 
scientific knowledge resulting from 
the Mekong studies, and thus a re- 
currence of the enormous damage 
caused by the devastating floods of 
1966 may be prevented. 
1 J- recent years the 
experience of many has been sought 
out to see how the Mekong as a vast 
natural resource might be turned to 
greater use and thus contribute to an 
improvement in the economic situation 
of the population of the great flood 
‘plain. 
The Lower Basin of the Mekong 
River comprises approximately one 
third of the total territory of Cambo- 
dia, Laos, Thailand and the Repub- 
lic of Viet-Nam, and within it live 
20 million people. Eighty per cent of 
them are farmers and fishermen and 
all are dependent on the river. 
Less than 3 per cent of the basin is 
irrigated; much more of it could be 
and will be under the development 
plans. Only 86 per cent of the culti- 
vated land is under rice, and only one 
crop a year is grown, but this could 
be increased to three. With electric 
power becoming available it will be 
possible to produce nitrogenous ferti- 
lizer. Furthermore, large abandoned 
areas like the Plaine des Joncs could

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

One of four U.N. Special Fund projects on tributaries of the Mekong 
provides for the construction of a dam on the Nam Ngum River in 
Laos. Far left, site chosen for the dam as it looks today. Left, artist's 
impression of the future dam, 200 feet (66 metres) high and nearly 
1,200 ft. (360 metres) long. The jungle spreading to the hills in the 
background will be engulfed by a vast artificial lake covering 
140 square miles (370 sq. kms.). The project should bring irrigation 
to about 100,000 acres and generate 520 million kilowatt hours of 
electricity a year. Right, lowering a current meter into the Mekong 
during preparatory studies for the River Basin project. 
well be brought under cultivation if 
they were desalinated. 
The advent of power could also 
make 1t possible to work the iron ore, 
bauxite, copper, tungsten and zinc 
which are found in the area, and to set 
up new industries. These will call 
for increased educational and exten- 
sion programmes for the people to 
enable them to understand the new 
development, to acquire new skills 
and to adapt the existing social and 
commercial structures. 
The fishing industry, about 90 per 
cent of it fresh-water, is extensive and 
important, with the Great Lake pro- 
ducing about 50,000 tons per year. 
But this production is very vanable 
and it is foreseen that if the proposed 
barrage on the Tonle Sap could be 
regulated the fish production might be 
more balanced. 
Whatever might be the sum total 
of benefits from a barrage on the 
Tonle Sap it is clear that there would 
result a tremendous reduction in the 
loss of lives and property. For exam- 
ple, in the 1961 flood, 164 lives were 
lost and a population of over 300,000 
affected; untold damage was done to 
buildings, roads and bridges. 
The problems of the Lower Mekong 
Basin can only be solved as a whole: 
there is need for a joint effort, but 
not even the four countries involved 
could assemble anything like the ne- 
cessary technical and material resour- 
ces required to carry through a pro- 
ject of this magnitude. This then was 
a real project for study and assistance 
by the United Nations. 
In 1951, the Economic Commission 
for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE) 
established by the United Nations Eco- 
nomic and Social Council in 1947 took 
up the study of the Lower Mekong. 
The technical work was undertaken 
by the Bureau of Flood Control and 
Water Resources Development, a sub- 
sidiary body of ECAFE which is em- 
powered, among other things, to advise 
and assist governments on flood con- 
trol and related river problems. The 
first study, published early in 1952, 
aroused keen interest and brought 
forth favourable response. 
|. 1957, a United Nations 
mission planned a five-year program- 
me of surveys with a budget of $9 ml- 
lion. The first recommendation, which 
received early approval of the United 
Nations, was the creation of a local 
authority to draw up a master plan 
and to ensure proper co-ordination of 
resources. 
Thus was established the Committee 
for Co-ordination of Investigations of 
the Lower Mekong Basin, which is 
composed of plenipotentiaries from 
the four riparian states of Cambodia, 
Laos, ‘Thailand and the Republic of 
Viet-Nam. It is empowered to control 
supervise and co-ordinate develop- 
ment projects. To handle the vital day 
to day work between sessions of the 
committee an executive agent was 
appointed and, to assist him, a three- 
member consultative committee. This 
small operational body puts into effect 
decisions taken by the Commuttee for 
Co-ordination. 
Pilot projects have been started, 
and are well under way in each of 
the four states. These are the four 
Photo © SOGREAH, Grenoble 
Mekong United Nations Special Fund 
tributary projects: 
R The Battambang Project in Cambo- 
dia envisages a diversion dam. But, 
since the river is almost dry during 
April and May, round-the-year irnga- 
tion cannot be ensured simply by pro- 
viding such a diversion dam. It is 
proposed to solve this problem by 
building an upstream storage dam and 
reservoir, which should provide gra- 
vity irrigation for 150,000 acres. In 
addition it is planned to generate 
110 million KWh of electricity per year. 
BR The Nam Ngum Project in Laos is 
to provide irrigation for farming on 
about 100,000 acres and will produce 
about 520 million KWh of electricity 
per year. 
HW In Thailand the Nam Pong project 
located in the north makes provision 
for pumping and irrigation to about 
95,000 acres and provides for the 
drainage of soil which is sandy and 
often very salty. It will also produce 
some 90 million KWh, of electricity. 
RB Finally, the Upper Se San Project 
located in the plateau area of the 
Republic of Viet-Nam is designed to 
develop a large area for resettlement. 
The project will provide gravity irriga- 
tion for some 25000 acres down- 
stream and, by pumping and upstream 
diversion, for an additional 35,000 
acres. The production of 220 million 
KWh. of electricity is planned. 
These then constitute the four 
UNDP Special Fund Component pro- 
jects which aim to irrigate slightly more 
than 400,000 acres; and additional trn- 
butary projects will doubtless be built. 
A number of mainstream projects 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

22 
MEKONG (Continued) 
The delta in the computer 
are under way and are being assisted 
under bilateral aid and the Colombo 
Plan. (The British Commonwealth's 
scheme for aiding its member coun- 
tries in South-East Asia.) Five of these 
projects envisage providing irrigation 
to an area of nearly 6 million acres 
and an annual electricity output of 
about 25,000 millon KWh. 
The Tonle Sap and Delta project is 
one of especial interest to Unesco as 
the organization entrusted by UNDP 
with the making of the mathematical 
model of the Delta. 
Quite apart from these large-scale 
land and water development projects 
other work is in progress undertaken 
by the four riparian governments 
which are receiving bilateral assis- 
tance as well as aid from the United 
Nations and other international agen- 
cies. 
Fo example the U.N. is 
carrying out a survey of minerals and 
the mineral processing industries in 
the Mekong Basin. In agriculture, the 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) is helping with the development 
of a 740-acre experimental irngation 
and demonstration farm in the Vietiane 
Plain, under the Special Fund Compo- 
nent Tributaries Project. FAO is also 
assisting by directing the design of 
a number of agriculture stations. 
Because of great losses from forest 
and grassland fires caused by shifting 
cultivation, FAQ is investigating ways 
which may be used to restrain this 
practice. Schistosomiasis (a disease 
caused when the bloodstream 1s in- 
vaded by tiny parasites) and malaria 
surveys have been carried out by the 
World Health Organization, and pre- 
ventive measures suggested. 
At the request of the Co-ordination 
Committee, the International Labour 
Organization has completed a prelimi- 
nary manpower survey of the Mekong 
Basin. 
The change of flow of the Tonle Sap 
caused by the swelling of the Mekong 
at flood time has already been men- 
tioned. This constitutes a major hy- 
drological and hydraulic problem, and 
a detalled scientific study was consi- 
dered to be fundamental to any plan 
for building a barrage on the Tonle 
Sap and indeed basic to most of the 
projects envisaged for the whole 
Lower Mekong Basin. 
Having in mind the need for a 
thorough basic study, Unesco consti- 
tuted a three-man mission to visit the 
area and to look into the idea of 
constructing a suitable hydrological 
model. 
Studies of hydraulic problems are 
usually carried out by using a physical 
scale model, but in this case the rela- 
tions between surface distances and 
gradients were of an order that made 
it almost impossible to reproduce such 
small slopes in a model. 
Such a model would have requir- 
ed an area of almost one hectare 
(2% acres) with levels accurate to 
1/10 mm. This important considera- 
tion, among others, led the Unesco 
Mission to propose the development 
of a mathematical model, to be pre- 
pared by using an electronic com- 
puter, 
Accordingly, the Committee for Co- 
ordination, on behalf of the Govern- 
ments of Cambodia and the Repub- 
lic of Viet-Nam asked the UNDP 
Special Fund Component for help in 
building up a mathematical model of 
the Delta. The project was approved 
and in May 1961 the Governing Council 
of the Special Fund entrusted Unesco 
with the responsibility for building the 
model. 
The mission contemplated the build- 
ing of a model for two major reasons. 
Firstly, they considered it necessary to 
resolve the controversy existing be- 
tween experts about the total effect 
of building the dam and also to prepare 
a design that would provide the most 
efficient control. Secondly they felt 
it was vital to demonstrate clearly that 
a dam built in Cambodia would not 
in any circumstances adversely affect 
the lower part of the Delta in the 
Republic of Viet-Nam. 
A T the time of the mission's 
work a physical model had already 
been ruled out, A new approach was 
being made and new developments 
were taking place which eventually 
made it clear that a mathematical 
model was more suited to the invest- 
gation. That the decision to use a 
mathematical model was taken at a 
time when the technique had not yet 
been fully developed can be consi- 
dered as an important contribution to 
fundamental hydraulic studies. 
Very careful planning was required 
in preparation for the model. First a 
panel of consultants was appointed— 
three hydraulics experts and two 
mathematicians—who contributed the 
expert knowledge and experience of 
the four different countries from which 
they came. Then a suitable laboratory 
had to be found to undertake the 
construction of the model. The one 
selected, SOGREAH—the Société Gre- 
nobloise d'Etudes et d'Applications 
Hydrauliques—in Grenoble, France, 
had had years of experience of 
research in this field. 
Te model project was 
planned to cover four phases: 
B® The collection of all existing docu- 
mentation and data on the hydraulics 
of the region; 
B The designing and programming 
of a preliminary model on the basis 
of these results which could determine 
the possible deficiencies of the 
eventual model; 
B A measurement campaign plan- 
ned on the basis of the preliminary 
model, which would check the cri- 
tical data needed for improving the 
accuracy of this model in preparation 
for the final stage; 
B The construction of the eventual 
model, in the form of a computer 
programme accurately representing 
the seasonal variations in water levels 
and discharge rates. 
In phase two, trial runs were made 
to determine how faithfully the pre- 
liminary model reflected the natural 
phenomena. The main purpose was 
to determine which factors (discharge 
rates and levels at particular points 
for instance), were cntical for the 
operation of the model, adjustments 
being possible to make it more 
accurate. 
Essentially the computer programme 
constituting the Mathematical Model 
involves the introduction of detailed 
hydraulic data (topographic features, 
water levels and discharge volumes 
etc.) into an electronic computer in 
the form of formulae embodying well 
known physical laws. The computer 
then determines the water levels and 
their rates of variation at the points 
and times of special interest in the 
Delta plain. 
The test area concerning the Tonle 
Sap was divided up into more than 
260 meshes covering dry land, 
water or marsh from which the 
natural phenomena could be faithfully 
reproduced by definition of the 
exchanges between them and the 
average water levels in each of them. 
Each mesh entailed a great number of 
accurate and painstaking measure- 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

  . . “. TN 
ht 4 KC - \ “- a Vo 4 8 
Photo © Raymond Cauchetier, Paris 
season the rising waters of the Mekong reverse the current of the Tonle Sap and cause it 
to flow back into the Great Lake, raising its level by some 30 feet. The fishermen and 
their families live permanently on their boats and at high water periods cast their lines 
and nets almost at tree-top level. 
FISHING VILLAGE AFLOAT on the Great Lake that feeds the Tonle Sap River. In the rainy 23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

24 
On June 25, 1967, satellites were 
used to relay a live programme 
simultaneously to television 
audiences in Japan, Australia, 
North America, Europe and 
North Africa. Photo shows an 
opening shot from this programme, 
“Our World,” presented via the 
B.B.C. Television Centre in London. 


### 58798: Communication satellites: the new music of the spheres

Communication satellites 
The new music 
of the spheres 
 
by Wilbur Schramm 
With the latest advances in technology it 
is foreseen that in the next 10 years our 
TV screens will be able to receive world-wide 
programmes via satellite relays. The real 
problem today is not so much the need for 
more perfected satellites as better plans for 
using them for a vast exchange of educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural programmes. 
Professor W. Schramm, a world authority on 
mass media development, here looks at a 
few of the major problems that call for 
solution before the intercontinental exchange 
of news and cultural programmes can become 
a day-to-day occurence. 
 
gas SER 
  
T HE opportunity now exists 
to share data over long distances as 
never before in the history of mankind. 
The development of computers of great 
capacity has made it possible to store 
enormous quantities of information in 
digital form, and to search efficiently 
for and retrieve any part of what is 
stored. The development of related 
arts and sciences of indexing, abstract- 
ing and programming has brought into 
being a new force in human affairs 
—information science. 
Fortunately for us, these develop- 
ments come at a time when many of 
the natural sciences are experiencing 
WILBUR SCHRAMM is director of the Insti- 
tute for Joint Communication Research at 
Stanford University, U.S A. and the author 
of many books on mass communication. A 
number of his studies have been published 
by Unesco “Communication Satellites for 
Education, Science and Culture”, 1967 ($1.00, 
6/-), on which his present article 1s based; 
“The Effects of Television on Children and 
Adolescents”, 1964 ($075; 4/-), “Mass Media 
and National Development (The Role of Infor- 
mation in the Developing Countries) 1964 
(86 00, 30/-) Professor Schramm is now direct- 
ing publication of a series of studies on the 
use of modern teaching techniques in the 
developing countries, based on surveys made 
by the International Institute for Educational 
Planning.

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 58798: Communication satellites: the new music of the spheres

VA ie niu 
ker Thing ” aia HAR 
The pS PENT TTL os ah ret 
used —- hy “ Si : 
dl RTI ar 2 
AT Mandy 
Cri 
; i - a 4 
a glut of research information, when 
information of great importance to 
scientists is being produced at many 
and distant places on earth, and when 
rising educational levels and expanding 
scholarships are creating new needs 
for information world wide. 
In this race between information 
needs and new information capabilities, 
communication satellites will play a 
facilitating role, and probably an impor- 
tant one. 
Indeed, some space scientists have 
predicted that communication satellites 
may be used more for data than for 
telephone transmission. Their function 
will be to extend the connexion bet- 
ween data sources and user. 
Already computers have been con- 
nected to other computers or to data 
consoles, over thousands of miles, by 
means of land lines. They can also 
be connected by satellite. 
Weather data have been exchanged, 
‘by words, numbers and pictures, over 
almost all the world, by satellite. Tele- 
metry and even television from satel- 
lites have been received on earth 
from many hundreds of thousands of 
miles away in space. Can we now 
adapt these proved capabilities to the 
needs of scientific and educational 
information? 
Men have dreamed of a new age of 
information. Great data banks, estab- 
lished centrally, would be available 
to the most distant users. Scientists 
in developing countries or at isolated 
locations would have as ready access 
to scientific research as would their 
colleagues 1n the great centres. A 
sick man in a distant location could 
count on the help of a great medical 
centre, There would no longer be a 
stultifying lag between new knowledge 
and its dissemination. New findings in 
medicine, for example, would be 
promptly available to clinics and hos- 
pitals and medical schools everywhere. 
The resources of a small town or 
school library would no longer be a 
few hundred or a few thousand volu- 
mes; there would be available by quick 
data transmission, when needed, the 
enormous resources of such great 
information centres as the Library of 
Congress, the British Museum, or the 
Lenin Library. 
National, and ultimately international, 
information systems would come to be 
realities, and computerized indexing 
Photo Eurcpean Broadcasting Union 
and cataloguing would take much of 
the drudgery out of working with them. 
Let us not mistake the dream for 
present reality: we are far from being 
able to make that kind of dream come 
true. But we can already do remark- 
able things in using computers for 
information storage and retrieval, and 
it is safe to say that whatever we can 
store on a computer we can transmit 
and retrieve at the end of a satellite 
circuit. 
Present needs, as we move toward 
full use of satellites for scientific and 
educational data transmission, are to 
establish the demand for such data, 
the locations where it exists, the forms 
in which it must be packaged in order 
to be useful, and the institutions and 
organizations which must come into 
being in order to collect and dissemi- 
nate it. This is planning of a high order 
which must involve many sectors of 
the academic community and the infor- 
mation professions. 
International data exchange will 
require building up national capabi- 
ities for information exchange. 
How can an organization like Unesco 
best contribute to this growth toward 
international data exchange, in which 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
2

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 58798: Communication satellites: the new music of the spheres

26 
NEW MUSIC OF THE SPHERES (Continued) 
Libraries 
in the sky 
Photo © Keystone 
  
A talk on Greek poetry in the 
television series, “The Sense of 
Poetry,” produced by the 
educational TV station in Boston 
(U.S.A). With the use of 
communication satellites, completely 
new possibilities are open to 
educational radio and television in 
every country and notably in the 
vast areas covered by the 
developing countries. 
communication satellites will play a 
considerable part? 
It seems that the greatest contn- 
butions might come: (a) by helping to 
share with the smaller and newer 
countries what 1s being found out about 
information technology and dissemi- 
nation, and (b) by facilitating in every 
way possible the planning for truly 
international data systems. The joint 
International Council of Scientific 
Unions (ICSU)-Unesco Project on the 
Communication of Scientific Informa- 
tion and the Feasibility of a World 
Science Information System is an 
important step toward meeting these 
objectives. 
The central committee designed to 
supervise the I[CSU-Unesco Project 
could serve as the nucleus of a com- 
misston or advisory group on infor- 
mation exchange. 
International information exchange 
will become a very large activity. it 
may be that a new United Nations 
Specialized Agency or bureau will have 
to be organized to handle it. 
Communication satellites offer an 
opportunity to increase and even out 
the flow of news in the world. It has 
been amply demonstrated that news 
flow falls off markedly with distance 
(geographical or psychological) and 
that the flow is overwhelmingly from 
the more developed countries to the 
less developed ones. 
Experience has shown that whenever 
cables have been extended to a 
country there has been a notable 
improvement in both the speed and 
quantity of news available to readers 
and listeners In that country. There- 
fore, there 1s reason to believe that 
satellites can potentially make a real 
difference in news availability through- 
out the world. 
In theory at least, this should occur 
at each stage of satellite development. 
In the relatively distant years of direct 
broadcasting we may be able to look 
forward to facsimile newspapers broad- 
cast directly into the home, and 
perhaps even to some choice as to 
what part of the news one wants to 
have printed on his facsimile machine. 
That stage of development should 
also make a difference in the kinds 
of news organizations that serve 
the home. For example, international 
newspapers could become a realty, 
and in very large countries national 
newspapers could circulate much more 
easily than now. 
There might be a merger of some 
newspapers and broadcasting news 
units into a broader kind of news ser- 
vice, combining the sense of receiving 
“Instant news” that television offers 
with the greater depth possible in print 
and facsimile 
Much of the effect on news trans- 
mission may be felt even at the early 
stages when most satellite communi- 
cation 1s point-to-point. 
One of the characteristics of satel- 
lite communication is that the use of 
the space link should cost about the 
same regardless of the distance the 
message travels, providing that it 1s 
within the satellite's effective coverage 
area. This area can be as large as 
40 per cent of the earth's surface. 
This suggests the attractive idea that 
perhaps something like a flat rate (or 
an almost flat rate) for news, regard- 
less of distance, might be established 
world wide thanks to the peculiar eco- 
nomic qualities of satellite transmis- 
sion. If this were possible, It would 
help to even out the flow, and thus 
help to equalize the chance for one part 
of the world to know about others. 
Similarly, satellites will sooner or 
later offer a chance to develop reliable 
teletype news service by radio to parts 
of the world where radio reception 1s 
not now reliable. They also offer an 
invitation to experiment with facsimile, 
a method which has been improved 
and used for the transmission of 
numerous kinds of pictural material, 
including newspaper pages for offset 
reproduction. Satellites extend these 
capabilities farther and invite the news 
media to review the question of what 
news functions might in the future be 
carried on by facsimile. 
Foo television news, point- 
to-point satellites offer an opportunity 
to transmit news films and sound 
tracks more quickly and probably more 
cheaply. One major American net- 
work has announced that it plans 
to establish “self-contained news 
bureaux... complete with equipment 
and production crews for transmitting 
fully prepared stones” around the 
“main gateways for satellite commu- 
nication"—meaning chiefly the country 
with ground stations. 
The international news agencies and 
many national press associations are 
well aware of the potential of satel- 
lites for news transmissions, and ten 
of these organizations have formed a 
joint committee, with a secretariat, in 
London. 
One of the keenest observers of 
the press has suggested that a joint 
advisory board should be formed, In- 
cluding the committee just mentioned, 
the International Telecommunications 
Union, the Communications Satellite 
Corporation, other organizations that 
may be responsible for launching com- 
munication satellites, and Unesco. 
This board, he suggests, should be 
responsible for examining all means 
by which the world flow of news could 
be improved through developments in 
space communication. 
The contribution of Unesco to bring- 
ing satellites Into use to assist the 
flow of world news might take the form 
of calling together such a group as 
this, representing as broad as pos- 
sible a spectrum of news media, news 
agencies, and space communication, 
at first on a one-time basis, later on 
a continuing basis if that proved 
desirable.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 58798: Communication satellites: the new music of the spheres

It is reasonable to assume that most 
cultural exchange via satellites will be 
in the form of television, and that as 
long as we have only point-to-point 
satellites there will not be much of 
it. Most programmes, except spot 
news, sporting events of wide in- 
terest, or great historical events can 
be exchanged just as appropriately on 
films or videotape carried by jet aero- 
plane, as by satellite. 
In fact many cultural programmes, 
such as opera, ballet and drama, are 
relatively timeless, and can be trans- 
mitted by almost any means. A com- 
plicating factor, however, is that if it 
proves impossible to negotiate for 
other than live transmission of certain 
art and entertainment events (for 
example some music festivals), an ex- 
change by films or videotape might 
not be feasible. 
Yet the televising ‘of great events 
by satellite, the occasional live pro- 
gramme (for example, the “Our World" 
programme seen in Europe, North 
America, Mexico, Tunisia, Australia 
and Japan on June 25, 1967, and the 
sporadic “Town Meeting of the Air” 
programmes of discussion between 
Europe and America), along with the 
increasing amount of travel in the 
world, are building appetites for 
foreign television, and if satellite 
charges continue to decrease we may 
expect to see more foreign television 
via satellite. 
There may be still more of it when 
distribution satellites come in, and 
offer the opportunity to use evening 
hours on an educational satellite for 
general programming. But the real 
impact of satellite culture exchange 
will come, if at all, when direct broad- 
casting satellites are operative. 
We can only speculate now as to 
what these will do to television ser- 
vices. The opportunity will be there 
for international television, If the bar- 
riers and objections to it can be over- 
come. It is not beyond belief that, 
twenty years from now, television from 
several continents, along with a fac- 
simile newspaper, might be readily 
available in any home where there is 
a receiver.. 
Satellite programmers will know less 
and less about their audiences and 
may be forced into more and more 
innocuous programming in order to 
meet a wide variety of tastes and 
avoid offending a wide variety of sen- 
sitivities. 
Furthermore, satellite broadcasting 
over a very wide range is certain to 
come up against the problems of na- 
tional sovereignty and national cultural 
sensitivity, What is a documentary to 
one country may be propaganda to 
another country, What is great [ite- 
rature to one country may be offensive 
to another. What 1s history to one 
country may be provocative to another. 
Even what is education to one 
country may be contrary to the norms 
and beliefs of another. In any wide- 
area satellite broadcasting there is 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
  Ph
ot
o 
U
S
I
S
 
FIRST OPEN-HEART OPERATION 
SEEN VIA SPACE 
On a television screen in the University of Geneva (Switzerland), 
below, doctors and students follow stages of an-open-heart operation 
being performed at the same moment by U.S. surgeons in a hospital 
at Houston (Texas) over 3,000 miles away. This first experiment in 
Mondovision was made possible in 1965 by “Early Bird”, a satellite 
placed in orbit some 22,000 miles above the Atlantic. Above, television 
camera records surgical techniques for transmission by closed 
circuit to a medical congress. 
 Ph
ot
o 
© 
K
e
y
s
t
o
n
e

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 
NEW MUSIC OF THE SPHERES (Continued) 
Performer’s rights in 
likelihood of unintentional overlap of 
coverage areas, as well as opportuni- 
ties for intentional propaganda to other 
countries. 
Along with this, consider the pecu- 
lar vulnerability of a satellite to hos- 
tile action. It is relatively easy to jam 
the communication link to the instru- 
ment, and in some cases even to take 
it over at times for one's own mes- 
sages. It is also within easy possi- 
bility to break the signal code by which 
the satellite is turned on or off, or 
by which the jets are operated to keep 
it in position. 
Therefore, it 1s conceivable that a 
nation offended by a satellite's trans- 
mission might simply turn on the jets 
to move the satellite out of orbit and 
destroy it. It is clear that the world 
can hardly enter into this direct broad- 
cast stage of cultural exchange until 
the institutions and patterns of co- 
operation, the mutually agreeable 
codes of programme conduct, and the 
arrangements for control of programme 
content and redress of grievances, are 
all carefully prepared. 
Every public communication system 
requires controlling patterns and ins- 
titutions so that its uses and content 
will be consonant with the norms of 
the society it serves. It is precisely 
because different nations of the world 
have different norms regarding free- 
dom of information that satellite com- 
munication represents a difficult con- 
trol problem. 
I. more international com- 
munication the satellites carry, the more 
necessary it will become to surround 
the satellite system with a pattern of 
law and orderliness and some institu- 
tional arrangements to manage the 
control problems. If these arrange- 
ments are not in working order by the - 
time we are ready to begin direct 
broadcasting from satellites, then we 
shall face a very dangerous situation. 
Point-to-point communication by sat- 
ellite is unlikely to challenge national 
sovereignty, and domestic legislation 
will provide recourse for individuals or 
organizations who consider themselves 
to be injured by satellite transmissions. 
Some problems may arise from dif- 
fering national legislation on libel and 
breach of privacy, and the rights of 
performers may have to be redefined 
or reconsidered on an international 
basis If their performances are made 
public In a number of distant countries. 
At present these international arran- 
gements are typically made by the 
broadcasting organizations of the na- 
tions involved. The more countries 
involved, however, the more attractive 
some broad, general arrangements will 
come to seem. Copyright, too, may 
present some problems. 
The closer we move toward direct 


### 58798: Communication satellites: the new music of the spheres

the era of satellites 
broadcasting, the more imperative it 
will become to approach on an inter- 
national basis the problem of prevent- 
ing abuses of the new capability for 
international communication, It is pre- 
dictable that efforts to establish an 
international legal system for infor- 
mation will be resumed, at or near the 
point where they were carried by the 
1948 Geneva Conference. Some ins- 
titutional arrangements to carry out 
control agreements will doubtless be 
required. 
Space law seems to be evolving 
within long-accepted outlines of inter- 
national law. At the time of the Inter- 
national Geophysical Year, all nations 
agreed by common consent to an evo- 
lutionary step of such importance that 
it might be considered a part of the 
“common law of mankind”: that outer 
space may be used for peaceful and 
scientific purposes without restrictions 
based on terrestrial sovereignty. 
A second principle, the basic right 
of a nation to defend itself from attack, 
whether from the ground or from outer 
space, is embodied in Article 51 of the 
Charter of the United Nations. It 
points to the obvious need of defin- 
ing what in the field of information 
constitutes an “attack”, and providing 
controls and opportunity for redress. 
A third principle is that of order- 
liness in space, illustrated by the In- 
ternational agreements already arrived 
at for use of the radio spectrum which, 
ike space itself, is conceived as the 
common property of mankind. It is 
desirable now to devote major atten- 
tion to defining these developing norms 
in practical terms. 
But a professional code typically 
requires a professional body to admi- 
nister it. A set of rules or regulations, 
or a body of law, is of little value with- 
out enforcement and administration. 
Therefore, 1t is necessary to consider 
the kinds of international institutions 
and arrangements that would be re- 
quired to maintain a rule of law and 
order in space broadcasting. 
The developing situation being what 
it is, this institution should be designed 
not only to administer an existing code, 
but also to meet a series of unfore- 
seen problems and challenges as hu- 
man experience in space unfolds. 
How can we begin to move toward 
the goal of very wide exchange, even 
where the pattern does not now exist? 
The European Broadcasting Union has 
its own exchange organization, Euro- 
vision, and the nations of East Europe 
have a parallel to it, Intervision, 
One reason why the prospect of a 
distribution satellite is so attractive in 
Europe is that a firm basis already 
exists ‘there for the exchange of pro- 
grammes. There Is also provision In 
the Far East. No such regional ex- 
change organizations exist, however, 
in Africa or the Americas. 
In this problem, as in others we have 
talked about, there is much to be done 
on the ground before we leap into 
space. Perhaps, the first step should 
be to encourage intercultural co-opera- 
tion among broadcasters, as it has 
been encouraged in Europe, quite apart 
from any consideration of space links 
for this exchange. 
A T the same time 1t would be 
useful to try to understand some of the 
problems involved in such co-operation, 
and how they may be overcome. 
Unesco has begun to collect some 
of the experiences of regional 
organizations with exchange of 
programmes. This is a sound and 
practical step and should furnish some 
guidance both for new regional 
organizations, and for co-operative 
efforts on a world-wide scale. 
The Chairman of the Board of the 
National Broadcasting Company (Uni- 
ted States) has advocated a world-wide 
association of broadcasters. Nothing 
less than that, he says, “can provide 
a wholly effective nerve centre to 
serve emerging needs rising from tele- 
vision's rapid global growth. These 
include the need, not only for a cen- 
tral file of programmes available for 
purchase or exchange, but for a clear- 
ing house to deal with such factors as 
time differentials, copyrights, union 
arrangements, scheduling clearances 
and simultaneous translation.” 
It 1s apparent that much international 
exchange of cultural programmes can 
and will take place without the use 
of satellites, and therefore if regional 
and then world-wide exchange can be 
facilited in general a certain part of 
the practice will merge into exchange 
by satellite, 
This would then be a step toward 
meeting the problems of direct broad- 
casting by satellite. At least, the habit 
of co-operation would be set up, and 
various forms of it—for example, the 
joint planning and production of a 
programme—would be tried out. Such 
difficult problems as performer's rights 
and copyright would be aired. 
Problems like these might be the 
Just published 
COMMUNICATION 
IN THE SPACE AGE 
(the use of satellites by 
the mass media) 
Unesco, 1968. Price $4.00; 
20/-stg. 
Based on a score of studies sub- 
mitted by specialists in the deve- 
lopment of space communication to 
a meeting convened by Unesco, in 
December 1965, to consider the use 
of communication satellites for 
education, science and culture. 
  
    

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 58798: Communication satellites: the new music of the spheres

  
  
As the Winter Olympic 
Games take place in 
Grenoble (France) from 
February 6 to 18, 
transmissions via aa 
communication satellites 
enable millions of 
televiewers as far away 
as Japan and the United 
States to watch the events 
Photo shows Olympic 
bobsleigh track 
illuminated for night 
race. Two satellites, 
“Early Bird” and “Lani 
Bird”, are retransmitting 
27 hours of sporting i 
events during the Games. 
During the last Olympic 
Winter Games, held 
four years ago in Austria, 
each relay by “Telstar” 
satellite was limited to 
11 minutes duration. 
   
next areas where Unesco or other 
appropriate organizations could help 
pave the way toward direct broad- 
casting of cultural programmes by sat- 
elite. The question of copyright, as 
affected by satellite transmission, 
needs to be studied. 
The Buenos Aires round table of 
1964 on Legal Systems Governing Sat- 
ellite Communications, as reported by 
Armando Cocca, concluded that an 
extension of the present copyright 
convention would provide adequate 
protection. 
The rights of performers will present 
more complex and difficult problems 
in the satellite age, and the Berne 
afl ARSE RRR TY a 
“eh 
———_— | 
   
I —~— Sa 
Convention, as revised at Rome in 
1961 and at Stockholm in 1967, clearly 
needs re-examination, When it 1s 
decided what modifications, extensions, 
or replacements of these agreements 
are desirable, then new instruments, 
if needed, might be drafted by the 
appropriate parties and brought to the 
attention of governments. 
Studies and possible agreements of 
these kinds would be easier than the 
ultimate problems of control and orga- 
nization which must be met before 
direct broadcasting becomes a reality. 
Yet at the appropriate time these too 
can be faced. Whether the problem 
of freedom and control, as applied 
NE cna ee SAGE. =F. 
SE a 
Lae 
TEN — i eE 
to space broadcasting, is taken up as 
an extension of the 1948 United Na- 
tions sessions, or otherwise, it would 
be desirable to stimulate preparatory 
dialogue. 
Practising broadcasters and inter- 
national legal scholars believe that a 
high degree of co-operation, tolerance 
and restraint, along with suitable agree- 
ments and administrative machinery, 
will be required If direct broadcasting 
from satellites is ever to be anything 
other than a piece of science fiction 
or a non-fictional fiasco. The reason 
for approaching these problems today 
is that they will certainly be far worse 
tomorrow. 
oo SE 
Photo Photopress, Grenoble 
29 
   

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 58799: The World we hope for: a prize-winning essay from Uruguay

30 
A prize-winning essay from Uruguay 
  
THE WORLD 
  
WE HOPE FOR 
by Maria Cristina Costa Diaz 
B Y “The world we hope for” 
| mean the world hoped for not only 
by the present generation to which | 
belong, but by future generations. 
Aspirations to a better world cannot 
be fulfilled in a single hfe-span, which 
is but a moment in the immensity of 
time. 
The world we hope for, then, should 
bring: 
Lasting peace: no more wars bet- 
ween nations or groups of nations; no 
expansionist countries using their su- 
perior material, military or economic 
strength to abuse or violate the rights 
of weaker countries; an end to the 
causes of strife within nations; no 
endless class struggles; international 
relations governed by clear, just prin- 
ciples which always respect the peo- 
ple's rights; a lasting peace, free from 
fear and oppression. 
Concord and selidarity among all 
men: no infunating disparity between 
those who make millions and those 
who have not even enough to feed 
their families properly. The sight for 
ever banished of the destitute begging 
for charity in the streets, when what 
they need, as our equals in nights, is 
work, a chance to improve their lot and 
to restore their confidence and faith in 
themselves. To be spared the sight of 
ragged children selling band-aids, tran- 
quilizers and matches in public buses, 
when their parents should be the ones 
to work; and to be rid of the selfish 
and miserly whose very existence 
means that many of their fellow-beings 
go hungry. The benefits would be 
universal If men acted upon feelings 
of friendship and mutual respect, 
instead of merely paying hp-service to 
them! 
The spread of education and know- 
ledge throughout every continent so 
that the light of learning may disperse 
the shadows of illiteracy. Education 
made available to all—an education 
no longer theoretical and largely di- 
vorced from life; all the cultural 
resources of society at the service of 
of the whole community. 
The aim of teaching and education 
to be a training for life, providing 
instruction rooted in life itself and in 
the fundamental problems of the day. 
To this end, industrial and agricultural 
education should be developed and 
intensified, as should scientific and 
technological research. In other 
words, the am should not be to 
make (or rather deform) to measure 
persons whose professional skills 
serve merely to plead the cause of 
privilege and to uphold the privileged; 
on the contrary, professional training 
should be dedicated to the service of 
society as a whole. 
The printed word is the most power- 
ful instrument of man's development: 
it satisfies the infinite thirst for know- 
ledge and is unmatched as a medium 
of intellectual communication; it main- 
tains the continuity of history and 
culture, the common herntage, animat- 
ing force and living essence of a 
people, which it behoves us all, 
as cells of the social organism, to 
conserve, defend and cherish. Books 
train and cultivate the mind. All men 
must be educated and taught their 
civic nghts and duties so as to enjoy 
a real freedom of decision, without the 
risk of being cheated or defrauded In 
their aspirations. 
Study as a corner-stone of life, so 
that when literacy becomes universal, 
everyone may find opportunities of 
applying, in their community and 
especially in their work, all they have 
learned. 
The promotion of science and tech- 
nology, symbolic of the present and 
the future, to enable man to explore 
infinite space, and allow human intelli- 
gence to penetrate far and deep in 
its insatiable thirst for knowledge. 
The Uruguayan scientist, Clemente 
Estable, addressing the Uruguayan 
Chamber of Representatives, which 
held a session in his honour on Octo- 
ber 3, 1960, declared : “In our time, 
when even astronomy has become, 
amazingly, an experimental science, 
with artificial satellites and planetoids, 
scientific research 1s an absolute and 
imperative necessity, and any invest- 
ment in such research is of great 
significance for democracy.” 
The paths of science and technology 
lead to the realm of energy, light and 
speed, A stimulus must be given to 
all speculative pure or applied thought 
(in philosophy or the sciences) and to 
every concrete expression of the 
concept of beauty (in the realm of the 
arts, whether sculpture or painting, 
music or literature) The essential 
aim 1s to enhance the meaning of life 
through art, and thus hallow the 
triumph of spintual over material 
things. 
Increased production, and the abun- 
dance that will result from compulsory 
work, whose effects will be chiefly 
felt in the productive sectors; by 
planning and rationalization of produc- 
tion; by the contribution of techno- 
logy; by economic development. All 
this should make for abundance; 
enough food for all, an end to malnu- 
tition; lower death rates; prevention 
and eradication of sickness; the gua- 
rantee of a better life for future gen- 
erations; a fair distribution of the 
national income. 
The concept of work as a law of 
life, in accordance with the following 
principles: compulsion to work for all 
the mentally and physically fit; a nor- 
mal work day to satisfy not only the 
needs but the reasonable and legiti- 
mate desires of all; elimination of 
social parasites so that each can and 
must live by his own resources, not by 
the effort and sacnfice of others. 
Freedom from crime. The. minds 
of men purged of criminal thoughts 
by vigorous campaigns of education

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 58799: The World we hope for: a prize-winning essay from Uruguay

A regular programme on Uruguayan television, 
"The Questions of Man", is entirely devoted to 
themes from the "Unesco Courier”. 
the programme's director, Serfior Eduardo Adrian, 
and the Losada Publishing House in Montevideo 
organized a nation-wide essay contest for Uruguay's 
high school students on "The World We Hope 
We are pleased to publish here the text of 
the winning composition written by 16-year-old 
Maria Cristina Costa Diaz, a student of the Sacred 
Heart Institute, in Montevideo, whose prize was 
a collection of 30 books and a three-year subscrip- 
tion to the "Unesco Courier”. Photo shows Sefiorita 
Costa Diaz with (on her left) Salvador Valle (second 
prize), and Juan Carlos Mondragdn (third prize). 
2” 
For”. 
and re-education from the social, psy- 
chological, moral, individual and pro- 
fessional viewpoints. Creation of eco- 
nomic and social conditions which will 
do away with the socio-economic roots 
of crime. Penal laws with humane and 
social aims that concord with the 
most progressive recommendations 
adopted by specialists at international 
congresses, always bearing in mind 
that a prison should not be a place of 
torment and retribution, but of re-edu- 
cation, rehabilitation and work. And 
measures should be taken to prevent 
cnminals from buying immunity from 
the law through influence. 
Proper housing for all. The “right 
to a roof” is a pnmary, elementary and 
essentiel right which must be guaran- 
teed by the State. It 1s one way 
of giving self-respect to the citizen 
and promoting a better standard of 
living. 
An end to man’s exploitation by man, 
that appalling evi! which stll persists 
in various hidden forms: all men to be 
of equal standing, with neither exploi- 
ters nor exploited; work as a social 
force used to further the general in- 
terest, creating wealth for all; the 
fashioning of a new mentality, taking 
for granted that man should be the 
brother and friend of man, not his 
plunderer, and that everyone should 
support and help his neighbour. 
Strong feelings of solidanty, dead- 
ened under the present competitive 
system, would be aroused, and “all 
for each and each for all” would 
acquire real meaning as a principle 
of work, with a full, human, fraternal 
relationship uniting all mankind as 
artisans of progress. 
Full development of “fundamental 
rights”. | will refer to only one of 
these: freedom. This implies, in insti- 
tutional and material terms, the right 
of everyone to fulfil a vocation and 
to develop his personality; and in the 
expression and communication of 
ideas, the right to meet together and 
Last year, 
freedom to 
express political, philosophical, moral 
and religious ideas of any kind and 
the right to exercise any profession 
or occupation, as well as to develop 
any manual, scientific or cultural skill. 
to form associations, 
Freedom of work, certainly, but also 
for everyone the nght to work, to 
do an honest job without being exploit- 
ed; and for the State, the duty to 
provide it. In short, freedom unimped- 
ed by economic, social or political 
barriers, 
Ethical principles put into practice, 
shaping man's thoughts and acts. 
Fulfilment of moral precepts estab- 
shed by general consensus; man’s 
thinking and actions guided by pure 
and worthy motives. 
Justice for all, giving to each 
according to his needs, encouraging 
each to give according to his abilities, 
wiping out oppression and the exis- 
tence of privileged groups which place 
themselves above the law, 
Achievement of real equality, as all 
will have the same rights and duties, 
and the same economic, social, poli- 
tical, cultural and vocational opportu- 
nities. 
The reign of truth and sincerity with 
men speaking from the heart, in purity 
of intent and action, and an end to 
lying, hypocrisy and dissimulation. 
Governments worthy of civically 
mature peoples: upright, loyal, honest 
defenders of the general interest; 
neither corrupt nor corrupting, nor 
venal; neither enriching themselves In 
office, nor betraying the people. Poli- 
tics practised with a moral sense of 
civil guidance and conduct, without 
suborning or purchasing the cons- 
cience of men with money or favours; 
in other words, politics based on matu- 
nty and enlightenment, instead of 
ignorance. 
The disappearance of existing colo- 
nies and the incorporation of their 
 
peoples in the concert of free nations. 
In our century of satellites and space 
rockets, in this atomic and thermo- 
nuclear age, colonies are a blot to be 
wiped from the face of the planet once 
and for all. We Uruguayans finally 
threw off all foreign yokes in 1828. 
Shame on the human race that colo- 
nies should still exist in our world 
today. 
The world we Uruguayans hope for 
fits into the pattern already outlined 
(conceived not as a vision of tomor- 
row but of a future time), yet has 
some special features of its own. 
In the reality we expect for Uruguay 
and the other Latin American countries, 
the following aims should be achieved: 
land must be put to better use, redis- 
tributed to serve the whole community, 
exploited rationally and with the help 
of modern technology; sources of 
employment must be created, as the 
only effective weapon to attack enfore- 
ed idleness; commerce and industry 
must be planned to take account of 
national needs; the various branches 
of national legislation must be reno- 
vated and adjusted to current ways 
of life and to the pace and demands 
of our time. 
Education and instruction must be 
available to all, with priority for those 
ving in the countryside; a vast literacy 
campaign should be promoted, and 
school-buillding accelerated. Higher 
agricultural, industrial and technical 
education must also be developed. 
All public services must be 
reorganized, to prevent the irrational 
distribution of specialists, technicians, 
office staff and manual workers. 
Their knowledge and ability should be 
used to the best advantage, with 
agricultural engineers and specialists 
working in rural agricultural schools, 
not in offices in the capital; and in 
general, all professional men, doctors, 
lawyers, architects and others should 
devote their efforts to the work for 
which they were trained. 
Ji

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

LY. 
  
HOMES ON STILTS 
are those of fishermen 
who live in parts of 
the Great Lake of the 
Tonle Sap where the 
least annual flooding 
occurs. The projected 
Tonle Sap barrage will 
control the maximum 
water level of the lake 
and increase its depth 
in dry weather, thereby 
regulating fish production 
which today fluctuates 
according to the extent 
and duration of floods.      


### 58797: UNESCO mathematical model to harness the Mekong

Unesco mathematical model 
to harness the Mekong (continued from page 22) 
ments and a certain co-operation on 
the part of nature. 
With this special Model hydraulic 
and hydrological conditions In the 
Delta, from Chlong to the South China 
Sea and the Gulf of Thailand were 
simulated, first without and later with 
a dam: the data collected in the field 
and those already available were 
subjected to computer analysis taking 
the two sets of conditions, without and 
with the dam All these materials 
will be carefully kept because, with 
modifications appropriate to different 
conditions, they can be used in future 
investigations, perhaps for the study 
of different problems. 
At the SOGREAH laboratories, 
where the computer work was done, 
six specialists—two from Cambodia 
and four from the Republic of Viet- 
Nam—were given UNDP fellow- 
ships to be trained in the use of 
the Model. Though unexpected va- 
garies of the monsoon caused delays 
in the measurement campaign, the 
first three phases of the project 
were almost finished by the end of 
1965. With all the essential data 
collected at this time, it was thus 
possible to complete the final model 
by early 1966. 
Coming to the end of this 
programme after seven years, and 
with a joint expenditure of slightly 
more than $1,250,000 by the govern- 
ments concerned and UNDP, it 1s 
logical to ask: has the project been 
successful and has it been worth 
while? 
The completed project demonstrates 
a number of special achievements. 
In the final plan the Mathematical 
Model has enabled the technicians to 
find answers to many questions 
relating to the effect of the Tonle Sap 
dam. It can now be demonstrated that 
the control of the flood-water will be 
effective, although less so than was 
expected, but that great care will be 
needed to avoid aggravating the flood 
effect, mainly in Cambodia. 
Taking the results of the programme 
as a whole mention can be made of 
three notable conclusions: 
mM There 1s now agreement between 
the specialists on what could be 
expected of the Tonle Sap dam; 
mM The Mathematical Model is an 
essential tool for effecting the best 
control of the flood. It may also be 
used for studies yet to be made on 
possible dam sites in the upper part 
of the Mekong Basin and may permit 
the study of the etfects on the Delta 
of upper basin regulation; 
MM In order to adjust the model, a 
5 ach 
_ = 
Ry ee — _- ? iy 
~~ — Tad . 
EN CS = 2 a ~Y 
- va * olf N - 
a | == EAs 
- . 
  Ba rs oy p: Jo Lp 
i rs ») EP— ay als 
Photo © Raymond Cauchetier 
survey has been carried out which 
has added to the knowledge of the 
Delta. For example, the curve defining 
the capacity of the lake as a function 
of the water level is now accurately 
known. 
In the broader sense, the carrying 
through of this project has contributed 
new scientific techniques which can 
and will be used in other parts of the 
world. 
The project has also an important 
educational factor in that competent 
senior personnel from countries of the 
region have received high level training 
in specialized laboratories in fields 
such as programming, hydraulics, 
computer mathematics, engineering 
technology and administration. 
Finally some comment is due on the 
spirit of international technical co- 
operation which prevailed throughout 
the project. 
In an area where there were periods 
of major political conflicts and strained 
diplomatic relations, at no time was 
it necessary to suspend or interrupt 
the work of the committee. This fact 
alone has instilled into the project a 
healthy air of confidence which it is 
hoped will carry on into the develop- 
ment projects that the creation of 
the Mathematical Model has made 
possible.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Letters to the Editor 
FARADAY AND THE DYNAMO 
 
Sir, 
In “Great Men, Great Events” (Oct. 
1967) | read that Michael Faraday 
invented the dynamo. | believe this 
Is incorrect. The dynamo—the ma- 
chine capable of generating a con- 
tinuous electric current—was invented 
by a Belgian, Zénobe Gramme, a con- 
temporary of Faraday. | believe Fara- 
day, in his experiments, concentrated 
on alternating current. The first 
successful generation of continuous 
current cannot be attributed to him, 
but this in no way detracts from his 
talents. 
Raymond Bertrand 
Brussels, Belgium 
Dr. B. N. GOSWAMY 
A CORRECTION 
 
Sir, 
My contribution to the studies of 
Indian and Asian art is far more 
modest than 1s suggested by the bio- 
graphical note on me which appears 
in the Dec. 1967 1ssue of the “Unesco 
Courier”, accompanying my article on 
“The Epics in the Art of India and 
South Asia”. The error in my iden- 
tification appears to have arisen from 
my surname which | share with other 
and learned authors. The principal 
field of my work 1s the History of 
Indian Painting and my publications 
do not include the titles listed in the 
biographical note. 
Dr. B. N. Goswamy 
Professor of Art History 
Panjab University 
Chandigarh, India 
THE RIGHT VALUES 
FOR CULTURAL TOURISM 
Sir, 
What is Unesco doing for the 
preservation of cultural assets not 
carved in stone? Your reports on 
plans for “cultural tourism” in Turkey, 
Peru and Iran (Dec. 1966) qualifies 
as “tourist attractions” such things as 
“native traditions, customs, national 
dress, folklore, ete.” 
As a student of folk music, | submit 
with all respect that if large-scale 
tourism is brought to Peru, the young 
Peruvian piper whose photo you 
reproduce will In a few years be a 
thing of the past. This young man 
will be dnving a taxi or slouching 
around in the streets of the neighbour- 
ing town. The “attrachons” you men- 
tion will be nothing more than artificial 
survivals for exhibition at annual fairs. 
Should not economic develop- 
ment take more responsible forms? 
Should it not, among other things, 
encourage the native crafts instead of 
meddlesome activities from outside 
the country? Efforts of that kind 
should at least go side by side with 
the plans in view, If we are to avoid 
a social convulsion, the effects of 
which are hard to foretell. Unesco 
should be concerned primarily with 
these matters And this, | may 
presume, 1s your general practice, 
although these articles harp rather 
too much on the scramble for foreign 
exchange. 
The attentive reader might question 
your optimism about international 
understanding ‘International under- 
standing is nothing more than 
“education” and, in this context, the 
education of both parties. The mass 
tourist, however, does not travel in 
search of culture, but, for the most 
part unprepared and without any 
inward urge, wants to spend his 
holiday in an “interesting” place. 
The inhabitant of the country visited 1s 
thinking solely in terms of “money”. 
The result, | am afraid, is what ethno- 
logists would call an “exchange 
between mutes”. (Sausages, films, 
picture postcards and straw hats can be 
sold just as easily by slot machines; 
and, all the world over, the tourist 
guide 1s, regrettably, httle more than 
a superior gramophone.) What has so 
far been achieved in this branch of 
work and what, to judge by your 
articles, 1s still to be achieved 1s not 
the beginning of understanding, but 
its lamentable end! 
That, of course, 1s no more your 
fault than mine; yet | consider that 
it should be your job, in future under- 
takings of this kind, to set the right 
standards 
If | may be allowed the question, 
what will become of the “nvest- 
ments” spoken of, should the flow of 
tourists not materialize or gradually 
dry up? True, a restored temple will 
retain its incalculable value (scientific 
or other), but a change in a country’s 
infrastructure, brought about artificially 
from beyond its borders, 1s left behind, 
stripped of all meaning. It can only 
be hoped that the authorities on both 
sides are not thinking exclusively of 
foreign currency, for what ends have 
hitherto been served by the blessings 
of foreign exchange and teeming 
tourists? Nowhere have they con- 
tributed anything worth mentioning to 
native studies or to any notable 
flowering of an indigenous culture. 
All that they have done is to hasten 
its decay or, at best, to sap its 
vitality in every sphere. 
In conclusion, may { thank you for 
your informative magazine and assure 
you that | follow your projects with 
lively interest. 
Leonard Vohs 
Cologne, Fed. Rep. of Germany 
UNITED STATES OF EUROPE ? 
 
Sir, 
Congratulations on your issue 
“U.S.S R. Today" (November 1967) | 
wonder whether you could publish a 
similar issue on the United States, 
dealing with roughly the same subjects 
in equal depth and breadth. 
May | also suggest an issue on 
“The United States of Europe: Myth 
or Future Reality”, which could include 
articles on Christendom in the Middle 
Ages; the ideas of France's Henry IV; 
the Europe of the Emperor Charles V, 
of Louis XIV, the “Sun King”, of 
Napoleon and of Hitler; and the am- 
bitions of each of these men; also 
the efforts being made today in the 
context of the European Economic 
Community. 
| should also welcome an article 
comparing the U.S.S.R. and the United 
States from an administrative as well 
as an economic viewpoint: how, for 
example, the American states and the 
Soviet republics administer their own 
affairs and to what extent they are 
obliged to comply with federal laws. 
Jean Catherineau 
Bordeaux, France 
WORLD PETITION 
FOR PEACE 
 
Sir, 
In your issue on “War or Peace" 
(August-September 1967) | was struck 
by the identity of views expressed by 
men of such different outlooks as 
Pope Paul VI, a Soviet journalist and 
Philip Noel-Baker—namely that war 
is anachronistic and absurd and that 
all "men of good will" must devote 
themselves urgently to building a last- 
ing Peace. | believe public opinion 
will be awakened to the terrifying 
prospect of a nuclear war, a danger 
which we must strive to eliminate. The 
solutions you propose are reasonable, 
realistic and sound. A call for a 
world petition is not a Utopian idea— 
it would certainly disclose the pro- 
found longing for peace felt by millions 
of human beings. 
Elisabeth Coin, aged 16 
Caen, France 
COSTA RICA SETS 
AN EXAMPLE 
 
Sir, 
As a mathematics teacher in the 
oldest high school in Costa Rica and 
an admirer of your magazine, | decid- 
ed in December 1966 to take out ten 
one-year subscriptions with money 
collected by my 100 students. When 
the next academic year began the 
following March we already had in 
hand 30 copies of the magazine 
with which to establish a circulat- 
ing library. By the end of the year 
each student had been able to borrow 
five different issues, each for a two- 
week period, and was then present- 
ed with a copy to keep. Among your 
1967 issues “Africa and the African 
Genius”, with its excellent map, “Expo 
67“ and "The Population Crunch were 
favourites with these young readers. 
| think such a scheme could be 
followed in hundreds of secondary 
schools, thus promoting the diffusion 
of your splendid magazine. 
Rafael Llubere Zufiga 
San José, Costa Rica 33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco News 
Australia’s weather 
data satellite 
Australia has become the seventh nation 
to place an artificial satellite in orbit around 
the earth. Named Wresat, the Australian- 
built satellite was launched on November 
29, 1967 from the Woomera Rocket Range 
with a US rocket and with the help 
of British technical facilities. Conical in 
shape and weighing 100 lbs (45 Kg), its 
primary object 1s to transmit scientific data 
for studies of climate Other nations which 
have successfully launched artificial satel- 
ites are Canada, France, Italy, USSR, 
UK. and USA. 
Cyclone warning 
system for Pakistan 
The Swedish Save the Children Organ- 
ization has given a modern hurricane 
warning system costing about $200,000 to 
Pakistan. Functioning by radar, the system 
can detect hurricanes 250 miles away It 
will protect a region in East Pakistan where 
hurricanes occur frequently, causing many 
deaths each year. 
Medicated salt 
against malaria 
By impregnating ordinary cooking salt 
with chloroquine, an anti-malarial drug, the 
World Health Organization may have found 
an effective way to combat malaria among 
nomadic peoples In a pilot project in Iran, 
the malaria parasite rate among nomads 
using the medicated salt dropped in one 
year from 18.7 per cent to 34 per cent, 
and to 011 per cent in the following year. 
Malaria control among nomads 1s difficult 
because their way of life makes spraying 
of living quarters impractical and regular 
drug-taking difficult 
Lifting taxes on knowledge 
Representatives of 68 governments, 
meeting In Geneva under Unesco's 
auspices, have recommended the elimin- 
ation of tanffs and frontier formalities 
affecting the international circulation of 
audio-visual equipment, books, news- 
papers, magazines, works of art, scientific 
apparatus and articles for the blind Two 
Unesco international agreements aimed at 
easing the circulation of educational, 
scientific and cultural materials already 
exist; the Geneva meeting urged that they 
be given wider application; in particular, 
that sound recordings for broadcasting and 
apparatus for fundamental scientific 
research be duty-free 
REGULAR PAGES 
IN FULL COLOUR 
A e wish to remind our readers that, 
as in past years, the UNESCO 
COURIER id publish 2 full colour 
pages grouped in four of issues 
during 1968. " Rue 
  
  
  
Motorists, T.V. 
is watching you 
Television cameras placed at busy inter- 
sections may give United States road 
safety experts a better idea of what 
actually happens in traffic accidents. To 
be used mmitially on an experimental basis, 
the cameras will monitor traffic contin- 
uously, erasing the video record automatic- 
ally every twenty seconds. However, the 
sound of an accident will touch off a signal 
and preserve the preceding images. The 
United States Department of Transport- 
ation 1s installing the first monitoring unit 
in Buffalo, New York State, and plans to 
set up 75 to 100 others If the experiment 
1s successful. 
Cheaper drilling for minerals 
Scientists in Australia are experimenting 
with high-pressure water Jets as a means 
of drilling holes for mineral prospection. In 
laboratory tests with the new method hard 
granite has been cut at a rate of about 
one foot (30 cm) a second over a short 
period, much faster than conventional 
diamond-tipped drills Subjected first to 
very high pressure, the water 1s released 
through a fine nozzle, reaching a velocity 
of 2,000 feet (600 metres) a second. If 
commercially applicable, this drilling 
technique would be not only faster but 
also cheaper than diamond dnlling, which 
can cost $20 a foot ($66 a metre). 
6,000 U.N. specialists 
aid developing countries 
During 1967-68 more than 6,000 special- 
ists are participating in technical assistance 
projects in 113 countries under the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
These projects are carried out with the 
help of U.N. specialized agencies Their 
cost during the two-year period will total 
$140 million, of which $114 million will be 
spent in Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
Flashes... 
BM Spain has singled out 1,550 of its historic 
buildings and sites for State conservation 
and restoration 
WM |n Brisbane (Australia) technicians have 
perfected a typewriter which flashes the 
words typed onto a screen, thus enabling 
dumb persons to communicate rapidly with 
each other 
BM Young men drivers with good academic 
records in school or university have fewer 
accidents than those with poor records, 
a United States insurance company has 
found. 
BM The first Soviet observatory specially 
designed to study comets is being built 
near Kiev. 
BM There are now more than 191 million 
motor vehicles in ‘use in the world, com- 
pared with only 56 million in 1946. 
HB An underground concert auditorium is 
being built in the leita Cave near Beirut, 
Lebanon—the largest known cave in Asia. 
  
  
BOOKSHELF 
  
  
  
U.N. BOOKS 
BM International Space Bibliography 
1966 ($4.00). 
BM Economic Survey of Latin Amer- 
ica, 1965 
1967 ($5.00). 
BM The Libraries of the United Na- 
tions (A descriptive guide) 1966 
($1.50). 
U.N. publications can be ordered 
through bookstores, through the 
Unesco Publications Center, New 
York (see page 35) or from U.N. Sales 
Section New York and Geneva. 
MENTOR-UNESCO ART BOOKS 
FONTANA UNESCO ART BOOKS 
HM The Art of Central Africa: 
sculpture and tribal masks 
Introduction by William Fagg. 
HM Renoir 
Introduction by Michel Drucker. 
H Miro 
Introduction by Jacques Dupin. 
Mentor-Unesco Art Books are pub- 
lished by The New American Libra- 
ry, New York and Toronto, by arran- 
gement with Unesco, 1967 ($1.25). 
Fontana Unesco Art Books are pub- 
lished by Collins, London, in asso- 
ciation with Unesco, 1967 (5/-). 
HISTORY AND HISTORY TEACHING 
BM The Middle Age of African History 
Edited by Roland Oliver. 
Oxford University Press, London, 
1967 (13/6). 
BM A Handbook for History Teachers 
By R. Vajreswari 
Allied Publishers Private Ltd. Cal- 
cutta, 1966 (Rs. 14.00). 
BM South-East Asia in World History 
(A course for lower secondary 
schools) 
3: The Modern World (2nd ed.) 
By P.B. Hilton and D.J. Tate 
Oxford University Press, 1967 (13/-). 
* 
MW The Story of the English 
Language 
By Mario Pei 
A revised edition of “The Story of 
English” 
J. P. Lippincott Company, Philadel- 
phia and New York, 1987 ($6.95). 
BM The Electronic Revolution 
By S. Handel 
A Pelican original, Penguin Books, 
Harmondsworth, England, 1967 (6/-). 
WM The Novelists’ Inheritance in 
French Africa 
Writers from Senegal to Cameroon 
By A. C. Brench 
(Three Crowns Library) 
Oxford University Press, London, 
1967, (10/6). 
BM British Further Education 
By A.J. Peters. 
Pergamon Press, 
(63/-stg.). 
BM World Peace Through World Law 
(Two Alternative Plans) 
By Grenville Clark and Louis B. 
Sohn 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, 3rd ed. enlarged, 
1966 ($5.25). 
Oxford, 1967   Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
D
é
p
é
t
 
lé
ga
l 
C 
1 
1 
*r 
tr
im
es
tr
e 
19
68

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

New edition 
STUDY ABROAD 
  
including Vacation Study 
Vol. XVII, 1968-1969, 1969-1970 is 
INTERNATIONAL SCHOLARSHIPS 
EDUCATIONAL EXCHANGE 
Hl Individual awards for study abroad. Information 
on some 215,000 individual opportunities for subsidized 
study or educational travel abroad in the form of scho- 
larships, fellowships and other types of financial assis- 
tance. These awards are for study during the academic 
years 1967/1968, 1968/1969, 1969/1970. 
Jil Opportunity for travel to virtually every country of 
the world and for study of almost every academic subject. 
Jl Short-term educational opportunities of an 
international character — particularly those offering 
vacation courses at university level. 
The section Vacation Study Abroad replaces Vaca- 
tions Abroad : courses, study tours, work camps, 
previously issued as a separate publication. 
 
     
  
  CARB SE LP Rd eh i SE 
Trilingual: English /French/Spanish. 683 pages 
Price: $5 25/- (stg.) 17,50 F. 
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Longmans of Austraha Pty Led, Railway Crescent, 
Croydon, Victoria; sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
tion of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne C. I. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only: Dominie Pry Ltd, 463 Pitt- 
water Road, Brookvale (N S.W.) ($ 2.75). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
— BELGIUM. All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3, NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeveriy Belgielel 147, Antwerp |. For 
The Unesco Courier (170 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only. 
Louis De Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont. 
($ 4.00) — CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chitcam- 
pafan Gardiner Mawata, P.0.B. 244, Colombo, 2 (Rs 12.50) 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Tapeh, Taiwan (Formosa) — CYPRUS. 
“MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA, SN.T.L,, 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); Zahranicm 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, Ltd., 6, Norregade, Copenhagen K, (Dan. Kr. 
20.00). — ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O. 
Box 120, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 10.30), — 
FRANCE, Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7+, C.C.P. 12598-48. (12 F) — GERMANY, All 
publications: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, 8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 12). — GHANA. Methodist Book Depot 
Ltd., Atlantis House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Mikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co.. 64, Nathan Road, 
Kowloon, — HUNGARY, Akadémiai Konyvesbalt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.V. Konyvtirosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co, H F, Hafnarstraet1 9, Reykjavik. 
— INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd, Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Al Road, PO. Box 386, New Delhi 
1; Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co, 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New Delhi: 
Indian National Commussion for Cooperation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 13 50) 
— INDONESIA. P.T.N. “Permata-Nusantara” cfo 
Department of Commerce 22, Djalan Nusantara Dja- 
karta. — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid Street, 
Baghdad; University Bookstore, University of Baghdad, 
P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National 
Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin, 4. 
— ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blumstein’s 
Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat Benjamin 
Street, Tel-Aviv, — JAMAICA, Sangster's Book 
Stores Ltd., PO Box 366 101 Water Lane, Kingston, — 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichorne, Nihonbash;, 
P.O Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo — JOR- 
DAN. Joseph I. Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, Salt Road 
P.O.B. 66, Amman. — KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi, — KOREA. Korean 
National Comnussion for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, 
Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd., 
P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA. Cole and Yancy 
Bookshops Led, P. O. Box 286. Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG., Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. (F.L. 170) — MALAYSIA. Federa Publ- 
cations Ltd., Times House, River Valley Road, Singapore, 
9; Pudu Building (3rd floor), 110, Jalan Pudu, Kuala 
Lumpur. — MALTA. Sapienza’s Library, 
26 Kingsway, Valletta, — MAURITIUS. Na- 
landa Company Ltd, 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Lours, 
— MONACO. Bntish Library, 30, Bid. des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fi. 10). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. NLA. (NA fl 5.25) — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 22, Molesworth Street (Private 
Bag), Wellington; Government Bookshops: Auckland 
(P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dune- 
din (P.O. Box 1104). ($2.15) — NIGERIA, C.M 5. Book- 
shops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos. — NORWAY, 
All publications: A.S. Bokhjornet, Akersgt 41-Oslo 1, 
For Unesco Courier only: A.S. Norvesens Litteratur- 
Jeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6. — PAKISTAN. 
The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd, Unesco Publications 
House, P.O. Box 374 G P.O.,, Lahore; Showrooms: 
Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree Highway, G/é6- 
1, Istamabad, — PHILIPPINES. The Modern Book 
Co, Inc, 928 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila, 
— POLAND. All publications; ORWN PAN Palac 
Kultury, Warsaw. For the Unesco Courier only: “RUSH”, 
ul Wronma, 23, Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL. 
Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 
70, Lisbon, — PUERTO RICO. Spanish English Publi- 
cations, Eleanor Roosevelt 115. Apartado 1912, Hato 
Rey. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. Textbook Sales 
(PYT) Ltd., 67, Union Avenue, Salsbury. — SUDAN. 
Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — 
SWEDEN. All publications : A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. 
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16. — For 
the Unesco Courier: The United, Nauons Associa- 
tion of Sweden, Vasagatan 15-17, Stockholm, C. 
— SWITZERLAND. All publications: Europa 
Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich. Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C,CP. 1-236. Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. CCP, 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 12). — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam, — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
(37.50 b.ht — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. —SOUTHAFRICA. 
All publications: Van Schaik’s Bookstore (Pry) Led, 
Libri Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, |ohannesburg. 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr EI Nil, 38, rue Kasr EI Nil, Cairo, Subfagent: 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM, H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.l, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham and Bristol. (20/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, New York. 
N.Y. 10016 ($ 5). — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA, Jugoslovenska 
Knjiga Terazye, 27, Belgrade; NAPRIJED, Trg. Repu- 
blike 17, Zagreb. Drzavna Zaluzba Slovene, Mestni 
Trg 26, LJUBLJANA.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078373engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

   
ery TL = oy Ta oe ha 
> 
ARE RA    Ba
: as att nA 
  
ates | ad Pr or I Wee 
or
A a. 
— Rie 
AON 
  
A N 
 
  
 
 
Photo © Raymond Cauchetier   
  
ELECTRONIC 
COMPUTER 
HELPS HARNESS 
THE MEKONG 
Until recently man had never attempted to control the unpre- 
dictable Mekong (‘Mother of Rivers’), one of the world’s 
longest rivers (2,600 miles) whose vagaries directly affect the 
economy of vast areas of South-East Asia. The development 
of the Lower Mekong Basin concerns Cambodia, Laos, Thai- 
land and the Republic of Viet-Nam, but cannot be carried 
out without international assistance. For the past seven 
years Unesco and the United Nations Development Programme 
have worked with these countries on plans to control the 
lower course of the Mekong. For this unprecedented project a 
mathematical model of the Mekong Delta has been created 
with the aid of an electronic computer (see article page 17). 
 