# [214579](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Iii 
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
  
2009 * number 7 *« ISSN 1993-8616 
 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

© 
N
A
S
A
/
J
P
L
/
S
p
a
c
e
 
S
c
i
e
n
c
e
 
In
st
it
ut
e 
   
  
Contents 
2009 - N°7   
 
 
EDITORIAL 3 
ENIGMAS OF THE UNIVERSE 
From Alhazen Ibn Haitham’s theory about the dark spots on the moon 
(11th century) to the recent discovery of exoplanets in April 2009, this 
issue, published on the occasion of the International Year of Astronomy, 
traces these steps in our long history of observing the stars. 
  
Image of Saturn taken by the space probe 
Cassini, launched by NASA in 1997. 
FROM CLOSED WORLD 
TO INFINITE UNIVERSE 
A small sphere at the centre of a much 
larger sphere: this is how the earth and the 
universe were imagined in Greek antiquity. This image of a closed 
world was shattered by a gadget sold in shops. 400 years ago, 
Galileo observed the sky with a telescope he made himself. 
The world would never be the same. 4 
 
OVER THE MOON 
The Apollo 11 Mission and Galileo's obser- 
vations, whose respective 40th and 400th 
anniversaries we are celebrating this year, 
confirmed discoveries with the naked eye almost a millennium 
ago by the Arab polymath Alhazen - a man ahead of his time who 
determined the future of astronomy. 7 
A STORY AS OLD AS 
THE WORLD 
The movements of the Sun and the phases 
of the Moon have synchronized human 
 
activities, particularly rituals and agriculture, for thousands of years. 
At its inception, astronomy was primarily used to measure time. 
Calendars have played an essential role in people’s lives. 
We revisit the astronomy of ancient China, the Mayans 
and the medieval Islamic world with the astronomers Zhao Gang, 
Julieta Fierro and George Saliba. 1 0 
FOCUS 
   
   
FORUM 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7   
§ TOWARDS A MAP 
| OF THE UNIVERSE 
On May 14, 2009 the Planck satellite 
was launched into space aboard the 
Ariane 5 rocket from the Kourou aeronautical base in French 
Guyana. This European Space Agency (ESA) mission will 
help us to improve our understanding of the universe. A 2006 
Nobel Laureate in physics, Professor George Fitzgerald Smoot, 
explains more. 12 
EXTRATERRESTRIAL LIFE: 
{ SURPRISES IN STORE? 
Does the discovery of extrasolar planets 
mean the discovery of extraterrestrial 
life’? During a UNESCO conference marking the International 
Year of Astronomy, three world renowned scientists, Lord Mar- 
tin John Rees (United Kingdom), Jonathan P. Gardner (United 
States) and Francoise Combes (France), tackled the question 
from different perspectives. 15 
ASTRONOMY : 
THE THREE TIERS 
OF RESEARCH 
We have no reason to think that the 
planets in our solar system represent every type of planet in 
existence, according to the Swiss astrophysicist Michel Mayor, 
who discovered the first extrasolar planet with Didier Queloz 
in 1995. Last April, his team at the Geneva Observatory 
discovered the smallest exoplanet known today. 1 8 
“Gross National Happiness” through literacy 
Innovative literacy projects in Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, India and the Philippines are the winners 
of this year's UNESCO International Literacy Prizes. 20 
_ On living with less, from three points of view 
How to protect the poor from a crisis caused by a few of the rich? 
' This was the main question raised at the UNESCO Future Forum held last March. 22

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### 214591: Editorial

© 
N
A
S
A
 
  
I 
    
This view out the aft windows on Endeavour's flight deck was one of 
a series of images recorded by the STS-123 crew during the first full 
day in space. 
400 years ago Galileo took the dark 
stains on the surface of the Moon 
to be seas. He was wrong. Today, 
we send missions to the Moon 
in search of water. Technological 
advances have been extraordinary: 
in the past 20 years 350 planets have 
been discovered outside of our solar 
system and several months ago 
the first images of them reached us 
via satellite. Telescopes on earth 
and in space explore the universe 
24 hours a day, yet it is still remains 
largely unknown. 
  
_ 
o help us penetrate his secrets the 
nited Nations declared 2009 the Interna- 
ional Year of Astronomy (IYA2009). Sub- 
itted by Italy, the homeland of Galileo, 
he initiative is lead by the International 
stronomical Union and UNESCO. 
With the motto “The Universe — yours to 
discover” the [YA2009 aims to stimulate 
interest in astronomy among the gen- 
eral public and especially youth. Activi- 
ties are underway around the world and 
UNESCO hasorganisedaseriesofevents 
designed to both stimulate research 
and disseminate scientific knowledge. 
Exhibitions for young and adults have 
been organised, as have scientific sym- 
posiums and debates with the wider 
public featuring many of the world’s lead- 
ing astronomical experts. 
Among these, Francoise Balibar, Fran- 
coise Combes, Julieta Fierro, Zhao 
Gang, Jonathan P. Gardner, Michel 
Mayor, Lord Martin John Rees, George 
Saliba et Georges F. Smoot have con- 
    
    
   
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
O
.
B
r
e
n
d
a
n
 
tributed to this issue of The UNESCO 
Courier published with a view to popu- 
larise astronomical knowledge within the 
IYA2009 framework. 
In terms of scientific research, the main 
topic discussed was that of dark matter 
and dark energy. “Ninety-five percent of 
the total energy of the universe is not vis- 
ible in the sense we usually understand 
it, so we nicknamed it “dark matter” 
and “dark energy”, said Nobel laureate 
Physics George F. Smoot. Francoise 
Combes of the Paris Observatory added 
“Scientists invented the notion of dark 
energy to explain a phenomenon disco- 
vered 10 years ago — the acceleration of 
the expansion of the universe. According 
to the theory most widely accepted up 
until then the universe has been expand- 
ing since the Big Bang and will contract 
in a “Big Crunch”. Today we know this 
theory is false, yet it is still unclear what 
causes the acceleration’ 
In terms of popularising science, the 
main concern for experts is educa- 
during an astronomy class. 
3 
  
ting youth and teaching astronomy in 
schools. “In my opinion, we should start 
teaching astronomy in primary school” 
declared Beatriz Barbuy, a Brazilian 
astronomer and recipient of the 2009 
L'Oreal-UNESCO award for Women in 
Science. Interviewed during the prepara- 
tion of this issue by the Brazilian journalist 
Dénio Maués Vianna, Barbuy explains: 
“The mysterious world of stars and 
galaxies greatly intrigues children. 
Astronomy is an excellent way to teach 
children not only about cosmic pheno- 
mena, but also mathematics, physics, 
optics, chemistry and even computer 
science and biology” She believes that 
the reason why astronomy appears inac- 
cessible is because it's not sufficiently 
featured in school curriculums. The 
resulting lack of knowledge has a negative 
impact: “scientists are often frustrated 
to note that obscurantism sometimes 
prevails over the facts established by 
science” ». 
Jasmina Sopova 
~~ 
- wf Bo 
Children at Katha public school (Govinpuri slums, south Delhi, India),

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

A small sphere at the centre of a much larger sphere: this is how the earth 
nd the universe were imagined in Greek antiquity. This image of a closed world 
EER Ea (To Mo): We Fo Te fo TY To [oT BY Co oS: KL RTLY: TCR Te [MU CET] [To Wo oS 4 TTo By [ER 4) 
with a telescope he made himself. The world would never be the same. 


### 214592: From closed world to infinite universe

  
FROM CLOSED WORLD 
TO INFINITE UNIVERSE 
© 
All
 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
  
Portrait of Galileo painted by Justus Sustermans (1636). 
This article is an extract from the lecture From Galileo to Einstein, de- 
livered by Francoise Balibar at the launch of the International Year 
of Astronomy at UNESCO, 15 January 2009. 
n 1639, nearly thirty years after 
the discovery we are celebrating 
today, Galileo, then aged 68, lost 
the use of his right eye. A year 
later, he became totally blind. In 
despair, he then wrote to his most 
faithful friend Elie Diodati, “Alas, 
honoured Sir, Galileo, your dear 
friend and servant, has become 
by now irremediably blind. Your 
Honour may understand in what 
affliction | find myself, as | con- 
sider how the heaven, the world, 
the universe, which by my ob- 
servations and clear demonstra- 
tions | had amplified a hundred 
and a thousand times over what 
had been seen and known by the 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
learned of all past centuries, has 
now reduced to the space occu- 
pied by my person.” 
An agonizing statement of a man 
to whom blindness had given the 
ability to “see”, with the eyes of the 
mind, the position he would for- 
ever hold not only among worldly 
things but in the history of man. 
As if physical blindness had given 
him the power to adopt what 
would be posterity's point of view 
on his achievements, namely, as 
Alexandre Koyré (French philoso- 
pher and historian of science, of 
Russian origin, 1892-1964) has so 
justly coined it: going from a closed 
world to an infinite universe. 
4 
A closed world 
The closed world view has its ori- 
gin in Greek philosophy. For most 
Greek astronomers and philoso- 
phers, from the 4th century on, the 
earth is a small sphere (the most 
symmetrical surface) occupying the 
centre of another much larger rotat- 
ing sphere, which carries the stars. 
Different cosmological devices are 
added during the nearly twenty 
centuries which separate the 4th 
century B.C. from Galileo's time, 
in order to account for the move- 
ments of the sun, moon and planets 
(wandering celestial bodies) in the 
intermediate space between the 
two spheres. The point here is that 
outside of the celestial sphere there 
IS no space, no matter, nothing. The 
whole world is enclosed, or, so to 
speak, encapsulated, inside this 
second sphere; a sphere where, 
large as it may be when compared 
to the size of his earthly residence, 
man is imprisoned. 
Cosmology 
and Astronomy 
A second point: cosmology (as a 
set of conceptions about the struc- 
ture of the universe) and astronomy 
(defined as observation of the ap- 
pearances of the heavens) are inex- 
tricably combined in such a model. 
Thomas Kuhn (American philoso- 
pher and historian of science, 
1922-1996) sees in this combina- 
tion the origin of the “unreasonable 
effectiveness” of western science. 
According to Kuhn's view, the re- 
quirement that cosmology should 
supply both a world-view and an 
explanation of observed phenom- 
ena has channelled the universal 
psychological compulsion for being 
part of the universe into a drive for 
scientific explanations — thus en- 
hancing the power of cosmological 
thought. The devastating result is 
that “the astronomer may on occa- 
sions destroy, for reasons lying en- 
tirely within his speciality, a world- 
view that had previously made the

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

All
 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
© 
  
Ptolemy, 2nd century Greek geographer 
and astronomer. 
universe meaningful for the mem- 
bers of a whole civilization, special- 
ist and non specialist alike”. This is 
precisely what happened in 1609: 
Galileo's astronomical observations 
destroyed the world-view, common 
to both the educated and the “man 
in the street” 
Both the Copernican and Ptole- 
maic systems, which clashed in the 
17th century, are cosmological and 
astronomical at the same time. This 
is explicit in the title Galileo gave 
to his first Dialogue: “Dialogue 
Concerning the two Chief World 
Systems”, where the two systems, 
Ptolemaic and Copernican, appear 
on the same footing, alternative 
systems within the same intellec- 
tual framework, where any change 
in astronomical explanation (as that 
proposed by Copernicus in 1543, 
=
 ° 
® 
c 
Io} 
12] 
id 
® jo 
= 
2 £ 
< 
© 
The Copernican system. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 


### 214592: From closed world to infinite universe

FROM CLOSED WORLD TO INFINITE UNIVERSE 
in his De Revolutionibus Orbium 
Coelestium) entails a change in 
man’s cosmological conceptions 
about the structure of the world. 
The earth is no longer 
the centre 
of the universe 
No wonder then that the dispute 
surrounding the Copernican (1473- 
1543) heliocentric explanation was 
itself felt to be not a mere controver- 
sy restricted to scientists (astrono- 
mers) but a threat to the estab- 
lished general order, relying as this 
latter did on a geocentric world- 
view. No wonder too that Galileo's 
observations and interpretations of 
evolving bright spots as evidence 
of mountains on the Moon, some- 
thing anyone could understand in 
relation to his own experience of 
the sun rising on the top of a moun- 
tain before it illuminates the valley, 
were much more threatening to 
the established world-view than 
the other important scientific event 
of that same year 1609, Kepler's 
(1571-1630) Astronomia Nova 
[1571-1630]. All the more so in- 
asmuch as Galileo's observations 
involved an instrument derived 
from a gadget sold on the open 
market, an instrument of such sim- 
plicity that anyone might believe he 
could build one himself. But who 
could read Astronomia Nova apart 
from specialists? Who would care 
about the elliptical planetary trajec- 
 
tories exhibited by Kepler? 
Such an achievement as Kepler's 
could be interpreted as a change 
in world-view only by astronomers 
themselves, while the disclosure 
of mountains on the moon had the 
effect that anyone looking at the 
Moon could no longer see it as a 
perfectly polished celestial body, 
radically different from the earth. 
Once the Moons of Jupiter (“which 
had been invisible to everyone un- 
til now” writes Galileo) had been 
seen (even if Galileo was for a time 
the only one who had really seen 
them, with the exception of Kepler 
who, as a professional astronomer, 
was clever enough to adjust the in- 
strument Galileo had sent to him, 
to his own eyes), the thought that 
their movement around Jupiter itself 
should take them outside the celes- 
tial sphere “behind” the spherical 
surface on which Jupiter was sup- 
posed to be located, could occur 
to anyone willing to think seriously 
about it. As a consequence, the 
world could no longer be restrict- 
ed to the space inside the celes- 
tial sphere. Even worse: the earth 
could not be located at the centre 
of the universe (this is what Sig- 
mund Freud later called the first of 
three humiliations inflicted upon hu- 
man narcissism, the other two be- 
ing Darwinian evolution and Freud's 
own discovery of the Unbewusst). 
The infinite universe 
The “closed world” picture had lost 
its coherence and does not con- 
form to observation. But what about 
the “infinite universe” Koyre alludes 
to? That the closed world has been 
burst open does not necessarily im- 
ply an infinite size for the universe. 
The question here is that of the 
physical reality of infinity. It is well 
known that Kepler objected to the 
idea of an infinite universe on the 
ground that such an entity would ac- 
commodate regions devoid of mat- 
ter — which was pure non-sense ac- 
cording to his views: space without 
matter is nothing, it simply does not 
exist. Galileo is more subtle and am- 
bivalent on this matter. He refuses

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

© 
All
 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 


### 214592: From closed world to infinite universe

FROM CLOSED WORLD TO INFINITE UNIVERS 
  
  
  
  
= - i 
Sg 
[Vi EET — I 
  
  
  
Kepler's model of the universe, based on five regular polyhedra. 
to identify the inertial movement 
(the one which is comme nullo) with 
translations at uniform speed, on the 
ground that the mobile would then 
be taken to infinity, which he finds 
unrealistic. At the same time, by 
destroying the idea that the cosmos 
is structured by a hierarchical order 
(the perfect and eternal heavens 
as opposed to the corruptible and 
instable Earth), he introduces the 
idea of a universe whose spatial 
structureisuniform, free ofany natural 
hierarchy, and without any reference 
to a world of values, a world where 
all points are on the same footing. 
In other words, a Euclidean geome- 
© 
NA
SA
/J
PL
/U
ni
ve
rs
it
y 
of
 
Ar
iz
on
a 
The Serpents star cluster, at some 8,484 light years 
trical space, including infinity in its 
definition, on which the mathemati- 
zation of physical world, i.e. modern 
physics, relies. 
No doubt we would not be cel 
ebrating Galileo's astronomical dis- 
coveries with such ceremony had 
they not led to the foundation of 
“modern science”. By replacing the 
hierarchical structure of space by 
the uniformity which characterizes 
geometric spaces, Galileo made 
it possible for geometry, and more 
generally speaking, mathematics, 
the application of which had been 
up to then (from the time of Greece 
on) restricted to understanding the 
 
from Earth. Photo taken with the infrared 
Spitzer Space Telescope. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
movements of perfect celestial ob- 
jects, to become part of the expla- 
nation of terrestrial phenomena, no 
longer considered less perfect than 
celestial ones. 
Three centuries later, in 1919, Ein- 
stein, Galileo's direct heir, not so 
much as concerns his astronomical 
discoveries as his project for the 
mathematization of nature, having 
painfully worked out his so called 
“general theory of relativity”, came 
to realize that this physico-mathe- 
matical theory, intended as a theory 
of gravitation, was in fact a theory of 
the universe itself — therefore a cos- 
mology. The entanglement of as- 
tronomy and cosmology, which had 
been crucial to the birth of modern 
science, ended in the absorption of 
cosmology by science: cosmology 
had become a branch of physics. 
Francoise Balibar, 
Professor Emeritus of Physics 
at the University of Paris — Diderot 
Author of 
Galilée: Le messager des étoiles 
(with Jean-Pierre Maury), 
Gallimard, 2005 and 
Einstein : Decoding the Universe, 
Abrams, 2001.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

The Apollo 11 Mission and Galileo’s observations, whose respective 40th and 400th 
man ahead of his tim 
nniversaries we are celebrating this year, confirmed discoveries with the naked ey 
[ERT ELL JET [oR TAG TW El oN olel iT EG WAL EFL IE 
  
who determined the future of astronomy. 


### 214593: Over the moon

OVER THE MOON 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
R
.
 
Le
sa
ge
 
  
UNESCO welcomes the Apollo 11 astronauts: N. Armstrong, E. Aldrin 
and M. Collins. 8 October 1969. 
reath on 20 July 1969, as the 
United States’ Eagle lunar module 
ow down in the Moon's Sea 
    fof Tranquillity — without making a 
lash! Despite its name, the Sea 
of Tranquillity does not contain a 
single drop of water. Instead, it is 
covered with volcanic rocks which 
flowed some 3 to 4 billion years 
ago, as lava. The quirky name, how- 
ever, is reminiscent of a once popu- 
lar theory explaining the Moon's 
appearance from Earth. As ltalian 
painter and scientist Leonardo da 
Vinci wrote in his Codex Leicester, 
“The luminous part of the Moon is 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
water, which has been stirred up by 
the winds! 
You might be forgiven for thinking 
that a scientific explanation for the 
Moon's appearance was not practi- 
cally possible — that is until Italian 
astronomer Galileo Galilaei turned 
his telescope towards the night sky 
400 years ago. Now enter Alhazen, 
or Ibn Haitham (965-1040), an 
Iraqi scientist working at the turn 
of the first millennium near Al-Azhar 
mosque in Cairo, and dubbed the 
founding father of modern optics. 
Among a number of major contri- 
butions, he answered one of the 
most intriguing questions faced by 
7 
science: what gives rise to the dark 
figure in the Moon's face. 
Mystery solved 
This phenomenon had been the 
subject of much speculation since 
antiquity, resulting in numerous ex- 
travagant theories. Half a dozen of 
these, at least, were explored by 
Alhazen in his work The Trace on 
the Moon's Face. Here, he showed 
that none of the theories examined 
made predictions that agreed with 
observational evidence. He put 
each candidate theory to the test 
using some crucial observations, 
most notably the fact that the figure 
in question always appears con- 
stant in terms of positioning, size, 
shape, and darkness. 
For instance, he ruled out the theo- 
ry that the dark figure was an image 
of Earth's oceans and mountains 
reflected on the Moon's mirror-like 
surface. Based on the law of reflec- 
tion, he showed that the Moon's 
changing angle with respect to an 
observer on Earth meant that any 
such image had to change with time 
— which is obviously not the case. 
A couple of other theories were 
written off based on similar argu- 
ments. Firstly, that the dark figure is 
a shadow caused by dramatic lunar 
features such as mountains and 
craters. This time, Alhazen argued 
that the Moon's changing orienta- 
tion with respect to the Sun meant 
that any shadowy patterns had to 
also change with time — flying in the 
face of empirical evidence. 
And secondly, that the dark figure 
is caused by a vaporised substance 
ever present between the Moon and 
Earth. He argued that if this were 
true, observing the Moon from dif- 
ferent Earthly locations would show 
the vaporised substance against 
different parts of the Moon, if not 
outside the Moon altogether!

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

© 
N
A
S
A
 
     
Have you ever wondered what gives rise to the dark figure on the 
Moon's face? 
Solar eclipses — something of a 
laboratory for physicists and as- 
tronomers — enabled Alhazen to 
rule out yet another exotic theory: 
the dark figure is a transparent re- 
gion in the lunar body. If this were 
true, asked Alhazen, why doesn't 
sunlight shine through it during an 
eclipse of the Sun”? 
Moonlight, Alhazen concluded, 
can only be adequately explained 
using the phenomenon of diffuse 
reflection — that is, reflection from 
a rough surface. Further, the Moon 
does not reflect light in any other 
way. What gives rise to the dark 
figure, he explained, is the fact that 
its material, because of its different 
optical properties simply reflects 
less light! 
Date with the Moon 
Although, astonishingly, Alhazen 
made his lunar discoveries based 
on observations with the naked eye, 
the study of the visual and magnify- 
ing properties of lenses was in fact 
launched with his Book of Optics. 
This new understanding of the lens, 
based on geometry and experiment, 
underpinned the craft of the Dutch 
spectacle-makers who, by holding 
one lens in front of another, invented 
the telescope, enabling Galileo to 
revolutionise astronomy. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
In December 1609, hunting for the 
unexpected, Galileo used a 20-fold 
magnification telescope to observe 
the Moon. He could make out moun- 
tains, craters, and what he wrongly 
thought were seas (i.e. water). We 
now know, from lunar samples col- 
lected by Apollo missions (1966- 
1972), along with a certain amount 
© 
Bi
bl
io
te
ca
 
Na
zi
on
al
e 
Ce
nt
ra
le
 
(F
lo
re
nc
e)
 


### 214593: Over the moon

     
OVER THE MOON 
collected by Russia's robotic Luna 
missions (1958-1976) that lunar 
maria are covered with dark rocks 
(basalts) — confirming Alhazen's 
basic conclusions about the make- 
up of our closest neighbour. 
The two men are immortalized on 
the Moon: there is a lunar crater, 
Galilaei, celebrating Galileo's dis- 
coveries. Another crater, Alhazen, 
celebrates Ibn Haitham's. 
Ambitious projects such as the 
IYA2009 could inspire the “next 
big thing” in astronomy. Soon the 
entire night sky will be continuously 
scanned by space as well as Earth- 
based telescopes, across many 
wavebands, churning out terabytes 
of data. The next 40 years, let alone 
the next 400, could well see anoth- 
er revolution in astronomy. 
Hatim Salih 
is a Sudanese researcher in quantum 
computing and a member of the York 
Astronomical Society 
(United Kingdom). 
Looking at the 
Moon with his 
newly made 
telescope, 
Galileo discerned 
mountains, craters, 
and what he 
2 thought were seas.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 214594: Looking for water on the moon

       OVER THE MOON 
Ri 0
LOOKING FOR WATER 
ON THE MOON 
© 
N
A
S
A
 
: 
» The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), 
} and its sister mission LCROSS, launched by 
- National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) last June, 
” are the first in a series of unmanned missions scouting 
” for the return of astronauts to the Moon. 
"~~ Tantalizingly, in 1998, NASA’s Lunar Prospector found 
an excess of hydrogen in the frigid, permanently shadowed craters 
| at the Moon’s poles, indicating the possibility of water ice. 
“The only way you're going to know if it's water ice is by stick- 
ing your finger in it; says Alan Binder of NASA. That's exactly why 
LCROSS won't be around for long. Having hitched a ride with LRO, 
LCROSS is currently in an unusual orbit around both the Earth and 
Moon, and is set to impact the lunar south pole on 9 October 2009. 
But why the wait? 
One reason is to give LRO time to remote-sense the lunar south 
pole, where ancient comets and asteroids might have deposited 
water. Data from LRO will help decide which exact crater to ex- 
cavate. Another reason is to drag LCROSS’s impactor, called 
Centaur, in space long enough to rid it of residual fuel (containing 
both hydrogen and oxygen), which could contaminate results. Yet 
another reason is to time the impact so that observatories in Hawaii 
(USA), with their sophisticated water detecting capabilities, can 
tune in. “The goal is to muster as many eyes and instruments as 
possible,” says LCROSS Principal Investigator Tony Colaprete. 
In fact anyone in Hawaii, up to the Mississippi region, with a 10 
to 12 inch diameter telescope or larger, should be able to witness 
the event! If everything goes according to script, Centaur will hit 
the lunar south pole with an energy equivalent to what you get from 
100 million 60 Watt light bulbs in a second, kicking lunar debris 
that has not been exposed to sunlight for billions of years, more 
than 2 kilometers up, enough to clear the crater's rim. LCROSS will 
then fly through the ejecta cloud looking for watery spectroscopic 
signatures in the dust-dimmed sunlight, before plunging into the 
Moon's south pole four minutes later. 
Discovery of bits of ice hidden at the lunar poles could be invalu- 
able for any sustained human presence in space. For one thing, 
transporting water from Earth into space is highly costly. And the 
fact that the Moon's gravity is only one sixth of Earthly gravity means 
that you need smaller rockets to launch space missions from the 
Moon that go the same distance. The implications of LCROSS 
could therefore be, quite literally, far reaching. If future astronauts 
could extract lunar water for human consumption and for making 
. rocket fuel, perhaps the ‘one giant leap’ of setting foot on Mars will 
become, sooner than we imagine, ‘one small step’ away. 
 
H. S. 
Launch of LCROSS and LRO on 18 June 20009. 
Sa | SEER 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 9

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 214595: A Story as old as the world

A STORY AS OLD AS 
THE WORLD 
I 1 0 Te ET CI EI RG CRETE [oR CR ERLE 1 Ro TeTy WEAK Log] (og [FA] 
  
LTT ET IE: Coe AV CSO ET [oT ETA TET EE Ta Lo BE Te [ToT] {TT (00 {oT TITEL [e EX] RETR 
    
  
i 
7? adil 
L——— ” 
7 : pe ul nt i ( na Ferm , en ih wes 4 AL — . 
perp rien 
» La 
© 
Br
it
is
h 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
a
r
 
a
d
 
T
a
l
s
 
i
.
 
- 
: 
T
O
R
Y
 
— 
- 
: te
at
 
    
  
bservatory. He continues “it is 
difficult for man to conceive 
Infinity of space-time and, more- 
over, it has not yet been scientifically 
proven! 
“Our ancestors believed in the idea 
of harmony between man and the 
sky", he says, explaining that before 
starting any important activity they 
would first consult the stars. “Live- 
stock and agriculture were in effect 
the two pillars of Chinese society 
during Antiquity. That is why agri- 
cultural calendars were a central 
concern for astronomers, along with 
manufacturing astronomical instru- 
ments and the observation of astro- 
nomical phenomenon’ 
“Even our lunar calendar used 
today is founded on the scientific 
method applied by Luo Xiahong 
(140-87 B.C), author of Tai Chu, 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
From interviews at the launch 
of the International Year 
of Astronomy at UNESCO 
(January 2009), 
by Weiny Cauhape, 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
and Katerina Markelova. 
Cuneiform tablet containing 
" ancient observations of the planet 
wry ~ Venus (7th century BC). 
the first written Chinese calendar”, 
highlights Zhao Gang. Luo Xiahong 
is equally well known for having cal- 
culated the precise frequency of so- 
lar and lunar eclipses over a period 
of 135 months and for also having 
perfected the spherical astrolabe, 
which during Chinese antiquity was 
the main tool for predicting the posi- 
tions of the stars. 
Another famed calendar was reat- 
ed by Guo Shoujing (1231-1316). 
Developed under the Yuan dynasty, 
the astronomer calculated that the 
Earth's revolution around the Sun 
takes 365.2425 days. This extremely 
accurate calendar was created 300 
years before the Gregorian calendar 
which uses the same calculation and 
is universally accepted today. 
It is estimated that from the 24th 
century B.C an official at the court 
of emperor Yao was specifically in- 
structed to observe the sky and as- 
tronomical phenomenon as well as 
tell the time. But the most ancient 
10 
BY \ 3 CR (CY ga {MEE (Co oT AVE ER o LT ELA TET Ro CERT CRT CE 1 EY e ETE EVR J EVE 
dt CECH ET NC CRT Wo TT o (SCR NT CR CWE RG CREE (oy Te] VA ET Le CT LA oO THEIR TR EVE I 
(RO EN EG EE IRS ETAT RTA ORG EER (oD I) [EA ER et [BUI ER EN Fey [s KET (s CRE oF 
written information comes from ruins 
of the Yin dynasty (during the 14th 
to 11th centuries B.C). From these 
sites inscriptions on tortoise shells 
and bones tell us about the Sun and 
Moon, planets, comets, stars and 
meteor showers. 
The most ancient astronomical 
book known today comes from the 
Era of Warring States. The work en- 
titled “Gan Shi Catalogue of Stars” 
(6th-4th centuries B.C) lists no fewer 
than 800 stars, including 121 with 
exact known positions. 
A particularly interesting document 
from Chinese astronomical history is 
the “Map of Dunhuang’, which con- 
tains over 1300 stars (see photo). 
Created in the 7th century on a roll 
of Chinese paper about 4 metres in 
length, it is considered one of the 
oldest celestial atlases in the world. 
Uniting the heavens 
and the earth 
“The Mayan civilisation spread 
over an enormous territory includ- 
ing south-east Mexico and parts of 
Central America. Their year was or- 
ganised according to rainy and dry 
seasons and therefore the calendar 
had fundamental importance for 
organising civil life, building monu- 
ments and agriculture”, explains the 
Mexican astronomer Julieta Fierro 
Gossman, winner of the UNESCO 
Kalinga Prize for the Popularisation 
of Science (1995). 
Onstage with a suitcase full of 
masks, sticks and cards — props 
for her performance — the expert in 
Mayan astronomy used stories and 
images to illuminate this fascinating 
culture, and concluded by handing 
out paper butterflies. Aregular figure 
on television and radio, as well as 
at universities and schools both in

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
Br
it
is
h 
Li
br
ar
y 
LINEN UNE ALON) 
China: The map of the heavens of Dunhuang 
is the most ancient map of the stars found to date. 


### 214595: A Story as old as the world

Mexico and abroad, Fierro spreads 
the message that science can be 
brought to everyone, provided they 
lift their eyes to the sky. 
“The main Mayan buildings were built 
with a view to measure time” Fierro 
reflects, before highlighting the story 
of Chichen Itza (a UNESCO World 
Heritage Site). This site was de- 
signed so that during the equinox the 
Sun cast a shadow onto the pyramid 
resembling a serpent descending 
the staircase — this symbolised Ku- 
kulkan, god of resurrection and rein- 
carnation, also known as “feathered 
serpent”. “This effect was achieved 
by first building small models of their 
monuments” allowing them to calcu- 
late exactly how and where to build. 
“The sophisticated level of Mayan 
astronomy, which still astounds sci- 
entists today, can also be seen in 
the codices, made from bark, and 
stele, engraved stone to stone, that 
survived the Spanish conquest. Yet, 
the different measuring devices they 
used weren't as complicated as 
astrolabes - they used merely two 
sticks. One had to be horizontal and 
the other placed at the altitude of 
the celestial objects — this way they 
could draw the different paths of the 
Sun, Moon, Venus and Mars and 
know when special events such as 
eclipses would happen” Fierro ex- 
plains. The design of the temple at 
Bonampak for example, shows that 
they observed the Milky Way, which 
they called “Wakah Chan" and is por- 
trayed in the beautiful frescos within 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
the temple. It is embodied as a deity 
in the form of a snake which accord- 
ing to their beliefs united the heavens 
and the Earth. 
The Mayans used both the astro- 
nomical calendar (or solar, 365 days), 
similar to that found in other cultures, 
and another religious calendar with a 
260 day year, reflecting the time taken 
to bear a child. These two calendars 
coincided every 52 solar years. This 
was marked by a grand ceremony in 
which every house fire was put out 
and then relit to signify renewal. 
The missing link 
Contrary to popular belief Islamic 
astronomy is not the docile pupil of 
Greek astronomy. While the heaven- 
ly science may have been in slumber 
in Europe between Antiquity and the 
Renaissance, it had extraordinary 
momentum in the Islamic world dur- 
ing the Middle Ages, reflects George 
Saliba, professor of Islamic and 
Arab science at Columbia University 
in New York (United States). This is 
particularly true of the Caliphate of 
Baghdad, who under the reign of al- 
Mamun gathered the wise men from 
the empire and encouraged them to 
translate ancient Greek, Indian and 
Persian texts into Arabic. 
According to Saliba, simply being 
a good linguist wasn't sufficient for 
being a good translator. You also 
had to be equipped with a strong 
scientific background. So much so 
that some translators even correct- 
ed the masters - the great Ptolemy 
11 
was refuted more than once. 
When, for example, in 829 al- 
Hajjaj translated the celebrated 
Almageste, the “great book” of 
mathematics and astronomy, he 
took the opportunity to recalculate 
the duration of the lunar month and 
included the correct figure. Ptolemy 
had published an incorrect calcula- 
tion, taken from the Babylonians, 
without having verified it. 
In 1375 Ibn Al-Shati also improved 
Ptolemy's highly complex “Earth- 
Moon-Sun” model. The model is 
based on Arab knowledge and is 
almost identical to that proposed by 
Copernicus in 1543, the difference 
being that the Earth and not the 
Sun was the centre of the universe. 
Saliba wonders whether Coperni- 
cus's model was not even directly 
inspired by the works of Ibn Al-Shati. 
Especially given that their diagrams 
both represent the three celestial 
© 
Br
it
is
h 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
  
A brass astrolabe (Ispahan, Iran, 1712). 
bodies and use the same symbols 
in the same places, only with Arabic 
characters in one and Latin in the 
other. Could this be the missing link 
between the Ptolemaic system and 
Copernicus's heliocentric  sys- 
tem? 
One thing is certain: thanks to 
their technology, Islamic astrono- 
mers perfected observations of 
the sky and through their meticu- 
lous calculations they fine tuned 
the mathematics of astronomy. 
We cannot deny, as Saliba states, 
that “they redefined nearly all the 
parameters at the foundation of 
Greek astronomy!’

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### 214596: Towards a map of the universe

TOWARDS A MAP 
OF THE UNIVERSE 
~~ On May 14, 2009 the Planck satellite was launched into space aboard 
(CRED CR ol CIR (oT RE CRG ITET (ELT Tor: | Ne ETN W 2 (i [oR ETE T FI TER ST (of oF: T BS] o ED) t 
ey (ESA) mission will help us to improve our understanding of the universe. 
iL [VT (oY o SY WIE TTT] CO) od 02 (oo a (o]) {=13 Yo) MC TTo] {o [XW | PJs [<1 21 [0 JE=T (oo) MY Co] PE TT0 EE  [o] (= 
  
| 
wr
 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
!
 
Mi
ch
el
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
You were one of the principal 
architects of COBE, the first 
satellite to observe the CMB 
in 1989. What are your 
thoughts, 20 years later, 
on the Planck mission? 
Irecall that as soon as we had made 
the COBE discoveries and made 
the announcement, | was already 
thinking about what was next. | had 
colleagues Nazzareno Mandolesi 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
  
and Marco Bersanelli from Italy 
visiting fora month. We met together 
and outlined possible missions. We 
eventually proposed what became 
COBRAS (COsmic Background 
Radiation Anisotropy Satellite). At 
the same time the French people 
here, mostly from Orsay, but some 
others as well, proposed SAM- 
BA (Satellite for Measurement of 
Background Anisotropies). 
12 
George Fitzgerald Smoot was awarded 
the Nobel Prize in Physics along 
with John C. Mather for their discovery 
of the blackbody form 
and anisotropy of the cosmic microwave 
background radiation. Their discovery follows 
a quarter of a century after the initial discovery 
of Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (CMB) 
by Arno A. Penzias and Robert W. Wilson. 
Mr. Smoot began his scientific career 
by obtaining dual bachelor’s degrees 
in Mathematics and Physics from 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). 
It was there, after obtaining a doctorate in particle 
physics, he first began to turn his attention towards 
cosmology. He subsequently started working 
for the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory in the early 1970s where 
he collaborated with Luis Walter Alvarez, 
a 1968 Nobel Laureate in Physics. 
Professor Smoot took part in the UNESCO 
sponsored international symposium, 
“The Invisible Universe”, held at UNESCO 
in Paris from June 29 to July 3. During his visit 
he gave an interview to French science journalist 
Dominique Chouchan. 
Later on they merged and eventu- 
ally it became COBRAS-SAMBA 
and then it became Planck. Once 
we made the discovery that the 
radiation was sure and that there 
were these fluctuations in the early 
universe to map, then the fluctua- 
tions became this tool where you 
could discover the geometry and 
constituents of space and check 
to see if the laws of physics re-

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

ERS UNE CARTOGRAPHIE DE LUNIVERS 
  
main constant over time and valid 
over all of space time. What was 
needed was to make a much more 
precise set of maps using these 
fluctuations. 
Therefore, one of the objectives 
of the Planck mission 
is to make these more precise 
maps of the early universe? 


### 214596: Towards a map of the universe

Its objective is to make a beauti- 
ful map to measure very precisely 
the embryo universe by using the 
light from the beginning of the uni- 
verse. In order to accomplish this 
task the detectors and the cooling 
system had to be very high-tech 
and the way to send the data back 
is also very complicated. 
In order to explain the importance 
of measuring with such precision 
the radiation and its fluctuations, | 
will use an analogy. If you have two 
bells that you hear are struck, you 
can tell which one is bigger. If they 
are made of the same material, the 
bigger one will be the lower fre- 
quency because the wavelength 
is longer. If you have two bells, 
one made of iron and one made 
of brass, and you strike them both, 
you can tell the constituents of the 
bell by the harmonics you hear. It's 
the same for the early universe, 
it's a precise analogy. The sound 
speed is affected by what the ear- 
ly universe is made out of and by 
measuring precisely you can tell 
what the universe is made out of. 
When will astrophysicists 
receive the first data from 
Planck? 
We're already getting some data, 
but it takes at least 6 months before 
you have seen even the sky and it 
takes 14 months before you have 
seen the whole sky enough times 
so that you have a complete sky 
map. Nothing will be released to 
the public for some time because 
it's going to take a while to analyze 
the data and the team is so large 
(400 scientists) and they have a lot 
of comments to make. So, | think it 
will be 2 to 3 years. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 


### 214597: The Planck mission at a glance

THE PLANCK MISSION 
AT A GLANCE 
  
On board the Planck satellite. 
Did the universe begin with a Big Bang? 
This question remains a source of controversy. 
However, for the supporters of this theory, 
which are the majority in the astronomical community, 
the observation of relic radiation (the electromagnetic 
radiation present in the universe at a time 
when matter and radiation existed separately), 
and in particular the measure of its fluctuations, 
should allow us to see around 380,000 years 
after the famous Big Bang. 
These low frequency microwaves, 
also referred to as Cosmic Microwave 
Background Radiation (CMB), are a 
remnant of the hotter anterior period. 
Its fluctuations, or its heterogeneities 
according to observations (anisotro- 
pies), provide a key to understanding 
the formation of visible matter (stars, 
galaxies, etc.). 
The Planck Mission of the European 
Space Agency follows in the footsteps 
of the COBE (COsmic Background 
Observer) satellite launched by NASA 
in 1989 and the WMAP (Wilkinson 
Microwave Anisotropy Probe) also 
launched by NASA in 2001. The two 
detectors aboard the Planck satellite 
13 
have been designed to be 50 times 
more sensitive in detecting fluctuations 
in relic radiation than that of its pre- 
decessor WMAP, which had already 
been 30 times more sensitive than the 
original instruments aboard the COBE 
satellite. They cover complementary 
ranges of frequencies: one of the de- 
tectors is under the direction of Jean- 
Loup Puget, Director of the IAS (Institut 
d'Astrophysique Spatiale) located in 
Orsay, France, the other is headed by 
Nazzareno Mandolesi of the Istituto di 
Tecnologie e Studio delle Radiazioni 
Extraterrestri in Bologna, Italy.

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 214596: Towards a map of the universe

TOWARDS A MAP OF THE UNIVERSE 
  
Will the results from Planck 
definitively confirm the Big 
Bang Theory? 
The thing about science is that 
you never prove anything, you only 
support it. It's like the theory of evo- 
lution. Do you know how strong 
the evidence is for evolution? You 
can map DNA, and so forth. It's a 
theory. But it is very, very accurate 
and has very many cross-checks. 
For the universe, 20 years ago we 
used to not have as much evidence, 
now we're getting much more. The 
predictions so far have been check, 
check, check. The fact that | am still 
talking about the Big Bang Theory 
and putting checkmarks down tells 
you so far, so good. But the fact that 
there are so many checks means 
that now we have it really, really nar- 
rowed down. 
When pondering to such length 
the secrets of space and time, 
do you feel more like 
a scientist, a poet, 
a philosopher, or all three? 
Sometimes | have to become more 
of an artist and philosopher be- 
cause that's what people relate to 
and not to the technical details. All 
they care about is the real struc- 
ture of space and time and what's 
possible and what's not possible. 
What we know today probably 
tells you that time travel is not 
possible. Is that philosophy or is 
that science? Well, it's a mixture. 
It's like people who cook. Are they 
chemists or are they artists? Well, 
a good cook is both. And so a re- 
ally good scientist will be a scien- 
tist, artist and a philosopher. 
But you remember the Greek 
word for science is “natural phi- 
losophy”. It's only because sci- 
ence has been so extraordinarily 
successful that philosophy is now 
the domain about what we don't 
know and science is the domain 
about what we do know. There 
are just so many incredible and 
beautiful places on earth. It's hard 
when you go into the forest and 
you see all these interconnected 
species to not see the hand of 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
© 
N
A
S
A
 
  
© 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Li
br
ar
y 
of
 
Au
st
ra
li
a 
      
Drawing of the constellations in the Southern hemisphere by Joannes Janssonius(1661). 
God. But when you step back 
and you see evolution, then it be- 
comes very natural. But it doesn't 
mean it's still not beautiful. If you 
see a rainbow and you know how 
the rainbow works, it still doesn't 
mean it's not beautiful. | was once 
asked “Are you reducing man to a 
jiggling string of corks? Isn't that 
dehumanizing? Doesn't that take 
away the soul?” | said, “Not nec- 
essarily. Sometimes there is even 
more beauty in understanding 
how the machine works 
  
COBE was the first satellite to observe cosmic radiation in 1989. 
14

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

(01o TTR 1) (oN [Eool1=Y Ao V4 Ee) ET MI ET LER CEL RG CX [ETE of YU EC ERE] life? 
ITE RVI SoCo Mole) CY CU CH ETL RG CE CTO ETT ET CET AEE (0 Ted (A LT (T-R[o) 4 [4] 
enowned scientists, Lord Martin John Rees (United Kingdom), Jonathan P. Gardner (United States 
and Francoise Combes (France), tackled the question from different perspectives. 


### 214598: Extraterrestrial life: surprises in store?

EXTRATERRESTRIAL LIFE: 
SURPRISES IN STORE 
| TT 
- 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
  
  say because we don't know how 
life began on earth, so we don't 
  
   
    
    
The search for extraterrestrial life is a fascinating 
aspect of the work of Martin John Rees, 
Baron of Ludlow, whose current research deals 
with cosmic structure formation, 
especially the early generation of stars and galaxies 
that formed relatively shortly after the “Big Bang’. 
The Astronomer Royal, President of the Royal Society, 
Master of Trinity College and Professor 
of Cosmology and Astrophysics 
at the University of Cambridge 
believes we will soon answer the question 
“Are there other forms of life in the universe?’ 
as he told Cathy Nolan (UNESCO). 
even if simple life is com- 
e don't know whether it 
evolves into complex life, 
re could be another planet 
where there are just bugs, or ants, 
nothing else. 
| think it's stupid to have convic- 
tions about a topic where we have 
no idea. | think we should not be 
surprised either way. It could be 
that we are the only life in the galaxy. 
It could be that there's a lot out 
there. But it's a very important 
question and probably this century 
we will settle it. 
It's important, but | wouldn't want 
15 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

EXTRATERRESTRIAL LIFE: SURPRISES IN STORE: 
  
everyone to work on it, because it 
may be impossible. If you're a sci- 
entist, | think it's best to work most 
of the time on a topic where you are 
sure to make some progress. Main- 
ly, it is certain that we will discover 
lots more planets around stars, even 
if we don't know if there's life on 
them. That's a very important sub- 
© 
N
A
S
A
 
r 
Sescecralt ban  
promises to be just as exciting! 
Recently, a couple of planets 
were detected through direct im- 
aging, which is very exciting. Most 
of the planets discovered to date 
are big ones like Jupiter. A small, 
rocky planet like the Earth is a 
lot harder to detect. Future tele- 
scopes will be able to find small- 
Pinyin re omen (OTH) 
Letra 
The future James Webb Space telescope. 
ject. And we'll understand galaxies 
more, we'll find even more distant 
galaxies and do better calculations. 
We'll understand much better what 
happened (at the very beginning to 
create life on Earth), that's the main 
thing. As a bonus, we may find 
some real surprises! 
Galileo’s telescope measured 
only a few centimeters in 
diameter - that of some modern 
telescopesreaches upto 10 meters. 
What discoveries do they hold 
in store for us? According 
to NASA's project manager 
Jonathan P. Gardner, the launch 
of the space telescope James 
Webb in 2013 may herald an 
entirely new phase in aerospace 
research. 
In just the last 10 or 20 years, us- 
ing large new telescopes on the 
ground and Hubble and other tele- 
scopes in space, we have made a 
tremendous number of discover- 
ies that have revolutionized what 
we know about the universe. With 
upcoming missions like James 
Webb, the next 10 or 20 years 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
er planets and tell us a lot more 
about them. 
The next big step will be the 
James Webb Space Telescope, 
which is Hubble's successor. 
After it is launched in 2013, it will 
be able to study the atmospheres 
of transiting rocky planets. 
What astronomers really want to 
do is to find “biomarkers” such as 
ozone and methane in the atmo- 
© 
Ob
se
rv
at
oi
re
 
de
 
Pa
ri
s 
sphere of an Earth-like planet that 
is warm enough to have liquid wa- 
ter on its surface. That would be 
a good indication that the planet 
has life: bacteria, plants, and 
maybe animals. We don't know if 
Webb can do that. We'll try. 
In 1995 two Swiss astronomers, 
Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz, 
made one of the most remarkable 
discoveries of the century. They 
detected a celestial object orbit- 
ing a star that was not our Sun. It 
became known as 51 Peg b — the 
first extrasolar planet. Suddenly, 
the search for extraterrestrial life 
seemed more promising. “Not so 
fast!” warns Francoise Combes, 
an astronomer at the Paris Obser- 
vatory and member of the French 
Academy of Sciences. “There 
could be thousands of solar sys- 
tems neighbouring the Sun, but 
that does not mean we can see 
them” She tells the UNESCO 
Courier's Katerina  Markelova 
about some of the questions at 
the centre of current research into 
exo-planets. 
If we were anywhere else in our 
galaxy, on a distant celestial ob- 
ject, we would never have been 
able to detect Earth with the ob- 
servation facilities available to us 
at present. Our instruments are 
simply not sensitive enough to see 
small telluric [rocky] planets like 
ours. Of the 353 exo-planets, or 
extrasolar plants, that have been 
  
Image taken by the CFH telescope (Canada-France-Hawaii) 
of the star around which CoRoT-Exo-7b orbits. 
16

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

XTRATERRESTRIAL LIFE: SURPRISES IN STORE? 
  
discovered so far, the majority are 
“hot Jupiters”, large gaseous plan- 
ets that orbit very close to their 
stars. The time it takes them to 
make a complete orbit is there- 
fore very short. Planets that are 
further out can take hundreds of 
years to travel the full distance 
around their stars. It would take 
several human lifetimes to see 
them. 
A series of methods can be 
used to detect exo-planets. 
There is the transit method: 
when the planet passes in front 
of its star, it obscures it slight- 
ly. Some 59 planets have been 
discoveredthisway,todate. Seven 
other planets have been disco- 
vered using so-called ‘gravita- 
tional lensing’, where light rays 
from a star are deviated by the 
gravitational field of a massive 
celestial object on the same 
visual axis as the star. But most 
exo-planets have been detected 
using the Doppler effect, which 
allows us to measure the distur- 
bance of the speed of the star as 
its planet passes close by. 
In 2006 the French Nation- 
al Centre for Space Studies 
(CNES) put the Corot (Con- 
vection, Rotation and Planetary 
Transit) satellite into space with 
the mission of finding exo-plan- 
ets similar to Earth. This Febru- 
ary, Corot discovered what was 
then the smallest exo-planet 
ever observed - Corot-Exo-7b. 
Its diameter is barely1.8 times 
that of Earth, its period of revo- 
lution is just 20 hours and it has 
a temperature of between 1000 
and 1500°C. Its density has not 
been determined precisely, but it 
is without doubt a rocky object 
like Earth. 
The European Space Agency 
(ESA) is currently studying 
the possibility of launching the 
Darwin satellite, which will 
mostly be used by ‘exo-biologists’, 
as it is designed to detect traces 
of water and oxygen in the 
atmosphere of exo-planets. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
© 
Au
ge
r 
Ob
se
rv
at
or
y 
The Observatory’s office building. 
 
PIERRE AUGER OBSERVATORY 
On 14 November 2008, the Pierre Auger Observatory was inaugurated 
in Malargue, Argentina. The Observatory is exploring the mysteries 
of the highest energy cosmic rays - charged particles showering 
the Earth at energies 10 million times higher than the world’s 
highest-energy particle accelerator. Launched more than a decade ago 
under the auspices of UNESCO, the observatory is a network 
of 1600 sensors spread over 3000 km? in Argentina. 
The Auger Observatory is a ‘hybrid detec- 
tor’, employing two independent methods 
to detect and study high-energy cosmic rays. 
One technique detects high energy particles 
through their interaction with water placed 
in surface detector tanks. The other tech- 
nique tracks the development of air showers 
by observing ultraviolet light emitted high 
in the Earth’s atmosphere. 
It was at UNESCO Headquarters in 1995 
that the international collaboration in sup- 
port of the project formally got off the 
ground after Argentina’s offer to host the 
southern Pierre Auger Observatory was 
gratefully accepted by all parties. On 13 Oc- 
tober 1998, the finance board of the Pierre 
Auger project met at UNESCO Headquar- 
ters to work on the agreement underpinning 
the organization, management and funding 
of the project. The meeting was graced by 
the visit of then President of Argentina, 
Carlos Menem, who announced that con- 
struction of the Pierre Auger Observatory 
could begin early the following year. The 
project formally came into being in March 
1999 with the signing of an agreement, two 
months before construction of the detector 
began in Argentina. 
The project is named after former UNES- 
CO Science Director Pierre Auger (1948- 
1958), who died in 1993. He is perhaps 
best-remembered for UNESCO's key role 
in the founding of the European Organiza- 
tion for Nuclear Research (CERN) near 
Geneva, which launched the Large Hadron 
Collider [gigantic particle accelerator used 
17 
by physicists to study the smallest known 
particles].on 21 October last year. 
Pierre Auger’s scientific speciality was expe- 
rimental physics, inthe fieldsof atomic(photo 
electric effect), nuclear (slow neutrons) 
and cosmic ray physics (atmospheric air 
showers). After his service with UNESCO, 
he served as Director of the Cosmic Physics 
Service at the French National Centre for 
Scientific Research (1959-1962) and as 
Director-General of the European Space 
Research Organization (1962-1967). 
The Pierre Auger Collaboration involves 
about 350 scientists from Argentina, 
Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, the Czech 
Republic, France, Gemany, Italy, 
Mexico, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, 
Slovenia, Spain, UK, USA and Vietnam. 
Nobel Laureate in Physics, James 
W. Cronin, of the University of 
Chicago, conceived the Pierre Auger 
Observatory, together with Alan Watson 
of the University of Leeds. 
The first research results from the Pierre Au- 
ger Observatory have given fresh insights 
into the properties of the highest energy 
particles in the Universe. These findings are 
summarized in a paper published in Science 
in November 2007. 
Now begins the project's second phase, 
which includes plans for a northern 
hemisphere site in Colorado (USA) and 
enhancements to the site in the southern 
hemisphere. 
World of Science, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, April-June 2009

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

We have no reason to think that the planets in our solar system represent every type 
f planet in existence, according to the Swiss astrophysicist Michel Mayor, who discovered 
he first extrasolar planet with Didier Queloz in 1995. Last April, his team 
1 CX CTY CE RO FTE Y (ol oT [lol CT To RL CXS ET CIS HY CT ET Sl GATT RCo Ts FA 


### 214599: Astronomy: the three tiers of research

  
ASTRONOMY : 
THE THREE TIERS OF RESEARCH 
© 
Jo
hn
 
W
h
a
t
m
o
u
g
h
 
An image of 51 Peg b, the first exo-planet discovered by Michel Mayor 
and Didier Queloz in 1995. 
  
Interview by Marie-Christine Pinault-Desmoulins (UNESCO). 
The great scientific discoveries 
are often the result of chance. 
Was this the case for the first 
planet discovered outside 
of our solar system? 
No, it wasn't a stroke of luck if 
that's what you mean. It was the 
outcome of a long process of re- 
search and the development of 
instruments to accurately mea- 
sure the speed of stars. The 
spectrograph called ELODIE 
at the Provence Observatory 
[France] allowed us to detect the 
first exoplanet and was designed 
precisely in order to look for planets 
outside of out solar system. 
Where we were lucky was in dis- 
covering some planets that revolved 
around their orbit very quickly. The 
orbital period of 51 Pegasi b is only 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
4.2 days. To give you an idea, by 
contrast the orbital period of Jupiter 
is 4332.71 days - approximately 10 
years. It is without doubt that ob- 
jects with a shorter orbital period 
are easier to discover and observe. 
In a few nights you can make obser- 
vations that in other cases would 
take you 10 or 20 years. 
What is your most important 
current research? 
In the short run, | would say that 
the research follows three main 
themes: comparative planetology, 
the detection of lighter planets and 
planetary imaging. 
The first field combines data from 
satellites and ground instruments 
to determine the average density of 
planets. These studies aim to know 
18 
the physics of planets. This is very 
important since we have no reason 
to believe that the planets in our solar 
systemrepresenteverytypeofplanet. 
In theoretical terms we can predict 
that, for example, there are planets 
made of melted ice. This would 
be the case with Neptune. If it ap- 
proached the sun its surface would 
be covered with oceans. But this 
sort of ocean would have nothing 
to do with the type of ocean we 
have here on earth because it 
wouldn't have a rocky bottom 
Regarding the search for lighter 
planets, you must know that until re- 
centlywe'vebeenabletodetectextra 
solar planets that are as small as 
four times the mass of Earth. That's 
already almost 100 times lighter 
than Jupiter! In our jargon, we call

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### 214599: Astronomy: the three tiers of research

ASTRONOMY : THE THREE TIERS OF RESEARCH 
  
them “Super-Earths”. But thanks to 
new instruments we have discov- 
ered a telluric exoplanet only two 
times the mass of earth. [Note, the 
Geneva Observatory announced 
the discovery of Gliese 581 E on 
the 21 April] 
These discoveries are made by in- 
direct measures. At the same time, 
planetary imaging that allows us to 
see the exoplanets directly is taking 
off. At the end of last year, we had 
great success in obtaining images 
of some very large young planets. 
But please note this doesn’t mean 
we will now be flooded with im- 
ages, because the vast majority of 
exoplanets cannot be seen easily: 
either they are already cold, or they 
Planet imaging is a priorit of current research. This image of the Rosette are too close to their stars. 
Nebula, situated 4500 light years from earth, was taken by the infrared spatial Currently, the Geneva Observatory 
telescope Spitzer. rr . . 
is in the process of developing, in 
collaboration with partners, a tool 
called SPHERE for direct imaging 
of exoplanets, which will allow us to 
see these tiny planets. It should be 
m ————————— operational in 2011. More than 200 
people have been working on it for 
over 9 years. 
  
© 
NA
SA
/J
PL
-C
al
te
ch
/U
ni
ve
rs
it
y 
of
 
Ar
iz
on
a 
  
Is there much international 
collaboration in the field 
: of astrophysics? 
Currently the most common collab- 
oration is person to person. There 
isn't any real international collabora- 
tion. It must be said that in certain 
areas it isn't necessary or even de- 
sirable: competition is positive. How- 
ever, the search for life in the universe 
necessitates international collabora- 
tion. This field requires consider- 
able resources and it is probable 
that the existing organizations aren't 
adequate for promoting this type of 
mission effectively. 
This ambitious mission has largely 
been put on hold for budgetary 
reasons, both from ESA (European 
Space Agency) and NASA (National 
Aeronautic and Space Administration 
of the United States). Some re- 
searchers dream of a type of insti- 
tution which could coordinate these 
  
© 
Mi
ch
el
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
    
Michel Mayor, who discovered the first extra studies on a global scale, but for the 
solar planet, participated in the launch of the iS | i inki 
International Gear of Astronomy (UNESCO, moment this is wishful thinking. 
January 2009). 
19 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### 214600: Gross national happiness through literacy

  
“Gross National Happiness” 
© 
Ja
um
e 
Pl
en
sa
 / 
Co
ur
te
sy
 
Ga
le
ri
e 
Le
lo
ng
 
Nn NX va 
. CANIS Ey, La    - 
TrelN-, = — 
4 | 
. So = “ 
“The Thief of Words” (2008) 
     
   
— . eT 
pw So $5 Be 4 . 
through literacy 
Since 1967 UNESCO 
rn of TF RN aE SLA. 
sama bo Hela Ree JE putin A 
by Jaume Plensa (Barcelona, Spain), one of the most 
important international sculptors. 
Throughout the years, these prizes 
have rewarded over 450 literacy 
projects and programmes under- 
taken by governments and NGOs 
around the world. The theme for this 
year's Prizes was “Literacy and Em- 
powerment.” 
The Pashai Language Develop- 
ment Project is a community- 
owned initiative that has defied war, 
cultural hostility to female educa- 
tion and a lack of an existing writing 
system for the dialect concerned, to 
provide education to about 1,000 
participants a year. Founded in 
1999 by SERVE Afghanistan, a 
British NGO, in response to com- 
munity requests for an adult educa- 
tion program, the project is a winner 
of this year's UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy. The organisation 
expanded its work in 2006 with sup- 
port from the provincial government 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
to include classes for girls and now 
provides literacy, livelihood, public 
health and nutrition education to the 
Pashai minority, some of whom were 
completely excluded from the exis- 
ting education systems. Participants 
learn to use written material in their 
local language as well as in Pashto, 
one of the country’s two official lan- 
guages, the other being Dari. 
Tin Tua is an NGO in eastern 
Burkina Faso working to educate 
communities that have some of the 
lowest literacy rates in the world. 
In the Gulimancema language Tin 
Tua means “let's help ourselves 
develop”, a principle their Literacy 
Programme has been putting into ac- 
tion since 1986 across 750 villages 
and hamlets. They now reach 40,000 
learners annually and in recognition 
of their work they are a winner of 
this year's UNESCO King Sejong 
20 
Innovative literacy projects in 
Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, India and the Philippines 
are the winners of this year’s 
UNESCO International Literacy Prizes, 
while a programme in Bhutan received 
an Honourable Mention. 
has awarded annual International Literacy Prizes 
to outstanding efforts in the field of literacy and non-formal 
education. The current prizes are 
the UNESCO King Sejong Prize 
(supported by the Republic of Korea) 
and the UNESCO Confucius Prize for Literacy 
(supported by the People’s Republic of China). 
Literacy Prize. Their participatory 
approach engages communities, 
using any of five local languages 
and offering numerical and literacy 
lessons as well as practical 
lessons about farming, gender, health, 
hygiene and human rights. Their in- 
novative approach has made striking 
changes to the daily life of villagers, 
from enabling farmers to manage 
food production better at the village 
level, by taking measures to stock 
cereals in order to avoid speculation 
in times of famine for example, to 
training health workers, notably in the 
field of maternal health. Staff also say 
that girls who follow the programme 
are less likely to accept forced or 
early marriage. Tin Tua is now shar- 
ing its experience with organisa- 
tions in Benin, Togo, and Niger. 
Khabar Lahariya was a project 
doomed to failure: a newspaper writ- 
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

ten, produced and sold by poor, “low- 
caste,’ rural and barely literate wom- . 
en, in a local language in the region - 
Uttar Pradesh, northern India. Seven 
years later, however, the newspa- 
per which means “news waves” in 
English, has a fortnightly readership 
of over 25,000 and has just been 
awarded a UNESCO King Se- 
jong Literacy Prize. The newspaper 
was started by Nirantar, a women's 
organisation founded in 1993 with 
the aim of promoting literacy and ed- 
ucation for women’s empowerment. 
In 2002 the organisation began se- 
lecting women from marginalised 
backgrounds and training them as 
journalists. Two years on, Nirantar 
and Khabar Lahariya began collec- 
  
© 
Ce
nt
er
 
fo
r 
ge
nd
er
 
an
d 
ed
uc
at
io
n 
  
Khabar Lahariya is an Indian newspaper, 
written and sold by poor women. 
tively offering journalism courses for 
neo-literate and semi-literate women. 
The result has been the only wom- 
en's media collective in the country, 
a newspaper from, about and for the 
village that has raised the voice of vil- 
lagers. Its easily replicated example 
of transformative education is a mod- 
el for women fighting caste, gender, 
traditional role models and lack of 
education. The independent journal- 
ist and women's activist Farah Naqvi, 
who has recently written a book 
“Waves in the Hinterland, the journey 
of a newspaper” about their story, 
states that Khabar Lahariya has “not 
only redefined the very male notion of 
citizenship but turned the very notion 
of women in India on its head’ 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
© 
Ja
sm
in
a 
So
po
va
 
-
_
 J 
~p
 
  
: 
3 oD
, 
, vel a 
HR \ 
I a 
D . a 
x - (J 
~ 
A wall on the metro in Lisbon (Portugal). 
The Municipal Literacy Coordi- 
nating Council of the Municipa- 
lity of Agoo, La Union, Philippines 
has developed a holistic education 
system that aims to encompass all 
within their community. From basic 
literacy and numeracy, to computer 
skills, farming techniques and indig- 
enous crafts — the entire local popu- 
lation has the chance to become 
literateor upgrade their skills. It is 
this vision and ethos that has earned 
them a 2009 UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy. The very old, mar- 
ginalized and neediest in all 49 villag- 
es in the area are served by travelling 
teachers and mobile libraries that en- 
sure the unreached are reached. The 
programme Is also distinguished by 
its unique funding arrangement, with 
the government, NGOs, the private 
sector and international donors all 
contributing. 
The Continuing Education Pro- 
gramme of the Ministry of Educa- 
tion of Bhutan was launched in 1992 
and has since reached over 135,000 
learners, 70% of whom are women, 
and established 700 non-formal 
education centres. lts approach is 
community driven, flexible and par- 
ticipatory with courses ranging from 
literacy and numeracy to health, hy- 
giene, forestry, family planning, ag- 
riculture and the environment. This 
year's recipient of the Honourable 
21 
  


### 214600: Gross national happiness through literacy

Mention of the UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy emphasises edu- 
cation as an integral part of the 
country’s guiding principle, “Gross 
National Happiness”, which aims to 
improve the life of all its citizens. 
The experience of last year's winners 
highlights the positive impact that 
being awarded a UNESCO 
International Literacy Prize makes. 
Since the Adult and Non Formal 
Education Association (ANFEAE) 
in Ethiopia won a 2008 UNESCO 
Confucius Prize for Literacy, 
their voice is being clearly heard by 
the Ethiopian Ministry of Education. 
They are acting as government ad- 
visors to implement adult education 
and are helping to guide national 
adult education curriculum. Similarly, 
the KwaNibela Project, Operation 
Upgrade of South Africa, which 
also won a 2008 UNESCO 
Confucius Prize for Literacy, has 
gone from strength to strength since 
the award. Their raised profile with 
the government has built confidence 
in donors - some have actually 
contacted them asking for funding 
proposals. They are being consult- 
ed more frequently by the Ministry 
of Education, and have also helped 
the Namibian government review 
their literacy curriculum. 
David Jackman, 
UNESCO Courier 
 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### 214601: On living with less, from three points of view

   
ON LIVING WITH LESS, 
FROM THREE POINTS OF VIEW 
How to protect the poor from 
a crisis caused by a few of the rich? 
This was the main question raised 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
at the UNESCO Future Forum g = = 
held last March. | CB - & 
The debate is summarized i | : ow. 
by one of the moderators, 
Alison Smale, in a presentation 
of three different perspectives 
on the crisis and its effects. 
The message arrived one recent 
weekend with a glossy thud: a 
300-plus-page edition of Madame 
Figaro, the French daily’s weekly ode 
to women and beauty, dedicated to 
the first Paris ready-to-wear fashion 
shows since the advent of “la crise” 
in the luxury industry. 
Madame Figaro, like all such maga- 
zines, had been somewhat crisis- 
starved of ads and thus pagination of 
late, but fashion week - and fashion 
houses determined that the shows 
will go on - bulked it up again. None- 
theless, “fashionistas” could not miss 
the main point: times are tough, or at 
least much tougher, as evidenced in 
the 10 detailed tips for “recessioni- 
stas” » about maintaining cool and 
chic even on diminished budgets 
(mostly this seems to involve trawling 
Web sites that will offer you slightly 
used couture on the cheap). 
To get readers in the right mood, 
the French designer Jean-Charles 
de Castelbajac kicked off the edito- 
rial offerings with musings on what 
he called "the democratization of 
beauty,” or “low cost luxury. 
“We are moving irredeemably,” he 
proclaimed, “to this new El Dorado.” 
“Today,” wrote Castelbajac, “'fash- 
ion, luxury and creation must reinvent 
themselves!” A young generation 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
A 
of designers, he insisted, has this 
transformation in hand. Nothing will 
be the same again, and that's for 
the best. Our renaissance will equal 
the measure of our conscience,’ he 
added, because "we carry within us 
a treasure beyond value: imagina- 
tion” 
French ingenuity at pleasing the 
senses - whether through food, wine, 
fine clothes or graceful buildings - 
has survived and indeed thrived for 
many centuries, and Castelbajac, 
himself a veteran of invention, can 
doubtless bank on it safely once 
more. 
Impact of the crisis on 
the developing world 
Across town, a few days earlier, 
sounded a cri de coeur that was just 
as timeless and true: the indignation 
of international aid workers, labor 
officials and others about the ever 
quickening, ever harsher impact of 
the global crisis on the developing 
world. 
UNESCO had summoned a day- 
long conference on this theme, and 
the conclusions of one panel (atwhich 
| moderated) were sobering. Kevin 
Watkins, director of UNESCO's 
Global Monitoring Report on Edu- 
cation for All, summed up the task: 
22 
    y EAN, - 
a — 
Opening of the Future Forum at UNESCO (2 March 2009). 
“What to do to protect some of the 
poorest from a crisis created by 
some of the richest.” 
In his presentation, Watkins coined 
an acronym new to the alphabet 
soup of international institutions: 
ITYBL. In The Year Before Lehman, 
..e. 2007, he noted, aid to poorer 
countries was already falling. Now 
that foreign investment in the devel- 
oping world has slowed to a trickle, 
trade has shrunk, commodity prices 
have fallen, and remittances sent 
home by immigrants in richer coun- 
tries are declining sharply, Watkins 
asked how poor and middle-income 
countries could avoid a drastic fall 
in already meager or subsistence liv- 
ing standards. 
He estimated that the poorest 70 
countries needed about $400 bil- 
lion a year - or about 1 percent of 
the total gross domestic product 
of the 30 (mostly rich) countries in 
the Paris-based Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Devel- 
opment. In the lingua franca of his 
world, that's what it would take to 
maintain hope of realizing the eight 
MDGs, or Millennium Development 
Goals, to which 189 countries com- 
mitted in 2000. Several now look 
truly unrealizable by the target date 
of 2015.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

If anyone had any doubt that broken 
promises like this leave a great deal 
more than a bitter taste, he had only 
to hear the passion of another speak- 
er, Aminata Traore, a West African 


### 214601: On living with less, from three points of view

activist and former minister of 
culture and tourism for Mali. Hers 
was a howl of outrage at the many ills 
bestowed on Africa by the outside 
world, and particularly colonial pow- 
ers. She was loudly applauded. And 
this was before the G-20 meeting in 
London, which while pledging to do 
more for the poorest -- a pledge fol- 
lowed by an energetic push for the 
poor from U.N. Secretary General 
Ban Ki Moon in a meeting of all U.N. 
agencies, the World Bank and the 
International Monetary Fund in Paris 
the following weekend -- sets the 
developed world up for yet another 
test that it may flunk in the eyes of 
the poorest. 
At the UNESCO gathering, Jose 
Manuel Salazar, a Costa Rican who 
heads the employment sector at the 
International Labor Organization, 
was also blunt about the effects of 
crisis on Africa. “It is very clear that 
the crisis will reverse the modest 
gains,’ he said. ‘The effects will out- 
last the crisis!” 
The impact of the crisis on develo- 
ping countries has made few head- 
lines in the Western news media 
compared to the attention heaped 
upon the swindler Bernard Madoff, 
the high-flying investment bankers 
of Wall Street, London and Hong 
Kong, or the trans-Atlantic dispute 
© 
Ph
il
ip
 
T
o
l
e
d
a
n
o
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
E
.
 
Ga
ll
o 
  
  
over what to do first to get out of the 
nosedive: spend, or regulate. 
One interesting aspect of that chat- 
ter was the fall in global markets af- 
ter Moody's Investor Service wrote 
in February that the indebtedness of 
Eastern Europe, and particularly its 
weak banks, would drag down their 
owners, mostly large banks in West- 
ern Europe. 
etary Fund or other institutions for help. 
And so to a third scene of the world in 
crisis, Warsaw. A 24-hour visit in March 
-- around the 10th anniversary of the 
first opening of the West's most exclu- 
sive club, the entry of Poland, the Czech 
Republic and Hungary into NATO - 
found a country calmly determined to 
relay that it is not, thank you, in crisis. 
From the president on down, ac- 
St = 
J] — — 
 
A man from Jaipur (India), the crisis particularly hurts the poor. 
Europe after the crisis 
The crisis has exposed many rifts 
and weaknesses in the European po- 
litical structure so painstakingly assem- 
bled since World War Il. But the coun- 
tries that most recently benefited - the 
ex-Communist nations which regained 
liberty in the 1990s - are not uniformly 
glum, nor are all going hat in hand to the 
European Union, the International Mon- 
  
A disused office in the wake of the bankruptcy of a company. 
23 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
knowledgement of the crisis was plain, 
but gloom was not, as in New York or 
London these days, setting the tone of 
the conversation. 
Indeed, Pavel Swieboda, a former 
diplomat who now heads a think tank, 
the Center for European Strategy, 
jauntily revealed over breakfast that he 
was off to the first of a series of discus- 
sions under the title “Europe After the 
Crisis” 
And, yes, maybe the anniversary and 
the satisfaction of the political elite at 
having spent 10 years in NATO and al- 
most five in the European Union tinted 
the mood. But it was surely refreshing 
to hear people who 20 years ago were 
waging politics underground extolling 
not the joys or woes brought by mon- 
ey, but, at a packed Warsaw Univer- 
sity forum, the many ways in which to 
guard very jealously its best guaran- 
tor — democracy. 
Alison Smale, 
Executive Editor, 
International Herald Tribune

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/214579eng.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

ZN 
        
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour I'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHusaups 
O6beanHeHHbIX Haumin no 
BOMpPOCaM 00pa3oBaHus, 
HayKu 1 KYNbTYpbl 
daaiall any alin 
asl] Lu La ill 
KE EAR. 
BEE ROCEHLAR 
  
  
  
 
  
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°7 
   
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
http://www.unesco.org/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
Director 
Saturnino Munoz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Jasmina Sopova - j.sopova@unesco.org 
Editorial assistance 
Katerina Markelova - k.markelova@unesco.org 
EDITORS 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org 
assisted by Zaina Dufour - z.dufour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org 
English 
Cathy Nolan - c.nolan@unesco.org 
Portuguese 
Ana Lucia Guimaraes et Nelson Souza Aguiar 
a.guimaraes@unesco.org 
Russian 
Victoria Kalinin - v.kalinin@unesco.org 
Photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
and Ariane Bailey 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web Platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
s.roberts@unesco.org 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be 
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” 
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without 
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations 
of the countries and territories concerned.