# [074977](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf) 11

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Publication No oth 
" VOLUME [Il — N°. 2 PRICE : 10 Cents (U. S.), 6 Pence (U. K.), or 20 Francs (FRANCE). Ist MARCH 1950 
— y = TRAE * ~ rv) “A Ty pe # ELEN FF ra   
  
Ad Ry Se SE. 
~ 3 i | 6 i" 
oo BN | | 3 
  
  
   
< A — — . -— 4 - : : = < 
Lone e En I aL TR ee————————— eel | Cplore Rl, "CE VOSSED™ Tey LN BWC fret, 
R
R
R
 
W
h
 
» 
   > y : . 
““ Within the four seas... titmin t e four seas.
~ On the Grand Banks of Newfoundland... along the shores of Baja California. Kamchatka, Cape God, Hokkaido. Vancouver, 
Peru... in the Chatham Islands, the Marshalls, Aleulians, Ieeland, Marseilles, Aran... here is a picture that tells its own story. 
Wherever seas and rivers touch the land, and men embark in the early morning to win their livelihood and sustenance from 
the water, there is a common bond. Man fights to earn his living and to feed his family, but it is not a fight against nature nor can 
it be a fight against his fellow man. It is a common struggle to learn more and ever more of nature’s secrets, a struggle in which 
world-wide understanding and co-operation can raise human life to richer and nobler levels. This picture, helping to tell that story, 
has come from the shore of the Niger River lo the Bank of the Seine in Paris, where school-children can see for themselves, as 
Confucius saw, that... “Within the Four Seas, All Men Are Brothers”. 
Tho LANE ...All men are brothers”

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=2) 2

### 74263: (Julian Huxley)

### 74261: UNESCO helps educational films over frontier barriers

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
      
og 
       
   
Pd = BER TEYER 
EEE ER] | ) LJ 
%. 
. = JR. 
es — tt. p La 
ERE a 
    
8 Re It CK 
-— gr org 
i hd ; 
  
    
E ) 
DUCATIO 
FRONTIER B 
Premier and already famous as a producer of scientific films, hurriedly 
entrained at the Gare du Nord in Paris for Brussels. His only luggage 
was a large case of his films, which King Albert and Queen Elisabeth of 
the Belgians had invited him to show at a palace reception that evening. 
. When the train reached the border a few hours later, M. Painlevé disco- 
vered that he had left his passport behind. But he was able to show Belgian 
customs officials his identity card and the invitation from King Albert. The 
officials were satisfied — certainly he could pass through. But the films — 
that, unfortunately, was another matter. He'd have to pay a heavy duty on 
each one of them, since the Belgian tariff made no distinction between educa- 
tional, scientific or cultural films and purely commercial ones; not even if 
Ox summer afternoon 20 years ago Jean Painlevé, son of the late French 
they were to be shown before the King himself. 
M. Painlevé protested, but the offi- 
cials were adamant. So he went on 
to Brussels, and his films stayed at the 
border. 
“It's a crazy situation, Your Majes- 
ties”, he told the disappointed King 
and Queen that evening. “A film man 
such as myself has been allowed to 
cross the frontier without a passport, 
but my films, the expression of my 
ideas, cannot enter without being 
taxed. 
Campaign To Break 
The Barriers 
ROM that day M. Painlevé fought 
to free educational and kindred 
films from import duties. When 
asked to show his films to interna- 
tional conferences, he would take them 
as far as the border, and, if asked to 
pay duty, would leave them there. 
Travelling on to the conference centre, 
he would explain his problem to the 
delegates and ask them to aid hi 
campaign to free educational films. 
The International Institute for 
Intellectual Co-operation was mean- 
while making a survey of educatiorlal 
film problems through its technical 
agency, the International Institute for 
Educational Films, in Rome. It found 
that, in general, films of high educa- 
tional but doubtful commercial value 
were liable to the same duties as 
“entertainment” films likely to show 
a profit. One effect of this obstacle 
to the international exchange of edu- 
cational films was to discourage pro- 
ducers from making such films. 
The work of the international agen- 
cies resulted in the drafting by the 
League of Nations in October, 1933 of 
the “Convention to Facilitate the 
International Circulation of Educa- 
tional Films”, under which countries 
would exempt imported educational 
films from customs duties and grant. 
them the same tax privileges as might 
be enjoyed by locally produced films. 
The Rome Institute was authorized 
to act as executive agency for the 
agreement and to issue certificates for 
films it approved as being educational. 
By December, 1937, 24 nations had 
signed or ratified the agreement and 
educational films were beginning to 
move more freely. Then, Mussolini 
took Italy out of the League and closed 
the Rome Institute. To keep the 
agreement in force, the other signa- 
tory nations met at Geneva in Sep- 
tember, 1938 and authorized the Inter- 
national Institute for Intellectual 
  
The UNESCO COURIER is 
of UNESCO and to activities an 
cation, science and culture. 
Until now some of our rea 
periodical. In order to permit us to 
subscribers, 
French Francs. 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! 
get them to subscribe too. 
Argentina : 
Australia : 
Belgium : Librairie encyclopédique, 7, 1 
Brazil : Livraria Agir 
Canada : Mr Victor P. Seary, Manager, 
Toronto. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, Sr. D. 
Great Britain : HM. Stationery 
Service) : P.O. Box 569, 
Hungary 
India : 
Lebanon and Syria : 
Mexizo © 
Netherlands : 
Hague. 
Portugal : Unico Portuguesa 
Sweden : 
United States of America : 
2660 Broadway. New York 27, N.Y. 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacién Cien 
Artigas, 1320-24. Montevideo.   
  
 
an international periodical devoted to the work 
d developments throughout the world in edu- 
ders have been receiving free copies of our 
supply the many thousands of new readers 
in almost every country in the world we are undertaking a special drive for 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 US., or 5/- or 200 
Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, 
House, 19, avenue Kliéber, Paris, 16¢, France, . 
Editorial Sudamericana S. A. Alsina S0C Buenos-Aires. 
H A. Goddard Ltd., 255a, George St., 
ue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Editora, Rua Mexico $8-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio-de-Janeiro. 
The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. 
bia : Emili o Martin, Carrera 9a, 1791, Bogotd. 
Vt TA ve Ming René de Smedt, O'Reilly, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Stalinova, 46, Praha XII 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 8. Norregade. Copenhagen. re 
: Li in tan, . asr e , Cairo. : 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan rue 1° r6l. Kiéber 52.00. 
: ice, 19, av. Kléber, Paris (16+ 
Fr SN Sinenery Oftee London : York House, Kingsway (Retail Counter 
London S.E.I. (Post orders). - 
Street. - Edinburgh 2 : 13a Castle Street. - Cardiff : 
Bristol 1 : Tower Lane. - Belfast : 80 Chichester Street. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens. 
: “Ibusz” Akademia-u. 10, Budapest V. . 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Israel : Lec Blumstein, Book and Art Shop, 35, Allenby Roa 
Italy : Messagerie Italiane, Via Lomazzo, 52. Milano. . . 
Librairie Universelle, Avenue des Francais, Beirut. 
Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, Mexico DF. 
: N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Afd. Fondsadministratie, Lange Voorhout 9, The 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 7, Oslo. 
P : Libreria Internacional del Pera, S.A. t : 
bs de Imprensa, 198 Rue de S. Bento, 3° Esq. Lisbon. 
C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. ) 
International Documents Service, Columbia University Press, 
tifica para la América Latina, Unesco, Bulevar 
Co-operation to carry on as executive 
agency, but with the outbreak of 
World War II, the agreement fell into 
abeyance. 
In June, 1946, six months before 
Unesco came into operation, an 
international meeting of mass com- 
munications experts 
that the new agency should sponsor 
a fresh agreement which would take 
the place of the League of Nations 
Convention. This agreement they 
suggested should be broadened to 
include sound recordings and other 
audio-visual materials as well as films; 
it would free these aids from quotas 
and other quantitative restrictions as 
well as customs duties; and it would 
provide for a decentralized system of 
certification in place of the pre-war 
centralized one. 
It took many months and many 
meetings of experts to draft an 
agreement likely to be generally 
acceptable, but the text was finally 
approved by the Unesco General 
Conference when it met at Beirut in 
November, 1948. This first inter- 
national agreement to be sponsored by 
Unesco was circulated to governments 
early in 1949 and was opened for 
signature last July. 
Nations Support New Pact 
[THIN six months, 16 nations had 
W signed it, and the first to ratify it 
recently was Norway. Several 
other governments are also pre- 
paring ratification, and it is expected 
that the total of ten needed to put the 
agreement into force will be obtained 
in the near future. 
The agreement will remove customs 
duties, quotas, licences and other 
obstacles to the exchange, not only of 
educational, scientific or cultural films, 
but also of film strips, microfilms, 
sound recordings, glass slides, models, 
wall charts, maps and posters, to 
name the more important items. It 
will mean that school children in 
devastated Greece, for example, will 
have the latest American maps and 
wall charts sent to them quickly and 
cheaply; that villagers in the Philip- 
pine mountains will learn, through 
films, of the life of other villagers in 
Ecuador or the Lebanon; or that 
teachers and scientists in Brazil will 
keep in touch through microfilms or 
recordings, with the work of their 
colleagues in Norway and the Nether- 
lands. 
  
or directly to UNESCO 
Sydney. 
Manchester 2 : 39-41 King 
1 St Andrew's Crescent. - 
d, Tel Aviv. 
Girén de Wa Unién, Lima. 
recommended 
    — 
  
ARR 
Educational, scientific and cultural 
groups regard the agreement as a 
valuable aid for the removal of the 
many existing barriers to the Iree 
exchange of ideas. Almost every 
week Unesco receives complaints from 
educationists and scientists who have 
been prevented from obtaining films 
for their studies and conferences 
through high import costs and quota 
restrictions. Meanwhile veteran pro- 
ducers like Jean Painlevé look forward 
to the day when their young successors 
will have real encouragement to 
produce films of value, films which 
will be able to circulate internationally 
without being taxed, delayed or other- 
wise obstructed. 
Film Coupon Scheme Planned 
TE ending of legal barriers will 
almost certainly be accompanied by 
even more positive action to make 
such material available to those whose 
access to it has been barred by 
economic obstacles. This would be 
done through a “Film Coupon” scheme, 
on the lines of Unesco’s Book Coupon 
system which enables “soft” currency 
countries to purchase from “hard” 
currency areas. It is expected that 
participation in such a scheme will 
ENT ORL ; 
A LF 
fn FEET oe 
’ FP - * 
  
   
    
  
   
      
1 Sn y fia 
) . 
y & 
\ at “«* > 
Chal JF Sahin IA 
IEE EERE NR    
films, as well as to 16 mm. raw stock 
for printing such films. 
Unesco is meanwhile sponsoring a 
second international agreement which 
would grant duty-free entry to a wide 
range of educational, scientific and 
cultural materials. - They would in- 
clude hooks, newspapers, periodicals, 
travel literature, museum materials, 
paintings and sculpture, as well as 
scientific equipment and audio-visual 
items for educational institutions. 
Under it, countries would also grant 
licences and foreign exchange for the 
import of United Nations and govern- 
ment publications, as well as for 
publications consigned to public 
libraries and other institutions. 
The Unesco General Conference 
decided last October to circulate the 
text of this agreement to Member 
States of Unesco and of the United 
Nations. On the basis of their 
comments, a revised text will be 
prepared for submission to Unesco’s 
General Conference at Florence next 
May. 
The problem of books is perhaps 
even more urgent than that of films. 
Before the war, scarcely any country 
taxed imported books; today over 
50 countries impose customs duties, 
licence systems, postal taxes or other 
restrictions on their international cir- 
culation. It is evident that a for- 
gotten lesson must be learned again - 
that knowledge is a thing no country 
can afford to hamper, limit or tax. 
soon be agreed to hy Unesco’s Member 
States. This currency facility will 
apply to prints, negatives and lavenders 
of educational, scientific and cultural 
  
 
ssides the many agreeable memories Unesco’s Secretariat has of its fiemt . 
General, Dr. Julian Huxley (left. above), the Organisation now has 8 Aga 
souvenirs in the lorm of @ bust executed by the sculptor Jo Davidson (right, above) 
whe claims it is “more like Huxley than Huxley himsel™, f 
The pressntation to Unesco of en intormal ceremony In Unesco House last 
Janucry wes on occasion to recall what the Organisation owes fo Dr. Huxley. 
Appointed Secretary -General to the Preparatory Commission at the beginning of 
IME. Dr. Huxley was faced with the task of preparing a workable programme for 
Unesco out of the suggestions. ideas and pel schemes of experts ia education, 
science end culture. Whilst preparing @ detailed budget, and endeavouring ‘eo 
recruit as international secretariat. he alse hod to try and ensure @ certain amount 
of slfective fimst.aid in the immediate and highest-priocity task of Educational 
reconstruction. 
All this be did with an untiring energy. neverlailing imegination end a sense 
of humour which won lor him the affection and respect of members of his staff. of 
the Executive Board, end delegates to the Ceneral Conference. 
Paying tribute to Dr. Huxley's work, M. Torres Bodel. present Director-general, 
said that only future generctions would be able to appreciate adequately Dr. Huxley's 
contribution to the success of Unesco. 
SOME RECENT UNESCO PUBLICATIONS 
GREAT ANNIVERSARIES SERIES : 
PUSHKIN (1799-1837), by Wladimir Weidlé. Translated by David Scott. pp. 38. | 
Short biography published on the occasion of the 150th anniversary of Pushkin’s 
~ birth. Chief biographical dates. 
Price: $ 0.10, 6d, 20 Frs. 
FREDERIC CHOPIN (1810-1849), by Roland Manuel. pp. 19. 
A short biography of Chopin with a bibliography. 
Price: § 0.10, 6d, 20 Frs. 
GOETHE (1749-1832), by Wladimir Weidlé. pp. 37. 
A short biography of Goethe with principal data and a bibliography. 
Price: $ 0.10, 6d, 20 Frs. 
JOAQUIM NABUCO (1849-1910), by Detailed information on opportun- 
  
Victor Tapié. pp. 39. Translated by 
Jacob Bean. 
A biography of Joaquim Nabuco and 
a history of the movement for the 
abolition of slavery in Brazil. 
Price: § 0.10, 6d, 20 Frs. 
A HANDBOOK FOR THE IMPROVE- 
MENT OF TEXTBOOKS AND 
TEACHING MATERIALS AS AIDS 
TO INTERNATIONAL UNDER- 
STANDING. pp. 172. 
History of the efforts to improve 
textbooks by the League of Nations; 
the programme of Unesco in this 
field; recommendations for action. 
Price: § 0.45, 2/6, 125 Frs. 
STUDY ABROAD, 
International Handbook of Fellow- 
ships. Scholarships and Educationa\ 
Exchange, Vol. II, 1949, pp. 364. 
(155 mm. x 305 mm.). 
ities available in 1949-1950. 
Price: $ 1.25, 6/-, 350 Frs. 
CHILDREN’S COMMUNITIES, by Eli- 
zabeth Rotten, Numerous illustrations 
pp. 32. 
Description of the problem of child 
war victims and its solution through 
the construction of Children’s Com- 
munities; evaluation of the results 
thus far obtained; list of Children’s 
Communities. 
Price: § 0.20, 1/-, 50 Frs. 
WAR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, by 
Dr. Thérése Brosse. (Problems of Edu- 
cation, Vol I). 
A study of the situation of war han- 
dicapped children in Europe; an exa- 
mination of the social problems and 
a description of the general educa- 
tional solutions. (In print). 
Price : § 0.50. 3/- 150 Frs.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

      
         yr rLEw eS 


### 74978: Where men group themselves in co-operative organizations economics and education go hand-in-hand

| WHERE MEN GROUP 
IN CO-OPERATIVE ORGANIZATIONS. ; 
f 
s 
: 
hy 
THEMSELVES 
. 
a
 
ne 
attain a better life through shared learning in co-operative organi- 
O NE among every dozen persons in the world is to-day being helped to 
zations. In India alone there are some 175,000 co-operatives, with a 
membership of well over 10,000,000, getting the elements of fundamental 
education as part of various forms of economic community. On all five 
continents, from central Australia to Zululand, from Germany and Gary, 
Indiana, to Papua and the Gold Coast, vast numbers of men and women 
are living out the intimate connection between “Co-operatives and Fun- 
damental Education”. 
This is the title of a booklet 
prepared for Unesco by Maurice 
Colombain, for many years head of 
the division of co-operation of the 
International Labour Office. It is the 
second of a series, Monographs on 
Fundamental Education, published by 
Unesco, each dealing with a single 
topic or problem in the field of 
fundamental education. The Tirst, 
published in 1949, described the field 
and what Unesco is doing in it to 
create a common ground of human 
advancement for all peaples, especially 
those less favoured by historical and 
other circumstances. 
Co-operative organization was chosen 
as the subject of the second booklet 
because of its unusually ‘wide 
application. In the century since 
co-operatives were first founded, at 
places such as the Westerwald in the 
German Rhineland, they have grown 
to number hundreds of thousands in 
all parts of the world; and they have 
become for their members ~ in 1939 
more than 143,000,000, and now much 
greater - an opportunity for the living 
experience of active education. 
Struggle Against ) 
Ignorance and Inertia 
T HE Co-operative Society is formed 
to serve man’s economic needs. 
The problem of earning a living 
is common to all men and the message 
of the co-operative movement is that 
  
men, by grouping themselves in a 
society, produce and sell more effi- 
ciently. Thus, when a co-operative 
movement is formed the members are 
striving to improve their economic 
conditions. This has a two-fold 
educational effect. First, working 
together in a groyp is itself a most 
valuable form of adult education and 
second, a rising standard of living 
means that better educational facilities 
can be provided for the rising gene- 
ration. 
«The co-operative movement”, 
Mr Colombain points out, “can be 
regarded as a firm ally in the struggle 
against ignorance and inertia. The 
earliest acts of co-operators have al- 
ways and everywhere been to procure 
for themselves and for their children 
the means of education. Experience 
has shown that among backward po- 
pulations, co-operatives simply through 
their working, and independently of 
their economic results, have contribut- 
ed to the intellectual, moral and civic 
training of their members. To work, 
purchase, sell and create together is 
to think together, and to think toge- 
ther is to form communicable ideas, 
that is fo say rational ideas”. 
In French West Africa and in the 
French Cameroons, for example, school 
co-operatives are training children in 
handicrafts. Among the 3,000,000 
Gonds, a tribe living primitively in 
the jungles of the Central Provinces 
of India, a co-operative called the 
Gond Sewak Sangh works with the 
government to set up primary schools 
where children are taught crafts and 
trades; to win over the consent of the 
adults - a primary element in funda- 
mental education - the ancient Karma 
songs and Shails dances are used 
as part of the methods of group 
persuasion. 
Keeping Cemmunity 
Spirit Alive 
¢¢ C O-OPERATIVES and Funda- 
mental Education” describes 
how, in underdeveloped regions 
and communities, the educational me- 
thods of the co-operatives help esta- 
blish new social tissues to replace old, 
dying ones, and provide new bases in 
better living for the community spirit 
kept alive’ by ancient traditions. 
Many of the old groupings are ured 
in the creation of new ones : the Ti- 
mezgida of the Berbers, the Hoh-Hui 
of China, the Chittis of India, the 
secret societies of Equatorial Africa, 
and the organizations of the Bracciahti 
based on co-operation, not only with 
of Italy to nome only a few. 
The second of Unesco’s monographs 
on fundamental education is itself 
based on co-operation, not only with 
the International Labour Office 
(ILO), but also with many experts 
who showed the value of close colla- 
boration in the associated fields of 
fundamental education and forms of 
economic co-operation. Some 45 re- 
ports went into the preparation of the 
booklet to make it a reference work 
on experiments throughout the world 
for the benefit of specialists and field 
workers in fundamental education. 
‘While the co-operatives are an 
economic movement that uses educa- 
tion as an instrument, they are af the 
same time an educational movement 
that stresses the economic bases of 
learning, especially among primitive 
peoples. “The main aim is not to 
make money but to make men”, said 
Father Bernhard Huss who Was 
largely responsible for developing 
credit co-operatives among the Bantus 
of South Africa. “Co-operation”, said 
- C.F. Strickland, “is adult education 
in the business of life’. These views 
are suppo~ted by countless examples 
in the text of the new Unesco booklet. 
Education Defeated 
Sugar Crisis 
N the Ivory Coast, Africans have 
bettered their lives by learning 
how to use modern methods of 
preparing palm oil. In Kenya, edu- 
cation taught that cattle breeding 
could serve a better purpose than the 
traditional display of wealth. On the 
island of Mauritius, education defeated 
a sugar crisis by spreading knowledge 
of mixed farthing. In India and 
  
  
"suitable standard of 
Indonesia it taught the advantages 
of new crop composts and chemical 
fertilizers, in the Punjab and Bengal 
of land reform and irrigation. 
The nature of the co-operative move- 
ment promotes all forms of education. 
This, the Unesco booklet makes clear 
by describing examples among the 
manifold varieties of credit, producing, 
buying, selling, health and hygiene 
co-operatives now functioning. The 
decision to establish a co-operative 
society or to join one, and the co- 
operation which is necessary for its 
running, require knowledge and a 
intellectual and 
moral qualities. 
Dr. Spencer Hatch, a veteran adult 
education leader, is quoted as summing 
up the problem of fundamental edu- 
cation in backward areas in the 
formula: spiritual, mental, physical, 
social and economic poverty form a 
single whole which must be attacked 
from all sides at once. 
In advanced areas, the great task 
of the co-operatives in the field of 
education is the teaching of leaders 
and teachers. The extraordinary 
work being done #5 this end is shown 
through descriptions of activities of 
such institutions as the Extension 
Department of Social Education at 
Laval University, Quebec; the educa- 
  
Union of Great Britain; the Bombay 
Provincial Co-operative Institute in 
India, and many others. Moreover, in 
at least twenty-six countries, for the 
most part in Europe and the Ame- 
ricas, there are school co-operatives 
whose purposes are directly educational 
and cultural. 
Seli-help in World’s 
Backward Areas 
UT it is in the backward areas 
that the effects of the co-operative 
movement are closest to the 
primary goal of fundamental educa- 
tion department of the Co-operative 
  
tion: to help people to help themselves. 
The booklet describes how the peasant 
co-operatives of the African Gold 
Coast, Nigeria, Tanganyika become 
practical professional schools for small 
farmers; how improved living, working 
and thinking grow out of the co-ope- 
rative schooling among the scores of 
millions of members of co-operatives 
in India, Ceylon, China, the Federated 
Malay States, Australia and the South 
Sea Islands. 
Changing Faulty 
Living Habits 
N such regions men are not only 
freed from userers and profiteers 
but from themselves and their own 
bad habits - from faulty habits of liv- 
ing, lack of hygiene, inefficient me- 
thods of farming, competitive extra- 
vagance of ceremonial expenditures. 
Instead of squandering wealth on fire- 
work displays, elaborate festivals and 
tribal rituals, primitive peoples learn 
orderliness, foresight, punctuality, and 
a strict respect for engagements enter- 
ed into. They send their children to 
schools, vaccinate them, improve the 
general health by sanitation and 
hygiéne. 
“By placing them without dis- 
tinction of class or sex within a 
simple framework of self-govern- 
ment in which they become fami- 
liar with democratic procedures”, 
the booklet says, this process 
“trains them in their civic duties, 
reconstitutes a new social fabric 
which prolongs or replaces earlier 
forms of collective life gradually 
dying out, and without destroying 
what is original and fruitful in 
their national cultures, tends to 
establish a natural and free com- 
munication between their cultures 
and the modern world”. 
and Brussels, last month. 
literacy and citizenship training. 
radio and in films.   
  
EXTBOOKS in dozens of little known languages, through which Unesco 
is helping to bring to millions of people in Africa and Asia the 
knowledge which spells a better way of life, were on display in Paris 
The exhibition opened under the auspices of the French National Com- 
mission for Unesco at the Musée Pédagogique, in Paris, cn February 
2nd, and comprised textbooks already in use in Fundamental Education 
projects in Africa, Indo-China and Indonesia. 
Some cof these books, printed in esoteric languages, vernaculars or 
dialects, show the stages of progress already made in advancing illiterate 
people through reading and writing to courses in crafts, hygiene, agri- 
culture, nutrition and vocational subjects. 
as to stimulate the preparation of similar works for new Fundamental 
Education projects, part of Unesco’s world-wide programme in aid oi 
Reflecting the areas of interest, activity and need in adult education, 
exhibits range from a crossword puzzle book for new literates to a « First 
Aid Illustrated », used by mine workers in Northern Rhodesia. 
the literacy primers are printed in large, simple type, for where there 
are no schools, adults are often obliged to study in poorly lit homes. 
Other books are intended for town criers, for use in newspapers, by 
The exhibition, in whose preparation, Unesco and its French, Belgian 
and British National Commissions were assisted by the Indonesian and 
Netherlands Governments was taken from Paris to Brussels where it 
stayed until the end of the month. It can be seen in Amsterdam from 
March 6th to 14th and in London beginning March 20th. 
The textbooks for adults displayed at 
Unesco’s Exhibition in Paris had « 
special interest for M. Torres Bodet. 
Unesco’s Director-General (left). 
Through the intensive campaigns 
against illiteracy which as Mexico's 
Minister of Education he initiated 
and developed from 1943 to 1946. 
more than 1.200.000 Mexicans learned 
to read and write. 


### 74265: Guide books to a better way of life

‘GUIDE BOOKS’ 
TO A BETTER 
WAY OF LIFE 
They are being displayed so 
Some of   

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 


### 74266: Three months progress in UNESCO's world task

THREE MONTHS PROGRESS | (0°S 
 
  
the Courier. 
r
H
 
  
issue of the Courier wen! to press. to examine the 
Organization's curren! activities and to consider 
work plans for the future as well as preparations for 
Unesco's next General Conference. due lo open in 
Florence, Italy, on May 22ad. A full report on the deci. 
sions of the Board will be published in the next issue of 
| HE Executive Board of Unesco was meeting as this 
In preparation for the General Conference. the Board 
rence. 
toxis 
gramme, the methods for carrying 
plans for 1951 which are to be submitted to the Conle- 
Belore dealing with the 
Board considered and adopted a report from M. Jaime 
Torres Bodel. Unesco’s Director-General. on the Organi- 
sation’s work during the past three months. Highlights 
from this report are given below, 
this out 
these questions, 
  
NOVEMBER 1949 - 
JANUARY 1950 
Education 
WOMEN 11 cooperation with 
Unesco’s Education Department, dele- 
gates cf 16 women's organizations dis- 
cussed the problem of women’s access 
to education, and called for action to 
bring present laws into line with the 
educational needs of modern woman. 
ADULT EDUCATION an in. 
ternational catalogue was completed nf 
organizations, teachers and specialists 
working in this field. 
CHINA The experimental funda- 
mental education centre at Pehpei 
continued to carry out its work. The 
Centre is producing interesting film- 
strips in colour. 
ASIA The needs of Burma and 
Thailand in Fundamental Education 
are being studied locally. At the same 
time work begun in Thailand and the 
Philippines last year will be followed 
up. These countries are asking Unesco 
for its help in training their own spe- 
cialists. 
MISSIONS On the request of Bur. 
ma, Bolivia and India, Unesco is pre- 
paring to send missions to study their 
educational problems. 
SEMINARS Two seminars are now 
being prepared for this summer, one 
in Canada on the teaching of geogra- 
phy, the other in Brussels on the im- 
provement of textbooks. : 
Exchange of Persons 
FELLOWSHIPS The fellowship 
pregramme for 1949 concluded with 
provision of eight grants financed and 
six administered by Unesco. Altoge- 
ther Unesco financed 33 and admin- 
istered 87 during the year. The crea- 
tion of five new scholarships to be 
awarded in Asiatic countries by Unesco 
and the Netherlands Government was 
announced at the end of the year. 
Volume II of Study Abroad, Unesco’s 
ccmprehensive handbook of fellowships 
and student exchanges throughout the 
world, describing in detail more than 
21,000 fellowships, was published. 
REFUGEES Unesco referred to the 
International Refugee Organization 
requests, submitted by Member States, 
concerning 200 specialists and experts 
in the fields of education, agriculture, 
medicine and technical work. IRO is 
now studying how to satisfy the re- 
quests. Unesco continues to forward 
suggestions to IRO about the orienta- 
tion, adaptation and the material 
well-being of the specialists after they 
arrive at their new posts. 
Mass 
Communications 
BLIND A Committee for the Blind 
met at Unesco House to discuss unifi- 
cation of Braille and recommended the 
creation of a World Braille Council. 
This organization would co-ordinate all 
ossible future measures and would 
orm national or regional committees to 
co-operate with the central council. The 
Committee also formulated proposals 
for the composition and agenda of the 
International Congress of Experts on the 
Unification of Braille to meet in Paris in 
May. 
TECHNICAL Unesco is continuing 
it's investigation int FAGILITIES Us investigation into 
technical facilities of 
mass communication in the United 
States, Great Britain and Eire. Unesco 
experts have already left to begin simi- 
lar investigations in countries of 
Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Asia 
and Oceania. 
CONVENTIONS Fifteen States 
have already signed an agreement to 
facilitate the international circulation of 
visual and auditory material of an edu- 
gational, scientific and cultural charac- 
er. 
ARID ZONES 1n collaboration 
with the London News Chronicle, 
Unesco has sent the scientific editor of 
that newspaper, Ritchie Calder on a sur- 
vey of North Africa and the Middle East, 
to study problems and resources of the 
Arid Zones. 
MARCH OF TIME on Unescos 
recommendation, “March of Time” has 
made a film highlighting reconstruction 
work in several European countries, as 
well as their present needs. 
Cultural Activities 
MUSIC The first volume of the 
Unesco Archives of Recorded Music 
has been published and is dedicated to 
the works of Frederick Chopin. 
The Organization turned over to the 
Ccnservatoire National de Paris a gift 
of $4000 from the International Music 
Fund, and inaugurated a monthly ra- 
dio programme presenting the works 
of young contemporary composers. 
ARTS The International Review of 
the Arts is being prepared, and will 
soon be published. A second catalogue 
of colour reproductions, devoted to 
painting prior to 1860, has now been 
completed. A second album of repro- 
ductions, prepared with the co-opera- 
tion of the Vatican and devoted to Ra- 
phael’s frescoes, will soon appear. Ne- 
gotiations are in course with the 
Australian Government to publish two 
albums on Australian aboriginal art. 
EXHIBITIONS Travelling exhi- 
biticns organized by Unesco are being 
shown in Australia, Brazil, Ecuador, 
Haiti, India, Mexico, Norway, Iran, Tu- 
nisia, Uruguay and in the British Afri- 
can territories. Many others are being 
prepared. 
LITERATURE Dpiscussions with 
the PEN Club have led to a plan for 
cc-operation including organization of 
an international gathering of writers 
to take place in Edinburgh in August. 
MUSEUMS work is now under 
way for the reconstruction of museums 
in Austria and Italy, and also in con- 
nection with the popular arts in Latin 
America. In Turkey, a programme in- 
velving Byzantine and Moslem ar- 
chaeolegy is being drawn up, and will 
be submitted to the Turkish Govern- 
ment. 
UNESCO COUPONS The sys 
tem cof Unesco book coupons has been 
extended to educational and scientific 
films, and to scientific equipment. 
Italy has joined the Book Coupon 
Scheme, and its usefulness is steadily 
becoming greater in all parts of the 
world. 
COPYRIGHT Unesco has con- 
cluded its enquiry on bilateral agree- 
ments in the field of copyright. The 
results will be published shortly. 
DR. 
DEPUTY 
My dear Director-General : 
When 1 accep- 
ted in Janua- 
ry 1947 my 
appointment as 
Deputy Directlor- 
General, 1 speci- 
fied that my con- 
tract should be 
for not more than 
two years. At the 
time of your elec- 
tion as Director- 
General at the 
Beirut Conference Dr 
in 1948, I submitt- 
ed to you my resignation as Deputy 
Director-General, effective at your con- 
venience. I did this, not only in order 
to give you a free hand in planning 
and selecting your top personnel, but 
also because I felt that, for family and 
professional reasons, I should return 
   
. Laves 
We. H.C. LAVES 
  
D 
of financial controls. 
A social scientist by training, Dr. 
Defence.   
r. Walter H.C. Laves. Deputy Director-General of Unesco since 1947 and top- 
ranking American member of the staff, will leave the Organization at the end 
of June, following the close of the Florence Conference, it was announced at 
last month's meeting of the Unesco Executive Board. 
Dr. Laves was a member of the U.S. delegation to the First General Conference 
of Unesco in 1946, and was appointed Deputy Director-General the following January. 
serving under the Organization's first Director-General, Dr. Julian Huxley. 
During the formative stage of the Organization. Dr. Laves was largely concerned 
with creating the staff machinery and the means to carry out Unesco’s programme. 
This included the preparation of a programme for recruiting personnel. establishing 
staff regulations. budget and administrative procedures, and the creation of a system 
He assisted the Director-General in the development of Unesco’s 
programme, and was charged particularly vith ensuring its coordinated execution. 
Dr. Laves represented Unesco at various international meetings and undertook a 
number of important missions on behalf of the Director-General. He handled the 
top-level negotiations with the military commanders of the three Western zones of 
Germany which resulted in the development of Unesco’s German programme. At 
Lake Success and Geneva he played a leading role in assuring greater co-ordination 
in the work of the United Nations and Specialized Agencies. 
Laves, who was born in Chicago in 1902, has 
behind him a career both as educator and administrator. 
During the war, he held advisory and executive posts with the U.S. Government- 
among others with the Co-ordinator of Inter-American Affairs and the Office of Civilian 
He served as adviser to the U.S. delegajon to the U.N. Conference in San 
Francisco, the first Assembly of the U.N, in London, the Economic and Social Council. 
the International Labour Organization and the first General Conference of Unesco. 


### 74268: Dr. W.H.C. Laves resigns his post as Deputy Director-General of UNESCO

RESIGNS HIS 
DIRECTOR-GENERAL 
  
to the United States after my two years with Unesco. You asked me then, and on 
subsequent occasions, to continue my work through the 1950 Conference, sche- 
duled to be held in Florence in the spring of 1950. I feel now that, contrary to 
suggestions that I should remain until the end of the year, you should definitely 
not count on me after 30 June 1950. 
I shall of course continue to serve you and the Organization to the best of 
my ability until that time, but I hcpe that you will proceed with finding my 
successor, so that he may take over when I depart. 
In the meantime, if you agree, I believe that this letter, together with any 
reply you may care to make, should be made public. 
Sincerely yours, 
Walter H.C. LAVES, 
Deputy Director-General. 
OF 
WORLD TASK 
Natural Sciences 
SCIENTIFIC EDUCATION |, 
the fleld of Natural Sciences. Unesco 
has undertaken the preparation of ten 
volumes on the teaching of science, 
especially designed for under-deve- 
loped countries. It has also completed 
plans for a scientific museum to be 
opened by the City of Montevideo in 
Uruguay. 
Unesco also held an important confer- 
ence on the co-ordination of medical 
science congresses, and work continues 
for the foundation of an International 
Institute of the Arid Zone, and the esta- 
blishment of an International Computa- 
tion Centre. 
Social Sciences 
SOCIAL RESEARCH A com- 
mittee set up by Unesco to make a 
study of the origins of Fascism, has 
completed plans for a forthcoming 
bcok on this subject. 
At the request of the Government of 
India, Unesco has appointed a coun- 
sellor to direct a study on social ten- 
sions in India. 
Reconstruction 
RELIEF Twenty-four relief projects 
prepared by Unesco provide principally 
for the supply of materials on adult 
education, handicapped children, mu- 
seums, and the provision of scientific 
and artistic equipment. 
«“ ORADOUR ” 1n collaboration 
with Unesco, the French National 
Commission for Unesco is now examin- 
ing a project to create a children’s vil- 
lage in “Oradour”—the French Lidice— 
for orphans of deportees and political 
prisoners who died in captivity. 
MIDDLE EAST Donations re- 
ceived by 
REFUGEES Unescae during 
the past three months bring to 
$113,907, the funds provided for educa- 
tional assistance to child refugees in 
the Middle East. 
GREEK CHILDREN Twenty in- 
ternational organizations have decided 
to collaborate with Unesco in its 
pregramme of educational assistance 
for Greek child refugees. 
WORK CAMPS Two projects 
IN THE LANDES for voluntary 
work camps in 
the fire-regions of Tne Gironde and the 
Landes are at present under study with 
the French National Commission. 
Germany and Japan 
Unesco’s aims and activities are 
being explained to the German people 
through special exhibitions and lectu- 
res. The creation of a Liaison Com- 
mittee on Unesco is being considered. 
The anniversary of the Declaration of 
Human Rights was celebrated both in 
Germany and Japan. 
POST AS 
UNESCO 
«My dear Dr. Laves, : 
T was with very sincere regret tha 
I I learned from your letter of the 
5th January that you had dect- 
ded to leave us on the 1st July of this 
year. 
Several times in the past, as you 
yourself recall, I have urged you to 
stay in the Organization which you 
have served so well and which owes 
so much to your efforts. I should 
have liked to think that we could con- 
tinue together the work which we both 
have so much at heart. But in the 
light of the personal reasons which 
you mention in your letter, I realize 
that I cannot do otherwise than ac- 
cept your decision, although I do so 
with very great reluctance. 
When you leave, you will have the 
satisfaction of knowing that you have 
succeeded in your mission and thal 
you have nursed the Organization 
through its infancy at a time when 
it stood most in need of your help. 
The organization and discipline 
which Unesco possesses today and which are essential in an institution as com- 
plex and many-sided as this is, are due in large measure to your initiative and it 
is no exaggeration to say that its whole being has been deeply influenced by 
your personality. Your devotion and enthusiasm combined with your outstand- 
ing qualities of leadership and administration will remain a source of inspira- 
tion for all of us. 
I myself shall remember you as a colleague for whose counsel and help I have 
had the highest esteem and regard. I know that you will always be a firm 
friend of Unesco, and I trust that, in the important duties to which you may be 
called, I shall be able to count on your co-operation. 
I shall of course lay your letter together with this reply before the Executive 
Council at its next session. 
Let me say once again how sorry I shall be to lose you and accept on behalf 
of myself and the Organization sincere good wishes for your future success. 
Yours very sincerely, 
JATME TORRES BODET, 
Director-General.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 74980: To give new life to geography lessons a West African village comes to Paris

TO GIVE NEW LIFE 
TO GEOGRAPHY LESSONS 
not every schoolboy can afford to take a trip of thousands of 
T HE best way to learn a country’s geography is to live there, but 
miles to supplement his textbooks. 
The next best approach, a group of French teachers decided last 
year, was to bring the country to the pupil. That was the motive 
behind a three-month expedition to French West Africa sponsored 
last summer by the French Teaching League (Ligue Francaise d 
I’Enseignement), and led by Pierre Fourre, a teacher in a Paris Ly 
The expedition bore results several weeks ago when the Les 
opened an exhibit depicting life in a native village of French West 
Africa. More than two thousand 
school-children visited this corner 
of Africa transplanted to a display 
room on the Left Bank of the Seine 
in Paris. 
For these children, and thousands 
more in other French cities which 
the exhibit will visit, this is a novel 
and effective way of learning geo- 
graphy. Even from the photo- 
graphs brought back by the expedi- 
tion — a few of which are shown 
on this page — they can obtain a 
comprehensive pictorial impression 
of the way of life, customs and acti- 
vities of the people. However, the 
most effective lessons are learned 
: . 
EI A SSS 
“through the {hree-dimensional 
exhibits. 
“Air View’ of Nere-Koro 
EACHING the exhibition, the son 
of a Paris grocer or of a Bou- 
logne factory worker might 
well imagine himself arriving by 
air in French West Africa. There 
below him is the River Niger and, 
on one of its banks, the village 
of Nere-Koro. The village (a redu- 
ced scale model in plaster) shows 
him exactly how a native commu- 
nity lives on the banks of a river 
which supplies the livelihood for 
nearly all of the village's working 
population. 
The village itself is dominated by 
a mosque and dotted by small cir 
cular silos where tlie population 
stores its precious millet harvest, 
cultivated during the short rainy 
season. Its dwellings consist of 
thirty tinv huts, with minature 
rafters jutting out of their sides lo 
support their earthen roofs. In the 
centre lies the communal pond 
where the population of Nere-Koro 
obtains its drinking water, 
From this bird's eye view of Nere- 
- a Les ay Se 
Koro, young visilors pass next to a 
corner of the village itself. This 
is a full-sized replica of the en- 
trance to a native home, reconstruc- 
ted in plaster. There are no millet 
fields and the River Niger is mis- 
sing, but the next best things to 
liven up a geography lesson are 
there, 
As he picks up one of the agricul- 
tural tools at the hut's entrance, a 
boy begins to appreciate the amount 
of hard work that goes into the 
cultivation of a millet crop when 
only primitive implements are 
available. Visitors are particularly 
impressed by the “daba” — a wood- 
“en-handled instrument of hammnier- 
ed iron—which serves its users for 
everything from a pick to a plough. 
And, as a girl examines the weaving 
loom used by native women to make 
cloth for blankets and clothes, she 
marvels at the skill and patience 
that goes into the finished product. 
Another interesting sidelight on 
the life of another peopie is the 
exhibit’s section on tribes still prac- 
ticing fetishism, where photographs 
illustrate the tribal method of for- 
tune telling. This consists of 
tracing symbols and placing twigs 
in the sand, then sowing the sand 
A WEST AFRICAN 
VILLAGE COMES TO PARIS 
JUST LIKE THE REAL THING. French 
schoolchildren, visiting the Paris exhibit on 
life in French West Africa (above) examine 
an exact model of Nere-Koro, a village on 
the Niger River. Dr Francis Corde, medical 
man of the expedition which brought back 
the exhibit materials, explains that in 
villages like Nere-Koro or Mopti (photo on 
left) homes are made of “bance” — beaten 
earth mixed with straw. The family lives 
in one room, the second generally housing 
several sheep. In the courtyard there is 
usually a loom. One end of the cloth being 
woven is attached to a stone. just outside 
the courtyard entrance show: in the photo. 
  
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
    
   
 
 
 
  
  
with peanuts. The following morn- 
ing, the seer loooks at the tracks 
ieft by animals who ate the nuts 
during the night, and thus tells the 
future. 
From Dakar 
To Timbuctu 
LL this material and data was 
collected by the expedition, 
partially financed by the 
French Ministry of Education, on a 
trip from Dakar to Timbuctu, the 
door to the Sahara Desert. Its 
members, who included photogra- 
phers, film cameramen, a geography 
specialist and a naturalist, first 
{ravelled by train and then trans- 
ferred to a truck. They made part 
of their frip in a native canoe 
constructed of two hollowed-out 
logs lashed together. While aboard 
their canoe, they were caught by 
one of the 31 tornadoes they expe- 
rienced during the rainy season and 
forgot about education for a night’ 
while they bailed to keep afloat. 
The results of this new approach 
to geography teaching so far have 
been promising, and the Teaching 
League now plans to send the same 
group on another expedition this 
summer. Their destination will 
probably be French Equatorial 
Africa, since this will enable them 
to report on life in a forest civiliza- 
tion instead of a river society, such 
as they visited jast vear 
As in most native communities, 
weaving has an important place 
among village handcraft industries 
of French West Africa. Using pri 
mitive looms, natives weave the 
. cloth in bands. nine inches wide. 
Sewn together, side by side these 
are made into blankets or clothes. 
  
FOOD FROM THE SEA. At Yoff, 
near Dakar, French West Africa, 
the native fishing boats have just 
returned from a trip. Fishermens’ 
wives carry their wicker baskets of 
fish from the boats and empty the 
catch on the beach, which conve- 
niently serves as fish market.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNESCC COURIER — Page 6 
    
   
a 
= pT onB 
TQ MEDITE 
. 
~ a ———— — 
— 
: 4 7 
or... Te 5 Tam 
. -~ 
or many generations, and on every continent, the yellow sand and the grey dust 
F of desert areas spread like an ugly flood across the green grass upon which human 
life fundamentally subsists. Here and there, and now and then, the desert’s 
advance was stopped, and sometimes pushed back, but, today, the arid and semi- 
arid zones of the earth cover about one-third of the land surface of the globe. 
Today, too, there are more men, women and children than have ever existed before. 
Now, more than ever, it is true that man cannot live on only two-thirds of the world. 
He needs it all. He does not accept and he need not accept the thought that his 
greater numbers mean greater misery. Man demands and has the means to get a 
better life. 
For these reasons, the story of “The Desert Against Man” is being rewritten. Now 
it must be “Man Against the Desert”. Most of the desert areas of the world were 
once fertile. Why do they no longer support life? What is needed, in the way of 
water, fertilizers, farming methods, to reclaim them for human use? 
Ritchie Calder, Science Editor of the British News Chronicle, working in collabo- 
ration with the Natural Sciences Department of UNESCO, has gone to the classic desert 
of all deserts, the Sahara, and is going on to other arid regions in the Middle East, for 
answers to these and other questions. 
Mr. Calder is not only undertaking a great and vital task of exploration, but a big 
and unique reportorial and educational job. It is not enough for a few experts to know 
what can be done to make the deserts useful, for the men and women of many countries 
must also know—so that they will agree to support and help carry out the necessary 
measures. It is not enough for the older generation to know—for they cannot com- 
plete the task, and the “older generations” have had a mixed record anyway in the 
Wise use of the land. The children must also know, for the biggest part of the job is 
or them. 
Accordingly, Mr. Calder is writing a series of articles for his paper, which will be 
distributed to newspapers throughout the world by UNESCO. In collaboration with 
the News Chronicle, the British illustrated weekly Picture Post is preparing text 
books and film strips for schools. Other publications in several countries will deal 
with various aspects of the trip. Results of Mr. Calder’s studies will be widely used 
in school courses in England dealing with history, scripture, economics, geography 
and current affairs. 
On these pages, the UNESCO Courier reprints the first three stories by Mr. Calder 
in his series, “Men Against the Desert”. So 
Before leaving Paris 
for North Africa, Rit- 
chie Calder had an in- 
terview with M. Jaime 
Torres Bodet, Director- 
General' of 
who told him : “Your 
articles, 
ing public 
tion to the challenge 
and possibility of the 
desert, will render «o 
valuable international 
service.” This 
shows Ritchie Calder 
(right) discussing this 
Unesco 
M. Torres Bodet. (cen- 
tre) and Raymond Kle- 
photographer, accomp- + 
anying Ritchie Calder. 
   
Xx © adh 
Unesco 
by awaken- 
imagina- 
photo 
project with 
  
the Picture Post 
3 , 
‘naires’.  
Es CSN tl = a 
by RITCHIE CALDER Science Editor of the London News Chronicle. 


### 74271: Men against the desert: a new Sahara 'garrison'; the desert scientists

A NEW SAHARA ‘GARRISON’ 
v
e
h
 
- THE DESERT SCIENTISTS     
“FORT BENI ABBES — (Lat. 30° N., 
Long. 0:2” W.) 
     
gion” plunges suddenly over the 
T = “Boulevard of the Foreign Le- 
Edge of Beyond. And there, on the 
opposite side of the canyon, is the Saharan fortress of Beni Abbes, on a ridge 
against mountainous sand dunes. 
“Look!” cried Cvijanovich (hereinafter called “George”) pointing to what might have 
been an infant fortress on an adjoining ridge, “that is the laboratory of the Centre 
of Saharan Research”. 
This was what he had been promising me all the way—from the Paris café on the 
Champs-Elysées, through the snows on the Atlas Mountains, through the hailstorm 
on the High Plateau and across the cold (yes, very cold) desolation of the Sahara 
which separates Beni Abbes from Colomb Bechar, the capital of Algerian Sahara. 
George is a scientist infatuated with the desert, and this was his homecoming. And 
in that first glimpse of white battlements tinted with the hues of a desert sunset I 
understood. 
It was worth the tribulations of that 
journey of a thousand miles (or in 
nomad measurements 40 camel-days) 
from Algiers. It was worth the bone- 
jarring jolting over that trail which some 
humorist has signposted as “The Boule- 
vard of the Foreign Legion”—a road 
across black misery of sun-enamelled 
rocks, through ravines where men died in 
ambush, across sand crusted like a merin- 
gue, with a thin layer of sun-fused glass. 
This was a trail first beaten out by the 
pads of camels, then by the weary boots 
of marching men, and now by the enorm- 
ous wheels of the trans-Saharan trucks 
and of military cars like the one in which 
we travelled. 
ILLUSION ENDS 
nd then to drop into the precipitous 
A valley of Oued Souara, with its fortress 
and its “Scorpion Oases”, at the sun- 
set when the muezzin was calling the 
Faithful to prayer — “Allah ila la Allah” 
— and when a camel caravan out of the 
Great Western Sand Desert was settling 
down for the night, with brushwood fires, 
in the square of the cases — that was 
our recompense. 
The young commander of Beni Abbes, 
Capt. Clarisse, and his beautiful wife 
were waiting for us at the gate of the 
fortress which once housed a regiment 
of men. The Goum sentries passed us 
through. And there the illusion of mili- 
tary might ended. 
The citadel of Beni Abbes houses barely 
a platoon. In these days, when the slave- 
raiders from the mountains of Morocco no 
longer harry the desert oases, Beni Abbes 
is the civil affairs administration of an 
area as big as Yugo-Slavia with a popu- 
lation of 20,000 living in near-starvation. 
The young captain, who embodies in 
his person the entire government, glows 
with Gallic excitement when he talks of 
his plans. Always it is water, water, wa- 
ter, and the new crops and animals which 
could be produced if only there was 
enough water, 
In this modern military task he does 
not need the rifles of the Foreign Legion 
or the death-or-glory exploits of the 
‘White Squadron, the camel corps. He 
needs his new “garrison”, the desert scien- 
‘tists, with their laboratory as their for- 
tress. 
They might be called the new “legion- 
George, for instance, is a state- 
less Yugo-Slav, with a refugee passport a 
yard long and the Research Centre was 
the inspiration of another refugee-— 
Mr Menchikoff, a Russian. 
As we came through a grim defile we 
passed a memorial on the spot where the 
Research Centre of the Sahara might 
have perished. There is a memorial to 
General Clavery and his Foreign Legion 
escort who were massacred in a Moroccan 
“rezzou” or raid on their way from Beni 
Abbes to Colomb Bechar. Menchikoff 
should have been in that party. 
Today he is a professor in Paris and 
creator and director cf the Saharan 
Centre, which has its resident staff 
but is also the headquarters for visiting 
scientists from Algiers and Paris. 
There is a biologist, Franklin Pierre, 
who is assisted by his young wife, a civil 
servant from Paris, who came toc Beni 
Abbes to be married by “Le Capitaine” 
and to receive the church benediction 
frem a desert priest who travelled 350 mi- 
les for the ceremony. 
With Pierre I went off into the sea of 
sand as vast as the North Sea to inspect 
his instruments and dig for beetles and 
insects. 
This is not just entomological curiosity. 
These beetles are insect-camels, which can. 
store. water for three months. How they’ 
find water and how they live has human: 
significance. 
UNDERMINED BY TERMITES 
ith Philip Guinet, the botanist, 1 
WW explored the experimental nurseries 
where desert plants are studied and 
where the food plants from other parts of 
the world, which might replace them, are 
tested. 
And I saw the miracle which water can 
work in desert sand—mandarin oranges as 
big as grape-fruit, potatoes, cauliflower, 
asparagus, etc. And I saw the ravages of 
the inevitable sparrow, which with the 
jerboah, or desert rat, is the plague of the 
desert gardener. 
I saw, too, the tearless despair of the 
desert scientist. All the way from Paris, 
George, the geophysicist, had hugged like 
a bridal bouquet a delicate magnetometer 
for the magnetic laboratory which for, 
eighteen months he had mined out of the 
sand and rock, 60 ft. beneath the ridge. 
‘With pride he opened the door to 
enthrone the instrument which he haa 
been all the way to Paris to fetch. 
Tragedy! The termite, the white ant, 
had done its own mining and undone 
his work.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=7) 3

### 74271: Men against the desert: a new Sahara 'garrison'; the desert scientists

“covered with hoar frost, 


### 74272: Goodbye to another illusion: the rainless desert

GOODBYE TO ANOTHER ILLUSION 
— THE 
THE WELL OF IGLI (Lat. 30° 40” 
  
long. 0° 20” W). 
' RAINLESS DESERT ' 
cheolday illusions about the Sahara aS disappear quickly in the Sahara. 
Indeed, the only “illusion” which is 
real is the mirage, 
The illusion which I resent most is the “till the sands of the desert grow cold” 
idea. I have been colder in the Sahara than I was in Greenland. 
I have been wearing a windproof coat, a camel-hair undercoat, a tweed suit, a 
pullover and winter underwear, and at high-noon, as we drove in the command car, my 
teeth have been chattering. 
Believe me, it is winter in the Sahara, with a north-east wind which cuts like a 
knife. The French officer who is escorting us is wise: he wears an Arab burnous, that 
all-service garment of the nomad, a heavy, hooded cloak of camel hair which is at 
“once an overcoat, a blanket and a self-contained tent. 
Frost on the Desert 
he cold has made George, the geo- 
physicist, “hopping mad”. He despe- 
rately wants a photograph of “la 
dune blanche” which means a sand dune 
He wants it as 
visible proof of the dew in the Sahara, of 
water in the “arid” sand. 
It explains a great deal of the mystery 
of the hydrological cycle—water-evapora- 
tion-condensation-water-wells—in which 
the scientists here are convinced that they 
have a practical answer to the desert 
problem, 
‘What annoys him is that Sergeant Wal- 
ter, the keeper of the barrage at Igli, 70 
miles north of Beni Abbes, has been seeing 
“la dune blanche” for a week, for ten mi- 
nutes at a time. 
Sergeant Walter is a classic example of 
“man against the desert”. He js a giant 
German who at 656 has the poker-back of 
the legionnaire. In 1913 he quarrelled 
with his father, left Germany and joined 
the Foreign Legion—in the violent, ruth- 
less days of Beau Geste, and of men who 
chose to be forgotten. 
  
FOSSATUM AfRICAE. — Among the first men 
to fight against the desert were the Romans. In 
Southern Algeria, on the frontiers of their Afri 
can possessions they erected fortifications, around 
: which colonies arew up. This aerial photograph 
shows traces of irrigation works comprising low 
- stone walls which retained flood waters, thus 
preventing it from being quickly lost and eroding 
the soil. (Photo taken from « Vue Aérienne de 
L'Organisation Romaine dans le Sud Algérien »). 
All his life was spent in the desert and 
. when he retired he could not leave it. 
“Sand Rose > In Crystal 
ow he is a solitary white man, keeper 
of the waters where Oued Cuir joins 
Oued Saoura. An “oued” is what 
appears on maps farther east as a “wadhi” 
—a river which flows intermittently. 
V
E
 
EG
A 
S
A
R
I
N
 
R
I
T
 
ci
el
 
At the time of a “crue” or spate it races 
from the Atlas, a wall of water which may 
be ten feet high. For a few brief days it 
courses as a river, spreads itself over the 
valleys and disappears eventually into the 
sand wastes to the south. 
His job at the barrage is to see that the 
flood-waters are directed into irrigation 
canals and basins where it will linger a 
little longer. 
He produced for me a “sand rose” as big 
as a flower-show cauliflower. George will 
tell you that this “rose” is another proof 
of the abundance of Sahara dew, for it is 
an aggregation of sand-crystals, with 
“petals” with fine veins, but as hard as 
quartz. These crystals grow from a com- 
bination of dew and sand and sun. 
“Rain-Makers > Visit 
ur mission may become legendary in 
O the desert—as the visit of the “rain- 
makers”. ‘We brought the first rains 
to North Africa, the first snows to the 
Atlas, hail and rain to the High Plateau, 
and as we journeyed south places which 
get less than two inches of rain in ten 
years have had a millimetre or two as 
cur “baksheesh”. 
At one place, under a cloudless sky, an 
Arab was frantically making irrigation 
canals. To our surprised interpreter he. 
said a “crue” was coming. He must have 
smelt it. Two hours later there piled up 
the blackest, most sinister, thunderstorm 
I have ever seen, turning daylight into 
night. 
‘We caught the flcunce of its rain, but it 
broke over the mountains. 
Lightning in the desert does extraor- 
dinary things. As the fork strikes the 
dunes it fuses the sand into glass. I have 
a hollow glass tube as a souvenir of 
“lightning-glass”. One of George's jobs in 
this remote outpost is to study electric 
storms. 
No Slaves To Sacrifice 
0, on our transitory experience of this 
part of the Sahara another illusion— 
the “rainless desert”— has gone. 
The sparse rain itself is no solution, 
except accumulatively and in the mecha- 
nism of desert dew. Rain on the rocky 
desert evaporates and is gone, but in the 
vast sand dunes it is not necessarily so. 
The dunes are like a sponge, which 
apsorbs water two ways (probably), by 
rain (recondensed as dew and reabsorbed) 
and by upward seepage from the water- 
bearing strata. 
This “sponge” explains the “foggara™, 
the mine-shafts which one sees in the 
cliff-faces from which a steady flow or 
water persists at all seasons. These tun- 
nels go many miles into the earth, drain- 
ing the water. They are age-old, tunnell- 
ed by slaves into the collapsing earth. 
Now they are choking up. There are no 
slaves tc be sacrificed and no mechanised 
equipment. 
cr--e 
|__| SEMI-ARID 
Bl ocseer   
  
DESERT 
ZONES OF THE WORLD 
) Pry, ~ 
|.) 
AND SEMI-ARID 
"metres, only 
“on the Arid 
  
'WASTELANDS OF THE WORLD. — Egypt is about 96 ¢; arid. Of nearly one million square kilo- 
.000 are arable. 
ports 570 inhabitants per square kilometre. 
$ square kilometres. 
In 
Twenty million peogle live on this arable land which thus sup- 
the arid zone there is one inhabitant for every 
Facts such as these. revealed at the recent meeting of the Committee of Experts 
Zone project of Unesco, illustrate the immensity of the “food and people” problems 
“in the arid and semi-arid regions of the world. One of the recommendations made by the experts 
aimed at pooling world experience to attack such problems was for the creation of an International 
Council for Arid Zone Research. . 
{I
RE
 
i 
 
Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 74273: Ploughshares have replaced rifles in the Sahara

PLOUGHSHARES HAVE REPLACED 
RIFLES IN THE SAHARA 
FORT ABADLA (Latitude 31° N. 
  
longitude 0° 50” W) 
cc law, we have freed the slaves. In 
I fact, there is too much left of the 
feudal past”, said Col. Quenard, 
administrator of a territory consi- 
derably larger than T'rance itself, when I saw him in Colomb Bechar, 
And he explained. 
few people. 
such as it is, and shelter. 
For them the landless work for their “keep”. 
Land and water rights in the desert are in the hands of very 
They are paid in food, 
“Shelter” may be the labyrinth if the “ksar”, the enclosed village in which the 
streets are pitch-dark tunnels, with the sleeping quarters cverhead and the stables 
and byres en the ground floer. 
chocolate in a downpour. . 
Money wages are unknown, but ex- 
cept in mutual catastrophe, dependants 
would never be allowed to starve, But 
they cannot escape their servitude 
except by trekking north to even 
greater squalor in the ports, already 
overcrowded with migrants from the 
desert. 
“Liberation can come only with the 
provision of new water supplies and 
the creation and settlement of new 
lands”, said Col. Quenard, “then we 
can give a freer and fuller life to the 
peoples of the Sahara.” 
On the wall was a great map of the 
Sahara on which his predecessors pre- 
viously disposed troops and on which 
‘he now pointed out to me the develop- 
ment areas already in progress. On 
his suggestion, we came to Abadla and 
visited Taghit en route. 
Taghit is a picture-postcard version of 
the desert. There is a red Legionary 
fort guarding an oasis in a valley 
between smoking sand dunes. These 
mountains with their windswept plumes of 
sand might pass for volcanoes. Looking 
down from the fort battlements on the 
palm-treed oasis, one would say “This is 
a paradise”. And judging from the number 
of “marabouts” or little temples conse- 
crated to the memory of Moslem saints, 
the Arabs must find it a particularly holy 
place. : - 
I 
NEVER SEE BREAD 
UT the sole diet of the 3000 hu- 
man beings who live in the five 
villages “paradise” is dates and water. 
They never see bread because they 
have nothing to exchange for flour. 
The soil is inhospitable. The river 
bed is encrusted with salt as thick as 
snow. They are to try a tobacco crop 
there to barter for flour. 
Abadla, 60 miles to the west, is a very 
different story. The approach to the valley 
of the Guir is forbidding, through grim de- 
files and over a wilderness of slatey grey- 
ness, a Golgotha of desolation. 
Then over a ridge, one is dazzled by 
glitter of surprising greenness. “Surpris- 
ing” because in the Sahara. where the 
famarisks, the jujubiers, the serub and the 
plants are a dusty lavender grey, one for- 
gets what greenery looks like. 
This, in the middle of the desert, was a 
field of wheat and beside it the prosperous 
market garden of the military post. 
We drove for miles across the basin of 
Ot huts of sunbaked clay, which would melt like 
the Guir, over. a surface as hard as 
concrete. But it was sand-baked silt, 
inches thick, deposited by the spate of the 
Guir, scouring the eroded soil of the 
Moroccan Atlas and leaving it here. 
The agricultural engineers of the 
Society of Rural Amelioration showed 
how, with tractors, soil-breakers and 
disc-ploughs, they break up the sur- 
face and find rich damp soil under- 
neath. The scheme is to create units 
of 1000 acres, with a heavy tractor, a 
light tractor and implements for each 
unit, on a collective farming basis. 
The Arabs will have their farms and 
will hand over a fifth of the produce 
for supplying other parts of the 
Sahara. 
= COTTON NEXT 
O VER 50.000 acres of this valley, which 
is 30 miles long and three miles 
broad, are already scheduled as 
valuable soil and the total may be as high 
as 125.000 acres. The “crues” or spates of 
the Guir will be controlled by a traditional 
Arab system of successive weirs instead of 
a great dam. A dam would choke with 
silt. The shallow basins will collect the 
silt and become rich acres themselves, with 
the river being periodically diverted over 
new weirs, 
Colonel Quenard reckons that the 
grain from the Guir and from a 
second desert valley can supply not 
only the entire bread needs of the 
“Sahara, but provide a surplus for 
export. Apart from grain and other 
local crops, it is proposed to try cotton 
growing for the fibre and for animal 
feed. Flocks and .herds are to be 
increased and improved. And this 
valley of the nomads will become an 
area of settled cultivation in the 
desert, 
x. 
VANISHED FOREST 
Hw in this valley I may have found 
the answer to the childish question I 
_ have asked everyone in the desert : 
“Where did Hasdrubal, the Carthaginian, 
get his elephants?” Maybe from the Guir. 
or Suetonius Polinius, in AD 47, reported 
that there still existed here a great forest 
abounding with elephants and wild ani- 
mals. 
\ thousand years later Sid Taveb, a 
powerful marabout and the St. Patrick of- 
Arab legend. when bitten by a snake ordered 
all the wild animals to leave the region. 
And the Arabs cut down the forest which 
he bequeathed to hem. .

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=8) 3

### IGNORE

  
UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 
Nn 
  
   
FEW months ago work- 
. A men were putting the 
’ finishing touches to a 
group of buildings in 
the Auer-wellsbach Park at 
Vienna. The buildings, whose 
modern functional design 
made a striking contrast with 
the ornate splendour of the 
Palace of Schoenbrunn just 
across the park, were intended 
to house a new kindergarten 
for children aged between 
3 and 7 years. 
But not all the children who 
have been attending the 
“Sonder Kindergarten” in 
Avuer-wellshach Park since it 
was completed and opened last 
September, are the happy, 
active youngsters normally 
found in kindergartens. 
To this modern centre each 
day come children who wear 
a brace on their leg, others 
who cannot see the sun shin- 
ing through trees, or who 
cannot hear the birds singing, 
and still others whose minds 
are confused, who may sud- 
denly burst into tears without 
cause. 
For the Sonder Kindergarten 
is one of the most modern of 
European institutions both 
for the education and re- 
education of young children. 
     + 
  
  
 
  
The Sonder Kindergarten in Vienna is one of the most up-to-date chil- 
dren’s rehabilitation centres in Europe. 
bath (shown above) has been installed. 
For physio-therapy a special 
Its glass side and interior 
lighting allow the therapist to observe and direct the exercises which 
assist disabled children to regain the use of their limbs. 
UNESGO REPORTS ON ONE 
Planned and built by the 
Social Assistance Department 
of the City of Vienna, with 
financial help from the Swiss 
Red Cross, it possesses an up- 
to-date centre for study and 
demonstration. Here educa- 
tors, psychologists and other 
specialists can draw on the 
results of observation and 
practical research to devise 
new methods for the re-educa- 
tion of handicapped children. 
From the Research Institute 
a corridor leads to a row of 
six pavilions, each of which 
constitutes a specialized unit 
designed for a selected group 
of children. One is devoted 
to the study of normal chil- 
dren; the others specialize in 
disabled, backward, deaf and 
dumb, blind and “emotionally 
disturbed” children. 
Normal Children 
as ‘ Yardstick ” 
N each of these pavilions 
the furnishings are simple 
though perfectly adapted to 
the needs of the 16 children 
and members of the stafl. 
Each unit has a large light 
airy room, whose high wide 
windows look out into the 
park. This room serves in 
turn as dining room, playroom, 
school room and, at the time 
of the afternoon nap, as a 
bedroom. 
Interior “One-way” windows 
have been installed, made of 
special glass through which 
experts can observe without 
being seen, so that the chil- 
dren are not disturbed, or 
conscious of being watched. 
The inclusion of a group of 
“normal” children enables the 
specialists to maintain contact 
with “normality” in their 
work and at the same time 
serves as a “yardstick” of 
reactions and behaviour 
against which those of the 
handicapped children can be 
measured. 
Modern equipment, and the 
re-education methods em- 
ployed, have made the institu- 
tion one of the most interest- 
ing achievements of its kind 
in Europe. In the pavilion for 
maimed children, for example, 
the successive stages of phy- 
sio-therapy can be controlled 
and observed in various ways. 
The handicap of moving the 


### 74275: In a Vienna kindergarten handicapped children can be 'the lucky ones'

REL HANDICAPPED CHILDREN 
AEE! CAN BE THE LUCKY ONES 
weight of limbs and bodies is 
partly overcome through teach- 
ing children to exercise in 
water. A special bath with a 
glass panel and interior light- 
ing allows the therapist to 
observe and teach exercises to 
the child in the bath. 
The children are taught and 
cared for in an atmosphere 
of happiness and kindness, 
and each pavilion has its own 
small playground complete 
with sandpit. 
It might seem ironic to des- 
cribe these children as “the 
lucky ones”, but they are for- 
tunate compared with the 
many thousands of handicap- 
ped children in the world who 
get no help to overcome their 
disabilities. Vienna’s “Sonder 
Kindergarten” should be an 
example and encouragement to 
educators in other countries 
to help give all afflicted chil- 
dren the chance of a normal 
happy life. 


### 74276: A 'Ray of sunshine' in the laboratory

A ‘RAY OF 
1 Nn 
SUNSHINE’ 
the Laboratory 
or the last four years a 
brave game of improvisa- 
tion has been played in the 
laboratories of war-hit schools 
and universities in Europe and 
the Far East. 


### 74277: UNESCO reports on one year's reconstruction

YEAR'S RECONSTRUCTION 
66 I t takes great courage to-day merely to go on 
living, for you and I are not the only ones who 
have lost hope : all men to-day are lonely and 
crushed by despair and no one is able to lend them 
a helping hand. One of the consequences of the war 
is that despair and loneliness have taken possession 
of everyone, and none can look for support to 
others...” 
HIS was how an Italian, 
Giuseppe Berto, described 
in a book the post-war 
sufferings of his country’s 
children and adolescents. But 
though there are many who 
still view life as darkly as this, 
there is evidence in the world 
that man’s solitude is not ab- 
solute and that his despair is 
not necessarily justified. For 
to counteract loneliness and 
despair there are men and 
organizations willing to help. 
The existence of Unesco 
itself is an important proof of 
this and the practical work it 
has been able to do for relief 
and reconstruction has already 
encouraged efforts by men of 
goodwill in all parts of the 
world. 
Since its inception, Unesco 
has been setting an example 
to other organizations by 
putting aside from its own 
limited budget sums of money 
for its Emergency Aid Fund. 
Last year it used 175,000 dollars 
to meet the most urgent needs 
in educational reconstruction, 
and this money was distribut- 
ed as shown in the table 
below. 
  
Toad 
Add to refugees in the Middle Bast .................... 15000 
Ald 10 Spanish students in Mexico... oo oiiiiiiiiiin 5.000 
Country % Sum distributed Cost of Shipment 
BRIE aecsnssnasnnsnss 5 20,925 1.335 11.150 
Poland | 1) 181358 2.015% 20,150 
CMMIRAL. 20 asvsssnsarsh [ 1,160 1,340 12.400 
Philippines ............. § 11,140 1,240 12.400 
Caschoslovakia . .. wwe B 11,160 1.140 12,400 
Hungary . NR » 11,160 1,240 12,400 
aly ... Sassen 7 2.745 1,085 10,850 
Austria . 7 9.745 1,088 10,850 
bran... Roa ? 9.745% 1.08% 10,850 
Netherlands ... + 8.170 30 %.300 
France censesnuen 8370 0 4.300 
Ald 10 Greek children... 10.850 
175.000 
_——— 
An additional sum of 23,000 
dollars was allocated to the 
refugees in the Middle East 
from a special supplementary 
fund. 
Two Appeals to 
World’s Conscience 
HEN handing over 10,850 
dollars to help the re- 
construction of Greek 
schools, Dr. Carneiro, Unesco’s 
representative, indicated that 
the act was a symbolic one. 
Though this money could do 
little to alleviate the over- 
whelming needs of Greece, his 
gesture drew the attention of 
the world to the appalling 
conditions endured by 340,000 
Greek refugee children driven 
from their homes by war. A 
booklet, “A Child Named Ma- 
rika”, published by Unesco 
and describing these children’s 
existence was part of the 
campaign Unesco launched 
with an appeal to all its mem- 
bers at its General Conference 
last September. 
An appeal for refugee chil- 
dren in the Middle East was 
also made by the Conference. 
Important practical results 
have already been achieved by 
Unesco’s work in this area. 
Of the 200,000 refugee children 
in the Middle East, 21,000 are 
now attending 39 schools or- 
ganized with Unesco’s assist- 
ance in the Lebanon, Syria. 
Transjordan and Palestine. 
But it was not enough to esta- 
blish schools, find teachers and 
furnish essential school equip- 
ment ; the schools had also to 
be given a chance of survival 
Most of them are housed in 
tents, and some in the open 
air. 
Winters are severe in the 
Lebanese mountains and. 
unless funds can be raised to 
build proper schools, protect 
and improve existing ones. 
and generally carry on the 
work initiated by Unesco, the 
effort will have been in vain, 
for the children will be forced 
to abandon their schools. 
To back up its appeal Unes- 
co has just published a 
pamphlet “Schoolbell In The 
Wilderness”, describing both 
the initial results achieved 
and calling for help to meet 
the enormous needs that still 
remain. “oo PETE 
Lg Coat, 
Where The Money Goes 
S well as providing emer- 
gency relief from its own 
budget, Unesco has dis- 
tributed money received from 
private organizations which 
has gone to help the recon- 
struction of educational sys- 
tems in war devastated coun- 
tries. 
£70,000 sent by the Lord Mayor 
of London's Fund has been dis- 
tributed to the following coun- 
tries : Austria (7%). Czechoslova- 
kia (8%), Greece (16%), Hungary 
(6%), Italy (12%), Poland (16%) 
and the British Colonies and 
Malta (25%). Ten per cent of 
his sum was used in transport 
and transfer charges, [leaving 
£10,000, of 
~oolontes "and (3.200 
Jo East refugees 
All this money was spent either 
in replacing scientific équipment 
or to buy material such as gra- 
mophotes, records, maps and 
books, 
In addition £5500 mised by the 
New York Reconstruction Pund 
was used to buy or reconstruct 
Alm projection apparatus In Aus 
tria, Poland, Greece, Czechosio- 
vakia, Hungary, Italy. the Phlip- 
pines and Iman Among other 
gifts distributed by Unesco was 
a sum of 1810 mised by the Union 
of South Africa, 
Norway raised £10,500, £10000 of 
RRich has already Deen disiribus 
to Middle East refugees for 
the organization of thelr winter 
schools, and Belgium provided 
which (1,800 went to Sam 
£22,900 which will be sent to 
Italy, Greece, Finland and Middle 
East countries for the purchase 
in replacing scientific equipment 
In raising and distributing 
these funds, Unesco has been 
greatly helped by TICER 
(Temporary International 
Committee for Educational 
Reconstruction). This organi- 
zation, which Unesco helped 
to establish, comprises all the 
principal private organizations 
working for educational re- 
construction. 
International voluntary work 
camps, where young people of 
many nationalities work side 
by side on urgent reconstruc- 
tion jobs, constitute one of the 
most effective means of de- 
veloping international under- 
standing. 
In addition to supplying 
camp libraries, Unesco last 
year sent representatives to 
see what was going on in the 
39 camps organized in 12 Eu- 
ropean countries. 
How Youth Lends A Hand 
OURTEEN were helping to 
build houses. schools or 
children’s villages; eleven 
uth centres and you 
stels ; nine were doing ag 
cultural work, two were re- 
pairing roads or dxkes; two 
were carrying out archaeologi- 
cal excavation and one 
doing social service work. 
One important part 
Unesco's Reconstruction w 
is aimed at helping children 
communities — through the 
raising of funds, public appea 
on their behalf, and by org 
izing such meetings as | 
October's Conference at 
jerol in collaboration with 
International Federation 
, Children’s Communities. 
  
Wicks dipped in alcohol have 
replaced bunsen burners and 
with a little ingenuity burned 
out electric light bulbs have 
been converted for use as re- 
torts. But there comes a time 
when this pretence must end: 
when instructors find it impos- 
sible to continue their work for 
lack of real equipment: when 
students despair of ever being 
able to see in practice the expe- 
riments they have learned in 
theory. 
Recognising this need, Unes- 
co, as part of its cducational 
reconstruction programme, has 
during the past few months 
been making efforts to supply 
laboratories with equipment 
they must have for teaching 
and research. 
Just what the arrival of badly 
needed equipment means lo 
instructors and to the students 
who, for the first time are able 
to use modern scientific instru- 
ments is expressed in letters 
which Unesco has recently re- 
ceived. 
Work Can Now 
Go Ahead 
NE of these letters was 
from Professor 0). Kratky, 
of Graz University in Aus- 
tria, who wrote : 
“I understand from your lust 
letter that the apparatus for 
which I asked you has been 
ordered. I can tell you thal 
this news is the first ray of 
sunshine in the desolation thal 
our experimental research ser- 
vices has experienced since the 
end of the war. This appa- 
ratus will help wus greatly in 
our work, which we shall now 
be able to organize on a new 
basis. I feel profondly grateful 
to Unesco, and I wish to convey 
my warmest thanks for yowr 
efforts.” 
Another Austrian scientist, 
Dr. L. Ebert, of the Chemical 
Laboratory at Vienna TUniver- 
sity, wrote: 
“I am happy to inform you 
that the two Roentgen lubes 
made available to us by Unesco 
have arrived to-day. As 1 have 
already told you, our old ones 
had become unusable, and it is 
entirely due to Unesco’s genero- 
sity that we are now able to 
continue our laboratory work. 
Please accept our sincere 
thanks, and kindly inform all 
those who contributed to this 
gift how grateful we are”. 
Many similar letters have 
heen received by Unesco. Some 
of them express the thanks not 
only of those who want to 
teach, but also of those who 
wish to learn-—students who 
have been able to begin studies 
that the destruction of labora- 
fory equipment had previously 
made impossible, 
In its reconstruction pio- 
gramme, tnesco is helping fo 
give men and wonien one of the 
first essentials of iife—a future.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 81278: New uses of a key-medium of mass communications show that comic strips must be taken seriously

New uses of a key-medium | 
of mass communications 
show that.   
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
COMIC STRIPS MUST 
‘BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY 
he comic strip is here to stay. In one country alone, the United States, 
between 300 and 400 titles are now on sale. Some 60,000,000 copies 
are sold monthly. Translated into more than 30 of the principal 
languages of the world, they are now widely read in more than 100 
countries. 
These were facts given by Dr. Lawrence A. Averill in New York at a recent 
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. His 
conclusion was that old and young were through the comics finding “escape 
from too deep concern with the deeper problems of the development of inner 
control and tne cultivation of ethical value: in an age that desperately needs 
them”. 
It is around this question of the social implications of comic strips that 
controversy has developed. One immediate, emotional reaction has been that 
comics are unsuitable reading for children. This may certainly be true of many 
strips. The important thing, however, is to recognize that the comic is a key- 
medium of mass communication and that it is necessary therefore to increase 
its social usefulness. 
To do this, there has been set up in the USA the first college course on how 
to create comics that stress education and information rather than murder and 
sensationalism. The course is conducted by Professor Harvey W. Zorbaugh, 
Chairman of the New York University Department of Educational Sociology. 
He declares that the reading of comic books does not necessarily stultify a 
child’s interest in reading the classics or other media, but often stimulates it. 
INVENTED 
  


### 74280: What is pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanokoniosis?

WHAT IS “PNEUMONOULTRAMICROSCOPIC- | pS 
SILICOVOLCANOKONIOSIS™ ? | 
CIENTISTS OF TO-DAY ARE NOT ONLY “MADE YOUNG”, 
S BUT START CONTRIBUTING TO SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS 
WHILE STILL IN THEIR TEENS. 
TAKE THE RECENT WORK OF A 16 YEAR-OLD YOUNGSTER 
IN THE UNITED STATES, IN CONNECTION WITH NEW 
THERMO-PLASTIC SUBSTANCES XNOWN AS ORGANIC SILICON 
POLYMERS. THESE ARE MADE BY A PROCESS IN WHICH 
SMALL MOLECULES JOIN TOGETHER TO FORM A LARGER 
MOLECULE, TYPICAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS OF THIS PRO- 
CE rina SYNTHETIC MATERIALS SUCH AS RUBBER AND 
THiS YOUTH WAS STRUCK BY THE FACT THAT THE BEST 
REAGENTS FOR MAKING THESE NEW PRODUCTS ARE DAN- 
GEROUS TO USE BECAUSE THEY ARE DISSOLVED IN ETHER, 
FORMING EXPLOSIVE MIXTURES IN THE AIR. DETERMINED 
TO FIND SOME LESS VOLATILE LIQUID AS A SUBSTITUTE, 
HE SET TO WORK AND FINALLY SUCCEEDED. HIS DISCOVERY 
REPRESENTED AN IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTION TO CHE- 
MISTRY AND TO INDUSTRY.   
   
   
   
 
IN ICO AD, HERD 
OF ALEXANDRIA hit gE a | oR PN TS MAG J 
  
Studies have shown that children may learn to read more rapidly from the 
comics than through other methods. 
The students at New York University are divided into teams of three: an 
artist, script writer and a researcher. They work in collaboration with the 
school’s art, sociology and communications departments. A representative of 
one of the largest comic book publishers in the USA provides technical informa- 
tion on how to capture the interest of the reader. 
Industrial, government and social welfare organizations are extremely inte- 
rested in the “message-spreading possibilities” of the comics. For example, an 
automobile-licensing bureau would like to get across the message of safe driving; 
an agricultural agency wishes to promote 4-H clubs (organizations for the sons 
and daughters of farmers); and a social welfare organization s=eks to develop 
goodwill activities among racial and religious groups. 
The Division for the Popularization of Science (in Unesco’s Natural Sciences 
Department) is making a survey of comic strips that stress education and 
information rather than melodramatic violence. During this survey, it was 
found that General Comics, Inc., is issuing a series of comic strips dealing with 
science. These are “Adventures in Electricity,” “Nuclear Physics,” and “Jet 
Propulsion.” 
Permission has been obtained by Unésco to distribute these. Authority to 
use them may be obtained gratis on application to Unesco. 
The Division wishes to develop this scheme, and would be interested to 
receive offers of similar material from organizations in other countries thus 
helping to advance the constructive use of the universally-present comic strip. 
— vi ( ‘ 
| 
       
RNY sows 
ITSELF. 
4 - 
Ev A 
—— 
4 
  
 
THIS YOUNQ SCIENTIST DESCRIBED HIS EXPERIMENT IN 
AN ESSAY HE WROTE AS A COMPETITOR IN A SCIENCE 
TALENT SEARCH IN THE UNITED STATES. HE, AND SOME 
16,000 OTHER YOUNG PEOPLE ARE NOW AWAITING THE 
RESULTS OF THIS SCIENCE APTITUDE EXAMINATION WHICH 
THE SCIENCE CLUBS OF AMERICA CONDUCT EACH YEAR. 
  
"$ream Foren wm me vesseL seLow ; 
PASSED INTO THE HOLLOW BALL AT TOP. SOMEONE AD THE DEA 
  
 
  
      
FyvER® 
 
ACTION "WN CEs 
A REACTION, ww 5 
EQUAL NN FORCE AND 
OPPOSITE N DMECTION 
       
  
  
        OF SNE JET FOR FOR 
WARD MOTION. REMEMBER 
SR SAAD NEWTONS   
  
 BELOW, WE GIVE A NUMBER OF QUESTIONS SELECTED 
FROM THE CURRENT SCIENCE APTITUDE TEST. SEE HOW 
MANY OF THEM YOU CAN ANSWER. YOU WILL FIND THE 
ANSWERS ON PAGE 10 OF THIS ISSUE. 
DIRECTIONS : Four possible answers are given for each 
question. Put an X beside the number corresponding to 
the answer which you think is correct. 
1. —— WHICH OF THE FOLLOWING DISEASES IS MOST LIKELY TO 
BE SPREAD BY RATS ? 
1. Rabies. — 2. Rocky Mountain spotted fever. — 3. Tulare- 
mia. — 4. Typhus. 
2. — A STROKE OF LIGHTNING WHICH HITS AN AIRPLANE 
FLYING THROUGH A THUNDERSTORM USUALLY : 
THRD LAN OF MOTION T     
  
 
1. Does little damage to the plane. — 2. Does major damage 
but does not wreck the plane. — 3. Puts the radio out of com- 
  
mission. — 4. Wrecks the plane.   
3. THE SYMBOL: AFTER A NUMBER INDICATES THAT IT IS A 
FACTORIAL. THUS 4! EQUALS 4 X 3 X 2 X 1. WHICH OF 
THE FOLLOWING EQUALS § ? 
“AND HERE'S A ROUGH DEA 
OF WHAT ITS "WNSIDES’ 
LOOKED LXE..." 
    
  
1.5! — 2.5!-41 — 3.5! — 4.5! X4! 
4! 
4. — THE NUMBER OF NAMED CONSTELLATIONS IS APPROXI- 
MATELY : 
1. 60. — 2. 80. — 3. 120 — 4. 1s0. 
5. — AN ADULT PERSON ACCURATELY DESCRIBED AS LEUCOME- 
LANOUS WOULD MOST LIKELY BE FOUND : 
1. As a member of the Caucasian race. — 2. In a mental 
hospital. — 3. In a stupor. — 4. Living in the Antarctic regions. 
§. — PNEUMONOULTRAMICROSCOPICSILICOVOLCANOKONIOSIS 
IS MOST LIKELY TC OCCUR AMONG : 
— 2, Miners. — 3. Oil 
  
1. Fishermen. drillers. — 4. Silk 
workers. 
    
  
  7. — THE TERM LOBOTOMY IS MOST LIKELY TO APPEAR IN 
JOURNALS PUBLISHED BY: 
  
These drawings are taken from « comic strip illustrating the development of jet propulsion. from the first ideas 
conceived centuries ago to the construction of modern jet engines which 
This is one of a series distributed for the General Electric Company by General Comics Inc. 
carry men through the air faster than 
1. Botanists. — 2. Herpetologists. — 3. Penologists. — 4. 
Psychiatrists. 
8. — IN MECHANICS POWER IS THE RATE OF DOING WORK. 
IF P =— POWER, T = TIME, AND W = AMOUNT OF WORK ever before. 
DONE. AND IF P IS CONSTANT, THEN P EQUALS: 
1. TW. — 2.T — 3. W — 4. WT: 
w T 
3. — EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE HAS SHOWN THAT: 
1. All persons are either completely right-handed or completely 
left-handed. 
2. Handedness is associated with eye dominance. 
3. Persons vary in their handedness from extremely right-handed 
to extremely left-handed. 
4. Right-handedness is genetically « dominant trait. 
10. — DOLORIMETRY IS A NEW WOR? REFERRING TO THE 
MEASUREMENT OF : 
1. Fatigue. — 2. Gold deposits. — 3. Lachrymation. — 4. 
Pain. 
11. — DDT. IN PARALYZING AND KILLINGS INSECTS. ACTS PRIMA- 
RILY ON THE : 
1. Cardio-vascular system. — 2. Digestive system. — 3. Nerv- 
ous system. — 4%. Respiratory system. 
12. — WHICH WORD MOST NEARLY MEANS “EXCEEDINGLY 
VARIABLE, READILY ASSUMING DIFFERENT SHAPES OR 
FORMS” ? 
1. Amoebic. — 2. Amorphous. — 3. Primordial. — 4. 
Protean.        
vince 1947, Unesco’'s Field Co-opera- 
tion Offices have been doing a 
vital job, helping to collect, exchange 
and spread scientific information in 
a two-way flow between the regions 
where they are situated and other 
parts of the world. Last month, the 
heads of these offices met for the 
first time in Paris to exchange expe- 
riences and to discuss how their work 
can best be developed with existing 
resources, especially in connection 
with a technical aid programme for 
under-developed countries. This pho- 
to, taken during their meeting, shows 
(from left to right): Dr. A. Establier 
(Latin America), Mr. W.J. Ellis (East 
Asia); Mr. Karl Borch (Middle East); 
Mr. W.E. Purnell (Head of Unesco’s 
Division of Field Science Co-opera- 
tion); Dr. S.W. Tromp (Middle East}; 
Dr. G.D. Lu (Asst. Head of the Field 
Science Division) and Dr. A. Wolsky 
(South Asia).  

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 81279: UNESCO's international fellowships handbook reports that travel opportunities are increasing for students and workers

  
UNESCO'S INTERNATIONAL FELLOWSHIPS 
HANDBOOK REPORTS THAT... 
TRAVEL OPPORTUNITIES ARE INCREASING 
FOR STUDENTS AND WORKERS 
ARLY last year a young American hotel employee set off for 
France to spend six months working in a Paris hotel and 
thereby improve his knowledge and experience of hotel 
management, At about the same.time a French automobile engineer 
was embarking at Le Havre, en route for a Cleveland factory where 
he could study the latest technical methods of American car 
production. 
These two young men were part 
of the ever-growing “army” of 
working men and women of many 
countries who during 1949 took 
advantage of a chance to learn 
through foreign travel and study, 
and who, by the end of the year, 
numbered about 40,000. Some 
learned languages and generally 
widened their cultural horizons, 
others studied social and labour 
problems while there were others, 
like the hotel employee and the 
engineer, who improved their 
working skills by experience under 
new conditions. 
"This year the number of such 
journeys will be even greater, 
thanks to the joint co-operation of 
Unesco and the International 
Labour Office (ILO) with trade 
unions and other organizations in 
twenty countries. To ensure the 
maximum result from this co-ope- 
ration, Unesco and the ILO last 
month called a meeting in Unesco 
House of experts on education and 
cultural exchange programmes for 
workers. 
  
UCH of the agenda was based 
on a panoramic survey of 
international travel for workers 
and others presented in Study 
Abroad, Volume II, a comprehen- 
sive handbook published by Unesco 
as a guide to fellowships, scholar- 
ships and related educational 
opportunities throughout the world. 
Volume 1, published in 1948, was 
the first attempt to make a uni- 
versal compendium of fellowships 
and grants available for study 
abroad. 
The value of Study Abroad 
Volume II has - been widely 
recognized in the world’s news- 
papers. Recently, for example, the 
London “News Chronicle” declared 
that the publication offered a 
challenge to political leaders “to 
pay more than lip service to the 
gospel of ‘one world’.” Another 
London newspaper, “The Times”, 
in an editorial entitled “ Wand- 
ering Scholars”, wrote: “The 
Grand Tour is, indeed, as dead as 
the Doge and the stage coach, but 
a new method of travel, confusing 
through the number of official and 
unofficial bodies concerned, and 
yet full of life and growth has 
recently developed. The extent is 
shown in a survey produced by 
Unesco ”. : 
Volume 11, a work of 363 fact- 
- packed pages, shows that the free- 
dom to study abroad is greater in 
1950 than it. has ever been before 
in the recorded history of human 
scholarship : seventy-two countries 
and territories, as well as the Uni- 
ted Nations, Unesco and other in- 
ternational organizations, have 
donated 2171 fellowships to nation- 
als of eighty-eight nations. 
OREOVER Volume II also shows 
that the cultural exchanges 
of workers have become an 
important part of the world’s free 
flow of the kind of knowledge that 
stimulates understanding and 
friendship among people. 
Eleven countries, according to 
the Unesco handbook, have made 
thirty-three international agree- 
ments on workers’ apprenticeship 
programmes, and a number of 
other agreements are being worked 
out. Eighteen additional countries 
furnished valuable information on 
workers exchanges. The agreements 
already concluded permitted some 
9.000 young men and women to 
travel in 1949 to foreign countries 
to participate in observation tours, 
study courses, and trade union 
activities. In addition, more than 
31,000 travelled either on planned 
educational and cultural tours, or 
for general touristic purposes. 
  
TUDY Abroad, Volume 1I devotes 
thirty large pages to a detailed 
factual description of the pro- 
grammes of workers exchanges — 
either for vocational ends, or for 
general cultural and educational 
purposes — already carried out by 
18 European countries, the U.S. 
and Canada, as well as inter- 
national non-governmental agen- 
cies. 
But professional industrial and 
agricultural workers from many 
other countries were also given op- 
portunities for vocational travel; 
these included, for example. Austra- 
lia, the Union of South Africa, Bul- 
garia and a number of the nations 
of South and Central America. And 
in the more general educational 
field, the area covered was even lar- 
ger geographically. 
Among the workers whose travel 
was arranged under the inter- 
governmental agreements were 
more than 3,000 trainees — young 
workers and apprentices who. went 
abroad in order to increase their 
occupational knowledge by taking 
student-training employment in 
agricultural, ingustrial and com- 
mercial enterprises. Although all 
the agreements were bi-lateral, 
some were part of joint program- 
mes undertaken by groups of 
countries. This was true of exchan- 
ges of agricultural and horticul- 
tural workers between England, 
Wales and various European coun- 
tries, also of exchanges of agricul- 
tural workers between Denmark 
Finland, Norway and Sweden. 
N - addition to agriculture, the 
occupations which trainees most 
frequently entered under the 
exchange programmes, as reported 
by the ILO, were the hotel industry, 
engineering, jobs as mechanics and 
in offices and commercial establish- 
ments. Some 30 other types of 
work which trainees undertook 
varied from gardening to glass 
blowing and from cheese making 
to bookbinding. 
Thirteen nations answered enqui- 
ries sent out by Unesco on workers” 
cultural exchange programmes, and 
the replies provided information 
about programmes in eight addi- 
tional countries. Most of the ex- 
changes, according to Study 
Abroad, Volume 11, were arranged 
- by trade unions, workers’ educa- 
tional associations, and other non- 
governmental organizations. Un- 
like the trainees’ foreign visits 
which extend from twelve to 
eighteen months, the educational 
and cultural journeys were quite 
short — one to three weeks. 
The overriding purpose of 
Unesco’s efforts in the field of 
international exchanges was sum- 
med up recently by a Scottish 
newspaper, “ The Evening Times ” 
of Glasgow, which wrote: “ With 
the tens of thousands of fellowships 
and other aids to foreign study 
available there should. be more 
glimmers of understanding between 
nations ”.   


### 74282: It happened in March...

IT HAPPENED 
IN MARCH... 
ARCH, once the first month of the year, has always had a special signi- 
ficance for poets, chiefly because its twenty-first day, the vernal equinox, 
marks the beginning of Spring in the northern hemisphere. With Spring 
comes the re-awakening of the earth and the resumption of ploughing, and 
this, at the half way point of a century facing gigantic agricultural problems 
to feed mankind, is of special significance. 
March 21 has been proposed as an appropriate date on which to honour the 
nameless inventors of man’s basic food producing instrument, the plough. 
Unfortunately, we do not even know when or just where they lived. We do 
know, however, that, four thousand years before Christ, the Sumerians inherited 
the primitive swing-plough from a civilization of which all trace has been lost. 
Yet, that same plough, just as Virgil described it in the first Georgic, is still 
found in some countries to-day. 
It was the Greeks and the Gauls who thought of attaching two wheels to the 
plough, athough, after their time, it remained practically unchanged until the 
eighteenth century. Then it was transformed by the addition of a mould-board, 
two steel shares and four wheels. 
and, last of all, it was fitted with a motor. 
Later it was to become even more complex 
In 1800 it took a man 120 hours to 
plough, harrow, sow and harvest two and a half acres of ground. To-day it takes 
him 15. 
HE “Father 
of Czecho- 
slovakia ”, 
born on 17 
March 1850, 
was the son of 
an emancipa- 
ted serf. By 
turn teacher. 
journalist and 
member of 
parliament, on 
his 60th birth- 
day he told his 
followers : “I 
have hardly 
begun”. He 
had yet to 
become a 
conspirator, a 
diplomat, a 
Thomas 
Garrigue 
MASARYK 
  
MASARYK 
strategist, a revolutionary and a 
statesman. He was still to found 
a republic and to guide its destiny 
for 15 years. 
Before his death, he watched 
with distress the rising tide of 
Fascism, and he at that time 
wrote “We must realize that 
patriotism and international res- 
ponsibility go hand in hand. Pa- 
triotism and internationalism 
supplement one another”. 
N 8 March 
1850, this 
ex-bank- 
clerk from 
Gottingen 
founded the 
news agency 
which bears 
his name. 
N e wspapers 
were then 
being read by 
more and more 
people ; busi- 
ness and 
politics both 
demanded 
news with less 
and less delay; 
Julius REUTER 
Reuter’s aim was to become the 
press correspondent and reporter 
for the whole world. He began by 
establishing a carrier-pigeon link 
between France and Germany and 
went on to organize a service of 
small steamboats between ships 
and their harbours. In a short 
time he was using the telegraph 
and submarine cables. 
EULER... 
CLAUSIUS... 
EINSTEIN... 
  
N March 
1750, Leo- 
nard Euler 
of Basle pu- 
blished his In- 
troduction to 
the Differen- 
tial Calculus. 
One hundred 
years later, 
March 1850, 
Rodolph Clau- 
sius, a native 
of Pomerania, 
worked out 
the rudiments 
of a new 
science Ther- 
modynamics. 
After 55 more years, in March 1905, 
Albert Einstein published an article 
entitled : 
bewegterkorper” 
“Zur Elektrodynamik 
(Electro Dyna- 
mics of Moving Bodies) in a Berlin 
journal. Men had never dreamed 
on 12 March 
1925, Sun Yat 
Sen, who was 
the first Pre- 
sident of the 
young Republic of China, had be- 
come for his countrymen the very 
pattern of the modern Chinese. 
that pure science could have such 
an effect on their lives. Euler, a 
founder of what was called “pure 
mathematics”, was only investigat- 
ing analysis. Clausius was only 
applying analysis to the principles 
of the conservation and dissipation 
of energy, to deduce the bases of 
the kinetic theory of gases. Ein- 
stein simply discovered a mathema- 
tical equivalence between thermo- 
dynamics and mechanics ; energy 
and mass became one and the same 
thing ; and the mass of any par- 
ticle of matter corresponded to a 
certain quantity of energy. But 
Einstein also showed that the 
quantity was tremendous — that 
. the energy in material is equal to 
its mass, multiplied by the square 
of the speed of light. No discovery 
has ever offered greater hope — 
or a greater threat to humanity. 
T the time of 
his death, 
  
He converted the idea of the 
right of the governed to call the 
government to account into a 
rallying-cry for millions. 
Sun Yat Sen himself had writ- 
ten : “I am a coolie and the son 
of a coolie. I was born in poverty 
and I am still poor. My heart has 
always been with the struggling 
masses”. 
 
DR. SUN YAT SEN'S TOMB AT NANKING. — 
Inset (above. right) is the Chinese leader's 
  
SCIENCE APTITUDE 
EXAMINATION ANSWERS 
(Test on Page 9) 
Question Answer 
1 i 
2 1 
3 3 
4 2 
$ 1 
6 2 
7 4 
8 ’ 3 
9 3 
10 3 
11 3 
12 N   

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=11) 3

### 81283: New international council will bring together the world's musicians

~~ WILL BRING TOGETHER 
THE WORLD'S MUSICIANS 
“MV usic”, wrote John Wilson, a 19th century Scottish writer, “is the 
universal language”. Like all arts music should not be res- 
tricted by frontiers and like the sciences it requires the co- 
operation of all peoples. Yet for many years it has lacked the best 
medium of assuring these two needs — an international organization 
covering the whole field of musical activities. 
It is true that about fifty years ago, musicians founded an inter- 
national society, but this was broken up by the outbreak of the First 
World War, and musicians again found themselves as isolated as before. 
From that time it seemed impossible, in spite of a general desire, 
to re-establish a similar organization covering the whole field of music 
from composition to execution, from the history of music to modern 
musical education and from the classics to the popular forms., 
It was in November 1947 that Unesco undertook to found this much 
needed organization. Before it was finally set up, however, two years 
of investigation, negotiation and consultation were required, for if it 
is to achieve practical results, work 
on an international level requires 
long and careful preparation. Finally, 
last month, the International Music 
Council, as the organization is called, 
held its first General Assembly at 
Unesco House in Paris. 
The membership of the Council can 
be divided into three categories. 
There are the associations — compos- 
ers, musicologists, folklorists — 
grouping musicians in different coun- 
tries according to their specialities. 
Then, there are experts, such as 
Arthur Honegger or Andrzelj Panuf- 
nik, chosen in a personal capacity, 
and lastly, there are national com- 
mittees. 
These committees, which already 
exist in the United States and 
Holland, are now being organized in 
many other countries. In several, 
the delegates who will organize the 
groups representing the entire musical 
life of the country have already been 
chosen. 
CONCENTRATION ON 
URGENT TASKS 
HE International Music Council 
has also elected an Executive 
Board whose chairman is M. Ro- 
land Manuel, professor at the Paris 
Conservatoire, and whose Secretary- 
General is M. Marcel Cuvelier, founder 
of the Belgian Musical Youth. 
What are the aims of this new 
international institution ? Firstly 
its members wish to improve co- 
operation between leading musical 
organizations and to encourage the 
foundation of new ones in fields of 
music where none exist. They will 
also work to promote and co-ordinate 
the organization of musical congresses, 
festivals, competitions and meetings 
of experts. 
But, above all, the Council wants 
to help the dissemination of musical 
works, the distribution of musical 
instruments and the exchange of 
‘musicians, individually and in groups; 
to improve the moral and material 
situation of musicians generally and 
to work for musical culture in all its 
forms. 
Such a programme is obviously a 
long-term one and requires far more 
resources than the Music Council at 
present possesses. The greater part 
of its budget is provided by Unesco, 
whose own budget is very limited, and 
for the rest, the Council relies on an 
ever-growing number of member orga- 
nizations. To manage on its present 
slender resources, the Council must 
therefore concentrate on the most 
urgent tasks, and these are listed 
among its first year's objectives. 
NO BRIGHTER LIGHT 
THAN MUSIC 
ANY contemporary musical works 
M and thcusands of folklore docu- 
ments have nct yet been record- 
ed. The Council will try to fill this 
gap by choosing works, having them 
recorded and getting the records put 
cn the market. Composers write, but 
often lack the means to make known 
their compositions. Seeking out com- 
positions worthy of note, the Council 
will have them copied, and, when 
possible, arrange for the works to be 
performed. Where musicologists are 
unable to cbtain the books and docu- 
ments needed for research the Council 
will again give assistance. Finally, it 
will try to improve travel facilities for 
musicians attending international 
meetings. 
These are the main tasks. But thera 
are others as well, and they all have 
the same objectives : mutual knowledge 
and jeint effort. At the beginning of 
the last war, Romain Rolland wrote: 
“ Let us save all the light that can be 
saved. There is no brighter light than 
music ”. The new International Music 
Council is uniting its efforts to save 
that light. 
x Kk 
MUSIC FUND GIFT 
FOR STUDENT 
COMPOSERS 
IN PARIS   
 
 
IGHT music students will be able 
to attend the National Conscr- 
vatory of Music of Paris for a 
year as a result of a gift of 4000 
dollars from the International Mu- 
sic Fund. The Fund has been set 
up by the American Section of the 
International Society of Contempo- 
rary Music to aid composcrs and 
composers’ socictics in Europe. 
The sum will cover the educatio- 
nal expenses, food and lodging of 
the students, four of whom come 
from the French provinces and 
four from other countries. 
When presenting the cheque to 
the Conservatory last January, 
Unesco’s Director-General M. Torres 
Bodet said: “In these difficult times, 
creative workers and artists in par- 
ticular are encountering many 
obstacles which Unesco is endea- 
vouring to determine in the hope 
of helping to reduce them.” 
Opening night at the Divadlo Hudby. 
Page || — UNESCO COURIER 
In the concert hall of Prague's Music Theatre, two 
young actresses who replace the “programme notes”, explain the origin of the music as 
members of the National Ballet prepare to execute folk dances. 
  
Sometimes the Pragué 
Music Theatre uses 
films to illustrate the 
motif behind the music 
that is played. To 
accompany music by 
Bach slides may be 
employed to illustrate 
the instruments in use 
during his lifetime or 
films shown (above) 
for an evening of jazz 
music composed by 
Jaroslav Jezek. 


### 81284: Modern Prague theatre for recorded music

* 
Beethoven and “Be-Bop ” are both welcome in... 
MODERN PRAGUE THEATRE 
FOR RECORDED MUSIC 
HE first theatre in the world to 
be devoted exclusively to the 
presentation of recorded music 
and drama has been created in Cze- 
choslovakia. 
It is the Divadlo Hudby (Music 
Theatre) opened last autumn as an 
experiment in bridging the gap be- 
tween the formality of the ordinary 
concert hall or playhouse and the 
informality of home listening to 
radio or gramophone. It is also an 


### 74285: A Better chance for young composers

A Better Chance For 
YOUNG COMPOSERS 
cognition — even fame 
when they are young. Two 
centuries ago when Mozart was 13 
his first opera was performed. 
But despite the finish, elegance and 
restraint of his work, and the 
noble and royal patronage of his 
day, he died in poverty. Most mu- 
sicans have had to fight hard before 
the public or the critics paid any 
attention to their efforts. Many 
received no real recognition until 
after their death. 
Unesco, working together with the 
French Radio and the International 
Music Council is now giving young 
and unknown musical composers of 
all nations a chance to have their 
unpublished works performed before 
critics and other people interested in 
music. 
On 1st February last a series of 
regular monthly concerts of chamber 
music and orchestral works by these 
“unknowns” was started in the 
Unesco House concert hall, 
The first concert included quartets 
written by five young composers : 
Hector Tosare of Uruguay, Karol 
S% composers meet with re- Goeyvaerts of Belgium, Charles 
Jones of the United States, Narcis 
Bonet of Spain and Olivier Alain of 
France. 
Similar concerts will be held every 
month ; programme notes will be 
presented before each of the works, 
and from time to time, the composers 
themselves will discuss their works. 
The history of this effort to make 
new music known goes back two and 
a half years ago, when the Radiodif-- 
fusion Francaise started what is 
called in French “Le Banc d’Essai 
des Jeunes Compositeurs”. or “The 
Trial Club” — a programme devoted 
to works by young composers. 
Then Unesco, in connection with 
its efforts to stimulate the creative 
activities of young artists in all 
cultural fields, offered its co-opera- 
tion to the Trial Club. As a result 
the concerts were re-organized on a 
broader and more professionnal 
basis. 
A committee of experts in touch 
with all the public or private schools 
of music throughout the world read 
the musical works that reach them 
from all countries. Each year, more 
than fifty new works have been 
made public. Co . 
experiment in combining various 
cultural forms. Although Divadlo 
Hudby means Music Theatre, many 
varieties of music with drama, 
dance and film have been tried. 
To parallel these combinations, the 
choice of material has been broadly in- 
ternational. The variety of music in- 
cludes Beethoven, Bach, Rimsky Korsa- 
kov and the classics of many nations as 
well as New Orleans and Dixieland jazz, 
swing and be-bop, European folk songs 
and African tribal compositions. 
Programmes of Verdi sung by Caruso 
and Gigli and of Moussourgsky by Cha- 
liapin have alternated with madrigal 
singers and spirituals from the best re- 
cordings of Marian Anderson, Kenneth 
Spencer and Paul Robeson. 
Drama has ranged from Shakespeare's 
Hamlet as done by Olivier, Gielgud, Clhu- 
ner, Kachalov and others to Chekhov 
and Gorky as presented by the Moscow 
Art Theatre. A regular English-lan- 
guage programme has initialed a multi- 
lingual project. The poems of Pablo 
Neruda and Mayakowsky in English 
translation were presented along with 
music and photographic slides. Memo- 
rials were held for the Czech poets Ju- 
lius Fucik and Frantisek Halas. 
The experiment has been so success- 
ful that each of the Music Theatre's one 
hundred seats has been filled since the 
opening day at each of the four or five 
daily performances. 
Morning performances, at which pla- 
ces are free, are for children and stu- 
dents. Afternoon sessions are often for 
the devotees of Duke Ellington, Cab 
Calloway and Louis Armstrong. Every 
week, the evening performances offer 
at least one classical symphony, an 
opera, a session of chamber music, a 
concert of rare recordings, and a Mevro 
— a variant of the audience particip- 
ation radio programmes in the United 
States. 
Dr. Seda, the Programme Director, is 
working out new combinations of cui- 
tural forms but in all cases, he says, 
the other forms will be subordinate to 
music. This point of view is shared by 
the three co-directors of Divadlo Hudby 
because its over-all purpose is to help 
people love, understand and know 
music as a universal language. ...

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074977engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
  
  
  
“IN BERNALD A. 
the 
    
cities, Florence, Italy, for the Fifth Session of the UNESCO General Conference. In terms 
of the number of men and women present, and in terms of the number of countries 
represented, the Florence Conference is expected to be the greatest in UNESCQ's career. 
In terms of the urgency of worldwide problems in the illimitable fields of education, science 
and culture, the Florence Conference will be Bne of the most important international gatherings 
in the still-young year of 1950. History books which are not yet written wiil gauge the courage, 
brotherhood, wisdom and breadth of vision which the delegates will bring to Florence—measuring 
them against the magnitude of the human needs they are called upon to answer. 
In a sense, the work must be worthy of the city, as Florence takes its place, with London, Paris, 
Mexico City and Beirut, on the list of UNESCO's conference cities. 
Florence was a little town, when it was destroyed for the first time in the 6th century by barbarian 
invaders. In later centuries, Florence was swept by plagues, fires and repeated invasions, climaxed 
by the cruel losses in World War ll, but it 
recovered from every brutal blow to become a 
great and ever greater city—a fit home for poets 
painters and philosophers, who set new 
standards for human achievement. 
UNESCO is coming to the city of Dante, 
Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Masaccio, Michel- 
angelo, Boccaccio--who have given courage, 
inspiration and beauty to generation after 
generation, in every corner of the world. 
The quality that lived in those great men, 
and in the lesser ones who built, protected 
and cherished the city of Florence, is still alive, 
in the towns and cities of the world. Always, 
that quality of aspiration shows itself best 
under conditions of the greatest difficulty. 
To-day, in Italy, after more than 20 years of 
Fascism, five years of war and only a little more 
than five years of peace, the determination of 
the people to win a richer life, materially and 
spiritually, is newly demonstrated every day. 
On this page, in the story of the National Union 
for the Fight Against Illiteracy, there is one 
such demonstration. 
x 
recognizes ignorance as his enemy. 
for ignorance is the most loathe- 
some tyranny of all. It stands for 
filth, darkness, cold, hunger, sickness, 
loneliness and fear. It means early 
death after a miserable life, and the 
helpless waiting at the bedside of a 
stricken child. Ignorance is everything 
that man hates — and its destruction 
is not to be accomplished by a few 
pen strokes in the cool twilight of li- 
braries. 
In the departments of Calabria and 
Lucania, in Southern Italy, there has 
been an uprising of the people against 
ignorance, stimulated and aided by the 
Naticnal Union for the Fight Against 
Illiteracy, an organization founded in 
Rome in December 1947, by a group of 
seven young people who could afford to 
give only their free time from regular 
jobs. , 
Work began with statistical recogni- 
tion of the affinity between ignorance 
and fascism. In all of Italy “literacy 
had been reduced steadily during the 
50 years before Mussa'ini’s “ march on 
Rome ” in 1922. Spot checks in Lau- 
D oN’T stand in the way when a man 
  
   
   
A 4 
LOTTA CONTRO { ANAL FARETISNG 
2 
SEGVENT) 
  
ASUTENLR £ RICREALIONE 


### 81285: In Bernalda, the school always has light

school 
HAS LIGHT ~ 
oO the 22nd of May, delegates from at least 53 nations will meet in one of the world’s great 
  
ALWAYS 
_
—
 
yo 
It is little use winning a battle against present-day 
adult illiteracy if the nex! generation is not get 
all the schooling it should. Post-war figures ( 1945-46 
schools, showed “of attendance in Italy's elementary 
CRTILCTT in most compared with 
1940-41. One of the aims of the movement in 
In —_— I 1alian villages teachers 
Pepino Aloja, the law student al Novi Velia may 
be called on to fill a second role—that of legal 
adviser. Holding * court” (right), Pepino tries to 
setlle a difference over the fulfillment of a contract, 
renzana and Picerno showed that fas- 
cism had stopped and reversed this 
trend. Ignorance, as expressed by 
figures on illiteracy, regained all the 
ground it had lcst since 1910. 
The Union’s first printed report, re- 
ceived recently by U said : 
“The major participation of the 
pecple will have the result of a civic 
conscience. The problem is not one 
for the schools alone, but one invol- 
ving the whole community. From the 
community itself, in a demccratic 
regime, must come that force and ini- 
tiative to sustain the fight and raise 
the standard of the people. ” 
A BEAUTIFUL SCHOOL 
BRINGS FELICITY 
TILL, this was talk — and perhaps 
there was a danger it might not 
get beyond the stage of talk, but... 
“ It was felt the convention should 
prcduce something permanent, and it 
was decided to build a small rural 
schcol at Scalo Nova Siri, near the 
plains of Metaponto. 
“ We had said that a beautiful 
school brings felicity to the town — 
because, little by little, even the town 
becomes beautiful — and we remem- 
bered the school of Colle di Fuori, 
built 20 years ago by Giovanni Cena. 
« So it was decided to construct the 
school at Sca'o Nova Siri — because 
this town was very poor and was in real 
need of a beautiful schcol. ” 
Detailed and orderly plans were 
acy courses. 
“In the brief space of 15 days”, says 
the report, “schools arose in all of 
Basilicata. They were so popular 
that the committees did not have 
encugh time to cpen classes. They 
would provide for three; to-morrow 
they would need five; after two days 
they would need ten. Soon there ° 
were no more teachers available. 
“ There were tumults outside the 
schools, as at Muro Lucano, where, 
the local brigade of the carabinieri 
had to come running to make peace 
among the people, or in Tricarico 
where for several days the people sat 
waiting outside the schools, quietly, so 
that the more fortunate ones could 
listen to the lesson. ” 
Learning and light were found to be 
identical, in the most immediate 
sense : , 
“ The community of Bernalda dces 
not have enough central electricity 
and suffers from a continuous lack of 
light. It was decided that the town 
could very well remain dark, but the 
schoel should always have light. 
Accordingly, a special installation was 
made for the school and the school 
always has light. 
“ Now it is the light of the school, 
high up there in the night, by which 
the farmers coming in from the fields 
at night, find their way into the 
town, all of the rest of which is dark.” 
TEACHERS LEARNED 
FROM THE PUPILS 
T is not certain whether it is the 
students or the teachers who have 
learned more from the courses : 
J“ Many of the teachers were young 
and inexperienced. Now they were to 
" made — for surveys, teacher’s training 
ccurses, publicity — but it has not jeach adult men and women. * 
been easy to preserve details and order So we had to prepare the teachers Editor : PETER DU BERG 
during the ensuing hurricane of popn- not only for the courses, but we had English Language Editor : R. 5. FENTON 
lar demand. Posters were put up in to impart to them specific social ma- * 
the streets of towns in Basilicata terial about the customs and art and All reproductions authorized 
asking the people to sign up for liter- culture of the locality; to arouse inte- * 
rest and admiration for the region in 
which they would teach, so that they 
would come to respect the adu't stu- 
dents who represented the region. 
The Union has specialized in teach- 
ing people, not in counting them, 
oh
 
A
.
 
4 I] 
Sg
 
{|
 I=
    
   
   
    i   
    | | 
       i H 
   
but it is estimated that more than 
10.000 adults in Basilicata learned to 
read in the first year of work. At the 
beginning of the year, there were 185 
popular courses in Basilicata, and 
there was pressure to reduce their 
number for reasons of economy. After 
a year’s work, there were 291 courses. 
It was an afterthought to ask for in- 
ternational assistance, but news of 
the campaign reached other parts 
of the world. A cantribution of 260 
books came from the Don Suisse orga- 
nizaticn in Switzerland ; two crates of 
miscellaneous school supplies were re- 
ceived from the children of the Mas- 
ters School of Dobbs Ferry, New York. 
Much more is still needed. In the 
words of the report : 
_“ A pencil, a ccpy-book, are pre- 
cious treasures and we, who have gone 
from town to town, know the requests 
made by the towns are most modest. 
Some of the requests are: a light by 
which to cecnduct classes at night ; a 
blackboard, glass for the windows, a 
chair for the teacher. ” 
Courier 
————— UNESCO —-— 
EDITOR IAL OFFICES 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. 14 
Ir Primers GEORGES LANG 
11, rue Curial, Paris 
UNESCO Publication 671     