# [078283](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
THE ART 
OF THE 
BOOK 
  
discoveries 
of ancient 
treasures 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

TREASURES 
PRE Cor 
WORLD ART 
(72) IRAQ 
Sumerian books in clay 
: , & - v i, “uo " TL : LY be 9 $e =i o § Fate oad 8 
~ This terracotta tablet (presented to Unesco by the Government Iraq) measures barely 4 by 9 cm. (2 by. 
~3.5in.). It is inscribed with the cuneiform characters of the ancient Sumerian language. Thousands of 
such ** books in clay ”’ have been discovered: legal documents, business contracts, lists of food allocations, 
palace inventories, even geometrical problems. They help us to visualize the brilliant Sumerian civilization 
~ which developed in the Tigris and Euphrates valley of Mesopotamia from 3500 B.C. Skilful architects, 
sculptors and goldsmiths, the Sumerians invented a system of writing that became one of the most 
important in the ancient world. Their inscribed clay tablets reveal them also as efficient accountants, 
archivists, schoolmasters—and tax collectors. Dating from the reign of Shu-Sin (2036-2028 B.C. i 
king of the third Ur dynasty, this tablet records details of the State's corn revenues. ! ad) 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"mCourier 
DECEMBER 1972 
  
25TH YEAR 
NOW PUBLISHED IN 14 LANGUAGES 
English italian 
French Hindi 
Spanish Tamil 
Russian Hebrew 
German Persian 
Arabic Dutch 
Japanese Portuguese 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7° 
Annual subscription rates £ 1.30 stg.; $5.00 
(North America): 17 French francs or 
equivalent; 2 years: £ 2.30 stg.; 30 F. Single 
"copies: 13 p stg.; 50 cents: 1.70 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 Issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese, Italian, Hindi, Tamil, Hebrew, Persian, Dutch and 
Portuguese. For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER.” plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courler is indexed monthly In the 
Readers’ Guide to Periodicel Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and In Current Con- 
tents « Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
* 
Editorial Office } 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7° - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Olga Rodel 
Managing Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Ferndndez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition : Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition : Kartar Singh Duggal (Delhi) 
Tamil ‘Edition : N.D. Sundaravadivelu (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition ; Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Assistant Editors 
English Edition : Howard Brabyn 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Hlustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard 
Research: Zoé Allix 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to 
the Editor-in-Chief Ne
 
11
 
- 
19
72
 
MC
 
72
-2
-2
83
 
A 
T
T
 
a
 
_
 
  
1] 1 
1972 
International 
Book Year 
THE ART OF THE BOOK 
Page 
CHINA, TRUE BIRTHPLACE OF PAPER, 
PRINTING AND MOVABLE TYPE 
By Tsuen-Hsuin Tsien 
 
 
   
: 
; 
pe 
| 
, 
: 12| CHINA'S NEW DISCOVERIES 
: OF ANCIENT TREASURES 
| Archaeological finds since the “Cultural Revolution” 
£ By Hsiao Wen 
: 19 | EIGHT PAGES IN FULL COLOUR: 
I CHINA, MEXICO 
 27| PAINTED MANUSCRIPTS 
¥ OF PRE-COLUMBIAN AMERICA 
a By Miguel Angel Asturias 
30| THE BOOK, REALM OF MANY ARTS 
By Alexei A. Sidorov 
36 | AN ‘ABC’ OF TEXT PLUS IMAGE 
2 By Gérard Blanchard 
~ 43 | UNESCO COURIER INDEX 1972 
2| TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Sumerian books in clay (Iraq) 
  
| 
: 
19
72
 
Fr
om
 
“
A
r
c
h
a
e
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
 
D
i
s
c
o
v
e
r
i
e
s
 
du
ri
ng
 
th
e 
Gr
ea
t 
Cu
lt
ur
al
 
Re
vo
lu
ti
on
”,
 
Pe
ki
ng
, 
on a ER | at Nd 
i. 3 4] 
! 
bA ji 
  
- 2,000-year-old gilt 
LADY OF THE LAMP 
In 1968, almost 3,000 archaeological 
treasures were recovered from two 
royal tombs at Man-ch’'eng in northeast 
China (see article page 12 and centre 
colour pages). Among them was this 
bronze lamp, in- 
genious in its concept and mechanism. 
The right arm of the girl holding the 
lamp is a sort of chimney which evac- 
uates the smoke into the body of 
the statuette, thus acting as perhaps 
one of the earliest anti-air pollution 
devices known. The figure pivots on 
a movable base allowing the position 
of the lamp to be adjusted; the intensity 
and direction of the light can also be 
controlled by means of a sliding shutter. 
The lamp stands 48 cm (19 in.) high 
and is thought to have come originally 
from the Chang-hsin palace.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
      
  
  
   
  
    
  
  
  
        
  
       
           
Paper, one of the greatest contributions .to civilization of 
all time, was invented by the Chinese about a century before 
the birth of Christ (see page 6). The panels above 
show five stages in the Chinese papermaking process as 
illustrated in a book on Chinese technology printed in 1637. 
From left to right, bamboo stems are cut and left to soak 
in water; the inner fibres from the bamboo stems are 
boiled over a fire; pulp is lifted from a vat on a screen; 
paper is pressed after the wet sheets from the screen 
have been placed on a wooden board; sheets of paper are 
dried on heated walls. Illustrations taken from “T’ien-kung 
k'ai-wu”, by Sung Ying-hsing, 1927 reprint edition. 
by Tsuen-Hsuin Tsien 
 
TSUEN-HSUIN TSIEN is considered a leading world authority 
on the history of Chinese printing. He is Professor of Chinese 
Literature and. Curator of the Far Eastern Library of the Uni- 
versity of Chicago. In 1962 Professor Tsien published his 
authoritative work “Written on Bamboo and Silk: the Beginnings 
of Chinese Books and Inscriptions”, University of Chicago Press 
(now In its third impression). He is at present preparing a major 
study on “Paper, Ink and Printing” for Volume V, part 1 of 
Joseph Needham's monumental “Science and Civilization in China" 
(Cambridge University Press). 


### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

CHINA 
true 
birthplace 
of paper, 
printing and 
movable type

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

  
    
    
   
  
  
 
     
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
       
   
1. the development of the 
art of bookmaking in the modern 
format, a text printed with black ink 
on white paper, the Chinese have 
probably contributed the most. 
It is generally known that paper was 
invented in China around the begin- 
ning of the Christian era, and spread 
all over the world before the modern 
age. Wood-block printing was first 
used by the Chinese in the seventh 
or eighth century and movable type 
some four hundred years earlier than 
Gutenberg. Even the use of the 
indelible ink of lampblack, which has 
been manufactured under the misnomer 
“Indian ink", can be traced back to 
antiquity in Chinese civilization. 
It was the introduction of these 
vehicles that made possible the pro- 
duction of multiple copies of a modern 
paged book for wide circulation. 
Printing has been regarded as the 
mother of civilization, and paper as its 
carrier to perpetuate man’s ideas and 
aspirations and expand their capacity 
for diffusion and exchange. Paper 
and printing represent two of the four 
great Chinese inventions (the other 
two are gunpowder and the compass) 
that contributed to the modernization 
of the West. 
No other achievements by the people 
of the ancient world can compare in 
importance with the invention of paper 
and the art of printing that was born 
from it. Both have a far-reaching 
impact upon the intellectual life of 
modern people. Can one imagine that 
if paper ceased production or printing 
were unknown today, what would 
happen in daily life in a modern 
society? Even though other media of 
communication are available, they 
cannot substitute for the function of 
paper and printing, which is basic and 
permanent, 
Paper is a felted sheet of fibres 
formed on a fine screen from a water 
suspension. When the water drains 
away, it leaves a mat of fibres to be 
dried. Over a span of two millennia 
since the inception of the idea of 
papermaking, the art has been changed 
and the tools have become complicated, 
but the basic principles and processes 
remain the same. 
The invention of paper in China 
originated from the process of pound- 
ing and stirring rags in water, several 
centuries before Christ. It is very 
likely that an accidental placing of 
fibres from the rags on a mat with 
water draining away may have suggest- 
ed the idea of making a thin sheet of 
paper. 
Scholars of the West have sometimes 
questioned the Chinese origin of paper-.- 
making. Their doubt resulted partly 
from the derivation of the word “paper” 
from “papyrus” and partly from their 
ignorance about the nature of. 
Chinese paper. 
Papyrus, used earlier than paper, 
was made of laminated slices from 
papyrus reeds, while paper is a 
manufactured product of fibres. The 
origin of paper derived from the 
writing on textile with its subsequent 
improvement to become paper as an 
economical substitute. 
Paper and textiles were closely 
related. Not only were they originally 
made of the same kinds of raw material, 
but also similar in physical format and 
properties, Even their uses were 
interchangeable. 
The chief difference between them 
was probably in the process of their 
manufacture and thus in their cost of 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

  
Photo from *Written on Bamboo and Silk”, by Tsuen-Hsuln Tslen, 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962. 
THE OLDEST PIEGE OF PAPER IN THE WORLD 
The oldest piece of paper In the world, this fragment of paper (above), 
dating back to the 2nd century B.C., was discovered recently in a tomb at 
Pa-ch’iao, in the Shensi province of northern China. It has pushed back the 
date of the invention of paper to over two centuries before the time of 
T'sai Lun, traditionally regarded as the inventor of paper. The papermaking 
techniques developed by Tsai Lun and described to the Imperial court In 
105 A.D. undoubtedly represented a big advance in the art of papermaking. 
T'sal Lun and his papermaking methods are depicted (below) on commemorative 
stamps Issued by the People’s Republic of China. 
WWW EET WY WEWY WL YET ey 
    
  
   
» 
! | » 
‘a AX) le 
; a PONTING . 
x Giggle # 
/ 4 
PRY 91 - * 
} Bi : el * a 
Po * » 
» B= . . 
' Be * ¥ 
) x Rs * 
r * . 
» ® * 
» M 
. : 
’ * 
’ . ' 
’ " yr ' 
PRR BS) eo %W2.B2 ‘ LJ 
Ad bdd AAA 
 
Photo Dominique Roger - Unesco 
PAPER AND PRINTING (Continued) 
production. Textiles were made by 
weaving spun threads of fibres by 
physical means, while paper was 
formed by the mixture of disintegrated 
fibres into a felted sheet by chemical 
processes, 
The invention of paper has been 
attributed to T'sai Lun, an official in 
charge of manufacture, who reported 
to the Court in 105 A.D. his method 
of papermaking with tree bark, hemp, 
rags and fish nets. This traditional 
date of invention was probably arbitrar- 
ily chosen, since there is evidence for 
the existence of paper made of plant 
and silk fibres prior to his time. 
The recent discovery of very ancient 
paper fragments in north China indi- 
cates its origin before Christ. Frag- 
ments of this oldest paper are reported 
as having been found in Pa-ch’iao, 
Shensi province, in 1957, in a tomb 
dated no later than the second century 
B.C. If this is true, the beginning of 
Chinese papermaking may have to be 
pushed back at least some two 
centuries before T'sai Lun. 
The role of T'sai Lun, however, may 
have been as an innovator of new 
materials, which had not been used 
before, and of new techniques for 
treating them. The supply of rags and 
other second-hand materials was limit- 
ed and the introduction of fresh fibres 
from tree bark and other plants 
provided new sources of raw materials, 
and thus made it possible for paper- 
making on a large scale to meet the 
increasing demand. 
I. major raw materials 
for Chinese papermaking include such 
bast plants as hemp, jute, flax, ramie 
(China grass), and rattan; the bark of 
the mulberry and paper mulberry; 
grasses such as bamboo, reeds, and 
stalks of rice and wheat; and such 
seed fibres as cotton. Hemp and 
cotton are probably the best, produc- 
ing the highest yields of pure and 
long fibres, but as they are needed 
primarily for the textile industry, paper 
mulberry and bamboo have been the 
chief raw materials for papermaking 
in China for many centuries, 
Although paper had been used for 
writing probably as early as it was 
invented, it was not until the third 
century A.D. that bamboo and wooden 
tablets were entirely replaced by paper 
as the material of Chinese books. 
We have also found that from this 
time on, paper began to be made with 
a fine screen-mould, sized and loaded 
to improve its quality for writing, and 
dyed with an insect repellent for 
permanence. It was also made in 
different colours and designs for

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

writing poems, notes, and letters, and 
cut into patterns for embroideries and 
decorations, 
Paper was also extensively used 
for documents and bookmaking, for 
painting and calligraphy, for calling 
cards, for offerings to the spirits, for 
wrapping, for covering windows, and 
for such household articles as fans, 
umbrellas, lanterns, kites, toys, and 
even sanitary and toilet papers. All 
of these were accomplished or used 
before the close of the sixth century. 
From the seventh or eighth century 
onward, paper is known to have been 
used in making hats, garments, pants, 
bed sheets, mosquito nets, curtains, 
and other household furnishings and 
appliances. It was also used in 
making screens, tiles, and even armour. 
The use of paper as “flying money” to 
substitute for heavy metallic coins was 
formally introduced in the early ninth 
century. 
Marco Polo was among the early 
European visitors to China who wit- 
nessed the wide circulation of paper 
money and the extravagant burning of 
paper effigies and replicas as offerings 
to the dead in the empire of the great 
Khan. The Mongol expansion resulted 
in the introduction of paper money, 
playing cards, and many other objects 
of paper and printing to other parts 
of the world. 
The Persians first issued in 1294 
paper money, for which the Chinese 
name ch'ao (money) was adopted. It 
is said that certain old systems in 
European banking, accounting, and 
even money deposit vouchers were 
influenced by some of the Chinese 
examples. 
Wallpaper also is said to have 
originated in China. It was first 
brought to Europe by French mission- 
aries in the sixteenth century and 
has been imitated there since the 
seventeenth century. How early it 
was used in China is uncertain, but the 
decoration of Chinese houses with 
hanging scrolls of painting and calli- 
graphy was a very ancient and com- 
mon practice. It is possible that these 
paper scrolls were first hung and later 
adapted to being pasted on the walls 
of European houses. 
The use of paper made books much 
cheaper and more portable, but their 
multiplication and wide distribution 
was not possible until the invention 
of printing. It is uncertain when and 
where the first book was printed in 
China and who was the earliest 
printer. The beginning of the art must 
have been a process of gradual 
development and been participated in 
by many people, especially the reli- 
gious devotees from whom great 
numbers of duplicates of their sacred 
writings were in demand. 
There was a long history of pre- 
printing techniques of duplication in 
China, including the use of seals for 
stamping on clay and later on paper, 
of stencils to duplicate designs on 
textiles and on paper, and of inked 
impressions taken from stone inscrip- 
tions. All these processes paved the 
way for the use of wood-block printing. 
The earliest possible date for the 
beginning of printing in China is 
probably around 700 A.D. The discov- 
ery in Korea in 1965 of a Buddhist 
charm in Chinese, printed no later 
than 751 AD., and a previously known 
charm also in Chinese, printed in Japan 
around 770 A.D. indicate that printing 
at that time was already a refined and 
widespread craft. Since both Korea 
and Japan were under the influence of 
Chinese culture long before the time 
when these texts were printed, there 
is little doubt that this technique was 
introduced from China. 
N. printed material of 
comparable date has been found in 
China, but specimens of the ninth and 
tenth centuries were discovered there 
and survive today. These include the 
famous Diamond sutra, a complete 
book in a paper roll printed in 868 A.D., 
calendars of 877 and 882, many single 
sheets of Buddhist pictures of 947-983, 
and two versions of an invocation 
sutra printed in 957 and 973. All these 
early specimens of printing are more 
or less related to Buddhism; Confucian 
classics were not printed until the first 
part of the tenth century. 
After that time, printing was widely 
applied and perfected through the 
efforts of many official, private, reli- 
gious, and commercial agencies. The 
Chinese printing of the eleventh 
to thirteenth centuries, which may 
be compared with the European 
incunabula, is especially noted for its 
excellence in paper, ink, calligraphy, 
illustration, workmanship, and in many 
other respects. 
All the wood blocks were selected 
from deciduous trees: the pear, jujube, 
catalpa, and sometimes apple, for their 
smooth and even texture. The manu- 
script, written on a thin sheet of paper, 
was transferred upside down to the 
surface of the block by means of rice 
paste. When dry, the backing of paper 
was scraped off, leaving a thin tissue 
showing the characters in the reverse 
position remaining on the block. 
The cutter then removed the surface 
of the block around the characters 
with gauges, picks, and chisels. When 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
 
of
 
Ro
ya
! 
On
ta
rl
o 
Mu
se
um
, 
To
ro
nt
o.
 
 
Engraving of a scholar carrying a bamboo 
book, reproduced from a 3rd century B.C. 
tomb tile now in the collection of the 
Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Canada. 
These books consisted of bamboo tablets 
connected with string and used like 
a paged book of modern times. Bamboo 
and wood were the most popular 
materials for writing (along with silk) 
- before the invention of paper.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

| 
a 
. 
O 
[a] 
c 
o = 
[)] 
= 
LE 
w 
2 
] 
o 
ae 
O 
xX 
— 
[5] 
° 
re} 
= 
[<8 
a) 
[+9 
[ 
-£ s 
- 
[=] 
> 
« 
[2] 
o 
o 
E 
wi 
© 
Ke = 
Ee 
[3 
> 
w 
o 2 
3 
o 
Qo 
fo) 
Ed 
£ 
‘THE WORLD'S OLDEST PRINTED DOCUMENT 
  
Z
H
 
R
E
C
A
 
S
A
A
 
HE 
Te
pe
r 
IR 
RE 
SQ 
r
e
 
& 
H
E
 BF
 
A
E
 
S
e
o
w
]
 
B
r
o
d
i
e
 
Ne
 
Ta
y 
2 
MB
OW
 IE 
Wk
 
I 
- ‘ 
i 
br 
FR
E 
AE
E 
SB
 B
f
 
S
T
 
E
G
 
dr
a 
S
E
A
M
 
R
E
 
J
P
R
 
6 
$8 
TE 
Re
st
 
P-
 2
0 
BE 
 e
 
Ed 
t 
H
i
p
 
pr
ey
 
| 
0 
3 
Re 
aa 
a 
ih 
3 
2 
5
0
 
2 
0 
e
H
 
H
m
 
No
e 
FE
 
wk
 
O&
K 
NE
 
R
R
 
| 2
 
Ry
 L e 
S
S
 J 
Z
e
 
Sr
 S
R 
R
E
A
 
SW
E 
SE 
Pd
Oo
S 
RR
R 
SE
 
V
Y
 
EB 
R
e
 
pr. 
4.
1 
Buddhist charm in 
Chinese (left), dated 
704-751 AD., is the 
oldest known specimen 
of printing in the world. 
It was found at Pulguk 
sa, in Kyongju, southeast 
characters were carved 
in reverse on wood and 
then transferred to paper. 
Below, an illustrated in 
vocation sutra printed in 
975 A.D. and discovered 
in the ruins of the Thun- 
der Peak Pagoda, i 
Hangchow, southe: 
Shinz: in 1924. N i 
 
on
e pS
 
1 
B
R
E
N
 
O
P
E
R
 
WX
 
2 
OH 
52 
58 
S
a
 
F
R
E
D
 
E
E
R
E
 
Er
 
> 
bef
 
4 
> 
SE 
F
R
 
F
R
E
Y
 
A
I
O
 
Sh 
P
o
 
OH 
E
E
 
E
R
E
R
E
P
 
F
F
P
 
RH
 
E
R
A
S
 
  
Ne 
un 
  
Photo courtesy of the Far Eastern Library, University of Chicago. 
CHINESE PAPER AND PRINTING (Continued) 
the block was ready, it was inked with 
a hair brush. A sheet of paper was 
then placed on the inked block and 
brushed over the back with .a soft 
brush. It was said that a skilled printer 
could turn out some 1,500 to 2,000 
sheets of double pages in a day. 
The art of Chinese printing was 
further developed through the intro- 
duction of movable type in the eleventh 
century and of multi-colour printing in 
the fourteenth century. According to 
a contemporary record, a font of 
earthenware movable type was used 
by a craftsman named Pi Sheng in 
about 1041-1048. He cut the characters 
in the soft clay and baked them in a 
fire. The type was set on a plate with 
a mixture of resin and wax. A flat 
board was pressed over the surface 
to even out the block of types. Several 
plates were used alternately and the 
printing was done rapidly. 
Other materials were later introduc- 
ed to make movable type, including 
wood in the early thirteenth century 
and bronze in the late fifteenth and 
the sixteenth century. The types made 
of wood, bronze, tin, lead, and 
ceramics were used repeatedly but 
intermittently in the following centuries. 
Printing with more than one colour 
was used as early as 1340 and 
advanced in the late seventeenth 
century when many manuals of paint- 
      
ings and patterned stationery were 
printed in multi-colour. This was done 
by means of a series of separate 
blocks, one for each colour, applied 
to the paper in succession. This 
method was used especially in printing 
book illustrations, maps, stationery, 
and texts with punctuation and com- 
mentaries. 
Throughout the ages, the wood-block 
printing was the main trend of Chinese 
book production while movable type 
was only occasionally used. Because 
of the nature of the Chinese vocabulary 
with a large number of individual 
characters, the block printing was more 
simple and economical to operate. 
After required copies were printed, the 
Korea, in 1966. The

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

THE INVENTION OF MOVABLE TYPE 
  
’ 
Na
y 
“T
I 
B
r
i
 
B
E
R
A
R
E
N
E
E
 CD
 
LY
 
&-
 
by
 
»
 
A
x
 
L
s
 fi 
| 
S 
2 == 
| 
N
r
 
S
N
 
T
o
e
s
 
oy
 
a
R
 
B
A
S
 
2 
S
E
R
R
E
 
(T 
i 
Zl 
fl 
15 
F3 
ifr, 
x 
174 
2 
H 
Pt 
HE 
i 
BA 
% 
# 
P
U
R
S
E
S
 mE
 
Ld 4   P
E
S
N
F
E
A
R
R
E
 
-
 k 
2 
- - 
= d
a
 
R
a
l
 
3 N
a
 Fe 
R
A
R
E
R
 —
 
h
o
 
4 
E
A
E
 
R
A
N
E
 
S
E
,
 
2
0
 
g 
& 
N
N
 
‘ 
=
 
y
n
 $
4 
BR
ER
A 
w Ld 
——
 at oh
 
3)
 
14
d 
oF
 Lo
w,
 
Ml
) 
CFP
 
E
R
R
 
LT
 
    
E
H
 
E
 
S
I
 
[
A
 
™
 
’ I. 
f
:
 
=
 
HE
 
TE
 
SE
N 
WA
M 
BM 
F
e
 
= 2
 
A
R
E
R
N
S
N
R
V
N
B
E
T
E
Z
F
 
I
R
 
H
R
E
S
D
 
2 
PR
R 
2 
mh
 
fe
 
(RB 
7 
& B
A
N
D
E
 
  HA
RN
RE
F 
E
X
 
RR
 
| 
   
The invention of movable type in the 11th century AD. 
~ was another notable “first” for China and a giant : 
step forward in printing technique. Experiments were 
~ made with many different materials including earthen- 
~ ware, wood, bronze, tin and lead. Above, a bronze 
~ movable type printing of the “Mo tzu", a 5th century 
B.C. philosophical work, printed in blue colour in 
~ 1553., Right, craftsmen making wooden movable type at 
~ the Wu Ying Palace. Illustrations taken from “Chung- 
kuo pan-k'o t'u-lu”, National Peking Library, 1961. 
wll cam 
LITT] 
blocks could be easily stored and 
used over again, when additional 
copies were needed. 
Only when voluminous books were 
produced on a large scale, movable 
type was preferred. Since the middle 
of the nineteenth century, both block 
printing and the traditional movable 
type have been gradually replaced by 
modern printing techniques, including 
lithography, typography, and other 
machine printing. 
After paper was invented, it not only 
became popular in China but spread 
in all directions throughout the world. 
its introduction to other countries must 
have occurred in two stages: first 
  
 
paper books and other paper products 
arrived in these countries to be 
followed later by the paper manufactur- 
ing methods, 
Paper moved eastward to Korea in 
the second century, to Japan in the 
third century, southward to Indo-China 
no later than the third century and to 
India before the seventh century, and 
westward to Central Asia in the 
third century, to western Asia in the 
eighth century, to Africa in the tenth 
century, to Europe in the twelfth 
century, and to America in the sixteenth 
century. 
It has often been said that the 
Chinese kept secret their knowledge 
  
  
of papermaking until a few paper- 
makers were captured by the Arabs 
in the eighth century, when this secret 
was revealed to the outside world. 
This is certainly not true. The slow 
© movement to the West was due primar- 
ily to geographical and cultural isola- 
tion rather than to secretiveness, since 
papermaking was introduced to China's 
immediate neighbours as soon as they 
began to have contacts with Chinese 
culture. 
When the eastward diffusion of 
Chinese culture began, Koreans first 
acquired Chinese books on paper and 
borrowed Chinese characters as their 
writing in the second century. By way 
of Korea, Chinese books were in- 
CONTINUED PAGE 11 
 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

  
       
  
  
Na
ti
on
al
 
Pe
ki
ng
 
Li
br
ar
y,
 
19
61
 
  
    
  
  
  
 
     
  
  
      Il
lu
st
ra
ti
on
 
fr
om
 
“C
hu
ng
-k
uo
 
pa
n-
k'
oc
 
t'
u-
lu
”,
 
 
FROM SALT BED 
  
10 ETI 
EN gAN 
PADDY FIELD 2357 §iais 
Above, a lively woodblock a QE LOSER I , 
illustration of salt = I AL b BF APT 
manufacture which appeared a a 2 a LAT I a yi): LESAN 
in an old work on Chinese a cM 3 
materia medica, printed 
in 1249. The poem and 
calligraphy that accompany 
the more sophisticated 
copper-plate engraving (right) 
printed in 1696, of peasants 
planting rice in paddy fields, 
are the work of the 
Emperor K'ang Hsi. 
It is one of 46 illustrations 
in the copper-plate 
edition of the “Keng 
chih tu”, an album showing 
the processes of tilling 
and weaving. 
om WEN ‘ 
Pvt AL 
edb habrnh B37]   
Ph
ot
o 
co
ur
te
sy
 
of
 
th
e 
Br
it
is
h 
M
u
s
e
u
m

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 52729: China, true birthplace of paper, printing and movable type

CHINESE PAPER AND PRINTING (Continued from page 3) 
troduced to Japan at the beginning of 
the third century. 
However, the craft of papermaking 
was not begun in Japan until 610 AD., 
when a Korean monk, who had learned 
inkmaking and papermaking in China, 
went to lapan and suggested its 
manufacture to the Japanese court. 
After this time, hundreds of priests 
and students from both Korea and 
lapan were sent to China to study and 
to acquire books. The Chinese craft 
of printing must have been learned by 
these students and applied in their own 
countries when they returned, 
How early papermaking moved 
southward is uncertain, but it must 
have been very early. Chinese 
records show that in the late third 
century, paper made of special mater- 
ials native to Indo-China was sent to 
the Chinese court as a tribute. It is 
assumed that the Indo-Chinese learned 
the craft from the Chinese. Even 
today, the methods used by Indo- 
Chinese papermakers are said to be 
more closely related to those of China 
than of any other Asian country. 
As to the printing of books, the Indo- 
Chinese have acquired many kinds of 
Chinese literature, including Confucian, 
Buddhist, and Taoist canons, medical 
works, and novels, ever since the tenth 
century. Books in Chinese and in 
bilingual text of Chinese and Viet- 
namese were printed there for many 
centuries with wood blocks, movable 
type, and colour process, as was done 
in China. 
The introduction of paper to India 
was probably not later than the seventh 
century. A Chinese monk named 
I-ching who travelled to India in 671- 
694, mentioned the Sanskrit word 
kékali for paper in his Chinese-Sanskrit 
dictionary. Since the sacred texts of 
India were memorized and transmitted 
orally for ages, paper was probably 
not popular there until the Mohammed- 
an period after the twelfth century. 
The use of printing reached India even 
much later. 
Papermaking travelled westward to 
Samarkand in 751 AD. when two 
Chinese papermakers were taken pris- 
oner and introduced the craft to the 
Arabic world. A second factory was 
started in Baghdad some forty years 
later when Chinese papermakers were 
brought to that city. From this time, 
papermaking spread to the cities of 
Damascus and Tripoli, and to Yemen, 
Egypt, and Morocco. The Arabs 
monopolized papermaking in the West 
for some five centuries before it was 
introduced to Europe in the twelfth 
century. 
After the Moors conquered the 
Iberian peninsula, they brought the 
craft to Spain and established a paper 
factory in Xativa in about 1150. A mill 
for maceration of rags was also operat- 
ed there, 
Another route which carried the 
craft to Europe was probably across 
the Mediterranean through Sicily to 
Italy from Egypt or Palestine. Paper 
mills are known to have been estab- 
lished in Italian cities of Babriano, 
J
 
y 
4 
pr
 
~»
 
“
a
 
    
  
  
Bologna, and Genoa, from the late 
thirteenth century, and in several cities 
in France and Germany in the four- 
teenth century. 
The famous papermaker Ulman 
Stromer, who built a paper mill in 
Nuremberg about 1390, used tools and 
processes, including the water-power- 
ed stampers, similar to those used in 
China. The craft was introduced to 
the Netherlands, Switzerland, and 
England in the fifteenth century and 
brought to the New World in the 
sixteenth century—to Mexico before 
1580 and to the American colonies 
toward the end of the seventeenth 
century. 
Throughout a long history of over 
fifteen hundred years, paper travelled 
from China to almost every part of the 
world. Whether printing in Europe 
was influenced by the Chinese is 
debatable, but knowledge of Chinese 
printing and many printed articles from 
China were certainly known in Europe 
before the first printing there was 
accomplished. 
The origin of paper in China and its 
borrowing by many others is definite 
and certain. Papermaking, which was 
already a fully developed art before 
its spread from China, is probably the 
most complete of the inventions that 
China has given to the world. =n 
  
” 
a
 
. 
.e 
» 
- 
. 
.» 
- 
hd 
.-. 
. 
- 
. 
o 
. 
SE 
HE 
= 
|= 
EE 
This woodcut by Jose Annam, printed in 
Frankfurt In 1568, is the earliest picture 
of papermaking In Europe, It shows 
the remarkable similarity of the tools 
and processes used by European 
papermakers to those employed 
centuries earlier In China (see particularly 
photos pages 4 and 5). Illustration 
taken from “Old Papermaking” by 
Dard Hunter, Mountain House, 1923, 
SSS CL — 
—— 
. 
\ + S 
‘3 | 3 
SS Ve — 
— . 
Nae ~ 
SS —— yy — 
 — 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 
  


### 52730: China's new discoveries of ancient treasures

Since the ‘Cultural Revolution’ 
China's new discoveries 
of ancient treasures 
1972 marks an important date in Chinese publishing, for it is during 
this year (which happens to be International Book Year) that, for the 
first time since the beginning of the ‘Cultural Revolution’, books 
on ancient art, archaeology, etc., have begun to re-appear in China. 
Among these books have been a number of magnificent albums, lavishly 
illustrated both in colour and in black and white, in which are presented 
the rich findings of campaigns of archaeological research carried 
out in the People’s Republic of China since 1968. Our cover photo and 
the photos reproduced in the following pages are a selection from 
two of these books: *’Archaeological Discoveries during the Great 
Cultural Revolution” (Cultural Objects Press, Peking, July 1972), and 
“Historical Relics Unearthed in New China’ (Foreign Languages Press, 
Peking. July 1972). These pages focus attention on one of the great 
archaeological discoveries of recent years—the unearthing of a Han 
Dynasty tomb dating back some 2,000 years and containing treasures 
of inestimable value, including astounding mailcoats made of jade 
and gold, the burial garments of a prince and princess. An exhibition 
of these recently-discovered treasures will be held in Paris early in1973. 
by Hsiao Wen 
1. the course of the past 
few years Chinese archaeologists have 
been carrying out extensive excava- 
tions in different parts of China as a 
result of which a large number of 
ancient sites and tombs have been 
unearthed containing many precious 
antiquities. 
An exhibition of some of these new 
archaeological discoveries was recent- 
ly held in Peking. It displayed about 
2,000 objects, dating mostly from bet- 
ween the 20th century B.C. and the 
15th century AD. This was only a 
sampling of the archaeological treas- 
ures discovered. In Shensi province 
alone, for instance, 160,000 objects 
have been unearthed, many of them 
unique or extremely rare, 
In the summer of 1968 two royal 
tombs, burial places of a prince and 
princess of the Western Han dynasty, 
were discovered at Man-ch’eng, in 
Hopei province. Hewn from the solid 
rock of a 600 ft. limestone hill, the 
tombs were those of Liu Sheng (who 
died in 113 B.C.) and his wife Tou Wan. 
Liu Sheng, ninth son of the fourth Han 
emperor Ching-ti had been named 
King Ching of Ch'ung-shan. Tou Wan 
is said to have been the great-niece 
of the Dowager Empress Tou, mother 
of the Emperor Ching-ti. 
Liu Sheng’s tomb Is 52 metres long, 
37 m. wide and over 7 m. high (115 by 
112 ft. and over 20 ft. high), with a 
total volume of 2,700 cubic metres. 
His wife's tomb has an even larger 
volume: 3,000 cubic metres. Built on 
the scale of a vast palace, each could 
have held 1,000 people. 
The tombs contained over 2,800 
objects made of gold, silver, bronze, 
stone, jade, iron, lacquer and silk; 
in one was a stable with carriages, 
horses and full harness. 
The most exciting finds—and the 
first of their kind unearthed up until 
now—were the two funerary vest- 
ments of the prince and the princess, 
each composed of over 2,000 rectan- 
gles of jade, perforated at the four 
corners and linked together with fine 
gold wire (see centre colour pages 
and caption on page 18). 
These jade “mailcoats”, Chinese 
counterparts, as it were, to the sarco- 
phagi of Egyptian mummies, were used 
to enshroud the bodies of emperors 
and high-ranking nobles under the 
Han dynasty. Sewn with gold, silver 
or bronze wire according to rank, they 
were supposed to keep the remains 
perfectly preserved. By the time the 
excavations were carried out, the 
bodies had of course long since disin- 
tegrated, and some of the jade plates 
and their golden threads had been 
broken. 
The mailcoats have now been 
completely restored. Liu Sheng's is 
made up of 2,690 pieces of jade and 
1,100 grams of gold wire. His wife's 
mailcoat has 2,156 pieces of jade and 
contains over 700 grams of gold wire. 
An artistic achievement of the highest 
order, they would take a skilled jade 
craftsman of today at least ten 
years to fashion. 
Many of the objects from the tombs 
are strange and lovely. There is the 
Po-shan-lu incense burner, wrought in 
bronze with gold and silver inlays. 
The conical lid represents the moun- 
tainous island of Po-shan. Half- 
hidden among the rocks and peaks, 
are scenes with huntsmen and animals 
picked out with minutely fine gold fili- 
gree work, 
The lid is pierced with tiny holes 
through which wisps of incense smoke 
rose and drifted. In this way, the 
craftsman symbolized the Po-shan 
mountain perpetually shrouded in 
mist. 
Another fine and indeed unique 
example is the large (48 cm. or 19 in.) 
gilt bronze lamp from the Ch’ang-hsin 
Palace (see cover photo) which con- 
sists of a lantern held by a kneeling 
court servant, on whose left arm can be 
read the inscription “Ch'ang-hsin” 
(eternal fidelity). 
This palace was the residence of 
the Dowager Empress Tou, who prob- 
ably gave the lamp to her great- 
niece as part of her dowry. The whole 
lamp can be taken to pieces, and the 
woman's head is detachable. The 
moveable base allows the direction of 
the light to be altered at will; and an 
CONTINUED PAGE 14

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 52730: China's new discoveries of ancient treasures

~ This is part of the grotto 
of Man-ch’eng in northeast 
China where prince Liu 
Sheng of the Han Dynasty 
was buried in 113 B.C. 
ALCR CL RVEEE EV RG IT 
the solid rock adjoining a 
~ similar tomb for his wife. 
~ The tombs contained over 
2,800 objects including the 
~ two burial jade mailcoats 
of the royal couple. Be- 
~ low right, young visitors 
to a recent Peking exhi- 
bition admire one of these 
~ magnificent vestments (see 
also centre colour page 
ELC ICED LGN ET ER EE) RA EY) 
~ found in the grotto were 
~ two stone figures (below), 
hands in sleeves, possibly 
effigies of the prince and 
his wife. The male figure 
~ measures 38.5 cm. (15 in.) 
and the female 35 
(14 in.) in height.   - | - 3 : - x . — 
om Ss - : N N rou . 
“ a a La A ha . 
doe TT = Lome Fa A SNE 3 SE i    
Photo from “Archaeological Discoverles during 
the Great Cultural Revolution”, Peking, 1972

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 52730: China's new discoveries of ancient treasures

CHINA'S TREASURES 
(Continued from page 12) 
adjustable shutter permitted the inten- 
sity of the light to be varied. 
In October 1970, two enormous terra- 
cotta jars were found in a cave dating 
from the T'ang dynasty (618-807 A.D.) 
in the southern suburbs of Sian, in 
Shensi province. They contained a 
thousand objects in perfect condition, 
including gold-worked vessels contain- 
ing cinnabar, amber, coral, amethysts, 
chalk-stones, etc., as well as alchem- 
ists’ materials such as agate mortars, 
silver pots in the form of pomegra- 
nates, etc. All these came from 
the mansion of an aristocrat and high 
official about the middle of the T'ang 
dynasty. 
The dominant class was then torn 
by internal strife. The officers of the 
frontier guard had mutinied and seized 
control of the capital, Shang-an (today 
Sian). Before fleeing, the Emperor 
Hslian-Tsang and his ministers had 
their treasures buried. The two jars 
held over 200 pieces of gold and silver 
plate, an unprecedented discovery. 
According to ancient chronicles, the 
Emperor Hslian-Tsang was not only a 
great drinker but also a great lover 
of horses and equestrian displays. To 
celebrate his birthday he would hold 
sumptuous feasts, during which horses 
danced with cups between their teeth, 
to ceremonial music. 
Later, these “dancers” became cav- 
alry horses. During the mutiny, when 
they heard the same tunes, they 
started to prance about in time to the 
music. The soldiers thought they were 
possessed by devils, and slaughtered 
them. One of these dancing horses 
decorates a silver ewer found among 
the hidden treasures. 
Other outstanding finds are the 
“six-petalled” or “lotus” bowls. They 
include octagonal cups, dishes, in 
the form of peaches, and amphoras, 
all works of remarkable beauty. Many 
of them are decorated with graceful 
embossed, modelled, traced, stippled 
or openwork motifs. 
Pe
ki
ng
, 
19
72
 
* 
The designs are often enhanced by 
grained backgrounds in low relief; in 
the silverware the main motifs are 
nearly always gilded. According to the 
style of the period, these generally 
CONTINUED PAGE 16 
Left, Han dynasty statuette of a peahen, 
discovered in the province of Yun-nan, 
Is remarkable for the graceful harmony 
of its lines. Right, Han bas-relief, dating 
from 107 A.D. and measuring 108 cm. 
(42 in.) in length by 38 ecm. (15 in.) in height. 
Note how the sculptor has allowed the 
figures in this farming scene to overlap the 
frame, Above it, he has carved a 
frieze of growing crops.   Ph
ot
o 
fr
om
 
“A
rc
ha
ec
lo
gi
ca
l 
Di
sc
ov
er
le
s 
du
ri
ng
 
th
e 
Gr
ea
t 
Cu
lt
ur
al
 
Re
vo
lu
ti
on
”,
 
Mn : "vj . : : . pb 
¢ . \ wig J ER # N 
oil ari RR

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 52730: China's new discoveries of ancient treasures

 
 
 
 
N
f
 
. 
r
y
 
o
r
 
a
k
 
+
 
J
E
 
is 
 
 
 
 
 
ese 
ail 
a 
Fri                                                   
os 
AS 
Ws 
a + Wy 
- 
n 
mw 
nt. 
"nm 
aN 
" 
» 
Ny 
bh 
3 
‘ 
EE 
: el 
' “, 
hy} a . 
10 
AE 
we 
. 
- 
. 
. 
a 
AS a 
ue 2 
| 
Ji ¥ 
bh L 
» 
a 
Wo 
: 
& 
5 
. 
* 
» 
~ 
Nh 
NE 
 
 
a AEs 
   
\ 
~ 
y 
. 
L 8 
; * . 
» 
| 
- 
a 
R y +3 
i RS 
Ye lB 
PETES 
4 
h 
rT. 
“ 
™e 
      
P
o
 
a
 
»
 
”~ 
N
l
 
TR 
OF 
RR 
Sa 
>
 
- 
7
,
 
E
a
 
x 
F
o
 
ge 
3
%
 
: 
vr S
A
 
i
 
 
     
 
 
r
y
 
4
 
F
E
T
T
 
g
h
 
I 
a
S
 
A
y
 
v 
Ve 
 
 
-~ 
- 
. 
* 
fF 
Lr 
- 
: 
of 
a
s
 
a 
F
o
 
# 
-
r
 
» 
» 
» 
v 
+ 
<< 
A
L
A
N
 
Yardy’ h ! 
: ~ . - 
a) 
bl 
~~ » 
a) 
4 - 
We 
, Sis Ee 2S 
Photo from “Historical Relics Unearthed in New China 
¢ 
L
A
 
NC

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 52730: China's new discoveries of ancient treasures

16 
CHINESE 
PEGASUS 
Caught by the sculptor 
in all the power and 
poetry of the gallop, this 
bronze charger is so 
delicately balanced that 
it seems, like some eastern 
Pegasus, to be almost 
airborne. Found at 
Wou-wei.in the province 
of Kan-su, it dates from 
the Eastern Han Dynasty 
{25-220 A.D.). 
Pe
ki
ng
, 
19
72
 
Ph
ot
o 
fr
om
 
“A
rc
ha
eo
lo
gi
ca
l 
Di
sc
ov
er
ie
s 
du
ri
ng
 
th
e 
Gr
ea
t 
Cu
lt
ur
al
 
Re
vo
lu
ti
on
®,
 
CHINA'S TREASURES (Continued from page 14) 
represent flowers, hunting scenes or 
animals (lion, fox, horse, bear, pheenix, 
parrot, mandarin duck, tortoise, etc.). 
Two octagonal cups with handles 
have low-relief figures of musicians 
and dancers on each of their eight 
sides. The even, clear-cut tooling 
seems to confirm the use of elemen- 
tary lathes. 
These new excavations have 
brought to light, among other things, 
a Byzantine gold coin of Heraclius 
(610-641 A.D.), a Persian silver coin 
of Khosro II (590-627 A.D.) and five 
Japanese pieces (Wadokaiho) minted 
in 708 A.D. These coins show that 
China was trading with other coun- 
tries at that time. 
In the region of Turfan (Sinkiang), 
silk and hempen fabrics dating from 
the T'ang dynasty have been found. 
With their close texture, iridescent 
colours and flower or bird designs, 
these materials show the quality of the 
textiles made in China in those early 
days. Under the dynasty of the Eas- 
tern Han (25-220 A.D.), Sinkiang was 
already the main channel for trade 
between China and the outside world. 
It was along this famous “Silk Road” 
that most of the T'ang silks were ex- 
ported. And the pieces of silk and 
hempen cloth discovered along this 
route bear eloquent testimony to the 
long history of commercial and cultural 
exchanges between China and the 
countries of Western Asia and even 
Europe. 
It was also in this region that a 
volume of the "Confucian Analects 
annotated by Ch’eng-Hstan" was dis- 
covered. This copy, made in 710 A.D. 
by Pu Tien-shou, then only 12 years 
old, takes the form of a scroll 5 metres 
(over 16 ft.) long. It is the oldest manu- 
script of this edition that has been 
found so far. It dates back two cen- 
turies earlier than the one recovered 
from the Tun-huang caves, and is more 
complete, 
in the Tsou-hsien district of the pro- 
vince of Shantung, excavations have 
brought to light jars and stone tools 
belonging to primitive Chinese sett- 
lements, and aiso a 14th century 
Ming dynasty tomb containing artist's 
brushes, ink tablets, inkpots and paper, 
sets of Chinese chessmen and a zither. 
Also found in this tomb were paintings 
and works of calligraphy including a 
fan with a poem by the southern Sung 
Emperor Chao Kou (1107-1187) and 
twenty-two books printed during the 
Yuan dynasty of the 13th and 14th 
centuries. 
From the Ching-shan district in 
Hopei province have come a series 
of bronzes dating from the last period 
of the Western Chou (11th to 8th cen- 
turies B.C.), and from the Chiangling 
district twenty-five “chings”™—a kind 
of stone xylophone—from the Kingdom 
of Ch'u (475-221 B.C.). 
These “chings™ are gracefully and 
delicately decorated with phoenixes 
and other coloured motifs. When 
played, they still produce well-pitched 
and harmonious musical notes,

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 52730: China's new discoveries of ancient treasures

  
CULINARY IDEOGRAM 
Bronze vessel for meat or other cooked dishes, discovered In the 
province of Hu-nan. It was made in two pieces and the lid which 
kept the food warm could be removed and Inverted for use as a 
serving dish. Known in Chinese as a “Tou” (pronounced *doe”), the 
vessel Is represented in writing by a character (below) which exactly 
  
Numerous “ying-yuan™—gold pieces 
from the Kingdom of Ch’'u—were found 
in the Lou-an and Fu-nan districts of 
Anhui province. At Ch'ang-sha in 
Hunan province, a bronze halberd and 
another long-handled weapon, a par- 
tisan, were found intact, mounted on 
lacquered wooden shafts, as well as 
a pike with a cane handle. These 
weapons date from the end of the 
Spring and Autumn Period (Sth cen- 
tury B.C.). 
The objects discovered at Tsinan in 
Shantung province include some twen- 
ty earthenware funerary statuettes 
dating from the Western Han dynasty 
and representing a circus show of that 
period. Ranged around the sides are 
a master of ceremonies, an orchestra 
with seven musicians and seven spec- 
tators. In the centre there are six per- 
formers, each wearing a different cos- 
tume. Two of the performers are 
dancers, the four others acrobats. 
At Tatung in Shansi province, exca- 
vations have brought to light inkpots 
Nn ap 
Ph
ot
o 
fr
om
 
°A
rc
ha
eo
lo
gi
ca
l 
Di
sc
ov
er
ie
s 
du
ri
ng
 
th
e 
Gr
ea
t 
Cu
it
ur
al
 
Re
vo
iu
ti
on
*,
 
Pe
ki
ng
, 
19
72
 
and two carved stone stands, as well 
as paintings on lacquered wood dating 
from the Northern Wei dynasty (386- 
534 AD.). These may be panels from 
a screen, as the bright colours and 
clear outlines resemble the typical 
pictorial art of the working people at 
that time. 
In Peking, an outer door of a watch- 
tower of the Ho-yi-men gate has 
been discovered, and also the ruins 
of ancient dwellings. The city of 
Peking has a long history. The Liao 
or Khitan Tartars (916-1125) set up 
their capital there, which they called 
Yen-ching. Then it became the capital 
of the Kin dynasty (1115-1234), under 
name of Tsung-ching. The later Yuan 
dynasty built a new town they called 
Ta-tu in the north-east suburbs of the 
old capital. 
Research has enabled the size of 
this Yuan capital to be estimated; and 
it is understandable that Marco Polo, 
who visited it in the second half of the 
13th century, should have described 
NP 
Oo \S 
OAK 
) 
reproduces the shape. 
3 Ea 
  
4 
A 
AE 
Cried 
it as the largest city he had ever seen. 
Tombs containing the skeletons of 
sacrificial victims, dating from the time 
of the Chang-yin Dynasty (16th to 
11th centuries B.C.), were discovered 
in 1966 and 1969, at Yi-tu in Shantung 
province and at Ho-ma in Shansi. 
In the Shantung tomb, the slave- 
owner lies surrounded by forty-eight 
immolated slaves; the Shansi tomb 
contains the remains of eighteen vic- 
tims, four of whom have iron collars 
round their necks. 
In 1969, the Han-chia granaries were 
cleared at Loyang in Honan province. 
Their construction was begun in 605 
A.D. under the Suei dynasty (581-618) ; 
and under the Sueis and the Tangs 
they constituted a vast State silo. 
The whole covers over 420,000 
square metres (500,000 sg. yds). 
Inside the surrounding wall there are 
- 400 circular and concentric trenches, 
6 to 8 metres wide and 5 to 10 metres 
deep (20 to 26 ft. and 16 to 33 ft.). 
The largest one could hold nearly 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
11

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 52730: China's new discoveries of ancient treasures

18 
CHINA'S TREASURES (Continued) 
600 tons of grain; and even today 
decomposed millet seeds have been 
found there. 
When the Chinese People's Repub- 
lic was founded, it was decided that 
the protection of historical remains 
would form an integral part of the 
scientific and cultural activities of the 
nation. Archaeological institutes were 
set up all over the country under the 
direction of the Chinese Academy of 
Science, and a great many archaeolo- 
gists were trained. 
In 1961, the State Affairs Council 
classed 180 places as protected cul- 
tural sites, including the caves of 
Long-men (Honan), Tun-huang (Kansu) 
and Yunkang (Shansi), and measures 
were taken for their protection, 
The Archaeological Research Insti- 
tute of the Chinese Academy of Scien- 
ces and teams of archaeologists from 
the various provinces, municipalities 
and autonomous regions have since 
brought to light a large number of 
antiquities. 
When ancient objects are found 
during building or farm work, they 
are immediately handed over to the 
State, and the appropriate authorities 
are informed. [In 1969, two peasants 
from Tsao-chuang in Shantung pro- 
vince unearthed the official seal of 
Han Linerh, a leader of the Red Ker- 
chief rebels formed in 1368 during the 
peasants’ revolt, before the fall of 
the Yuan dynasty. They immediately 
offered it to the Historical and Revolu- 
tionary Museum of China. 
When levelling a field, a farmer in 
the Sin ch'eng district of Honan dis- 
covered two bronze teapots weighing 
together over 37 kilograms (80 Ibs.) 
one of them dating from the Spring 
and Autumn Period, the other from that 
of the Warring States (722-221 B.C). 
He duly turned his finds over to the 
authorities. 
Gold coins (97.5%, pure) from the 
Chu Kingdom were found by farm 
workers in Anhui province and given 
into the keeping of the State. In 
February 1970, workers from the Ning- 
hsiang district of Hunan were digging 
the side of a hill when they unearthed 
a jar containing over 300 pieces of 
finely worked jade. After discussing 
their exciting discovery, they took the 
jade to the Hunan Provincial Museum. 
In this way, many precious historical 
relics were finally brought to light 
after thousands of years. 
The tomb of Liu Sheng was discov- 
ered at Man-ch'eng by a unit of the 
People’s Army of Liberation stationed 
in the area, and excavations were un- 
dertaken with the help of soldiers and 
the local population. The tomb cham- 
bers had been buried underground to 
a great depth and the entrance was 
filed with pebbles cemented and 
reinforced with iron, But the archae- 
ologists forced their way through 
by clearing the terrain stone by 
stone. |       
Colour pages 
 
All photos taken from <+Archaeological Discoveries 
during the Great Cultural Revolution”, Peking, 1972. 
CHINESE MORALITY TALE (page 19) 
Fragment of a morality tale of feudal times engraved and 
painted in lacquer on a piece of wood measuring 81.5 cm. 
(32 in) by-40.5 cm. {16 in.). Found in the Shan-Hsi province, 
it dates from the Northern Wei Dynasty (386-534 A.D.). 
BLACK CHARGER (page 20) 
The Chinese have always been famous for their sculptures 
and paintings of horses. This beautifully proportioned 
statuette was found recently at Lo-Yang in the province 
of Ho-nan in central China. It stands 66.8 cm. (27 in.) 
high and dates from the Tang Dynasty (618-907 A.D.) 
when ‘Lo-Yang was the capital of China. 
LEOPARD SLEEVE WEIGHTS (page 21) 
These miniature masterpieces, only 3.5 em (1 1 in.) in height, 
were found In the tomb of the princess Tou Wan (see 
caption for pages 22, 23). In gilt bronze with the leopards’ 
spots Inlaid in silver, they date from the Han Dynasty and 
served as sleeve weights for the flowing robes worn at 
the time, 
THE SHOW MUST GO ON {page 21) 
This lively scene, in which two dancers and four acrobats 
entertain seven spectators to the tunes of seven musicians 
under the watchful eye of their conductor, is an interesting 
example of early Chinese ceramic art. Originally the scene 
contained 22 figures, but one acrobat is missing. It was 
found in 1969 at Chi-Nan, in the province of Shantung, and 
dates from the Han Dynasty. 
JADE BURIAL VESTMENTS FOR A PRINCE 
AND PRINCESS (centre pages 22, 23) 
The sumptuous jade and gold funerary vestments of 
prince Liu Sheng and his wife princess Tou Wan were 
the most spectacular items discovered in 1968 in the 
Man-ch’eng tombs (see article page 12 and photo 
page 13), and are the first such objects ever found. 
The prince's vestment (bottom of photo) was made up 
of 2,690 polished Jade discs sewn together with gold 
wire; his wife's contained 2,156 discs. They confirm 
descriptions found in old Chinese histories, such as 
that in the “Hou-Han shu” (History of the Later Han) 
which says: “Bodies of Emperors are to be buried in jade casings sewn with gold 
wire; Imperial princes, first generation feudal lords, Imperial princesses use jade 
casings sewn with silver wire; high nobility and sisters and aunts of Emperors used 
bronze wire.” Prince Liu Sheng became King Ching of Ch'ung-Shan and he and his 
wife were no doubt therefore accorded the full privileges of gold wire upon their deaths. 
BRONZE AND CERAMIC WINE VESSELS (page 24) 
The first great flowering of Chinese art (apart from 
prehistoric pottery) found its expression in the very ancient 
bronze vessels of the Shang Dynasty (16th - 11th century 
B.C). The heavy, tripod, sacrificial, wine vessel (left of 
photo), called a “chia”, was found at Wen-hsien in the 
province of He-nan. Bronze vessels of this period were 
often ormamented with the “Yao tlieh” (“the glutton”), a 
mask motif representing a mythical monster with staring 
eyes, a nose and horns, but who is always depicted without 
a lower jaw. The bronze wine vessel (bottom right) with 
four feet and a swing handle dates from the same period 
and is called a “you”. Top right, a delicate glazed ceramic 
vase dating from the Northern Chi Dynasty (550-577 A.D.). 
PO-SHAN INCENSE-BURNER (page 25) 
One of the most lovely of the treasures recovered from 
the Man-ch’eng tombs is this bronze incense-burner with 
its delicate gold and silver inlays. According to ancient 
Chinese legend, there was a mountain in the province of 
Shantung named Po-shan where grew rare plants of 
immortality and other delicacies. Chinese art, particularly 
of the Han period, contains many examples of incense- 
burners called Po-shan-lou. They represent the mountain 
of Po-shan and incense smoke escaping from holes, in their 
lids portrays the clouds which perpetually shroud its summit.

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

~ 
Te
 
_ 
F
o
s
 
* 
%
 
of
 
o
o
n
 r
e 
ER
B 
an
 
Ei 
3 
E
E
R
 
PR
A 
a
k
 
E
T
R
E
 
ar
e 
ES
 
pi
le
: 
\ 
\ 
3 
r
a
 
a
 
n
i
f
 
y, 
Vy
) 
- 
D
T
 
a 
L
E
 
F
i
l
 
4 
2 
 
 
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

20 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

   
21 
 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

24 
  
A *
 
. 
' 
a
 
   
  
T
H
 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

EE he ol BET TP : : a 
R
R
R
 
S
T
E
 
v ls {lopuesti ‘JG 
_bunepal elo Mex ea Q 
A 10s \ 
=
 
  
  y \ AL 
4 of hl :  ; 
fe al 3 
i wr oh Fa ar - 3 
| _— t a 
| C— SE gr regu 
fs i 
4 
- " —— 
Tr . 
——— - 
GF 
oy 
  
          

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

Colour page opposite 
 
GODS, EPICS AND HEROES. A four-century old book—a combination of art album and 
historical novel—has just been published in the Unesco collection of Representative 
Works. Surprisingly modern in style, it is the famous “Tovar Manuscript” with its superb 
water-colour illustrations depicting Aztec epics, gods and heroes, copied In the 16th century from 
ancient Indian paintings. In 1587, a Mexican Indian missionary, Father juan de Tovar, 
gathered the historical and legendary traditions of the Aztecs into a single work. All trace of 
the manuscript was lost between the 16th century and the 19th century, when it was re-discovered 
by an English collector. The “Tovar Manuscript” has now been published by the Akademische 
It presents a Spanish text prepared by the 
French hispanist, Prof. Jacques Lafaye, of the Sorbonne (from the original manuscript now 
in the John Carter Brown Library of Brown University, in the U.S.A), a French translation and 
Opposite, three of its illustrations. 
the “plumed serpent”, a major deity in the Mexican pantheon and the Aztec god of creation, 
inventor of agriculture and patron of learning. His cape of feathers symbolizes the wings 
of a butterfly, the form in which warriors journeyed to paradise. 
on a cactus devours a bird. The painting recalls the legend of the sun god, Huitzilopochtli, 
Druck und Verlaganstalt, at Graz (Austria). 
numerous notes and commentaries. 
telling the Aztecs to build their capital at a spot where an eagle was devouring 
a snake (an image from which Mexico’s national emblem is derived). Tenochtitlan, the Aztec 
capital, is now buried under Mexico City. Footprints around the cactus roots symbolize 
the Aztecs’ search. At upper right of painting is the god's shield with five points 
representing the divisions of space, and two arrows. 
the painting of Huitzilopochtli. 
Left, the same symbols figure in 
Photos © Akademische Druck und Verlaganstalt, Graz 
by 
Miguel Angel Asturias 
Nobel Prize for Literature 
] HE existence of books 
among the pre-Hispanic peoples of 
America, the materials used and their 
typology, is such a wide theme that 
the three major cultures (Nahuatl, 
Maya and Quechua) should really be 
studied separately. 
The Mexican, Maya and Peruvian 
Indians discovered and cultivated 
different “modes” of transmitting their 
culture and ethics. Some of them 
still amaze us with their plastic beauty 
  
MIGUEL ANGEL ASTURIAS, one of today's 
greatest novelists in the Spanish language, 
was born in Guatemala in 1899. In 1967, he 
was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature. 
Three of his most Important novels have 
been translated into English: "The President” 
(Victor Gollancz, London, 1963), "The Mulatta 
and Mister Fly" (Harmondsworth-Penguin 
Books, London, 1970) and “The Green Pope” 
(Delacote Press, New York, 1971). 
Bottom left, Quetzalcoatl, 
Bottom right, an eagle perched 


### 52731: Painted manuscripts of pre-Columbian America

Painted manuscripts 
of pre-Columbian 
America 
and their esoteric ingenuity, and in 
them all we discern a fundamental 
and even obsessive urge to preserve 
and transmit through original forms 
of writing the profound meaning of 
man and the universe. 
Unlike the African world in which 
social and historical traditions are 
handed down through an unbroken 
chain of oral communications, in the 
pre-Columbian world, especially the 
Nahuatl and Maya cultures, writing 
and its preservation acquired an 
importance matched only among the 
Egyptians and the Jews. It is the key 
to the universe, the tool that unlocks 
its hidden mechanism, the sure and 
constant guide in the conflicts and 
catastrophes of an evolving world. 
For this reason writing became 
something sacred and esoteric for the 
pre-Hispanic peoples. Written signs, 
writing materials and those who could 
handle them were considered by the 
people as being connected with the 
divine, The writings themselves, in 
their creation and their appearance, 
had a magical character, closely linked 
to cosmogonic conceptions. 
That is why the various systems of 
writing that evolved among peoples 
with such a high level of technical 
expertise bore no relation to practical 
needs; they were symbols for the 
sacred message concealed within. 
We know that writing, its preser- 
vation and interpretation were the 
responsibility of a special class of 
dignitaries with priestlike functions— 
sometimes they even were priests— 
who used language, materials, colours 
and contents indissolubly related to 
the archetypal situations of the Indian 
deities. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 52731: Painted manuscripts of pre-Columbian America

Ph
ot
o 
©@
 
D
o
m
i
n
i
q
u
e
 
Da
rr
, 
Pa
ri
s 
PAINTED MANUSCRIPTS (Continued) 
In Moctezuma’s “List of Tributes”, 
which contains a kind of “live” classi- 
fication of metals and materials dif- 
fering profoundly from our modern 
ideas but corresponding perfectly to 
Indian religious priorities, paper made 
of amatl bark is rated as highly as 
quetzal feathers and pieces of jade. 
It was very widely used, both in 
religious ceremonies and for preparing 
codices. Many types of ceremonial 
vestments, ritual objects and orna- 
ments were made of amatl paper; 
some were natural-coloured and others 
were richly decorated with painted 
designs or splashed with “hule”, 
another sacred material. 
The images of the gods were 
adorned with crowns, fans, banners 
and garments of paper. For some 
ceremonies the priests wore paper 
suits called tilmatl, and in pouches of 
this material, decorated with seashells 
or painted to imitate ocelot skin, they 
carried incense or copal. Prisoners 
about to be sacrificed were dressed 
in tilmatl and decked with other paper 
ornaments. The women who took part 
in the festivals in honour of Huit- 
zilopochtli also wore paper garments 
painted with fine black stripes. 
The original religious significance 
of these systems of transmitting cul- 
ture has been lost for ever. So instead 
of comparing their characteristics in 
the different Indian cultures, | shall 
    
. 
wit The yy 
Jer o nnd tans WTF Se fans 
Photo © Musée de I'Homme, Paris 
give some specific examples of the 
special—even unique—importance of 
the methods or “channels” used for 
perpetuating the sacred explanations 
of the universe, the divine stories of 
kings and princes, which were the 
heritage to which our ancestors clung 
in the uncertainties of changing cir- 
cumstances. 
The pre-Columbian peoples pos- 
sessed several systems of writing 
(ideographic, calendric, pictographic, 
numeral, phonetic} with which they 
wrote on deerskins, stones, and strips 
of amatl paper. In their eyes however, 
the very fact of recording and of 
keeping these records was of such 
vital importance that their loss or 
preservation was identified with the 
destruction or continuity of the 
universe. 
     
As with the arts of gold and silver 
and feather working, we do not know 
when writing and books, for reasons 
of technical facility, lost their purely 
symbolic and priestly character and 
began to have profane uses. But 
throughout the history of the pre- 
Columbian peoples there is always a 
close relationship between their 
vision of the cosmos and their style 
of writing, between their sense of 
existence and the words stored in 
books and codices or on stones and 
skins. 
The oldest Nahuatl account of the 
origin of the People of the Sun 
mentions “an ancient tale told by old 
men” and speaks of the arrival of the 
ancient settlers in the mythical Ta- 
moanchan, where the forebears of the 
Aztecs lived. With them lived some 
Below right, a page from the “Codex Fejervary-Mayer”, now in the Free Public Library and Museum 
of Liverpool, England. This codex of the Mixtecs (“The Cloud People”), neighbours of the Mayas, was 
a calendar for divination. It has a system of numbering using vertical bars (see photo). The Mayas used 
the same system, but placed the bars horizontally. Below left, a page from another Mixtec manuscript, 
the “Codex Becker”, now in the Vienna Museum fiir Vélkerkunde. A historical and genealogical work, 
it was used in a court case in 1852 as a “property deed” by an Indian claiming hereditary ownership of land. 
  
  
  
  
Dr
uc
k 
un
d 
Ve
rl
ag
an
st
al
t,
 
2 
he
 
Ea
 
TE
 
cd
e 
ot
 
1 
{00 NRW Ns 
Cw 
CW , 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
A
k
a
d
e
m
i
s
c
h
e
 
” ko . LR Ey RENE

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 52731: Painted manuscripts of pre-Columbian America

Left, detail from the “Codex Mendoza” 
(a record of Aztec life commissioned 
in 1541 by the Spanish Viceroy in Mexico) 
listing different tributes paid by subject 
peoples to the Aztec emperor Moctezuma. 
It records in great detail, from left to right, 
the name of each city identified by its 
glyph, the form of tribute (birds, shields, 
clothes, etc.) surmounted in some cases 
by a symbol indicating the quantity. 
A feather signifies 400 items. Right, 
a page from another illustrated manuscript, 
the “Codex Borbonicus™ (see also back 
cover). It depicts children dancing round 
a “maypole” decorated with paper clothes 
on the occasion of an Aztec festival. 
wise men who are described in the 
native language as “knowers-of-things” 
and “possessors-of-codices”. 
These interchangeable epithets are 
remarkable in themselves, but the tale 
which follows is even more interesting. 
The wise men had arrived from the 
Gulf Coast and one day they heard 
the voice of their god telling them to 
depart, taking with them the ancient 
traditions and the art of the black 
and red inks which they used for 
writing on deerskin, The text says: 
And there were the knowers-of- 
(things, 
The so-called possessors-of-codi- 
[ces 
The wise men then went away, 
They took away the black and red 
: {inks, 
The codices, the paintings, 
They took away knowledge, 
They took everything away with 
(them, 
The books and the songs 
And the music of the flutes 
The old Indian tale goes on to depict 
the utter desolation In which the 
ancient Nahuas were left. It is easy 
to compare this state of stunned 
helplessness with the effect produced 
by the Spanish Conquest. The Indian 
text tells how the ancient Aztecs kept 
on tormenting themselves with ques- 
tions: 
Will the sun shine, will the day 
[dawn? 
Since they have gone away, since 
[they have taken away 
The black and red inks, the codices, 
How will the earth and the city 
lendure? 
What will govern us? 
What will guide us? 
What will be the rule? 
Where must one start from? 
What can be the torch and the 
(light? 
yo iA 
! » fiesta Seder ey 4 
Fld 0 Ales from 
Y NOCH fe 
  
  
‘We are obviously faced here with 
a historical concept, a view of the 
importance of tradition and of writings 
closely linked and practically assimilat- 
ed to the ontological conceptions on 
which the whole Indian way of life was 
built. 
In fact, in order to make sure that 
the world will continue to exist and 
that the loss of the instruments of 
transmission does not bring about the 
end of their lives and the destruction 
of the universe, the ancient Nahuas 
meet to reinvent or rediscover the old 
knowledge and the old form of pre- 
serving the past, the life and essence 
of their people. 
As may be seen from the text below, 
they are not concerned with the form 
and various ways of recording the 
past—hence their infinite variety—but 
          
Son _ ly a Ye Caper 
    
laps yu “y & 
nmr [or (ligne 
eld. oA PLAN, 
with the act of recording it so that its 
remembrance may illuminate and give 
coherence to a world filled with gods, 
conflicts and doubts. 
Then they invented the count of the 
[fates, 
The annals and the count of the 
[years, 
The book of dreams; 
They recorded the sequence and 
[course of events, 
The time that passed 
Under the lordship of the Toltecas, 
The lordship of the Tepanecas, 
The lordship of the Mexicas, 
And all the lordships of the Chichi- 
[mecas. 
Later Tlacaelel, the minister who in 
practice governed the Aztecs during 
the period of their greatest splendour, 
carried out a radical ideological reform 
CONTINUED PAGE 42 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
D
o
m
i
n
i
q
u
e
 
Da
rr
, 
Pa
ri
s 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

The photos on these pages are unusual examples of books selected from 
a recent Paris exhibition of treasures at the Bibliotheque Nationale in 
conjunction with International Book Year. 
A) 
— 
  
~ EGYPTIAN PAPYRUS. Above, detail of an Egyptian papyrus text 
(about 2000 B.C.) discovered at Thebes. The complete scroll 
(7 metres or 23 ft. long) records the maxims of Ptahhotep, a 
vizier renowned for his wisdom, as well as precepts of other 
ELL IEDR EEN = Bad pe 
Ll 
SUMERIAN CLAY TABLETS. Right, three Sumerian cuneiform 
~ “books” in clay from ancient Mesopotamia. The pointed inscrip- 
~ tion, recalling a wizard's hat, commemorates the building of a 
~ temple dedicated to the god Nin-Girsu about 2700 B.C. by Gudea, 
ruler of the city of Lagash. Text on right is inscribed on a clay 
cylinder telling of the consecration of the Lagash temple. Below 
it is a book-shaped tablet (about 1900 B.C.) lamenting the 
~ destruction of the City of Ur. = SA ay 
i 
- 
| T= : 
BURMESE COPPER SCRIPTURE. Right, a most unusual 
manuscript inscribed in “square” Burmese characters on 
long thin sheets of gilded copper. It contains the 
Kammavéca, a Buddhist religious text in the Pali lan- 
guage. The pages (10 X 53 cm. or 4 X 9 in.) are 
hooked, loose-leaf folder-like, between decorated gilt- 
‘copper covers. . 
a
 
“ 
-
 
=
p
 
O
y
 
N
e
 
e
l
 
p
p
 
| 
- 
B
a
p
e
 
E
E
 
h
e
 
L
e
 
R
A
Y
E
 
Po
S 
W
E
 
Te
 
W
y
,
 
WE
 
C
E
 
N
T
 
T
E
R
S
 
t
r
 
Lo
g 
~ SUMATRA BARK BOOK. Left, an 18th or 19th century 
treasure of the Batak people of Sumatra (Indonesia), this 
collection of magic spells and rites is inscribed on 
sheets of the inner bark of the agalloch, a resinous tree 
of S.E. Asia. It has a beautifully carved wooden cover. 
B lL ME (IS i ithe aids nl flirt org 


### 52767: The Book, realm of many arts

The book, realm 
of many arts 
by Alexei A. Sidorov 
  
ALEXEI A. SIDOROV Is the leading Soviet 
and book design. A corresponding member 
of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sclences, Pro- 
fessor Sidorov has written over 500 articles 
and many longer studies on these subjects 
for Soviet and other publications. 
20 authority on the history of the graphic arts 
Ho has known count- 
less varieties of “books”. They range 
from the cuneiform tablets of Sumer, 
papyri of ancient Egypt, Ceylonese 
books on rectangularly cut palm 
leaves, Japanese “butterfly” books, 
parchment manuscripts containing 
codes of antiquity and medieval folios 
down to modern publications. 
The book was born of a harmonious 
union between the arts and technology. 
It became and has remained the joint 
work of artist and printer, a fruitful 
synthesis of many crafts. 
The first European printed books, 
dating from the 15th century, combined 
the qualities of the illustrated manu- 
script with the new contribution of the 
printing and typographic crafts. Since 
then the book has undergone a constant 
process of renewal. 
An individual creation of the author 
who writes the text and of the artist 
who chooses the type and draws the 
illustrations and cover, the book in its 
final form is also the combined product 
of many persons—publisher, printer, 
bookbinder and manufacturers of

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 52767: The Book, realm of many arts

Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
rl
s 
paper, colours and ink. And It will 
continue to be so until photo-compo- 
sition and microfilms take over—if they 
ever really do. 
As an expression of world culture 
the book has a long history, but 
though many attempts have been 
made, a truly comprehensive study of 
the book has yet to be written. The 
history of the art of the book is not 
the history of printing, of book Illus- 
~ tration, of book-binding, or of typo- 
graphy. It Is the history of a complex 
ensemble, a synthesis of the work of 
all who have contributed to the book's 
development. 
Comparing the creation of a book 
with architecture, the French poet 
Paul Valéry pointed out that a book's 
structural composition obeys clearly 
defined laws of proportion. 
The effort to make the book a 
“celebration”, a triumph of man's 
creative genius, found expression in 
the first masterpiece of European 
—
 
| F
—
 
= 
Hs 
no
lo
 
BE
 
— 
" 
- 
p
i
t
]
 
se
ve
ss
sv
al
os
ss
s 
| 
printing—Gutenberg's Mainz Bible. 
Without the artist this celebration 
would have been inconceivable, 
Gutenberg used clear black letter- 
type disposed In beautifully pro- 
portioned columns which he embellish- 
ed with hand-inscribed ornamental 
borders in red and gold, contrasting 
dramatically with the severe order- 
liness of the type. This was the first 
instance of an artist painting in colour 
on the printed sheets of each indi- 
vidual book. 
Soon after Gutenberg printed his 
book, one of his former workmen, 
Peter Schoeffer, introduced coloured, 
engraved initials Into the type-setting 
of the Mainz Psalter (1457). This 
experiment saw the artist entering 
directly into the printing process. 
Other developments followed. Etch- 
ing on copper was tried, for example 
in Dante's books published in 1481, 
and attempts were also made to insert 
primitive woodcuts as In the case of 
F
k
 
i
 
¥ in
d 
iz
 
4 
Ulrich Boner’'s “Edelstein® in 1461. 
By the end of the 15th century, books 
were printed containing so many 
engravings that the same engraving 
was often repeated with different 
captions, making these works the 
negation of all that a book should be. 
Progress in printing was fairly rapid, 
so that when Aldo Manutius published 
“Hypnerotomachia”, at the turn of the 
16th century, the book acquired the 
form it has essentially retained to this 
day. In this publication the artist 
illustrated the text with linear woodcuts 
and the printer produced it in carefully 
selected Roman type disposed accord- 
ing to strictly defined laws of type- 
setting. Artist and craftsman joined 
forces to create a harmonious 
ensemble. 
Along with woodcuts, copper 
etchings were Introduced in books 
printed In the 16th and 17th centuries. 
Since these etchings required different 
techniques and equipment from those 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
# : |
 3 
? X
I
I
)
 
F
r
,
 
J 
-

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 52767: The Book, realm of many arts

Facsimile of a page of the 1456 Gutenberg Bible, the am get fn i 
first masterpiece of European typography with its strictly 
yet beautifully proportioned columns of type. The lay- 
out and design of the characters owed much to the 
traditions of medieval manuscripts which Gutenberg, 
and other early European printers took as their model.  _— a mre we W E— 
He ey Pentre plasm 
Ea tA iL... ren v gud dow humdi 
‘sow vio Lange" sony V7) 1 
Ie. P PO LF Ua a 
aU...» a s - - 
TE a ——~S D — UR CE 
Er _—n - sega 
  
 
   
—————————— 
  
QUADRILINGUAL BIBLE. In Inter- 
national Book Year, Antwerp (Bel- 
  
EY STVDIO AD SACROSANT 1A 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Pl
an
ti
n-
Mo
re
tu
s 
Mu
se
um
, 
An
tw
er
p 
gium) is celebrating the quatercente- 
nary of the monumental Bible in four 
languages completed in 1572 by the 
famous printer Christophe Plantin 
who established his printing works 
in Antwerp. Four different founts 
of type had to be cast to reproduce 
the text of the Bible in Hebrew, 
Aramaic, Greek and Latin. Left, the 
frontispiece to this edition shows 
the lion, the ox, the wolf and the 
lamb in peaceful harmony represent- 
ing the union of four languages. 
Plantin has given his name to ‘a 
form of type in use to this day. 
FOR EYE & MIND. This page from 
Dante's “Divine Comedy” published 
in Florence in 1481, provides a feast 
for eye and’ mind. The Botticelli- 
style illustration regales the eye and 
the comnientaries by Cristoforo 
Landino on Dante's tercets (in 
smaller’ type alongside the original 
text) are rich food for meditation. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Li
sr
ar
y 
of
 
th
e 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
of
 
Le
lp
zi
g,
 
e 
G
e
r
m
a
n
 
D
e
m
 
REALM OF MANY ARTS (Continued) 
with which woodcuts were produced, 
they were stuck into the books 
separately. The magnificent etchings 
inserted into the books of those days 
were so numerous that all too often 
they made the books look more like 
albums or atlases. 
A century later, sophisticated letter- 
ing and ornamental vignettes made 
their appearance in many books. But 
this was not the only trend. Caslon 
and Baskerville in Britain, Didot in 
i France, and Bodoni in Italy introduced 
splendid new type styles, and William 
Blake, poet, illustrator and printer 
rolled into one, attempted to produce 
a book that would be unique in every 
feature. 
in the 19th century, publishing 
became an industry and a battlefield 
of conflicting ideas. ‘While the 
Romantic poets were forging closer 
links with artists, some writers came 
to regard their prose’as an explanatory 
accompaniment to artists’ drawings. 
Charles Dickens’ “Pickwick Papers” 
began as an explanatory text to 
Robert Seymour's drawings and he 
was later to find another collaborator 
in the artist Hablot Browne, “Phiz”, 
with whom he undertook a study of 
the London slums. 
The 158th century was also marked 
by the emergence of masterpieces 
of the new style of illustration. Adolf 
Menzel adopted a scientific and histor- 
ical approach, while Gustave Doré’s 
passionate and dramatic style veered 
towards the grandiose and the fan- 
tastic. But it was also at this time 
that Gustave Flaubert began to protest 
against Illustrations in books of fiction 
in general. He maintained, quite 
rightly, that it was what was imagined 
and hinted at, whether in a poem or a 
psychological novel, that counted most 
for both the writer and the reader. 
Photography was yet another 
development that was taken up by 
printers and publishers during the 
18th century. : 
Of vital importance in the history 
of the art of the book were the new 
possibilities opened up during the 
20th century by the invention of 
mechanical type-setting, rotary print-- 
ing, photographic techniques, zinco- 
graphy, intaglio printing in colour and 
facsimile phototype reproduction. 
The progress made in the art of the 
book in the 20th century has been the 
subject of several studies which 
expound the now world famous art 
nouveau of Aubrey Beardsley in Brit- 
ain, and Félix Valloton and Théophile 
Steinlen in France, and the jugendstil 
of German artists. 
At the beginning of this century, 
the graphic arts and the art of the 
book were becoming international in 
character, a trend that was clearly 
i taragiont fuperiore che lo pivdi dla concemplatione ex 31thora La gi n oxcitan peuto bas! 
: Fd pti Dui oe APPA dic eo scone 
—— 
  
Pp OMumodire che eprece ente capitoto fia Nase 
quai ina pro jofinone di wee l pers p laquale O iomo fenandsua et Laer bruro 
to hous glanmals dhe fono mrerra Lacon: non ene dimol tra (on brieue 
dalle fatsche loro ret io [olo uno ito guciie he pen nuft ayn Wl EIA 
a Livagone orche Gene wile ordine, Deltofls 
Fipparesehiasaoafoflines iigutery coro 330 ¢ fo bene et Thminiee dallan wo 
{i del camo ex {i della prerace: ta Celusas «ins 3 manee done widen el fole, Ma 
che rrrrarea la mente dhe non erra dole heres all Quals ght fu weet of (aire, Lh he 
O male 0 alto mpegno hor masarare fuca dhe conofauto ma non m le ddtincamente 
© meare che (oruell ato dwo aude fommub bene confioustnfruire idiosocramincs evident at the 1900 World Exposition 
que fi parma La tua sobilseare. arr ahop, Por Poel. (rp in Paris. It is, perhaps, no mere co- 
» incidence that in this same year, 
Ambroise Vollard, the famous patron 
of “modern” artists, began publishing 
high quality books including reprints 
dou dT:ndo lewrtu audi non prrfzcer moleo pofiono p } 
le perumbarian dcflarimo lequali crrando piacere honor et utile noh legutano dnere pando Ne ancho ng 
ra wero wail dhe non puo mai feparare da hoadto. Nie dl wero bonore dquale non ¢/ altrodh la uers   
Ph
ot
o 
@ 
Fo
to
cl
as
si
ca
. 
Ro
me
 
ri

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 52767: The Book, realm of many arts

of works by authors of ancient times 
and 19th century poets. 
The appearance of luxurious publi- 
cations intended for a handful of 
booklovers in many countries was 
characteristic of this period, just as 
was the contradictory phenomenon of 
the spread of a completely different 
type of book influenced by futurists, 
dadaists and the Weimar Bauhaus 
whose chief exponents were the 
Russian El Lissitsky (see page 34) and 
the Hungarian Moholy Nagy. These 
publications appeared for the first 
time after the first World War and 
the October revolution in Russia. 
I. is fascinating to trace the 
main trends which gave shape to the 
art of the book at the beginning of the 
20th century and to study the ten- 
dencies that were common to various 
countries. 
Innovation was the first character- 
istic. Newly-coined words, new slo- 
gans and ideas produced in the melting 
pot of world war and revolution had 
immediate influence on the countries 
of Europe and later spread to the rest 
of the world. At the same time, 
however, the book preserved with care 
all that was best in the culture and 
achievements of the past. 
Constructivism was another contem- 
porary movement in which the balance 
was maintained between innovation 
and wisely selected traditions in book 
production. It had little in common 
with. the futurism of Marinetti, for 
example, or others in whose books 
the text was set in whimsically curv- 
ed lines to imitate the explosion of 
bombs or shells while the text itself 
evoked the whine and thunder of 
exploding missiles. Russian futurist 
book designers, meanwhile, were 
experimenting with lines interspersed 
with lithographs and texts printed in 
block letters or even typewritten. 
During the 1920s, functional cons- 
tructivism dominated and “art” and 
“ornament” in books gave way to the 
“structural” design of the printed 
page; pages were set in types of dif- 
ferent sizes and letters in red were 
scattered among the black type. The 
tone was set by “The New Typogra- 
phy”, a book published in German by 
the Czech engineer lan Tschihold. 
One of the most brilliant exponents 
of this tendency was the Russian artist 
El Lissitsky who worked with success 
in the Soviet Union and Germany. Also 
in the U.S.S.R., Alexander Rodchenko, 
who designed many books by Maya- 
kovsky, broke away from the classical 
rules of earlier aesthetics replacing 
elaborate drawings with simple photo- 
montages. Later, another Soviet artist, 
S. Telingater, combined Lissitsky's 
pure “structuralism” and Rodchenko's 
photo-montages. 
In general, books published at this 
time are notable for the vivid colours 
CONTINUED PAGE 35 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ox
fo
rd
 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
Pr
es
s 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N.
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
 
MR. PICKWICK IN CHASE OF HIS HAT. — “The Posthumous Papers 
of the Pickwick Club" are a classic example of the interplay of text and 
image and of collaboration between artist and writer. At the outset, 
Dickens’ text was written to accompany the humorous drawings of 
Seymour, such as that above; later, particularly when the young artist 
H. Browne, “Phiz", took over from Seymour, the work of writer and 
artist became inextricably interlinked to provide a rich word and image 
portrait of 19th century England. 
  
In this illustration for one of Pushkin’s four “Malenkie Tragedii” (“Little 
Tragedies”), the Soviet artist V. Favorsky attempts to carry the reader 
deeper into the world of “evil passions” evoked by the poet. 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 52767: The Book, realm of many arts

  
A revolution in modern 
A powerful current of new 
ideas in literature, the arts 
and graphic design surged 
through Europe shortly after 
the first World War. Numer- 
ous schools or styles, some 
short-lived, others more en- 
during, sprang up. Their new 
concepts and original works 
challenged and radically trans- 
formed long accepted prin- 
ciples of taste and art. One 
man who played a pioneering 
role in spreading the new art 
forms throughout western 
Europe was the Soviet artist, 
designer and architect El Lis- 
sitzky (1890-1941). In 1922, 
El Lissitzky published a ten- 
page children’s book entitled 
“Two Squares”. This book 
(all its pages are reproduc- 
ed here in their original 
colours) was a revolution in 
modern typography. EI Lis- 
sitzky had been influenced by 
Kasimir Malevich, another 
Soviet artist who founded a 
movement called "Suprema- 
tism", describing it as “the 
supremacy of pure feeling or 
perception in the pictorial 
arts”. As the illustrations of 
his book show, El Lissitzky 
repeatedly uses diagonal lines 
and balanced, asymmetric typ- 
ography, techniques which 
gave his pages a rhythm and 
grace that modern display 
advertising has since used to 
great effect. In his “Notes on 
~ Typography”, El Lissitzky 
~ commented on his book in 
these terms: "For this story 
of ‘Two Squares’ | endeav- 
oured to give form to an 
elementary idea with ele- 
  
     
  
s (Verlag), 1 
  
     
mentary means so as to stimu- 
late children to play actively 
and get adults to see” 
~ — build something 
sume paper = fold it 
some sticks — colour them 
some bits of wood 
4 
  
They come from far away, 
§ toward earth and. “a ying. 
  
        
gi) the black 
co evi dng tes Sse “o 
  
  
> 
ye © 
— 
"Ba 
|anpars      
El Lissitzky: a Suprematist story 
ELT TTL "V7. ETC TET I 1} 3 
constructions, Berlin, 
Sal 
  
     
| 1 
i ' 
t
o
r
n
 
Dr
es
de
n,
 
Ge
rm
an
 
De
m 
Re
p 
, 
  
  
  
Skythen 
© 
fr
om
 
“E
l 
L
i
s
s
i
t
z
k
y
”
.
 
by
 
S 
Li
ss
it
zk
y-
Ku
pp
er
s 
V
E
B
 
i
.
 

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 52767: The Book, realm of many arts

REALM OF MANY ARTS 
(Continued from page 33) 
used in their illustrations, though they 
were still designed in traditional style. 
Typical of this period is the set of 
black and white illustrations (1923) by 
M.V. Dobuzhinsky for “The White 
Nights”, by Fedor Dostoyevsky. 
Nothing is so indicative of the div- 
ersity of the book as the revival and 
almost universal success of books in 
which the old woodcut technique is 
used. Woodcuts by the great Russian 
illustrator and artist Vladimir Favorsky 
have won world-wide recognition as 
significant works of art. 
With consummate skill and intelli- 
gence Favorsky succeeded in reflect- 
ing in his woodcuts not only the con- 
tents of a book, but also its “inner 
world”, the author's hints and allu- 
sions, whose importance Gustave 
Flaubert had stressed earlier. Favor- 
sky showed that artists can build a 
new dimension into a book with 
decorative techniques such as the 
contrasting use of large and small 
woodcuts. 
This, of course, was not the only 
trend. There are always books that 
need traditional, colourful, vivid illus- 
trations. Such a book was Tolstoy's 
“Anna Karenina” for which N.l. Pis- 
karyov executed superb, lively colour- 
ed woodcuts. The book was publish- 
ed in the U.S.8.R. in 1933. 
l. the 1930s, many of the 
experiments of the previous decade 
were abandoned and artists concen- 
trated on evolving illustrations that 
gave deeper insight into the psy- 
chology of the book's characters, 
rejecting the play of lines and contours 
for subtle half-tones of light and shade. 
New techniques developed at this 
time began to influence book design. 
Offset printing was coming into its 
own and it became possible to use 
a variety of inks in any book. 
Diagrams, plates and coloured illus- 
trations (such as those by Picasso 
which were to make him famous) 
began to be used which were no 
longer integrally linked with the text. 
The book seemed to split into two 
parts, one literary, the other artistic. 
Printed separately, these illustrations 
were inserted into books. 
For a time the “picture in a book” 
style of design triumphed; splendid 
water colours, realistic, abstract or 
romantic drawings, cartoons and 
landscapes accompanied the book 
without being illustrations in the fullest 
sense. The art of the book gave 
way to “art in the book”. 
It was only in the mid 1950s and 
early 1960s that an attempt was made 
to seek unity in all the aspects of book 
production. The new generation of 
illustrators tended to demand personal 
control over all the artistic aspects of 
the book, from the dust cover to the 
inside illustrations, second titles, end 
pieces, ete, This calls for confident 
CONTINUED PAGE 41 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
N
a
v
e
n
d
r
a
,
 
N
e
w
 
De
lh
i 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
TYPORTRAIT OF A CROWD. If in the West 
calligraphy is little more than an exercise for 
ow I0CTORBEKRE children, this is not true of other parts of the 
world. This is shown by the age-old writing 
traditions of the East, not only In China (where 
calligraphy is one of the fine arts, equal in 
stature to painting, sculpture etc.) but also 
throughout the Arab and Moslem world. 
Calligraphy’s links with modern typographical 
design become evident in the work of the 
®uocrenscent young graphic artist Navendra, born in Delhi 
in 1931. His experiments in adapting the 
thousand-year-old Devanagari characters, used 
in the writing of Hindi, to the requirements 
of modern typographic techniques have given 
rise to an artistic concept closely allied, as 
he himself admits, to that which inspired such 
artists as El Lissitzky. The work above, entitled 
“To give an idea of a crowd”, Is composed 
una idea de la multitud», realizada con carac- 
teres «devanigari» modernizados. 
Cover for Dostoyevsky's “The Idiot", designed 
in 1971 by the Soviet graphic artist V. Gorayev. 
It illustrates the striking effect achleved by the 
contrasting use of, black and white, serving 
as a background to ultramodern typography. 
35

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 52769: An 'A B C' of text plus image

36 
An ‘ABC’ 
of text plus image 
by Gérard Blanchard 
B.. the outward appearance 
and the content of the book have changed considerably 
through the ages. 
The libraries of Antiquity—at Nineveh, Nippur, Lagash 
or Mari—contained only stacks of “writing bricks”; the 
Alexandria library, which was destroyed by fire, housed 
mainly papyrus and leather rolls. The Chinese wrote on 
bones, wooden panels, bamboo strips and silk scrolls 
before inventing paper. 
The Ancient World was full of writings on stones 
potsherds, or wax tablets before papyrus and parchment 
were used, while paper is of relatively recent date. It was 
only at the beginning of the Christian era that the scroll 
was replaced by the “codex” of folded sheets bound 
together to produce what we ordinarily term a “book”. 
Today the use of new materials and techniques has 
vastly widened this over-narrow conception of the book. 
Yet whatever the technique employed and the material on 
which they are reproduced, text and image remain the 
basis of visual communication, What concerns us here is 
the relationship between them. 
Western writing cannot be confounded with concrete 
images since it uses abstract signs arbitrarily selected to 
indicate sounds. This dual system was used on the walls 
of prehistoric caves (A) even earlier than the development 
of writing. 
Endless efforts have been made to achieve the impossible 
union of opposites, the superposition of text and image 
merging into an essentially lyrical whole. Reading such 
a complex image is rather reading a “mandala”. 
The Hindu and Buddhist mandala (India, Japan, Tibet and 
elsewhere} is read like a plan; and many temples—at 
Khajuraho, Angkor and Borobudur, for instance—are 
concrete realizations of such plans. The mandala is a very 
highly structured image for meditation (a series of concen- 
tric circles in squares), which leads the contemplator step 
by step into the heart of his meditation. 
And so it is rather in the style of a mandala that the 
illuminator of the Book of Kells (B) hides the key words 
under a wealth of decoration, that Rabanus Maurus (C) 
reveals figures hidden in the text by the use of contrasting 
black and red print, that Arab calligraphers give form to the 
spoken word (D), that Apollinaire lays out his poems in the 
  
GERARD BLANCHARD, French specialist in the graphic arts, is 
the author of “Métiers Graphiques” ("Graphic Crafts®, Editions 
Arts et Métiers Graphiques, Paris 1969) and “La Bande Dessinée” 
(“The Strip Cartoon™—from prehistory to the present), a Marabout 
Université paperback, Paris 1969. A new book on Typography 
and Language is in preparation. He contributed a special study 
on book typography in France from 1800 to 1914 to “Book Typo- 
graphy in Europe and America” (E. Benn, London, 1966). He is 
chairman of the “Rencontres Internationales de Lurs®, an annual 
meeting in southern France of specialists in the graphic arts and 
communication.   
Photos. A ; © Archives photographiques, Paris. B : Trinity College, Dublin, 
C and F : Gérard Blanchard Collection. D ; Calligrams from “Arab Calli- 
graphy by Mohamed Azlza, STD, Tunis. E : From “Art et Ordinateur”, by 
. Moles. Editions Casterman, Paris. G : © Paul Almasy, Paris. H : Paolo 
Koch © Rapho, Paris. 
communication. 
forerunners of writing. 
A
T
T
 
pe
 
—
 
  (Ireland). 
graphic invention, colour 
  
teacher and writer, Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mainz. 
image merge with striking effect. 
words or sentences. 
   
   
     
 
    
   
ou 30 lito ATA 
no 
oq 
Ra ff 
nfisducunth 
tradunt alma 
fuumfler fFinu 
atluxul/dica 
hiafalu'neis 
  
  
Decrucenonfalluntitorumflignanimsatum 
PRES Td a GILT IR WG RET SE Te AE 
, “u 
B A masterpiece of Celtic art, 
the Book of Kells (left) an 8th- 
9th century gospel book, is pre- 
served at Trinity College, Dublin 
In this work, rich in 
and | 
fantasy, the artist has illustrated 
only the first words of the texts, 
which the cantors knew by heart. 
Incrucefactoremcon fixuminfecipicercgem | 
Enchronushicregishlalecconci lia tiomund 
Vexillumframeaforsbelliinfignedecor um | 
Proterithochofltesarmaconfringictiniqua 
Bublcuatatquefuosviirtuctispraecmiadona t 
Na rf £ % ne 
J 
His qtr qivehice ! foqi | Pleh in ¢ 
Tumd ip fsintuc mlegeti robandoe 
Quac fam Aantcauct“etcarap Yitubi 
De cr uc ell itubant afeor umy/uny iavatum 
A 
A Above, paintings made 15,000 
years ago on the walls of the 
Lascaux cave (France) are 
amongst man's earliest efforts in 
Alongside the 
figurative representations of ani- 
mals are abstract signs—perhaps 
C Below, fragment of a Latin text by the famed Sth century 
In 
this edition, printed at Pforzheim (Germany) in 1503, text and 
Letters printed in red (here 
seen as light grey) are set within the outlines of the figures, and 
in the “corridors” dividing the page, where they form complete 
  

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 52769: An 'A B C' of text plus image

shape of the objects he is writing about and that the com- 
puter (E) prints out in letters the various tones of a photo- 
graph it is scanning. 
Between the two extremes of the illuminator's work “all 
of all sizes, rooftop signs, giant figures, window displays 
and flashing lights; the hurly-burly of free commercial 
competition throws together the most motley collection of 
styles, qualities and interests. This kaleidoscopic environ- 
ment is the reflection of the modern world and foreshadows 
the world of the future made of dreams, desires and myths, 
with advertising programming the slogans, 
done by hand” and the computer's entirely “machine-made” 
product, there are the various methods of reproduction 
offered by the printing process: conversion of manuscript 
into typographical characters (C) or, later, photographic 
“facsimiles” of letters stuck on the invisible outline of 
a drawing. These “text-images” indicate one extreme of 
the relationship between text and image; another extreme 
is revealed in the “text and environment-image”. 
Fully urbanized modern man lives in the heart of ‘a vast 
information centre in which text and image play an important 
part. We need think only of the street (H) with its posters 
An equally striking environment can be found centuries 
away in time, in the tombs of the ancient Egyptians (F). 
The scenes from the lives of the gods and from everyday 
life, painted at great cost during their lifetime, are, for the 
inner eye of the dead, a necessary accompaniment for their 
new life. The hieroglyphics between the friezes are for- 
mulas of intercession. The Book of the Dead (G) merely 
gives a summarized view of this environment. 
CONTINUED PAGE 39 
Er i 
  
 
 
  
    
     
  
  
D A bird and a pear, completely different 
shapes yet fashioned from two Arabic Inscrip- 
tions of the same invocation, “In the name of 
Allah the Almighty, the Merciful”. Two exam- 
ples of the remarkable skill and inventiveness 
of Arab calligraphers.   
E This print-out of a photo- 
graph scanned by a computer 
vividly illustrates the difference 
which exists between individual 
conventional signs (here typo- 
graphical signs) and the mean- 
ingful pattern they acquire 
when assembled. 
ADL Rn 
13. 15 a fl ar 
bine ERE TE A ed » a Tt TAL fot) 3u- [¥3 
a
 A 
Re
 
E
T
 
  
LW
   — Tl JH _-
      
     
               
CE
LT
S + wi
e
 
F Text and image surrounded the ancient Egyptian dead 
within the tomb. Scenes from daily life or the lives of the 
gods were interspersed with hieroglyphic texts, Mummies 
were even enveloped in strips with writing on them. Above, 
the tomb of Sennedjem, a high official of the 20th Dynasty 
(about 1200 B.C.). G Left, fragment from the 
“Book of the Dead", dating 
from the New Empire (1567- 
1085 B.C.) A guide to life 
beyond the grave, “books of 
the dead" were placed on the 
sarcophagus or on the dead 
person’s chest, under his arm 
or between his legs. 
Ny
 
\ 
Fa
s AN
 
  
    
         
   
        
  
    
  
    
      
    
   
le 
$s ph —— ak a ent 3 
xe fo] I ' Flas H By night, the 20th cen- 
= tr 9 e he tury city-dweller is engulfed in 
: = - 0 bs ’ the vast word and image spec- 
y - — pt 1 = tacle of illuminated advertise- 
oe Oa EMER ments. Right, street scene in 
— _ -~ Las V , U. =] “I a s Vegas, USA, 
— 3. 9 
PTS = SE mann 2x Em 
me a ar wife - 
| 
[H
ed
   t

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 52769: An 'A B C' of text plus image

  
y This Assyrian bas relief dating 
from 880 B.C. shows foreign subjects 
bringing a tribute of monkeys to king 
Assurnazirpal Il (883-859). Here the 
image, sculpted first, becomes the 
backdrop for the text: cuneiform ins- 
criptions recording the monarch's 
triumphs. 
L The “photo captions” on this 
Greek vase identify the figures as 
Ajax and Achilles at play. From as 
early as the 8th century B.C., inscrip- 
tions on such vases were like books 
and identified the myths and legends 
with which they were decorated. 
  
  
© Giraudon, Paris. M : © 
Toulouse, P 
Giraudon, Paris. N : 
Library of Karlsruhe, Fed. Rep. of Germany 
vy 
ADIDAS : 
M In this early 10th century A.D. Greco- 
Byzantine psalter, allegorical personages 
and religious events (such as the cross- 
ing of the Red Sea, bottom right), are 
identified by captions. The same page has 
typical figures of Byzantine religious art 
N Bulgarian poster, one of many publish- 
ed to mark International Book Year 1972. | 
Photos, | : © Roger-Viollet, Paris. | : © Joan Castel, Paris. K : © Canadian Embassy, Paris, L : Anderson 
Dominique Roger Unesco. O ; 
HARE 
Jean Dieuzaide © Yan, 
S., T : Gérard Blanchard Collection n 
  
J An Ivory Coast barber's sign 
(1969). Though its purpose is totally 
different, it is based on the same 
principle as that of the Assyrian 
stele; the records of royal triumph 
have given way to the slogans and 
images for shops and commerce. 
AA HHL 
Nee Tne 
RERTREN 
 
  
K Norman Mclaren 
is famous for writing 
his texts and engraving 
his images directly on 
the raw film, as here in 
the film “Canada”.

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 52769: An 'A B C' of text plus image

ABC OF TEXT PLUS IMAGE (Continued) 
The image is often separated from the text and their rela- 
tionship largely depends on the length of the text. The 
custom of official inscriptions gives the characters and 
lettering a monumental quality so that, even though unread, 
they are regarded as a statement of some importance. 
The Assyrian inscription (I) is overprinted on part of the 
image, rather like the sub-titles dubbing foreign films, These 
texts, carved in stone in defiance of time, tell their version 
of history. Monuments erected by princes to commemorate 
their conquests may be standing stones, writing carved on 
rocks, pillars, triumphal arches—all expressions of the 
need felt in all ages to leave a landmark and a record. 
Like these ancient records, the African trade signs contri- 
bute in their own way (J) to the exaltation of text and image. 
And nowadays credit titles (K) projected on the cinema 
screen before a film become like frontispieces, those lit- 
erary triumphal arches, that preface books of any impor- 
tance, 
The text of the caption beneath or alongside the picture is 
smaller in size and more familiar in tone, though still far 
removed from the detailed “confidences” of the book. 
In contemporary advertisements such texts are slanted 
to guide the reader (N) and give the key to the pictures, 
Even on Greek vases (L) this was so; apart from the signa- 
ture, praises and dedications personalizing a gift, the pur- 
pose of the text is to explain who the personages depicted 
are. An ordinary scene from everyday life suddenly be- 
comes an episode from mythology. 
Such means of identification have been used right 
through the centuries from Byzantium (M) to the Renais- 
sance and even long after in popular imagery. 
On Greek vases the text is inscribed close to the figures, 
but the circular structure of the image (as on Greek or 
Chinese scrolls) does not limit the artist so strictly to two- 
dimensional space as does the square or rectangular page 
of the codex. For this reason there is a kind of free en- 
counter between text and image. 
The desire for rationalization or for a division of labour 
(between copywriter and illustrator) entails enclosing the 
text in a frame (G), but the portrayal of the type of support 
material for the writing, scroll (O) or book, may determine 
the exact positioning of the text. This is so with the repre- 
sentation of the scrolls of the Prophets in the whole Judaeo- 
Christian iconography. 
Through a logical series of intermediary stages, these 
texts which exemplify the Word, are placed closer and 
closer to the mouth of the speaker. On manuscripts (P). 
at the time of the birth of the theatre in the early 13th 
century, and in the first printed works (Q) we begin to find 
texts in the pictures which are visualizations of speech and 
valuable memory aids for improvised public “readings”. 
The standard book of Western civilization, having become 
an intellectual working tool, discarded its illustrations. 
Furthermore, methods of reproducing illustrations made 
them completely independent of the text. 
The popularization of books in the 19th century encour- 
aged printers to invent simpler processes of illustration. 
Of these, wood engraving (R) made it possible to include so 
many pictures that the book sometimes came to resemble 
the picture storybooks (S) of popular literature. The text 
set out in captions under the drawings provides an abridged 
version of stories to be told to while away an evening. 
In the book, skilful typesetting arranged the text round 
the illustration, thus creating a kind of visual punctuation 
which restored some of the freedom in lay-out that charac- 
terizes the old manuscripts. The strip cartoon (T) uses 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
P
y
 
E
T
 
V
O
 
ST
 
A T
R
 
JE 
S
E
 
R
Y
 
P
R
 
E
E
 
T
h
 
™
 
E
T
 
ps 
3 
| 
  
C
E
S
 
E
A
 
T
T
 
T
R
 
C
T
 
A
e
 
S
E
 
i
 
     
0 Detail of prophets 
holding scrolls from the 
Portico de la Gloria at the 
cathedral of Santiago de 
Compostella, Spain, with 
its scenes from “The Last 
Judgment”. In medieval 
European statuary the 
scroll, held partly unrolled 
on which the faithful could 
read Biblical texts, was 
the distinctive sign of the 
prophets. 
Q The scroll-like frames enclos- 
ing the dialogue in this 14th 
century incunabula, an illustrated 
version of the “Song of Songs”, 
foreshadows the “balloons” of 
the modern strip cartoon. 
S “The Adventures of Baron 
Munchausen” are famous through- 
out the world for their inven- 
tive fantasy. This German edi- 
tion of the Baron's exploits is 
one of the first examples of the 
strip cartoon. 
 
P A 14th century miniature showing 
the bearded Ramon Llull (1231-1315) 
the Catalan 
presenting his works (condensed into 
3 tomes) to Jeanne de Champagne, 
Queen of France and Navarre. 
wrote 292 works in Catalan, Arabic and 
Latin. 
in word as well as image. 
writer and alchemist, 
Lull 
Here, the miniature tells the story 
  
     
      
of 
Ne am -      
  
   
  
) . i Fg + - 
¥ : - ~ 
// [3 hs x  —t— 
i JANE 1 LU \ VJ) 
UPS 2 WW PEA 
® It took ten years to prepare the type 
and illustrations for this edition of Bernar- 
din de Saint-Pierre’'s “Paul et Virginie”, 
published in 1838. Here we see the illus- 
trations encroaching more and more upon 
the text. 
 
Tr —— 
T A more modern strip cartoon, 
“Prince Valiant", by Hal Foster 
(U.S., 1963). The text is in the 
frame of the illustrations but not 
actually integrated with them.

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

ABC OF TEXT PLUS IMAGE (Continued) 
the two systems of text in pictures and pictures in the with their Chinese or Japanese counterparts, whose task 
text, sometimes both together, is facilitated by a more fluid and expressive writing. 


### 52769: An 'A B C' of text plus image

Part of the difficulty of the text-image relationship arises Any writer-poet, any Inventor making notes, anyone wri- from the fact that typography accentuates the arbitrary ting a letter is experimenting with the powerful graphic 
medium. But some, like’ Leonardo da Vinci (W) or t f ch ign. 
nature of character design Tagore (X) for example, try spontaneously to link drawing 
The “codex” form also contributes to these difficulties. with writing. Then another more complex adventure starts 
Calligraphers (U) tracing letters and drawings with the all over again—the one whose paths we have tried to trace 
same hand and the same implement maintain a certain in broad outline from the earliest writings to the annotated 
respect for uniformity. drawings of Matisse (Y), or from Babylonian bas-reliefs to 
Ethiopian paintings (V) and contemporary ‘Japanese comic 
Western calligraphers are at a disadvantage compared strips (2). [| 
NR RL RT RT A i ET —_ 
i TI 
\ Arr 
    
  
  
  
y A Zuciont Times hen Punting Sivst gan, | 
PD A Poor Cliath thes emetated Nar «— 
  7) « Lrg Hie the tbr Shien Soom Slop 2 h— 
fp A hoary Sabhatd dod S pncly rap oA 
@: § Whom Replat ge ot sce 
ds hol al Mone Lime i gn re 
ZY Hee re the mma, § 8 Limbrd Lier 
& eS) (ne Cdn! ht ad we. did bot Snag ~ (BZ 
DS tpn lh Hers, wows Me. nll V ort 0 
Bt Sima Song okt like Vogels rt 
  
 
By lore Degrees the Punting Art adoancdls:z . 
CAM Wan gro podiok il Picture was inhancd. i, 
25. 3 ES = 
E Toi’ 3 | y= A tL) Rk u
m
 
  
 
Ak 
Vv The legend of the Queen of Sheba, an Ethio- 
U Text and image by the hand of the pian painting of the 19th or early 20th century. English master of penmanship George Amb 
Bickham (1743). The professional penman The, Amiiarie text accompanies and explains the 
gives rein to his craftsmanship not 
only in his writing but also in the embel- 
lishments with which he adoms it. The 
images he draws have a direct relationship 
in form and style with the written word. 
X A corrected manuscript of Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), | 
o the Indian poet, musician, educationist, philosopher and painter. 
’ These highly sophisticated “doodles” recall the great man’s paint- 
ings. “My pictures”, he said, “are my poetry in graphic form", 
5 ck Bx 
@ my anir haar dr a, Savy 7 vr 
I Ty 
  
   
"i PAIN TW 
IER TI 7 ad 
- LL 
LINE 
’ ‘ <     
 
ORR “YE man oon 23 Y Matisse was an artist 
" d of many interests. He not 
only painted but also had a 
special predilection for book 
illustration and the associa- 
tion of drawings with the 
written word. Here in a 
drawing for the magazine 
oy Verve (1945) the design is     Dar AT, Sy ung 
Se C5 gore in black and white—the : 
MLL or | actual colours being indi- 
cated by the words “green”, 
“red”, “blue”, etc., in the 
WA SX SDE Sa ESOL SAY AY balloons, leaving the final 
i image to the reader's ima- 
i gination. = 
Photos, U, X, Z : Gérard Blanchard Collection. V : © Paul Almasy, Paris. et CC J Nt | 
: © Giraudon, Paris. Y : © Spadem, Paris.

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=41) 2

### 52769: An 'A B C' of text plus image

  
gn op AT a gl! A v a 
A» . a = 
Ap erri er Be N oF 
_ ’ nN 
/ 4 J ARINAYIEAY « gwen 'E = ~N 
iA a ANIA SYA L 0k 9 wid | \ a 
— “AB a rr ey 
Ww A page from the notebooks of Leo- 
nardo da Vinci (1452-1519) in which he 
jotted down ideas and sketches of his 
inventions. The drawings are inextricably 
enmeshed with the text which is written 
in the famous “mirror-writing” that da 
Vinci used. 
  
    
Zz Japanese “Compact Comics” (1970), 
recalling the traditional Japanese print 
and the “emaki”, successors of the Chi- 
nese painted scrolls. Even the world's 
first important novel, Japan's 11th cen- 
tury “Tale of Genji" by Murasaki. Shikibu, 
appeared in this “Emaki” book form. 
“Comics” are now widely used for mass 
education in China. 
A
S
R
 
because now the artist 


### 52767: The Book, realm of many arts

  
The hook, 
realm of many arts 
(Continued from page 35) 
mastery of the whole range of graphic 
art, enabling the designer to see a 
book as a whole, with an imaginative 
structure corresponding both to the 
spirit of the text and the demands of 
modern aesthetics. 
A technique frequently adopted by 
modern book designers is the 
extensive use of colour, by the 
introduction, for example, of black or 
red pages on which the text is printed 
in white, Printing part of the text, 
separate words, or parts of a word 
in bright colours has nothing in com- 
mon with the coloured initials and orna- 
mentations in ancient books, and the 
same holds for the striking light and 
black shades favoured in modern 
engravings. 
The new approach differs from the 
old, purely decorative technique 
introduces 
colour to emphasize shades of mean- 
ing in the text or to enhance the 
atmosphere of a passage, thus making 
the book more vivid and expressive. 
A.D. Goncharov used this technique 
in producing a new edition of Ajexan- 
der Block's poem “The Twelve". The 
poem is about the first days of the 
1917 revolution in Russia and the 
artist, feeling that black and white 
illustrations would be inadequate to 
convey the dramatic spirit of the 
revolution and the burst of enthusiasm 
it aroused, introduced illustrations in 
the symbolic red of the revolutionary 
banner. He used “grotesque” type 
which seemed best to suit the poem. 
The pages of the book are not all 
white; some are red or black with the 
text printed in white type. One page 
is grey, and the white of the snow 
falling on the dead body of a woman 
pictured there is made whiter still. 
Nevertheless, Goncharov only employ- 
ed fairly simple polygraphic tech- 
niques, 
The Soviet artist Dmitri S. Bisti 
gave appropriate treatment to Maya- 
kovsky's poem “Lenin”. The simplicity 
of the uncompromising combination of 
red and black that he used in his own 
way makes Mayakovsky's words stand 
out with even greater emphasis. 
Indeed, the complete fusion of colour 
with graphics, and of illustrations 
against white margins, suggests further 
striking possibilities in book design. 
In the field of fairy stories and 
children's books, to which publishers 
have always paid particular attention, 
joyful, full-bodied colour really comes 
into its own. For the student of modern 
book design children’s books and art 
books provide a rich and fascinating 
subject of study. 
Another, comparatively recent, phen- 
omenon which should not be over- 
looked is the increasing output of 
books on science, technology and 
science fiction which now compete 
with traditional literature in numbers 
of titles published and copies sold. 
It was inevitable that this consequence 
of the scientific and technological 
revolution should open a new chapter 
in the history of the book, leading to 
the use of new designs and motifs 
inspired by scientific discoveries. 
F OLLOWING the two dev- 
astating world wars of this century, 
artists not generally regarded as 
specialists in the field became in- 
terested in book illustration. The work 
of Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse and 
Rockwell Kent, Guillaume Appolli- 
naire’s calligrams, the “typoetry” of 
Reinhard Dahl, Vercors’ colour printing 
and the high artistic quality of the Skira 
publishers in Switzerland, have intro- 
duced such a variety, such a conflict 
of ideas into the modern book that one 
longs for the establishment of an 
international centre which would record 
and study new developments and pro- 
mote the international exchange of 
ideas. 
Created by the artist, the graphic 
art of the book is one of the prime 
elements of culture. In the wake of 
the writer, the graphic artist re-creates 
the past and records the present. 
The images evoked create a dialogue 
with contemporary man, becoming part 
of his life, his thoughts and his 
emotions. 
Throughout the centuries books 
have provided a distillation of each 
different national culture with its parti- 
cular aesthetic and moral ideals. Yet 
the process of research and creation 
is never complete. Despite all the 
achievements of the past new 
discoveries lie ahead. | 
Alexel A. Sidorov 
41

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

  
DUTCH EDITION 
The Dutch language edition is publish- 
ed by N.V. Handelmaatschappij Keesing 
in Antwerp (Belgium), under the patronage 
of the Unesco National Commissions of 
Belgium and the Netherlands. 
Annual subscription in Belgium: 250 FB. 
Single copy: 25 FB. 
Annual subscription in the Netherlands: 
17.50 Fl. Single copy: 1.75 Fl. 
UNESCO COURIER 
NOW IN 14 LANGUAGES 
We are happy to announce the launching of two 
new language editions, one in Dutch published 
in Antwerp, Belgium, the other in Portuguese 
published in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Publication 
of both editions began in October. 
The “UNESCO COURIER" is now completing 
25 years of publication which have seen the 
magazine grow in prestige and readership through- 
out the world. The Editors welcome the new 
readers and subscribers in the Dutch and Portu- 
guese languages who are joining the great world 
family linked by a common idea—faith in the 
collective effort of international co-operation to 
bring the people of different cultures, traditions 
and languages together, irrespective of religion, 
creed or ideology. 
The “UNESCO COURIER” now appears monthly 
in 14 languages: English, French, Spanish, Russian, 
German, Arabic, Japanese, Italian, Hindi, Tamil, 
Hebrew, Persian, Dutch and Portuguese. 
a Kocricr 
——— 
  
PORTUGUESE EDITION 
The Portuguese language edition is 
published by the Getulio Vargas Founda- 
tion in Rio de Janeiro, under the auspices 
of the Brazilian National Commission for 
Unesco. 
Annual subscription in Brazil: 25 Crs. 
Single copy: 2.5 Crs. 
       
“A subscription to the “Unesco Courier” is a New Year gift that will be 
~ remembered each month by friends and relatives. One year’s subscription 
still costs only £l. 30, $5 or 17 FF, and you now have a choice of 14 ELE 
guage editions. Place your orders today. (Unesco agents listed opposite.) 
NEW YEAR GIFTS? 


### 52731: Painted manuscripts of pre-Columbian America

OFFER A SUBSCRIPTION TO 
THE "UNESCO COURIER" 
  
Painted manuscripts of pre-Columbian AMEIICA (continued trom page 29) 
42 
by burning the historical records which 
mentioned other peoples and by 
manipulating the codices so as to 
establish for his people—the people 
chosen by the gods—a past which 
would provide a model for its future. 
This is one reason—not the most 
improbable—for the dearth of Maya 
texts and the abundance of Nahuatl 
writings. The Spanish Conquest and 
the destruction that ensued (the 
Council of Lima in 1583 proclaimed 
the “tabula rasa” of provincial ar- 
chives) put an end to the various 
systems of transmitting Indian culture. 
A few missionaries, imbued with the 
spirit of Renaissance humanism and 
interested in “Indian antiquities”, 
discovered and expounded the nature 
and ways of conserving the doctrines 
and events of the past. It is almost 
exclusively through their works that 
something of the great pre-Hispanic 
fervour for books and tradition has 
come down to us. 
In the final phase of the Mexican 
tragedy, when the first twelve Catholic 
missionaries arrive in 1524 to convert 
the vanquished, there is a scene 
highly significant of the importance of 
the codices in the pre-Columbian 
world. The missionaries attack the 
Indian religion and way of thought and 
at this point one of the Chiefs rises 
to express “with courtesy and urban- 
ity" his displeasure af this attack on 
the customs and beliefs so dear to his 
ancestors, It is not for him to defend 
them since there are still some 
survivors of 
Those who turn the rustling leaves 
[of the codices, 
Those who have in their power the 
[black and red inks and the painting. 
They lead us, guide us, show us 
[the way. 
They order how a year passes, 
How it follows its course, 
The account of the days 
And each of the twenty-day months, 
That is their business, 
It is for them to speak of the 
[gods... 
There could be no more concise 
description of the old Indian concep- 
tion nor any better expression of the 
loneliness, sadness and helplessness 
of a bewildered, leaderless people. 
Neither is it surprising that the main, 
purpose of the survivors should be 
precisely to bequeath to posterity a 
full undistorted picture of their history 
and the characteristics of their culture. 
This and the testimony of a few 
missionaries are all that is left to us 
after the cataclysm of the Conquest. 
Despite everything the old custom of 
fixing dates was maintained, although 
now they commemorated only the ruin 
of the Indian peoples, and we seem to 
hear the revered voice of the Chilam 
Balam de Chumayel lamenting: 
Alas, my younger brothers, 
Your cup will overflow with 
[sorrow ... 
Prepare to bear the load of misery 
That is coming to your peoples... 
And today those fabulous codices, 
whose ideographs have not yet been 
deciphered, can still be seen in the 
Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris, in the 
library of the Palais Bourbon, in the 
Vatican, in Florence and Dresden, 
testifying to the remarkable achieve- 
ments of the Amerindian peoples in 
the production of wonderful books, HW 
Miguel Angel Asturias. Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.
 
— 
Dé
pb
t 
lé
ga
l 
C 
1 
— 
No
ve
mb
re
 
72
 
— 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER INDEX 1972 
January 
BOOKS FOR ALL (R. Maheu). Reading habits and book hunger 
(BR. Escarpit). Books, electronics, television (L. Vladimirov). The 
yestermorrow of the book (M. McLuhan). China, birthplace of 
printing. The image and the word (A. Moravia). Reveries of a 
solitary reader (A. Carpentier). Books in the third world (Y. Laksh- 
mana Rao). Art treasures (62) Arab manuscript (Iraq). 
February 
IN DEFENCE OF DDT (N. Borlaug). Ancient irrigation and modern 
science (B. Andrianov). The bog people of Denmark (P. Glob). 
Bohemia’s “Codex of Vysehrad”. Stone-age Malta (P. Almasy). 
(P. Orata). Unesco youth forum (T. Lemaresquier). Schools of the 
Soviet north (T. Rytkheu). Art treasures (67) Buddha (Afghanistan). 
July 
BOOK, DEAR FRIEND (J. Adoum). Books people read (E. Weg- 
man). Ways to promote reading (C. Fitouri). Renaissance of 
Arab literature (P. Quannés). Micro-size books (H. Brabyn). 
University presses (M. English). Copyright revision (G. Ravelona- 
nosy). Art treasures (68) Book of Kells (Ireland). 
August-September 
THE EMERGENCE OF MAN (W. Howells). Life of stone-age man 
(F. Bordes). Our African ancestors (L. Leakey). Cave wall art Art treasures (63) Tomb decorations (Madagascar). 
LATIN AMERICAN CULTURE (C. Fernandez-Moreno). 
Pathways to a new art 
(J. Franco). The artist in Latin America (J. Adoum). New language 
of Latin American literature (R. Saguier). 
and underdevelopment (A. Candido). 
Stairway of the prophets (Brazil). 
YOUR HEART IS YOUR HEALTH (M. Candau). The heart, yours for 
Heart disease (J. Lenégre). life (Z. Fejfar). 
disease (A. Shaper and Z. Fejfar). 
vs. heart trouble (E. Chazov). 
(G. Teeling-Smith). 
Art treasures (64) 
Geography of heart 
Results of an inquiry in 
Sweden (G. Tibblin) and in the U.S.A, (D. Behrman). 
Futurology looks at heart disease 
Medicines of the future (I. Shkhvatsabaya). 
March 
Literature 
(A. Leroi-Gourhan). 
Where the first Americans came from (J. Comas). 
emergence of races (V. Yakimov). Puzzle of Peking man (P. Leroy). 
Origins of speech (V. Bunak). 
key and V. Goodall). 
our ancestors’ heads (M. Gerasimov). 
Long journey of the primates (Jl. Napier). 
Early man and 
New science of prehistory (L. Lea- 
The Piltdown man forgery. Reconstructing 
Unesco symposium on 
homo sapiens. Art treasures (69) Lady of Brassempouy (France). 
April 
(F. Bebey). 
Exercise centre (S. Naqvi). 
Art treasures (65) Ancestor image (New Hebrides). 
UNDERWATER ARCHAEOLOGY (M. Barinov). 
ologist (G. Bass). 
of the Spanish Main (M. Peterson). 
Drowned city of Port Royal (R. Marx). 
Itza (P. Romero). 
FAILURE IN SCHOOL (L. Fernig). 
Primary school drop-outs. Philippines’ 
Where to renew 
Underwater archae- 
Wreck sites in the Mediterranean, 
the seas of northern Europe (0. Crumlin-Pedersen). 
Enigma of the Bahamas. 
Sacred well of Chichen- 
Deep water archaeology (W. Bascom). Art 
treasures (66) Pre-Columbian pottery (Argentina). 
Obstacles to success in school 
(H. Passow). Letter to a teacher. Wastage in education (G. Breis). 
do-it-yourself schools 
May 
Under 
Treasure 
June 
WORLD INQUIRY INTO EDUCATION (A. Brock). 
the destiny of man (E. Faure). 
open university. China's revolution in learning. 21 point strategy 
for education. Philadelphia's school without walls. Children's art. 
Garden for the blind. Art treasures (71) Neolithic pottery (Romania). 
October 
SRI AUROBINDO & AUROVILLE (K.R. Srinivasa Iyengar). The 
ideal of human unity (Sri Aurobindo). 
Kirghizia (C. Aitmatov). 
Traditional African music 
Taxila, ancient university 
Unesco, publisher to the world (B. Werther). 
Art treasures (70) Diana the huntress, mosaic (Tunisia). 
November 
Education and 
Anatomy of a crisis. Britain's 
December 
ART OF THE BOOK — ANCIENT CHINESE ART. The birth of 
paper and printing in China (Tsuen-Hsuin Tsien). 
gical discoveries in China (Hsiao Wen). 
America (M. Asturias). 
The art of the book (A. Sidorov). 
books in clay (Iraq). 
New archaeolo- 
Pre-Columbian books in 
History of text and image (G. Blanchard). 
Art treasures (72) Sumerian 
your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookeeller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
— AUSTRALIA. Publications : Educational Supplies 
Pty. Led, P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NS; 
Periodicals: Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post 
Office, Brookvale 2100, NSW, Sub-agent. Uniced 
Nations Association of Awuscralia, Victorian Division 
Sth floor, 134/136 Flinders Se., Melbourne 
(Victoria), 3000. ($ Aus 3.60) — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C-, Arbeitgasss 1-7, 1051, 
Vienna (AS 110). — BELGIUM. * Unesco Courier.” 
French edition and general Unesco publications agent: 
Jean de Lannoy, 142, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. “Unesco Courier” Dutch edition only : N.V. 
Handelmaatschappi) Keesing, Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 
Deurne-Antwerpen. (250F belges) — BURMA, Trade. 
CorporationN® (9), 550-552 Merchant Stret, Rangoon. 
— CANADA. Information Canada, Ottawa, (Ont.) 
(3 5,00). — CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, 
Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, P.OB. 244 
Colombo 2. (Rs 25). — CYPRUS. "MAM", Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. SN.T.L, Spalena 51, Prague 1 
{permanent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1, For Slovakia only : Nakladatelstvo Alfa, Hurba- 
novo nam. 6 Bratislava. — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard 
Led., 6, Norregade, 1165, Copenhagen K. (Dan. Kr, 27.00) 
— EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for 
Unesco Publications, N* 1 Talaac Harb Stree, Tahrir Squa- 
re, Cairo; Librairie Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. 
IL.E. 35). — ETHIOPIA. National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box 2996, Addis Ababa. — FINLAND, Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki (Fmk. 13.90). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 7-9, place de Fontenoy, 
75-Paris-7°. C.C.P. 12598-48 (17 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications : Verlag Dokumentation, Postfach 148, 
Jaiserstrasse 13, 8023 Miinchen-Pullach, For the Unesco 
Kurier (Germaned only} Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P, 276650 (DM 16). — 
GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Led, P.O. 
Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd, P.O. Box 
786%, Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape Coast, The 
University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — 
GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — GREECE 
Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, Athens; Librairie 
Eleftheroudakis, Nikis 4, Athens, — HONG-KONG. 
Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon. — 
HUNGARY, Akadémiai Konyvesbolt, Vici uw. 122, 
Budapest V; AK.V. Konyvtirosok Boltja, Népkoztirsasig 
ueja 16, Budapest Vl. — ICELAND. 5naebjérn Jonsson 
& Co. H.F.,, Hafnarscraeei 9, Reykjavik. — INDIA. 
Orient Longman Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard Estate, Bom- 
bay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna 
Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2;B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road, New 
Delhi 1; Sub- Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 
17 Park Streec, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New 
Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry of Education 
and Youth Services, 72 Theatre Communication 
Building, Connaught Place New Delhi 1, (Rs. 18,75). 
— INDONESIA, Indira P.T.,, Djl. Dr. Sam Raculangie 
37, Djakarta., — IRAN. Iranian National Commission 
for Unesco, Avenue LIranchahr Chomali No 300, 
B.P. 1533, Teheran, — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, 
Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, Uni- 
versity of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — IRELAND, 
The National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Balisbridge, 
Dublin 4. — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly 
Blumstein's Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street 
Jerusalem. {24 LL.) — JAMAICA. Sangster’s Book Stores 
Led, P.O. Box 3.5, 10% Water Lane, Kingston. — 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd, P.O. Box 5050, Tokyo 
International 100-31(Y 1,440).— KENYA The E.5.A. Ltd, 
P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — KOREA, Korean National 
Commission for Unesco, P.O, Box Central 64, Seoul. — 
KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O, Box 
2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA, Cole and Yancy Bookshops 
Led, P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — LIBYA. Agency for 
Development of Publication & Distribution, P.O. Box 34- 
35, Tripoli. — LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. — MALAYSIA. 
federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Balai Berita, 31, Jalan 
Riong, Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. Sapienza's Library, 
26 Kingsway, Valletta. — MAURITIUS. Nalanda Com- 
pany Ltd.,, 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis (Rs. 17,45). — 
MONACO, British Library, 30, Bld des Moulins, Monte- 
Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. Agent for all Unesco pu- 
blications : N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 
9, The Hague. “Unesco Courier” Dutch edition only: 
N.V. Internationale Uitgevers-En Handelmaatschappij 
Systemen Keesing, Ruysdaelistraat 71-75, Amsterdam 
Zuid. cM 17.50) — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. 
C. T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant). N. 
v Willemstad, Curagao. N. A. (NA fi. 7, 80). 
— NEW ZEALAND. Government Printing Office, 
Government Bookshops at : Rutland Street, P.O. Box 
5344, Auckland: 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O, Box 1721, 
Christchurch; Alma Screet, P.O. Box 857, Hamilton; 
Princes Street, P.O, Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave 
Street, Private Bag, Wellington ($3 3.00). — NIGERIA 
The University Bookshop of Ife, The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286; The University Bookshop of 
Nsuka, The University Bookshop of Lagos, The Atmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. —= NORWAY. All 
publications : Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl 
Johans gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: A. S, 
Narvesens Licteraturjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6(K.23,00).—~ 
PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd, Unesco 
Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazaar, Lahore, and 57.58 Murree, 
Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad. Pakistan Publications Book- 
shop, Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi; Paribagh, Dacca. 
Mirza Book Agency 6% Shahrah Quaid-e-azam, 
P.O. Box N-=° 729% Lahore-3 — PHILIPPINES. 
The Modern Book Co., 926 Rizal Ave- 
nue, P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404, — POLAND. All 
publications : ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i Nauki, 
Warsaw. For the Unesco Courier only : RUCH, ul. 
Wronia, 23, Warsaw {0. — PORTUGAL.Dias & Andrade 
Leda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon (Esc,105). 
-_ SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Times 
House, River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOUTHERN 
RHODESIA. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd.,, 67 Union 
Avenue, Salisbury, — SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications: 
A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, 
Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Courier : Svenska FN-Férbundet, Vasagatan 15, IV 
10123, Stockholm 1 Postgiro 18 46 92 (Kr. 18). — 
SWITZERLAND. All publications : Europa Verlag, 
5 Rimistrasse, Zurich. Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236 (Fr. 5. 16.-). — TAN- 
ZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-ss- 
Salaam, — THAILAND. Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (71.00 baht). — TURKEY. 
Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, Beyogly, Istanbul. 
— UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 1 45, Kampala. 
= SOUTH AFRICA. All publications: Van Schaik’s 
Bookstore (Pty). Ltd,, Libri Building, Church Streec, P.O. 
Box 724, Pretoria. For the Unesco Courier (single copies) 
only: Central News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.El, and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham, Bristol (£1,30).—UNITED STATES. Unssco 
Publications Center, P.O. Box 433, New York, N.Y. 
10016 ($5). — U.S5.5.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow, G-200., — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugosiovenska 
Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zaluzba Slo- 
venije Mestni Trg. 26, Ljubljana.

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078283engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
L
S
 
o 
  
  
   
  
|g Age mau’ 
  
’ / 
f Allo edlaf os 
  
[Cres an 
peda ned 
INA IB INE; 
AND DAY OF THE RABBIT 
With their rich colours and vivid drawings the illuminated 
manuscripts of the Aztecs, of Mexico, rank high among the 
finest artistic creations of pre-Columbian civilizations (see 
ELH CEE AM o LENG 8 GER LE ST CLES GT WE SG EER ENTE 
scripts is the Codex Borbonicus (named from the Palais 
Bourbon, seat of the French National Assembly in Paris, 
where it is preserved). A calendar drawn up for the purpose 
of ritual and divination, it covers a strip of fibre paper 
14 metres (46 ft) long, inscribed on both sides and folded 
into accordion pleats to make a 38 page book. Each of the 
MLE SPA ETE TERT AVE CR Te Bc BF AVR VE-T-T SUN To AVIN ET To TT 
the manuscript showing a 13-day week beginning with 
the Day of the Vulture (bottom left) and ending with the 
Day of the Rabbit (top right). Divided into 20 units of 13 days, 
BR UURCETIET IEE TOR GIVERS CT Te BE: Wl BG EIS RE ER Ty ELE | 
mall 
a. 
E- 
» 
[== 
pis 
| 
+
1
 
=~ 
I
L
 
  
a
y
 
g
i
l
 
{T
-.
 
C
e
v
i
a
r
o
 
S
r
 
A
a
y
a
 
L
e
 
AN
 
LT CRs LTO TT ITER s ET SF TA FS 
THE VULTURE 
| 
I 
— 
=| 
i 
I 
with the 365-day year of the Aztec civil calendar. Each day 
4 
in the sacred almanac is indicated by two squares in the 
frieze, one for the day and the other for the night. The 
presiding god of each day is shown with his own bird symbol 
— the eagle for the sun god, the owl for the god of death, 
and so on. Days are numbered from 1 to 13 by a series of 
large red dots. As shown here, the days and nights are laid 
out in an inverted "L"” shape so as to leave a large square 
(here enclosed by a blue border symbolizing water). Within 
the square are portrayed the presiding gods of the 13-day 
week — the sun god Tonatiuh (left) and Quetzalcoatl (right) 
shown in his incarnation as the dog-headed Xolotl, wearing 
a pectoral, “the jewel of the wind” in the form of a shell. 
(GEN ERT ED TE RUE ET NG VEG Ts I GENCE TA EE of | 
AUCIET EDITED ICT TIVES SE 
ill 
 