# [184070](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
a, 
hid 
  
      <<
 
 The Courier 
MARCH 1989 - 9 French francs 
  
"A SILKEN BOND 
BETWEEN EAST AND WEST 
; PERSIA’S GREATEST LYRIC POET 
‘THE ONCE AND FUTURE | 
BAY) Aske). 
"POLLUTION UNLIMITED 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
A silken bond between East and West 
by Ahmad Hasan Dani 
11 
Mihai Eminescu: 
Romania’s national poet 
12 
Love sacred and profane 
Decoding Hafez’ mystic message 
by Réza Feiz 
13 
Hafez 
The golden age of Persian literature 
by Charles-Henri de Fouchécour 
17 
The once and future revolution 
by Maurice Agulhon 
23 
The Mermaid of the Dniester 
by Osyp Petrash 
24 
Pollution unlimited 
by France Bequette 
31 
Rediscovering ‘The Islands 
of the Moon’ 
by André Libioulle 
33 
Educational planners go back to school 
  
  
Statuette of a musician playing a double flute, 
4th century BC. Greek influences can be seen 
in the robes and headdress of the 12-cm high 
figure, which was found at Carthage on the 
4 north coast of Africa. 
     
    
    
  
         
  
   
_— 
‘The Courier ILI 
| A window open on the world 
  
42nd year 
~ Published monthly in 35 languages English 
i French Spanish Russian German 
Arabic Japanese Italian Hindi 
~ Tamil Hebrew Persian Dutch 
Portuguese Turkish Urdu Catalan 
Malaysian Korean Swahili Croato- 
~ Serb Macedonian Serbo-Croat 
~ Slovene Chinese Bulgarian Greek 
~ Sinhala Finnish Swedish Basque 
Thai Vietnamese Pashto Hausa 
bn 
ed
it
or
ia
l 
The American poet-essayist Ralph Waldo Emerson 
once wrote that “Great geniuses have the shortest 
biographies”. His compatriot and contemporary, 
James Russell Lowell, declared that the highest form 
of genius could be described as the voice that speaks 
“out of the eternal to the present”. The great 
Persian lyric poet Hafez, the six hundredth 
anniversary of whose death we commemorate this 
year, qualifies as a genius on both these counts. We 
have only the sketchiest outline of bis personal life, 
yet his poems speak to us across the centuries as 
though they were written yesterday. 
Mihai Eminescu, the Romanian poet who died a 
hundred years ago, was a genius of another order. 
A true Romantic and an expert in folklore and 
comparative mythology, his writings express the 
genius, the spiritual embodiment of an entire 
nation. The same might be said of the Rusalka 
Dnistrovaya, the “Mermaid of the Dniester”, the 
first collection of Ukrainian literature to appear in 
the western Ukraine. 
The third anniversary we salute in this issue, as 
a foretaste of a fuller treatment in our June 
number, is, of course, the bicentenary of the French 
Revolution. But when we speak of revolution today 
does the word have the same meaning for us as it 
did for the revolutionaries of two hundred years 
ago? 
French revolutionary ideas have since been 
carried to the four corners of the world, just as for 
centuries both merchandise and ideas have flowed 
back and forth between East and West along the 
great cultural and commercial highway we call the 
Silk Road. As leisurely caravans plied from 
Changan to Istanbul, from Kashgar to Samarkand, 
Portuguese seafarers, too, were forging new links 
between East and West as they opened up the Spice 
Route, becoming in their travels the first Westerners 
to marvel at the sight of the Comoros, the “Islands 
of the Moon”. 
Today, sadly, the caravans and the caravels have 
been replaced by jet aircraft, giant trucks and fast 
cars. Trade in both goods and ideas between East 
and West may have expanded, but so too has the 
pollution associated with our energy-hungry 
industries and our modern “convenience” transport.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 82426: A Silken bond between East and West

A SILKEN BOND BETWEEN EAST 
BY AHMAD HASAN DANI 
J SA 
ry 
Cx J 
4 w . >» . 
Ziel Zp TE {8 uw 1 
p  —— 
- 
—   
The Buddha's first sermon. Arch-shaped stele in the Gandhara (Graeco-Buddhist) style, Lahore Museum. 
HE Silk Road originated in the 
early centuries of the Christian 
era as a channel of trade in silk 
and other goods between China and 
India in the east and the Roman world 
in the west. It has a permanent place in 
world history as an important means of 
contact between peoples and cultures and 
a conduit for the two-way transmission 
of ideas, science and technology, lan- 
guages and literature. 
_ 4 
Such contact was not always easy to 
maintain in the face of political pressures 
and other hindrances, but when one 
stretch of the route closed down another 
would take its place. Several routes, both 
overland and maritime, were actually fol- 
lowed by travellers’ between east and 
west, and the expression “Silk Road” is 
a symbolic one evoking an enduring spirit 
of communication between peoples. It is 
in order to rediscover that eternal spirit 
that the project for the “Integral Study 
of the Silk Roads” has been undertaken 
(see the Unesco Courier, November 1988). 
The Silk Roads project is a many-sided 
undertaking. Some scholars will be retra- 
cing the various itineraries which con- 
nected China and the West and studying 
the geography of the countries through 
which they passed. Others will be focus- 
ing on the mechanics of road building and 
transport technology and the ways in

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 82426: A Silken bond between East and West

AND WEST 
which they were influenced by climatic 
conditions and the physical barriers 
which had to be overcome. Still others 
will study the technologies used by differ- 
ent peoples for the exploitation of ma- 
terial resources, and analyse the social 
systems, languages and literatures of these 
peoples, as well as their folklore, their 
myths and other aspects of their culture. 
Population movements, the great 
migrations that shaped the history of 
entire regions, will also be studied. But 
the individual travellers who made their 
way along the Silk Roads will not be 
forgotten—the artists, musicians and 
craftsmen who were prepared to risk 
their lives in pursuit of knowledge from 
other cultures and societies, to which in 
turn they contributed their own skills. 
Love of adventure, a hunger for 
knowledge about others, these were but 
two of many motives which fuelled the 
process of exchange between different 
societies and helped to break down the 
barriers which isolated people in differ- 
ent regions and to establish the bonds of 
co-existence that make human progress 
possible. This was the legacy of the Silk 
Road and the spirit which brought it 
into being. 
  
Orient and Occident: 
the first contacts 
  
The foundations of the east-west 
contacts, which were later channelled 
along the Silk Roads, were laid in the last 
few centuries of the pre-Christian era 
with the formation of a number of Asian 
states whose peoples exploited the 
resources they found locally and compet- 
ed for trade. This quest for profit led to 
a flourishing exchange of goods and the 
movement of men from region to region. 
Gradually, the peaceful conditions neces- 
sary for trade came into being. The 
diverse peoples involved in this process 
are vividly portrayed by the Greek 
historian Herodotus, who describes how 
their societies were organized, their ways 
of life and their close relationship with 
the Achaemenid empire in Persia. 
One example of this commercial and 
cultural exchange is that of the Aramaean 
merchants who travelled through Central 
Asia where their alphabetic script, 
continued on page 8 
The miracle of Sravasti. 3rd-century AD Gandhara bas-relief depicting the Buddha’s most famous miracle which occurred in the ancient Indian town 
of Sravasti (in the present-day state of Uttar Pradesh) where he lived and preached for part of his life. 
 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 82426: A Silken bond between East and West

     
Rnd Lay    
  
    
_— 
eT 
\ “4 » ” 
   
  
  
  

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 82426: A Silken bond between East and West

  
   
    
     
   
 
Detail of blue silk damask cloth (13th-14th century), discovered in 
the necropolis of Al-Azam, Egypt. Chinese artisans sometimes used 
Arabic characters in the designs of silks bound for Egypt, in order to 
gratify the tastes of their Muslim clients. 
This bronze statuette of a deity (1st 
century AD), from Alexandria or an 
eastern province of the Roman empire, 
was found at Begram, Afghanistan, the 
site of one of the ancient capitals of 
the Kushan kingdom. 
  
  
  
  
      Intaglio figure carved in carnelian (3rd-4th century AD), of 
Mediterranean origin, which was found during excavations at the 
port of Oc Eo on the southern coast of modern Viet Nam. The 
Roman figure with upraised index finger may represent a 
philosopher.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

continued from page 5 
Aramaic, influenced the ‘evolution of 
other alphabets such as Sogdian and 
Kharoshti. Among the other peoples 
described by Herodotus are the 
Scythians, the “Indians”, and the Persian- 
speaking people who moved eastward, 


### 82426: A Silken bond between East and West

where their language had a strong 
influence on the ancient languages of the 
region. 
The meeting of the peoples of east and 
west, the exchange of ideas and technol 
ogies, and the two-way transmission of 
languages and literature was made possi- 
ble for the first time by the Achaemenid 
empire between the sixth and fourth cen- 
turies BC. People were attracted from 
many points of the compass to the capi- 
tal of the empire, Persepolis, along roads 
built by the emperor Darius. At the same 
time, in the outlying central Asian 
provinces, cities such as Balkh!, Samar- 
kand and Taxila, which later became im- 
portant staging posts on the Silk Roads, 
were connected by overland routes and 
developed as meeting points between east 
and west. During this period the spirit of 
dialogue between the peoples of east and 
west was the primary form of the enrich- 
ment of human civilization. 
  
The conquests of Alexander 
the Great 
  
Contacts between east and west were 
facilitated in the late fourth century BC 
by the conquests of Alexander the Great, 
who overthrew the Achaemenid empire 
and campaigned eastwards as far as India. 
A Macedonian who became steeped in 
Greek culture after his conquest of 
Greece, and then an oriental monarch, 
captivated by the idealism of the East, 
Alexander was himself the embodiment 
of cultural intermingling. 
During his time the culture of the 
Greek world was transmitted into Asia 
in an unprecedented flow of men and 
ideas, technologies, artistic trends and 
architectural formulae, as well as drama, 
poetry, music, religions and above all 
language and literature. However, the 
_ 8 
  
adden ANP 
fF 
5 
Js 
$ : % v 
Fa 3 Ss ip at 
Ba Ee 
~ ££ We ; 
Bs A fy 7 REN £2 
~~ OR id 4 AS 
22h a 
3 IF 
# fa wf 
ox le Ea 
og. 3  , 
a t \ 
— A 
ars: | 5 
oF w d » . 
_ d 
2 Ng, | 
N “75 ‘ a 
“ by A - ow 8 f \ 
’ 
ly 
: 
YR SA Ban 2D + ak | [T° 
     
      NN 
» 
Y a 
% po & 
ME 4 & 
Shiva with three heads, A bas-relief from the 12th-century monastery of Pandrethan, near 
Srinagar, State of Jammu and Kashmir, India. 
traffic was not only one-way. Alexander 
and the scholars who accompanied him 
met Asian philosophers, whose ideas they 
took back to Greece along with tributes 
of gold, cattle and artefacts which 
enriched the classical world of the West. 
Alexander founded several new cities in 
Asia, and his men intermarried there, 
introducing Hellenism but at the same 
time becoming thoroughly Asianized and 
integrated into the local population. 
Shortly after Alexander invaded the 
sub-continent, Chandragupta Maurya 
seized the throne of the Indian kingdom 
of Magadha, thus taking the first step in 
the creation of the mighty Mauryan em- 
pire, which inherited both the Greek and 
the Achaemenid legacy. The empire 
reached its zenith during the reign of his 
grandson Asoka (274-237 BC). Asoka, 
who inaugurated an era of Buddhist mis- 
sionary activity that was to have a far- 
reaching impact on central Asia and the 
Far East, received many Greek envoys 
and in return sent his own ambassadors 
to the Hellenistic world.? 
After its founder’s death, Alexander’s 
great empire disintegrated into smaller 
units including such peoples as the Bac- 
trian Greeks, the Sogdians, the Parthians, 
and later the Sassanians and the Scythians. 
This fragmentation did not prevent the 
movement of people and goods; on the 
contrary, commercial activity was inten- 
sified as a result of advances in geographi- 
cal knowledge, which also encouraged the 
movements of learned Buddhists, Zoroas- 
trians, Manicheans and other mission- 
aries. The ruins of monasteries and other 
religious centres provide a clue to the 
routes they took. Cultural influences 
spread along the river valleys of 
Mesopotamia, Central Asia and India. 
Archaeological excavations at Taxila on 
the Indus and Ai-Khanum on the Oxus? 
have shown how art and architecture of 
that time drew on a wide variety of 
traditions. 
  
The growth of sea-borne trade 
 
Another significant development, 
thought to have taken place around 100 BC, 
was the discovery of the monsoon, which 
enabled ocean-going vessels to cross the 
Indian Ocean from west to east in spring 
and then to return in winter when the

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

winds reversed, laden with products of the 
East. For the first time the Indian Ocean 
had become a lake for ships travelling 
between the Roman world, Indian ports, 
and the coast of China. 
The work of geographers such as 
Pliny the Elder in the first century AD 
and Ptolemy a century later testifies to 
increasing knowledge of the world, The 
anonymous author of the first-century 
Periplus Maris Erythraei gives a detailed 
description of the countries around the 
Indian Ocean, their peoples, trade, im- 
ports and exports, climate and currency. 
New sea routes were developed, ex- 
tending the range of the coastal shipping 
that in ancient times had linked Egypt, 
via the land of Dilmun (possibly Bahrein) 
with the distant, eastern countries of 
Magan and Meluhha, which may have 
been located in the Indus valley. Sea 
traffic along these new routes would 
reinforce, and when necessary replace, 
the overland Silk Roads. 
  
China’s opening to the West 
Meanwhile, tribal conflicts on the 
western borders of China had caused the 
Qin Dynasty (221-206 BC) to build the 
Great Wall of China as a defensive meas- 
ure. Chinese sources describe how these 
tribes subsequently moved down the 
Oxus valley and penetrated south of the 
Kun-lun, Karakorum and Hindu Kush 
mountains. 
The rulers of the Han Dynasty 
(206 BC-220 AD) which followed kept a 
strict watch over these tribal movements 
on their western borders, but they also 
opened up for the first time the route to 
central Asia and maintained close contact 
with the mighty Kushan empire which 
stretched from the Caspian Sea in the 
north through the Oxus, Indus and 
Ganges valleys to the Arabian Sea in the 
south. The Kushan empire was so vast 


### 82426: A Silken bond between East and West

that it also had close contacts with the 
Roman empire. This period of close col- 
laboration between East and West helped 
to create the propitious conditions for the 
opening of the Silk Road. 
Traces of intense cultural activity still 
mark the routes that joined East and West 
centuries ago. Ruins of ancient cities, such 
as Kapisa (near modern Charikar) in the 
heart of Afghanistan, tell a story of com- 
plex exchanges with other countries. 
Rock carvings portray people wearing the 
costumes of different tribes and rock 
inscriptions speak of different peoples and 
languages. In the great ancient capital of 
Changan {modern Xian), Buddhist 
monks from Japan and Korea met learned 
‘scholars from Sri Lanka, India and 
Central Asia. Sculptures of Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas stand in spectacular natural 
surroundings, most notably at Bamiyan 
in Afghanistan, where there are two 
colossal Buddha figures carved from the 
Hl 
An apsaras, a goddess-nymph of Indian mythology. Detail from ar 11th-century fresco, Alchi 
monastery, Ladakh, in which both Indian and Persian influences can be seen. 
a 
a
r
 
i 
rn
 
“
 
i
=
 
a
 
a CY 
|
 
So
e.
 
$3
75
 
4 
2) \ 
L
L
 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 82426: A Silken bond between East and West

living rock and hundreds of man-made 
caves, many of which bear traces of fine 
fresco painting which links them with 
contemporary caves in Xin-jiang 
(Sinkiang). 
  
  
The expansion of Islam 
 
The rise of Islam in Arabia in the 
seventh century triggered a profound so- 
cial and religious revolution among the 
Engraved and embossed silver plate (4th century) showing Shapur II (310-379 AD), king of the 
Sasanian empire of Persia, hunting wild boar. Merchants from Khorezm on their way to Europe 
via the Caspian Sea and the Volga River may have brought the plate to Perm, in the central 
Urals, where it was discovered. 
While the Han Dynasty ruled in China, 
the Huns spread from the western 
borderland of China and Mongolia into 
the heart of Asia and Europe and down 
to India. A loose confederation of peo- 
ples, the Huns built a vast empire in cen- 
tral Asia stretching from China to Persia 
and from the Oxus to the Arabian Sea. 
Many Chinese and western travellers 
have left a vivid picture of the Huns’ 
horsemanship, polo-playing, weapons 
and dress. The Huns were followed by 
Turkic tribes who established states in 
Central Asia which obstructed passage 
along the old-established Silk Roads, 
although the Tang Dynasty which began 
to rule China in 618 AD still managed to 
send goods and people to the West. 
_ 10 __ 
Arabs, who expanded into Asia, Africa 
and Europe. Their expansion also opened 
up new vistas in science and philosophy 
as they began to plumb the ocean of 
knowledge contained in Greek manu- 
scripts and to translate them into Arabic. 
Through their contacts with India and 
China they also followed new develop- 
ments in mathematics, medicine and 
astronomy and learned how to manufac- 
ture paper, gunpowder, ceramics and silk 
and muslin cloth. The Arabs now became 
the intermediaries in a dialogue which 
extended from China to Venice and then 
westwards to France, Spain and Portugal. 
As well as passing on Greek science and 
philosophy to the newly-developing 
world of the time, they propagated Indian 
mathematics, the new symbols of number 
and the decimal system that became the 
foundations of modern science. They also 
disseminated the science of chemistry, 
knowledge of the properties of metals and 
of new Chinese technologies, and above 
all medical information which opened up 
great possibilities in the human and 
biological sciences. Arab interest in 
astronomy led to the development of new 
concepts of the universe and of cosmogo- 
ny. In the fields of art and architecture 
they allied the traditions of the past with 
scientific and mathematical precision 
and contributed new forms in building 
and new tastes in decoration which 
incorporated calligraphy and arabesque. 
In this way the spirit of the Silk Roads 
was carried on. As the caravans plied 
from Khotan, Yarkand and Kashgar to 
Samarkand, Bokhara and Merv and beyond 
to the markets of the western world, or 
further south through Balkh, Hamadan 
and Damascus to Aleppo, or from China 
westwards to the Caucasus and then on 
to Istanbul and Venice, they kept alive a 
dialogue between the peoples of east and 
west, a process of mutual contact and co- 
operation that encouraged the peaceful 
growth of human civilization. n 
1. Balkh: the ancient city of Bactra, capital of Bactria. 
2. After conquering the kingdom of Kalinga (the modern 
Indian state of Orissa), Asoka renounced war. The name 
of Kalinga lives on in the Kalinga Prize for distinguished 
popular writing in science which is awarded annually by 
Unesco. The Prize was created in 1951 after a donation 
from an Indian industrialist from Orissa, Mr. Bijoyanand 
Patnaik. 
3. Oxus: ancient name of the Amu Darya River, central 
Asia, which flows into the Aral Sea. Editor 
 
AHMAD HASAN DANI, of Pakistan, Professor 
Emeritus at Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 
and honorary director of the Centre for the Study 
of the Civilizations of Central Asia, is the author 
of many books and articles on history and 
archaeology. This article is adapted from a paper 
presented by Professor Dani at the first international 
seminar on Unesco’s Integral Study of the Silk Roads 
project, held in Osaka (Japan) in October 1988.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 82427: Mihai Eminescu, Romania's national poet

MIHAI EMINESCU, 
ROMANIA’S NATIONAL POET 
IHAI Eminescu 
(1850-1889) is recogn- 
ized as the foremost 
Romanian lyric poet. His 
mastery of language has also 
earned him a high place in 
world literature. 
Eminescu led a tormented 
life. Born into the minor 
aristocracy, he was educated at 
the universities of Vienna 
(1869-1872) and Berlin 
(1872-1874) and tried his hand 
at several jobs before joining 
the editorial staff of the 
newspaper Timpul (“Time”). 
In 1883 he suffered a mental 
breakdown which, punctuated 
by periods of lucidity, lasted 
until his death. 
Poet, dramatist, journalist, 
a specialist in Romanian folk 
poetry, Eminescu was a man 
of wide intellectual interests. 
He produced a vast body of work, but only published one 
volume of verse in his lifetime, under the title of Poezii (1883; 
“Poetry™). 
The poems he wrote in his youth, such as Inger si demon 
(“Angel and Devil”) or Impirat si proletar (“Emperor and 
Proletarian’), are marked by a Byronic and Faustian revolt 
against the social and the cosmic order. Later, his reading of 
the philosophy of Kant and Schopenhauer modified his vision 
of the world. A short prose fantasy, Sérmanul Dionis (“Den- 
nis the Pauper”), published in 1872, illustrates his determina- 
tion to transcend time and space in a quest for absolute liberty. 
He gave a new and original slant to the Romantic theme of 
the fallen angel. 
His interest in folklore and comparative mythology was re- 
inforced by his knowledge of the work of the German Roman- 
tic poets, particularly the Heidelberg school (Achim von Arnim, 
Clemens Brentano, Joseph von Géorres). After 1874, love be- 
comes a dominant theme of his poetry, in which woman is por- 
trayed in harmony with Nature, bathed in moonlight and the 
heavy perfume of lime blossom. His rhyme and verse forms, 
as in Floare albastrd (‘Blue Flower”) and Povestea teiului (“The 
Tale of the Lime Tree”), have a gentle, lyrical quality never 
before attained in the Romanian language. 
After 1877, a cold aura of gloom and death begins to per- 
vade his work. His love poetry becomes the expression of 
unrelieved solitude and suffer- 
ing. Some poems, such as 
Despartire (‘‘Separation”), 
evoke emotional crisis, while 
others, such as his sonnets, are 
imbued with a heart-rending 
and enchanting beauty. 
In the third of five Scrisor: 
(“Epistles”) from his mature 
work, the patriotic poet evokes 
episodes from the glory of 
the Romanian medieval past 
and, alternating between 
lyricism and satire, contrasts 
them with the bitterness of the 
degraded present. 
Eminescu was a true 
Romantic, creator of mytho- 
logical worlds in which the 
tragedy of the human condi- 
tion is played out. Like the 
great lyric poets Friedrich 
Holderlin and John Keats, he 
used the classical myth of 
Hyperion in his long ballad Luceafirul (1883; “The Evening 
Star”), in which he suggests that genius is condemned to soli- 
tude in a society hostile to spiritual values. Written in four-line 
stanzas with seven or eight syllables to the line and the rhythm 
and style of a folk tale, it is a masterpiece of lyric poetry. 
Hyperion, the evening star, who is in love with a mortal 
princess and ready to renounce his immortal existence and 
become human for her sake, engages in an epic astral journey 
which leads him into the presence of God. Warned of the fick- 
leness of mortal love (the princess has fallen in love with a young 
page), he understands the futility of the sacrifice which he was 
about to make and does not return to the world of humanity: 
But this time be does not fall 
down to the depths of the sea 
but says: “Does it matter to you, 
clod of earth, if it’s any man or me? 
You live in a narrow world, 
a plaything of fortune. 
But I live in my own universe, 
immortal and immune. x 
This article is based on a study by Zoe Dumitrescu Busulenga, a professor at the 
University of Bucharest.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 82428: Love, sacred and profane: decoding Hafez' mystic message

LOVE SACRED AND PROFANE 
Decoding Hafez’ mystic message 
BY REZA FEIZ 
    
- © 
AFEZ is considered in © 
the Islamic Republic of x 
Iran, the land of his birth, 
and beyond the frontiers of the 
Persian-speaking countries, as the A 
poet of love and as one of the 
greatest Muslim Sufi mystics, even 
though his worldly language 
presents him as a very human and 
sensual poet. - 
The meaning of love in Hafez 
must first be elucidated and an at- 
tempt then be made to establish the 
relationships between “Love”, “‘the. 
Lover”, and “the Beloved”. This 
may help to clarify Hafez’ use of 
language and to define the level at 
which his poetry should be read 
and appreciated. 
For a Sufi like Hafez, love has 
a sacred dimension and cannot be 
understood in its profane sense. 
Love 1s enacted in a sphere in which 
even a profane act automatically be- 
comes sacred. Thus for a Sufi, even ~~ p» 
humdrum everyday ‘life remains | (oor | 
spiritual. It is in this sense that 
Hafez sings the praises of love: 
I have never heard a sweeter word 
than the word love, 
It is the only memory that remains beneath the cupola of the heavens. 
However, this “sweet word” is accompanied by pain, the pain 
of man’s separation from his celestial origin, a theme magnificently 
treated by another great Persian Sufi poet, Mawlana (*‘Our Lord”) 
Jalal ad-Din ar-Rumi (1207-1273), in his great work the Masnavi. 
Thus all the poetry of Hafez is a hymn to love; for him poetry 
is simply a way of revealing and glorifying it. He is also intensely 
aware of love’s influence on the success of his verse, for he says: 
Since love has taught thee eloquence 
Thy words are heard in every gathering 
What is the place of love in this movement of the lover towards 
the Beloved? The starting point of the process is surely the lover’s 
longing, For Hafez, however, the Beloved is always the originator. 
It is when the Beloved is fully revealed that the lover’s ecstasy and 
passion come into being. The lover finds the beauty and perfec- 
tion to which he aspires embodied in the Beloved: 
In the beginning the reflection of thy beauty revealed itself 
Love appeared and enflamed the whole universe. 
In Sufi forms of expression, the lover’s overwhelming need for 
union with the Beloved is called Soluk, which might be 
H 
1 
4 
4 
t 
’ 
¥ 
9 
’ 
  
S
E
E
R
 
N
E
E
.
 
L
o
a
 
  
T
X
 
  
12 
  
15th<century miniature from a Divan (collection of poems) 
by Hafez. 
translated as “‘spiritual journey”. 
The circle of love begins and ends 
with the Beloved. He who accom- 
plishes the journey towards union 
with the Beloved lives in the materi- 
al world but also inhabits a spiritu- 
al universe. He sees the world as the 
reflection of the beauty of the 
Beloved, but he is not thereby 
attached to it. Hafez says: - 
I was not interested in the affairs of 
this world, 
It 1s thy face that has made it beauts- 
fil for me. 
Contrary to what might be sup- 
posed from his worldly and even 
licentious language, Hafez is a great 
Sufi who becomes a poet and not 
a poet who speaks as a mystic. 
He approaches poetry from a sacred 
and spiritual viewpoint. He speaks 
of wine, cabarets, cup-bearers; of 
loved ones, singers, harpists; of curls 
and tresses, of beautiful faces and 
marks of beauty ... Ostensibly these 
are all worldly images, but to accept 
them at their face value is to mis- 
understand completely the social and 
cultural ethos of the society of 
which Hafez was writing. 
The personality of Hafez (“he who has learned the Qur'an 
by heart”), also known as “the tongue of the invisible” /isan-ol 
ghayb), and “‘the interpreter of mysteries” (tarjoman-ol asrar), directs 
the reader to look for a further meaning to his words. It is evident 
that his is a symbolic and allegorical language written in the liter- 
ary style of the period and still valid. The fact that those poems 
which seem the most worldly are sung as psalms at Sufi gather- 
ings ts proof that Sufis consider him to be a spiritual master. 
Hafez’ poetry is universal because he touches on eternal truths. 
For Hafez, light comes straight from the sun, unfiltered by any 
earthly medium, and it is through this pure light of inspiration 
that he distinguishes between truth and illusion and, with unusual 
realism, recommends forgiveness and tolerance: 
Forgive the quarrel of seventy-two rites and religions 
Not having known truth, they have followed the path of illusion. m 
    
  
REZA FEIZ, of the Islamic Republic of Iran, is the author of a number of articles 
and papers on philosophical themes. A former director of the Iranian Centre for 
Cultural Studies, he is currently serving as his country’s Ambassador to Unesco.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 82429: Hafez: the golden age of Persian literature

HAFEZ 
The golden age of Persian literature 
BY CHARLES-HENRI DE FOUCHECOUR 
  
View of the interior of the Regent’s Mosque, Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Hafez was born in Shiraz and spent most of his life there. 
throughout his life as Hafez, was born and died at Shiraz, 
Persia, a town he rarely left during a lifetime of over 
sixty years. 
The year 1353 was a milestone in Hafez’ life. He was near- 
ly thirty years old and his obvious talent had already earned 
for him the patronage and protection of the Vizier Qevam 
od-Din Hassan. In 1353, however, his protector died and was 
replaced in the seat of power by a certain Mobarez od-Din 
Mohammad, who imposed a rigorous religious and moral 
régime that was totally at odds with the lifestyle of many of 
the citizens of Shiraz. Poems by Hafez and others, ironizing 
on the tyrant’s rigid attitudes, were circulated surreptitiously. 
Mohammad’s reign lasted eleven years, until the day when 
his son, Djalal od-Din Shah Shoja, rose up against him and took 
his place. Shoja was to reign from 1364 to 1384. These were 
NE od-Din Mohammad (c. 1325-1389), known golden years, especially for Persian literature, and it was in this 
period, when he enjoyed the patronage of the ruler and of court 
and state functionaries, that Hafez achieved his greatest liter- 
ary output. It was not long, however, before Hafez fell out of 
favour again, for a period of some twelve years during which, 
it appears, he frequented the courts of Ispahan and Yazd. 
It remains difficult to establish an accurate chronology of 
the poems of Hafez on the basis of these facts. The details of 
the poet’s life can only be deduced, and then very summarily, 
by taking the political life of his period as a starting point and 
searching in his works for allusions to that life. What else do 
we know of him? Many legends, but virtually nothing of which 
we can be certain. In a manner typically Persian, he was very 
discreet about himself and he may have lived his true life else- 
where than in the court circles in which he earned his living, 
Here, for the record, are a few more facts about him. The 
— 13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 82429: Hafez: the golden age of Persian literature

  
 
    
  
      
  
| RT a | 
lol fo y » A . c- a 
td arddull > HA 
nm —— _— 
——————— 
——— 
Ti — E   —— 
Seated in a garden in flower, a monarch reads a manuscript as a servant pours him some wine 
and musicians play. This miniature from a Divan by Hafez, published in the 16th century, 
accompanies one of the poet’s ghazals (poems). 
date of his death, the year 792 of the Hegira (1389 AD), is 
known to us from the introduction to an anthology of poems 
by Hafez compiled by an anonymous copyist (later identified 
as a man called Golandam). There is no indication that he ful- 
filled any particular function at the court, not even that of poet. 
Could it be that he worked as a teacher at a Qur’anic school, 
as his pseudonym Hafez (‘he who has learned the Qur’an by 
heart”) has led many to believe? In Tashkent, there is a 
manuscript copy of the works, in five volumes, of the poet 
Amir Khosrow Dehlavi (1253-1325) which is signed by Hafez 
and dated 1355. Perhaps Hafez was himself working as a copyist 
at that time. One of his ghazals (lyric poems of from six to 
fifteen couplets) laments the death of a child; Hafez, then, like 
Ferdowsi or Nezami, wept for the death of a dear one. 
— 14 
Although the elements that can be gleaned from the poet’s 
works are insufficient to provide even the skeleton of a 
biography, it should be noted that, as the British critic 
G.M. Wickens has pointed out, his Divan is much more directly 
related than it was once widely thought to the court circles in 
which the author moved at the time of its composition, and 
which provided the patronage essential to literary life. 
The works of Hafez mark the apogee of the lyric poetry 
produced by the giants of Persian literature. The borrowings 
he made from the works of his forerunners are gracefully trans- 
formed and exemplify his mastery of the finest figures of the 
Persian poetic tradition; he conjures with them, turning them 
upside down and giving them new life. The intellectual skill 
with which he gives meaning and implosive force to all these

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 82429: Hafez: the golden age of Persian literature

figures, simply and as though at play, is such that a hearing 
of a ghazal by Hafez is an occasion of high rejoicing. Each figure 
is set within the poem in such a way as to give off an endless 
series of allusive ripples. Properly to understand Hafez, there- 
fore, we must first place him as a poet. 
A ghazal is a poem, that is to say, in the spirit of the time, 
a formal construction within which a number of propositions 
can be arranged. This construction has two constituent ele- 
ments: a group of scanning lines with a single rhyme. Each line, 
or beyt, has two scanning sections each with the same metre. 
The metre is the same throughout the poem. The two sections 
of the first beyt rhyme with each other. 
Consisting normally of eight to twelve beyt, this poetic form 
is to be found among the earliest examples of Persian litera- 
ture that have come down to us. Short, highly elaborated, it 
was the preferred form in which to speak of love and to sing 
the praises of wine. Because of its formal constraints, the ghazal 
is very demanding, obliging the poet to develop a technique 
and an artistry by which he will for ever be judged. 
It was in the twilight of his career, or, more often, after his 
death, that a poet’s works were brought together in a compila- 
tion known as a divan. Hafez’ Divan consisted basically of 
ghazals,which was rather unusual, since Persian poets normal- 
ly write their poems in a variety of forms. 
However, as it happens, we do not have the authentic texts 
of Hafez. Of course, a ghazal was written down by its author, 
but it was also recited aloud, with all the niceties of accentua- 
tion, pauses, voice manipulation and articulation. Thus we have 
several scattered ghazals of Hafez that were taken down in- 
dividually in writing during his lifetime. Perhaps the author 
of the introduction to the Divan mentioned above was the very 
first compiler of his works. It would seem, however, that col- 
lections of Hafez’ ghazals circulated both before and after his 
death and that, as they circulated, he made alterations to some 
of his poems. 
The two oldest anthologies (consisting of forty-three and 
thirty-six works) date from 1404 and before 1408. The first more 
or less complete manuscript of the Divan (455 ghazals) dates 
back to 1410. But a century after the death of Hafez, there had 
been a multiplication of both manuscripts and ghazals (up to 
725) and the manuscript tradition had become corrupted. To- 
day, there are numerous printed editions of Hafez’ works. They 
include a notable critical edition by Parviz Natel Khanlari, pub- 
lished in Teheran in 1983 and based on fourteen ancient and 
reputable manuscripts. 
Thousands of studies of Hafez’ works have been published 
in many languages. The central question that they address has 
been, and continues to be, the meaning that should be given 
to Hafez’ poetry. Is it hedonistic, mystical, or pure lyricism? 
As early as the fifteenth century, the historian Khandamir 
reported that, one day, Shah Shoja reproached Hafez for the 
lack of homogeneity in his ghazals, each of which, he said, spoke 
of wine, then of mysticism and then of the Beloved One. To 
  -——acr 
  
«on MOA AS 
’ ely nah 4   
    
    
MN 
| Bl be 
  
 
JSD) » al Nw WA { ARTI A AA 
G7 11 AB 20d § A lrg & EAA 
  
  
    
 
 
16th-century miniature depicting the all-conquering Tamerlane 
(1336-1405). He may have met Hafez at Shiraz in 1387, 
when he was seeking to gather sages and poets around him at 
his court at Samarkand.

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

A 
J 
A 
4 
: 
  
  
Map of Shiraz and its surroundings from “The Book of Highways and 
Kingdoms” (Kitab al-masalik wa I-mamalik), by al-Istakhri or 
al-Farisi (10th century). 
which Hafez is reported to have replied that all this was true, 
but that he was the only poet whose ghazals were famous 
throughout the world. 
Critical studies of his works were first undertaken in the 
Ottoman empire and took the form of commentaries. Those 
of Sham’i and of Sorouri stressed Hafez’ mysticism and by the 
sixteenth century, in the time of the Safavids, this had become 
the accepted interpretation in both Persia and India. The great 
sage Soudi, who also wrote commentaries on the works of Sa’di, 
restricted himself to a sober study of Hafez based on grammat- 
ical analysis and, in so doing, gave a lead to European critics. 
Modern commentators on Hafez abound. The rich scope 
of the ghazals is such that none of the accepted interpretations 
has succeeded in excluding the others, an exclusive interpreta- 
tion being taken as a sign of weakness. 
Two major elements attract our attention, The first is that, 
very often, it is difficult to say whether the person to whom 
Hafez is addressing his poem is the object of his praise (mam- 
douh), his love (mabboub) or his adoration (ma’boud): prince or 
friend, beloved one, or God. The second is that, despite the 
seeming disconnectedness of many of the ghazals, they all have 
a subtle unity which becomes apparent in the atmosphere they 
exude. As a number of commentators have expressed it: the 
intertwining of figures and allusions around a few central themes 
(Wickens); a symphony of themes (Arberry); a hidden coher- 
ence (Stolz); a delicately rational lyricism (Bausani); a symbol- 
ic structure taken to the third degree and capable of offering 
incomparably rich resonances (Lazard). 
The ghazal has much in common with a diamond, bringing 
out all the sparkle of the poetic imagery accumulated in the 
literary tradition, and, with a prism, diffracting all the mean- 
ings with which word sounds have become loaded over the cen- 
turies. The commentator Nasrollah Pourdjavadi has aptly 
demonstrated the weight of mysticism with which the word 
“glance”, for example, has become charged as used in the writ- 
ings of Ahmad Ghazali and retained in the sure hand of Hafez. 
And the same applies to countless other images—a glass of wine, 
Noah’s Ark, a tavern, a mirror, the blood, the wise man, the 
libertine, the face ... 
Another commentator, Anne-Marie Schimmel, has rightly 
spoken of the circular nature of Hafez’ ghazals. The mind of 
the poet does not focus on a single point, it transports the 
listener into the heart of his own realities and breathes mean- 
ing into them. If Hafez succeeds in speaking to each one of us, 


### 82429: Hafez: the golden age of Persian literature

it is because his language encompasses two spheres, the world- 
ly and the spiritual, to both of which he belongs. In Hafez’ 
writing there is a kind of accomplishment of unification, the 
towhid at the heart of all Persian mysticism—the reality of hu- 
man life, of love, of wine and, especially, of the prince are in 
fact but a metaphor for spiritual reality. u 
  
CHARLES-HENRI DE FOUCHECOUR, of France, is professor of classical 
Persian literature (10th-15th century) at the University of Paris III (New 
Sorbonne). His most recent publication is a study of the concept of morality 
in the Persian literature of the 9th to the 13th century.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 82430: The Once and future revolution

THE ONCE AND 
FUTURE REVOLUTION 
  
BY MAURICE AGULHON 
T HIS year France is celebrating the 
bicentenary of the 1789 Revolu- 
tion and, to judge by the long list 
of public functions and learned confer- 
ences already announced, the eyes of 
most of the world will be upon her. 
For France, this is the occasion for an 
extra-special national day. Celebrated 
each year on 14 July, the official nation- 
al day is, after all, a tribute to the Revo- 
lution to which it is directly linked. The 
Bastille was taken by storm on 14 July 
1789, and 14 July 1790; the first anniver- 
sary of this event, was also the occasion 
of the grand and joyous Féte de la Fédér- 
ation (a federation of communes set up 
in many towns and villages to replace the 
former local authorities). Indeed, the en- 
tire French panoply of national sym- 
bolism refers back to the Revolution—the 
tricolour, adopted in July 1789, the na- 
tional anthem, La Marseillaise, composed 
in 1792, and La Liberté, the figure of a 
woman wearing the famous red Phrygian 
cap which became an official French ém- 
blem at this period. 
The French people of the day were 
very conscious of the fact that France had 
existed as a state for nearly a thousand 
years and had already produced many 
heroic, symbolic figures—great kings, 
such as Philippe-Auguste, Francois I or 
Henri IV, and great servants of kings, 
from Jeanne d’Arc to Richelieu. The year 
1789, however, marks the beginning of 
the modern age of which the world of to- 
day is the direct continuation. 
Since then, French public life has been 
ordered by a written constitution and by 
laws equally applicable to all. The peo- 
ple, through their elected representatives, 
have shared in the exercise of power, and 
basic rights and freedoms have been af- 
firmed, at least as an objective or an ideal. 
1789 marks, not the birth of France, but 
  
  
Earthenware figurine (1794-1795) which 
represents Liberty bringing down despotism. 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 82430: The Once and future revolution

BRS aS meadn Thin lod ve Wags. 
  rather her attainment of adulthood, of / 
reason and of freedom. That 14 July = 
should have been chosen as the national 
day is very indicative of the extent to 
which the desire to achieve the political 
ideal is inherent in the French national 
character. 
——
——
 
—
—
 
  
Revolution as Enlightenment 
  
Why are the events of 1789 seen and 
celebrated as being more than simply an 
incident in French history? It is because l h, 
Revolution is seen as having its own in- RLY ; 
trinsic value. Al Sal 7 | : ; 
What, then, it must be asked, is a, £1 Nee (7 4 TR 
“Revolution”? Contemporary thought, 
especially perhaps in Europe, defines : 
Revolution in a rather abstract, formal Fad ~AeaErIn = Faas 
way as sudden and violent social and po- ' : AY 
litical change. If we accept this view, then Ihr holder Sohonen der 
  ho
  —— 
woes erwahiten Mud 
  
  
    
the principal alternative to revolution is Hes Sbupohléfrijadeclered crod wrt hats adein. 
reform, that is to say, gradual, non- } “ a wht 065 aki ch lor cack auch das lio 
violent change. Today, a humanitarian 
ethos, which fortunately is fairly 
widespread, encourages us to prefer the 
A lady from Mainz (in the present-day Fed. Rep. of Germany). Round her waist is a sash bearing 
the words “Equality” and “Liberty” in French. Some of the city’s intellectuals supported the 
ideals of the French Revolution and unsuccessfully attempted to create a Republic of Mainz in 
reformer to the revolutionary. 1792-1793. 
Contemporary engraving of a Revolutionary committee meeting under the Reign of Terror This point of view, however, and this 
(1793-1794). Those who instituted it saw the “Terror” as an arm of national defence in face of interpretation of words, is quite recent. 
counter-revolutionary intrigues within France and the threat from abroad. 17,000 people are 
estimated to have been executed, and 500,000 imprisoned, during this period of the French Throughout the nineteenth century at 
Revolution. least, Revolution, in political terms, was 
defined above all by its content, its 
programme and its aims. And the alter- 
native to Revolution was Counter- 
revolution. Revolution thus meant 
change for the better, change inspired by 
faith in the possibility of progress, great- 
er rationality in the means used to achieve 
it and having, as its final objective, great- 
er collective well-being. Just as clearly, 
Counter-revolution meant resistance to 
change by, and possibly the restoration 
"of, the former centres of power and 
former social groupings, based on the 
old values of authority, hierarchy and 
tradition, often founded in religion and 
often oppressive. Co 
The repercussions that the events of 
1789 had throughout the world were due 
not to the fact that the change they 
brought about was sudden, radical and 
  
  
 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 82430: The Once and future revolution

complete, but because it appeared to be 
initiated in the name of positive values: 
Liberty, Equality, Happiness, Justice. 
  
France leads the way 
 
Did the France of 1789 deserve her 
reputation as an example to the world, 
which earned her both hatred and 
affection? At first sight this is debatable. 
We need go no further back than the 
eighteenth century to be reminded that 
the idea of applying reason to the govern- 
ment of states or of societies was due to 
enlightened despots such as Frederick II 
of Prussia, the Empress Catherine II of 
Russia, Joseph II, Emperor of Germany, 
and Gustav III, King of Sweden. And the 
notion that a political relationship could 
be modified by the will of the people, or 
that a government could be set up whose 
legal power was based on the consent of 
the governed, had been proclaimed in 
1776 by the American Revolution. 
The dominant ideas of the French 
Revolution of 1789 were undoubtedly 
closer to those of the American Revolu- 
tion than to those of enlightened despo- 
tism. Louis XVI could have been France's 
enlightened despot. That he did not 
take on this role can be put down to inde- 
cisiveness, due perhaps to lack of personal 
attachment to the philosophy of the day 
(he was a pious believer whereas the 
rulers named above were all more or 
less agnostic) and also—though this 
may have been another aspect of his 
religious convictions—to his failure to 
agree to break with the aristocracy. Thus 
Louis XVI soon came to resist a nascent 
Revolution that had vested hopes in him 
and as a consequence lost control of it. 
And, as soon as the Revolution was seen 
to be in opposition to the King, the 
formerly progressive, reforming Euro- 
pean monarchies became fiercely hostile 
to it. 
Declared a Republic in 1792, revolu- 
tionary France did not for all that follow 
the American model. This was because 
France remained a great state, an ancient 
and a powerful state, which was soon 
obliged by the exigencies of war to 
strengthen itself still further. 
The distinguishing feature of the 
French Revolution was, perhaps, that it 
emerged as the first synthesis of the two 
great changes that preceded it, as the 
point of convergence between the philo- 
sophy proclaimed by the American Revo- 
lution (Natural law and inalienable rights, 
including the right to life, liberty, and the 
pursuit of happiness) and the techniques 
of rational administration that had been 
tried out in the Old World. 
However this may be, the world was 
soon struck by the novelty of the French 
experiment. The story is told of how 
Kant, the philosopher of Koenigsberg, in 
1789 changed the previously unvarying 
route of his daily walk so as to hear more 
quickly the news from France. And who 
has not heard quoted the words of the 
German poet Goethe on the night of the 
battle of Valmy!: “From this day and 
this place dates a new era in the history 
of the world.” 
The French Revolution drew atten- 
tion not only because of its novelty but 
also because France herself was promi- 
nent on the world scene. At the end of 
the eighteenth century, all that could be 
described as being on a world scale, that 
is to say, everything relating to world 
politics that was collective, rational and 
interconnected, was to be found in 
Freed slave from the Antilles, wearing around his neck the tricolour ribbon and a plumb level, 
both revolutionary symbols. The French National Convention abolished slavery in 1794. 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

Europe of the North Atlantic. And in 
this European world, France was the 
most populous country (after Russia), the 
most powerful and (after Great Britain) 
one of the most advanced economically. 
French was the main instrument of inter- 
national communication and the language 
of the cultivated élite, This gave France 
claim to a literary hegemony paralleling 
that of Greece and then Rome. Exorbi- 
tant or not, this pretension, in addition 
to other more objective factors, undoub- 
tedly helps to explain why the events of 
1789 so strongly alarmed and shook the 
world. And although the long periods of 
warfare between 1792 and 1815 in some 
respects limited the impact of 1789, they 
also helped to prolong and propagate it. 
  
The universal Republic 
  
It is undoubtedly the case that, 
throughout the nineteenth century, 
France, as “the country of the Revolu- 
tion” or, to put it slightly differently, 


### 82430: The Once and future revolution

“the country of the Rights of Man”, was 
to evoke a degree of enthusiasm among 
the supporters of Progress and Liberty 
matched only by her own messianic zeal. 
Although French was then the univer- 
sal language of the educated élite, the mes- 
sage it bore was unreservedly universal. 
Not a word in the text of the Declaration 
of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen 
was specific, all the assertions it made 
were general and therefore could be ap- 
plied to any nation. The notions of 
Liberty and Equality were enhanced by 
the universality of their formulation. 
Even the form of Republicanism adopt- 
ed by the French after 1792 followed the 
same pattern. What, indeed, could be 
more specific than a monarchy, which be- 
longs to a dynasty with a family name 
and a geographical location and origin? 
What could be more universal than a 
Republic, an abstract term like Liberty 
or Justice, and a collegial system directly 
applicable everywhere? 
By the middle of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, the most idealistic of the heirs to the 
French Revolution had come to the con- 
clusion that the French Republic itself 
was destined to disappear one day within 
a World Republic. In evocation of this 
grandiose, utopian notion I quote not an 
isolated dreamer but the most famous and 
most venerated poet of his time, a man 
whose poems were known by heart in 
Republican France and on whom she 
bestowed the highest symbolic and 
political honours—Victor Hugo. 
No anthem could be more revolutiona- 
ry or more universalist than the last poem 
of his anthology Chatiments, dated 1853. 
Le char de la monarchie (“The Royal Coach”) sepia pen and wash drawing by Victor Hugo from 
his years of exile. . : 
  
Within the seed-bed of our present woes, 
The Hymen of the brother-peoples grows... 
Republic universal, you we acclaim 
Today a spark, a-tiny flame, 
Tomorrow the sun! 
Nobody really believed, either in 1870 
or in 1900, that this “Tomorrow” was 
very near. But the fact that, by adopting 
Hugo as their leading prophet, French 
revolutionary thinkers allowed them- 
selves to indulge in such dreams has had 
its consequences. 
~The magnificent tribute paid to Vic- 
tor Hugo at his death, in 1885, by the 
Portuguese writer José Maria Ega de 
Queirds, has recently (1985) been re- 
published. He had a profound admiration 
for Hugo for many reasons both moral 
and aesthetic. However, he admits that 
Hugo perhaps went too far in his affir- 
mation of French messianism and that it 
would be more reasonable to declare that 
all the peoples of the world will take part 
in “the final liberation of humanity”. 
This, however, is but a mild reproof and 
he nonetheless holds it as evident that: 
No country has contributed more than 
France to fashioning from the rough bar- 
barian of the sixth century the cultivated 
man of the nineteenth. France possesses to 
the highest and purest degree the divine 
spiritual qualities of sweetness and light, 
which are the most powerful agents of bu- 
man education. No country, like France, 
has taught the world the lesson of equality; 
and equality is, in truth, the surest ball- 
mark of civilization ... 
It was in terms such as these that, at 
the end of the last century, people out- 
side France were speaking of France. The 
vaunted “spreading influence of the 
French language and culture”, due initial- 
ly to such literary figures as Corneille and 
Bossuet, was given a kind of re-charge of 
energy by the Revolution, and became as- 
sociated also with Voltaire, Mirabeau and 
Victor Hugo. 
  
A controversial model 
  
Times, however, have changed, and 
for two kinds of reasons that neither

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Victor Hugo nor his extollers could have 
foreseen. The French Revolution had 
been a long, troubled affair interspersed 
with the vicissitudes and drama of both 
external and civil war. Doctrinal strug- 
gles, which at times interrupted the war 
between the classes, set the partisans 
against one another. Various constitution- 
al systems were tried out, rejected and 
replaced, giving those ten years of French 
history the appearance of a political test- 
ing ground, throwing up a whole stock 
of models for the world to follow. 
For a hundred years, in a host of coun- 
tries, many political figures who knew 
  
   
French and were well informed and pas- 
sionately interested in French history, 
borrowed French ideas and terminology: 
the Right, the Left, political “clubs”, 
Jacobin, Montagnard, Thermidorian, 
Bonapartist, Chouan, émigré, and so on. 


### 82430: The Once and future revolution

The most popular and most radical phases 
of the Revolution, those of the year II 
(September 1793-August 1794) of the 
Republican calendar, were to be of spe- 
cial interest (directly as well as indirectly 
through the subsequent events of 1848 
and the Paris Commune of 1871) to 
socialist revolutions of the twentieth 
century. In them, undeniably, can be seen 
a further series of historical effects stem- 
ming from 1789. The French Revolution 
could no longer be seen as simply a repe- 
tition of the message and aspirations of 
the American Revolution. It became the 
first in the series that was to lead to the 
Russian Revolution. 
This French Revolutionary 
print, entitled 
Citoyen né libre 
(“Free-born citizen”), 
the new political man. 
 
symbolizes the birth of 
  
A declaration for the third} 
millennium 
N the occasion of the bicentenary of 8 
Or French Revolution, an internation- 
al association of young people has set § 
itself the task of updating the Declaration of § 
the Rights of Man and of the Citizen which § 
was adopted by the French Constituent } 
Assembly in August 1789. Founded in 1985 | 
by three French students, the Association for § 
the Declaration of 26 August 1989 ("AD 89") § 
is currently rethinking the concept of human § 
rights for the twenty-first century, taking into E 
account the radical changes that are trans- 
forming society today. : 
The founders of the Association unveiled J 
their project at the United Nations in Geneva § 
in 1985, on the occasion of the fortieth § 
anniversary of the foundation of the UN. H 
Since then, the activities of AD 89 at both 
the national and the international level have 
centred on two major concerns. First, how can | 
technological progress be used positively, in 
the service of humanity? A second and more § 
ambitious aim is to formulate a doctrine of § 
human rights based on humanist concepts of § 
identity and universality. : 
The young people from very different § 
geographical, political and social backgrounds H 
who make up the Association's over 300 E 
members have been organized into working § 
groups to study a number of themes, includ- # 
tng information, computer science, genetics, § 
the environment and space. : 
The Declaration of 26 August 1989, based | 
on the proposals put forward by these groups, § 
will be drafted at an Extraordinary Conven- 
tion of European Youth (16-23 July 1989), | 
when 500 young delegates from the twenty- J 
one member states of the Counci! of Europe E 
and representatives of AD 89 groups all over § 
the world will meet at the Palais de I'Europe § 
in Strasbourg. i 
The Association's founders point out that 
"1789 brought the individual and the state § 
face to face, by assigning to the state aduty 
to refrain from any interference with the § 
individual's physical and moral integrity. But, 
paradoxically, the state was itself given the 
responsibility of guaranteeing its own non- 
intervention. We are still suffering from the 
consequences of this grave misunderstanding, 
by which the arbitration of our rights was en- 
trusted to institutions ... 
‘Don't give up!’, young people are insist- 
ing, as are men and women of goodwill all 
over the world. 
"The next bridge to be crossed is to put 
human rights back into the hands of mankind, 
beyond all frontiers and beyond all cynicism. 
This is the basis of a new revolution.” 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 82430: The Once and future revolution

From this follow two consequences, 
both of which tend to diminish the 
impact of the French example. On the 
one hand, the only possible link that can 
be made between 1789 and its aftermath 
and 1917 compromises 1789 in the eyes 
of those who dislike radical social 
struggles. On the other hand, for those 
who have revolutionary aspirations, the 
recent model of 1917 seems better suited 
than that of 1789, which was formulated 
long ago when the industrial revolution 
was in its infancy. The internationalism 
proclaimed by Marx, Lenin and Trotsky 
was to blot out the memory of the 
Universal Republic of Mazzini and Hugo. 
  
From the universal to the specific 
The Third French Republic, officially 
inspired by the 1789 Revolution, acquired 
a great colonial empire conquered by 
force of arms but with a perfectly clear 
conscience, in the sure knowledge that, 
under the French flag, the Republic was 
spreading a morally and intellectually su- 
perior message, an alluring message that 
was both civilizing and French inspired. 
This was but the French facet of a more 
widespread phenomenon. At the begin- 
ning of the twentieth century, Europe 
and North America, that is to say the in- 
dustrialized and developed world of the 
day, dominated the other continents by 
a combination of their material strength, 
their cultural and technological superiori- 
ty and their liberal beliefs. 
From this was to stem the last and 
most important change in the status of 
the Revolution of 1789 in the panorama 
of world history—it fell victim to an anti- 
Western counter-current. 
How do things stand today? 
The conditions which existed in the 
last century and which promoted the 
spread of French revolutionary ideas are 
clearly much weakened if not virtually 
non-existent. 
France no longer ranks as a major 
power. 
French is no longer the main language 
of international discourse. 
Europe is no longer the centre of the 
world. 
The world has become 2 unified, inter- 
connected, inter-related whole with a bet- 
ter mutual knowledge which has upset 
notions of a cultural hierarchy that were 
formerly taken for granted. Western 
— 22 
liberalism is no longer held to be the only 
acceptable form of civilization. Indeed, 
we now speak of civilizations in the plural. 
All this puts the message of 1789 in 
a truer perspective and lessens its impact. 
One has only to see how the great 
decolonization movement, or, alterna- 
tively, the great uprising of the Third 
World against the imperialism of the 
North, has achieved its ends. At first it 
seemed to be an uprising against France 
(or against Europe and the West) in the 
name of her, or their, own liberal 
principles—demanding from those who 
had colonized in the name of the Rights 
of Man the application to the colonies of 
those universal rights. This then deve- 
loped into a desire to affirm national 
differences, or national authenticity. 
Rather than its own universal values, im- 
perialism found brandished in its face the 
particular values specific to the oppressed. 
  
Towards a new universality 
 
Was this to be the final, definitive 
moral climate of the world, with equal, 
complete, but incommunicable cultures? 
If this were so, if the Revolution of 1789 
were no more than a fragment of French 
folklore, and if the ideal of Liberty were 
no more than a historical cover-up for 
European hegemony, then there would 
be no reason for a magazine such as the 
Unesco Courier to exist. 
Yet the Unesco Courier does exist, as 
does Unesco and the United Nations 
Organization and, for better or for worse, 
the international community. If a few 
common rules and a few common values 
are accepted, then this means, at least 
implicitly, that a philosophy universal in 
application indeed exists. 
This moral code of Justice and of 
Liberty, this notion of Humanity united 
by possession of a rationality common to 
all, transcends all religious and national 
specificities. For if this were not so, noth- 
ing would hold back the world from the 
slippery slope that leads to head-on con- 
frontational crusades and the chaos of war. 
Universality, that distant heritage from 
the Enlightenment, is indeed the philo- 
sophy implicit in, or at least the working 
hypothesis of, our international institu- 
tions. Why should we not recall for a 
moment—with no outdated triumphalism, 
yet without unnecessary deprecation—that 
two centuries ago France was the setting 
for a step forward in the journey towards 
the making of humanity? u 
1. On 20 September 172, the French Revolutionary army halt- 
ed the invasion of Prussian troops at Valmy, north of Paris. 
Editor 
 
MAURICE AGULHON, of France, is professor 
of modern French history at the Collége de France. 
Among his published works translated into English 
are Marianne into Battle: Republican Imagery and 
Symbolism in France, 1789-1880 (1981), and 
Republican Experiment, 1848-52 (1983), both from 
Cambridge University Press. 
Allegorical engraving from the French Revolution. Reason triumphant, with the support of 
Nature, demonstrates that all men are equal. The black man holds the Declaration of the Rights 
of Man in one hand, and, in the other, a decree according freedom to mixed races. At left, the 
demons of despotism and injustice are fleeing. 
  
  
   
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 82431: The Mermaid of the Dniester

THE MERMAID OF THE DNIESTER 
BY OSYP PETRASH 
Ukraine, became a part of the 
Austrian Habsburg monarchy. 
The people of the new province 
were severely oppressed and re- 
mained largely illiterate. Intellectual 
life was impoverished by the fact 
that no books were published in the 
Ukrainian language; only a rich tra- 
dition of folk songs and legends 
nourished the spiritual life of the 
people. 
At that time a number of Slav 
peoples (Czechs, Serbs and Croats) 
were undergoing a national and cul- 
tural revival. The first indications of 
a similar revival also began to ap- 
pear in Galicia. In 1833, a clandes- 
tine circle was organized in Lvov, the 
capital, with the objective of reviv- 
ing the national culture of the 
Ukrainians of Galicia. Its founders 
were three friends, Markiyan Shash- 
kevych (18111843), Ivan Vahylevych 
(1811-1866) and Yakiv Holovatsky (1814-1888). Instead of speaking 
German or Polish, as was the rule when societies held meetings, they 
used their native Ukrainian language, and discussed the culture and 
destiny of their people. 
The activities of the Shashkevych circle constituted not only a 
literary phenomenon, but a social and democratic movement. Its 
greatest achievement was the publication of an almanac entitled Rusa 
ka Dnistrovaya (“The Mermaid of the Dniester”), which was the 
first collection of Ukrainian literature to appear in the western 
Ukraine. 
Shashkevych prepared a collection of literary works and folk songs, 
originally entitled Zoria (“The Dawn’) and submitted the manuscript 
to the board of censors. As there was no censor of Ukrainian books 
in Lvov, Zoria was sent to Vienna, where Varfolomei Kopitar, the 
censor of Greek and Slav books, made positive comments on the 
manuscript but pointed out that it was “purely political” and sent 
it back to Lvov. Under the new title of Rusalka Dnistrouaya, the 
almanac was then sent to the Hungarian censor at Pest. He allowed 
it to be published and 1,000 copies appeared in Buda in 1837. One 
factor which had helped to make publication possible was 
Holovatsky’s friendship with the Serbian writer Georgi Petrovich and 
other leading figures in the Slav revival. 
What were the contents of this almanac that the Habsburg authori- 
ties found so disturbing? Its 150 pages open with an epigraph by 
the Czech poet Jan Kollar: “Not sad eyes, but the hands of the wor- 
ker bring hope!” These words were meant as an appeal to readers 
not to give way to pessimism about the destiny of the people, but 
to work towards its cultural and national awakening. The preface, 
Ir 1772, Galicia, in the western 
 
A copy of the Rusalka Dnistrovaya (“The Mermaid of the Dniester”) which 
escaped the clutches of the censor. This was the first collection of 
Ukrainian literature to appear in the western Ukraine. 
by Shashkevych, is a manifesto call- 
ing for the revival of Ukrainian liter- 
ature in Galicia. It lists Ukrainian 
publications which appeared in 
Moscow, St. Petersburg and Kharkov. 
Most of the almanac consists of 
Ukrainian folk songs, as if confirm- 
ing Kollar’s claim that “Folk songs 
are the most solid foundation of edu- 
cation. An element of culture, the 
support of national identity, they 
protect and beautify language” A 
chapter is devoted to original writ 
ing by Shashkevych, Vahylevych and 
Holovatsky. There follow translations 
of Serbian folk songs, extracts from 
“The Kraledvorski Manuscript” by 
V. Hanka, an article by Shashkevych 
on the importance of historical 
monuments in spiritual life, exam- 
ples of the vernacular Ukrainian lan- 
guage, a short description of the 
ancient manuscripts of Saint Basil's 
monastery, Lvov, and a review of a 
collection of marrage songs and folk customs. 
The Lvov censor objected both to the contents of the almanac 
and its use of popular speech and phonetic orthography. He decided 
that its distribution should be prohibited. About 800 copies were con- 
fiscated and legal proceedings were brought against the publishers. 
But Rusalka Dristrovaya was not doomed to perish. Some 200 copies 
were widely distributed with the help of friends of the circle in Buda. 
Rusalka Dristrovaya was intended by its authors to lay the foun- 
dations of a Ukrainian literature in tune with the ideological and 
aesthetic principles proclaimed by Shashkevych in his work “The 
Alphabet”: “Written language is for every people its life, its way of 
thinking, its other self; it should be born and grow among people... 
it must not become like the bird of paradise which is said to be 
without feet and is thus condemned to stay in the air for ever. Litera- 
ture is a vital need of the people” 
The Rusalka was a powerful voice which spoke out about the 
lives and national dignity of the Galician Ukrainians. Mainly con- 
sisting of works by Slav authors, it became a literary landmark in 
the Slav world. It is significant that the ideas of the Serbian writer 
and scholar Vuk Karad7ié (1787-1864), a leading figure in the Slav 
Renaissance, should have inspired Shashkevych’s circle, and that the 
lexical and orthographical principles set forth by Karadzi¢ should have 
been the basis of the phonetic spelling system used in the almanac. 
“The Mermaid of the Dniester” thus has an important place in the 
Slav Renaissance as a whole. | 
OSYP PETRASH, of the Ukrainian SSR, is the author of a number of studies on 
the history of 19th-century Ukrainian literature. 
— 23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 82432: Pollution unlimited

POLLUTION UNLIMITED 
 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 82432: Pollution unlimited

  
BY FRANCE BEQUETTE 
OST human beings seem to be 
quite unaware that the small 
blue planet on which we live 
is very fragile. Although, some twenty 
years ago, general concern began to be 
expressed about the state of our natural 
environment, we continue to inflict 
irreversible damage upon it. 
The atmosphere, our water resources, 
the soil, even our food, are all contami- 
nated, largely as a result of our own ac- 
tions. Rather than the quality of life, the 
level of industrial development achieved 
is taken as the yardstick by which we 
judge our civilization. We create deserts 
and cause floods by destroying our 
forests. Our homes and work-places are 
polluted by the tobacco we smoke, by 
harmful particles from the materials we 
e and the emanations from ill-adapted 
fireplaces. We can no longer afford to ig- 
nore the warnings we are given bytour 
most capable and conscientious scientists. 
If we do not want to condemn our chil- 
dren to a life of stagnation on a decaying 
planet, it is time for us to reflect upon 
the consequences of our daily actions. 
Once the atmosphere was pure. Now 
the quantity of polluting gases emitted 
into the atmosphere exceeds Nature's ca- 
-pacity to absorb them. The equilibrium 
is broken and we are threatened by an 
"ever-lengthening list of * perils—the 
“greenhouse effect”, the gap in the ozone 
layer, climatic change, a rise in the sea 
level. 
~ 
This copper smelting plant at Douglas, 
Arizona, was closed down in January 1987 by 
order of the United States Environmental 
Protection Agency. Noxious gases and particles 
emitted from its smokestacks had caused untold 
damage to the environment of the American . 
southwest and of neighbour country Mexico. 
What is happening? The more the 
world becomes industrialized, the more 
energy is consumed. No source of ener- 
gy, however, is completely innocuous. 
Combustion is a chemical reaction in 
which carbon, sulphur and nitrogen ox- 
ides are produced as well as all kinds of 
molecules, some of which are highly 
toxic. Since wood contains chlorine, an 
ordinary domestic fire gives off dioxin (a 
highly toxic substance made notorious by 
the Seveso disaster'), in minute quanti- 
ties only, it is true, but which augment 
the other pollutants present in the air, 
especially in poorly-ventilated dwellings. 
And the use of fossil fuels (coal, oil, natur- 
al gas), and ‘the need for them; are 
continually increasing. Industry, trans- 
port and heating systems emit a constant 
stream of pollutants into the atmosphere 
in quantities which, though they may 
seem small compared to the volume of 
the Earth’s atmosphere, are sufficient to 
have a marked effect. 
  
  
The greenhouse effect 
~The most widespread pollutant is car- 
bon dioxide, annual emission of which 
has increased from 90 million tonnes in 
the last century to 5,000 million tonnes 
today. The two World Wars and increases 
in the price of oil have slowed this up- 
ward trend somewhat, but the United 
Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) estimates that output of carbon 
dioxide may double by the year 2050. 
Carbon dioxide is the principal cause of 
the greenhouse effect. It is transparent to 
incoming radiation from the sun which 
penetrates the Earth’s atmosphere, 
although a large proportion of the ultra- 
— 25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 82432: Pollution unlimited

violet rays are absorbed by the ozone 
layer, situated some 10 to 50 kilometres 
above the Earth’s surface. On the other 
hand, it traps the infra-red radiation 
reflected back by the Earth, like the glass 
of a greenhouse, thus causing a heating 
up of the atmosphere . 
Other gases also contribute to the 
greenhouse effect. These include the chlo- 
rofluorocarbons (CFCs), 700,000 tonnes 
of which we release to the atmosphere an- 
nually through the use of aerosols, 
refrigerators, and air conditioners and the 
manufacture of plastics and the cleaning 
of electronic components. 
With a lifetime in the atmosphere of 
about one hundred years, a CFC 
molecule is 20,000 times more efficient 
at trapping heat than is a molecule of car- 
bon dioxide, so, proportionately to their  
This Canadian scientist is analysing the composition of tiny bubbles of air trapped in glacier ice at 
the beginning of the 19th century. 
Desert scene in North Dakota. The three-month drought that hit the central United States last year could presage the onset of global warming. 
 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

concentration in the air, CFCs contrib- 
ute much more to the greenhouse effect 
than does carbon dioxide. Furthermore, 
CFCs are capable of destroying ozone. 
The gap in the ozone layer observed over 
the Antarctic has become 40 per cent larg- 
er since 1957 and another gap has ap- 
peared above Australia and New Zealand. 
The B type ultra-violet rays which can 
now pass through these gaps and reach 
the Earth’s surface are thought to be the 
primary cause of some skin cancers. 
Nitrous oxide, another gas which 
contributes to the greenhouse effect, has 
a life of nearly 200 years. It is released by 
microbial fermentation in the soil and the 
burning of wood and fossil fuels. Of the 
12 to 15 million tonnes released into the 
atmosphere annually, nearly 10 per cent 
is due to the use of nitrogen fertilizers. 
  


### 82432: Pollution unlimited

Other forms of atmospheric 
pollution 
  
Until recently, the industrialized 
countries were the main propagators of 
atmospheric pollution, but they are being 
rapidly caught up by countries which are 
becoming industrialized. In Eastern Eu- 
rope and China, for instance, factories 
and non-nuclear power stations draw 
their energy from cheap, locally- 
produced coal. The combustion of coal 
releases sulphur dioxide to the 
atmosphere. When mixed with rain and 
carried by the wind it can travel thou- 
sands of kilometres. The acid deposits it 
produces attack forests and buildings and 
can also be harmful to man. 
The alarm was sounded in 1970 by the 
Scandinavian countries where “acid rain” 
has destroyed all life in many of their 
lakes. These countries soon realized that, 
since the prevailing winds were from the 
west, the sulphur dioxide being deposit- 
ed on their territory came from British 
and American factories. Winds from the 
east, however, were the source of the 
sulphur dioxide deposited on the Feder- 
al Republic of Germany, which was in 
turn responsible for deposits reaching the 
forests of the Vosges in France. 
In addition to burning tree leaves and 
pine needles, these acid deposits also seem 
to make the forest floor itself sterile. 
Furthermore, they are causing severe 
degradation to historic monuments that 
were still intact at the beginning of the 
century, such as the Parthenon in Greece, 
the Coliseum and Venetian palaces in 
Dhaka inundated. The catastrophic flooding to which Bangladesh is subject may be in part due to deforestation on the slopes of the Himalayas. 
  
Jal IEEE Te Rv i

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

Italy, the Cathedral of Strasbourg in 
France, the Taj Mahal in India, and vari- 
ous buildings in the United States. As 
these few examples show, the phenome- 
non occurs wherever industrial concen- 
tration is accompanied by heavy 
automobile traffic releasing exhaust gases 
rich in sulphur dioxide. 
Exhaust gases also contain lead, 
emissions of which are estimated at 
450,000 tonnes annually and are harmful 
to health. The struggle for lead-free petrol 
is still far from being won. 
  
Soiling the soil 
  
Other heavy, metals pollute not only 
the atmosphere but also the soil, ground- 
water and the water table. The quantities 
involved annually include: mercury, 
11,000 tonnes, cadmium, 5,500 tonnes, 
and arsenic, 78,000 tonnes. At present we 
are handling over seven million different 
chemical products and new ones are con- 
stantly being produced. Production, 
which amounted to 250 million tonnes 
in 1985, appears to be doubling every 
seven or eight years. 
Although the accumulation of small 
quantities of these products, dangerous 
though it may be, passes unnoticed, 
major disasters, which are becoming 
more frequent, draw our attention to 
them. In 1959, for example, at Minama- 
ta, in Japan, mercury which drained into 
the water table resulted in 400 deaths and 
left 2,000 people seriously ill or deformed. 
Farmers continue to lavish fertilizer on 
their fields to obtain ever greater yields, 
while the nitrates these fertilizers contain 
pollute the adjoining water resources. 
Another scandalous example of pollu- 
tion is the stocking of dangerous toxic in- 
dustrial wastes on the ground in humid 
areas with permeable soils. The industri- 
alized countries do not know what to do 
with their industrial wastes and allow 
themselves to be cajoled by unscrupulous 
agents who are prepared to take these 
wastes off their hands and dispose of them 
in poorer, less populated countries where 
environmental protection is not a priori- 
ty consideration. 
28 ___ 
es 
   
Lo a 
lly TE 
4 wre Be on Tenuta 
Fos Capt: 
as SN rN a a 
  
 
    
Be = - 
hn 
E310     
Beauty discountenanced. Air pollution and acid rain have defaced this once-graceful marble maiden 
(420-415 BC), at the Acropolis, Athens. 
As they become more industrialized, 
the developing countries are experiencing 
similar . problems. The factories and 
refineries installed around the Bay of 
Hann, at Dakar, have caused a level of 


### 82432: Pollution unlimited

pollution of the sea which is causing the 
Government of Senegal great concern. 
The techniques necessary to master this 
problem are costly and take a long time 
to learn. An equally dangerous and daily 
occurrence is pollution by untreated hu- 
man wastes. Illnesses linked to water pol- 
lution account for 25,000 deaths per day, 
mainly in the developing countries. 
  
Climatic change 
  
It is in these countries that the hydro- 
logical cycle has been the most disturbed, 
owing to the deforestation of mountain 
areas to make way for agriculture, to sup- 
ply the timber trade or to provide wood 
for fuel. After the trees have been cut 
down, rain water streams down the slopes 
carrying with it the cultivable topsoil and 
causing flooding. A recent example has 
been the serious flooding in Bangladesh, 
which was due to deforestation in Nepal.

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

If the practice of firing the bush continues 
in Guinea, the Fouta-Djalon mountain 
massif, where floods alternate with 
seasonal periods of drought, may well 
soon cease to be ““Africa’s water tower”. 
The danger for the world is very real. 
Twenty hectares of forest disappear every 
minute and it is estimated that 160 mil- 
lion hectares of woodland are degraded 
annually. Clearing Amazonian forest 
impairs the Earth’s “green lung”. For 
carbon dioxide is taken up not only by 
the oceans, but also by plant life which 
transforms it, by photosynthesis, into 
carbon hydrates. The fewer trees there 
are on the planet the more carbon dioxide 
there will be in the atmosphere, and this 
can only aggravate the greenhouse effect. 
If, as most experts predict will happen, 
global warming, a process that has already 
begun, drives the planet’s average temper- 
ature up by 2°C to 4.5°C, melting of 
continental glaciers could cause ocean 
levels to rise from 40 to 120 centimetres. 
The great deltas of the Ganges, the Nile 
and the Mississippi would disappear, as 
would the Netherlands and a host of 
islands of the Pacific and Indian Oceans, 
including the Maldives, Tuvalu and 
Tonga. 
  
A joint counter-attack 
 


### 82432: Pollution unlimited

The fight against pollution comes up 
against powerful economic and social 
interests. Old, heavily polluting factories 
which could not afford to install costly 
anti-pollution devices would have to close 
down, leaving their workers unem- 
ployed. The installation of catalytic 
converters would increase the cost of 
automobiles and discourage buyers, thus 
dealing a blow to the automobile indus- 
try. The new propellant gases for aerosols 
now under study are more expensive than 
the existing chlorofluorocarbons. Renew- 
able energy sources which could perhaps 
replace fossil fuels, such as solar and tidal 
power, are still far from being competi- 
tive. Only nuclear energy can supply 
cheap and abundant electricity, thanks to 
which certain highly toxic wastes can be 
destroyed in very high temperature 
incinerators. 
Unfortunately, no country wants to 
stock on its territory nuclear wastes, 
which have an extremely long radioactive 
life. Furthermore, it is impossible to 
eliminate the risk of recurrence of acci- 
dents such as those that occurred at Three 
Mile Island in the USA in 1979 and at 
Chernobyl in the USSR in 1986. Final- 
ly, the further the cost of oil falls, the less 
justification there is for economizing on 
energy consumption and the more pol- 
lution will increase. 
Nevertheless, the international com- 
munity seems determined to take action. 
Negotiations on global reduction of the 
emission of sulphur oxides opened in 
1979 under the aegis of the United 
Nations Economic Commission for 
Europe. Seventeen countries undertook 
to reduce their emissions of sulphur oxides 
by 30 per cent within twenty years. At 
Vienna, in 1985, and in Montreal, in 
1987, a Protocol was signed concerning 
the production of chlorofluorocarbons. 
It was agreed that the heaviest users of 
CFCs would reduce their consumption 
by 50 per cent by 1999. An extended time 
limit was agreed for the developing coun- 
tries, whose annual consumption 
amounts to only 0.30 kilograms per cap- 
ita. However, since the ozone layer is 
being damaged at a faster rate than that 
predicted by experts before the Protocol 
was signed, it may be questioned whether 
these undertakings are sufficient. 
One of the steps being taken by 
Unesco for the conservation of the en- 
vironment is the creation, within the 
framework of its Man and the Biosphere 
(MAB) Programme, of a network of 
Wind power is harnessed to pump water for irrigation for these garden-smallholdings in Malta, 
Greater use of non polluting, renewable energy sources would help to reduce atmospheric pollution. 
  

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

~ 
biosphere reserves. This work is being 
undertaken in collaboration with the 
United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP), the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAQ) and the Internation- 


### 82432: Pollution unlimited

al Union for the Conservation of Nature 
and Natural Resources (IUCN). There 
are now 273 biosphere reserves in some 
seventy countries. Some of these reserves, 
such as the Kavkazskiy reserve in the 
USSR, are specially equipped to monitor 
atmospheric pollution. 
  
Conservation in daily life 
 
Quite apart from the efforts being 
made at the national and international 
levels, each one of us should become 
more aware of the consequences of our 
actions. Throwing a mercury or a silver 
oxide battery away on a rubbish tip could 
lead to the pollution of a cubic metre of 
soil or 500 litres of water. Emptying out 
the engine oil from an automobile on to 
the ground could pollute 5,000 cubic 
metres of water. Each time we press the 
button on a CFC-powered aerosol we 
contribute to the destruction of the ozone 
layer. To respond to the state of emer- 
gency call put out by the world’s scien- 
tists, we must all react, and react quickly. 
Pollution knows no boundaries. The 
greenhouse effect could have dire conse- 
quences for the environment and for 
human societies. It is already late in the 
day both for study and for action. 
Yet the stakes are high—the survival of 
the Earth itself. - 
1. In July 1976, as a result of a leak in a reactor at a chemi- 
cal plant producing chlorophenol, a cloud of poisonous 
vapour spread over the town of Seveso, near Milan, kill- 
ing hundreds of birds and small animals and causing respira- 
tory problems, burns and other skin lesions among many 
of the inhabitants. Editor 
 
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a French-American 
journalist with a special interest in environmental 
topics. For the last four years she has been 
responsible for training African journalists in the 
fields of health and the environment for Unesco’s 
West and Central Africa News Agencies 
Development Project (WANAD). 
At Donon in the Vosges, France, a research worker examines a batch of young pine trees that have been exposed to acidic fog. 
SSR x AT 
Ne 
7 
ya LT A 
REESE Fa IN 
30 
p> i 
LJ T_T 

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 82433: Rediscovering 'the islands of the moon'

REDISCOVERING 
‘THE ISLANDS OF THE MOON’ 
LR AY AWN TOT 
tr 
ECAUESE of a paradox inherent in 
B the history of the islands on which 
they live, the people of the Como- 
ros archipelago have only had access to 
their age-old cultural heritage since 1979, 
when the first public library containing 
a collection of historical and contem- 
porary sources relating to their identity 
was opened at Moroni, the capital. 
This tropical archipelago of four 
islands—Ngazidja (Grande Comore), 
Mwali (Mohéli), Nzwani (Anjouan) and 
Mahoré (Mayotte)—has cast a spell on 
travellers ever since the first voyages of 
Arabs and Persians to what they called 
the “Islands of the Moon” (al-Kamar) 
because of the moonlit radiance of their 
rugged shores. Sixteenth-century Por- 
tuguese explorers opening up the Spice 
Route first made the islands’ existence 
known to the West. 
Navigators must have been attracted 
to this volcanic archipelago at the north- 
ern end of the Mozambique Channel in 
the Indian Ocean by its mild climate. But 
they were surely also drawn by the 
singularity of the population, a mixture 
of Bantu, Arab and Persian peoples living 
in closely-knit communities, whose 
tempestuous history was marked by 
rivalry between local chiefs and forays by 
pirates. Epic folk tales chronicled the 
myths and legends of a culture left 
astonishingly intact between its two great 
neighbours—the African mainland (Dar 
es-Salaam is some 700 kilometres away), 
and Madagascar, whose northern coast 
lies 300 kilometres from the Comoros. 
Why should the Comoros be isolat- 
ed? During the colonial period, from 1912 
to 1946, when the islands were ad- 
ministered from Madagascar as a French 
colony, they were considered of negligi- 
ble importance because they were so 
small. This archipelago which neither 
forms part of Madagascar nor of the 
BY ANDRE LIBIOULLE 
Creole-speaking world was overlooked 
by researchers. The little that was known 
about the Comoros was filtered through 
Madagascar, as in the “Comoros room”’ 
established half a century ago in the 
Tananarive Museum. 
The isolation of the Comoros was 
further intensified by the dispersal of 
ancient writings and legal, historical and 
ethnographic documents into east Africa, 
where the Swahili civilization (of which 
the Comoros constituted a kind of ocean 
outpost) had become an Anglo-Saxon 
sphere of influence. 
The Comorians—like the people in 
the outside world—thus did not know 
their own country. In order to discover 
their cultural identity, they had to take 
matters into their own hands, a task 
which was all the more urgent since eco- 
nomic instability, dependence on foreign 
aid and imports of essential commodities 
had made their country vulnerable. 
— 31 ——

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

In October 1978 the Islamic Federal 
Republic of the Comoros was consti- 


### 82433: Rediscovering 'the islands of the moon'

tuted, including all the islands except 
Mayotte, which remained a French 
dependency. A decree was issued the 
following year creating a National Centre 
of Documentation and Research on the 
Comorians (CNDRS), whose facilities 
include a library and a national museum 
and archive as well as a research centre 
on oral traditions. 
The multidisciplinary work of the 
CNDRS is concentrated on research on 
the history and communities of the 
archipelago. The Centre and its special- 
ized associations have succeeded in 
motivating people to study traditions 
which were erased during the colonial 
period. These deeply rooted traditions 
can be used fruitfully when they are 
adapted to modern circumstances. 
The guiding principle is that a link 
should be created between the CNDRS 
and village communities, where groups of 
young people—who are the best catalysts 
in that they are aware of tradition yet 
sensitive to modern technology—would 
bring about an attitude change, not with 
the idea of blind acceptance of the trans- 
fer of technology but rather of cultural 
transformation based on a “revival” of 
the past. 
None of the pilot schemes of the 
CNDRS, such as the establishment of 
associations to safeguard historic or 
archaeological sites, the restoration of 
ancestral dwellings, the setting up of read- 
ing rooms and small ethnographic collec- 
tions, the reconstitution of forgotten 
dances or traditional musical instruments, 
are secondary to urgent social needs, 
although they may seem to be so. They 
are all intended to enrich the present by 
looking to the cultural heritage of the 
past. 
In its early days the CNDRS received 
aid from many quarters, including 
Unesco and the Agency for Cultural and 
Technical Co-operation; and a number of 
European and African countries have 
contributed either to the purchase of 
video equipment or to the training of 
technicians. The Centre is now seeking 
32 __ 
 
In a school at Ikoni, near Moroni, the capital of the Comoros, children recite to the rhythm of 
tambourines in preparation for the Maulid, the Islamic festival that marks the birthday of the 
Prophet. 
to improve its facilities to train Comori- 
an experts to an international level, par- 
ticularly in the natural and environmental 
sciences. Moreover it is essential that a 
CNDRS unit should be set up on each 
island in order to disseminate information 
and identify new needs. 
Two progressive educational institu- 
tions, the National Institute of Education 
(INE) and the National School of Higher 
Education (ENES), are working with the 
Centre. The INE aims to establish the 
historical and linguistic content of school- 
books and promote appropriate teaching 
methods, while the ENES wishes to 
encourage students to produce original 
work on oral traditions, epidemics, botany 
or village communities. 
Thus a cultural identity, a real inspir- 
ation to the future of the Comoros, is 
consciously and progressively taking 
shape. m 
 
ANDRE LIBIOULLE, a Paris-based Belgian 
journalist and producer of radio programmes on 
cultural topics, has worked in the Comoros on 
behalf of the Agency for Cultural and Technical 
Co-operation. He has recently contributed articles 
to a Larousse chronicle of the 20th century.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 82434: Educational planners go back to school

EDUCATIONAL PLANNERS 
GO BACK TO SCHOOL 
N a modern building not far from 
Unesco’s Headquarters in Paris, 
forty-four men and women from all 
regions of the world are following a 
rigorous nine-month training programme 
covering the design, implementation and 
evaluation of strategies and plans for the 
development of education. 
All the participants are specialists who 
hold key positions in educational plan- 
ning or training in their respective coun- 
tries. One has been responsible for the 
evaluation of Rwanda’s educational re- 
form programme; another is deputy 
director of -educational planning in 
Oman; a third is a section chief at the 
State Education Commission in China; a 
fourth is responsible for the development 
of basic education in Brazil. 
They have been selected from a large 
number of applicants to participate in 
the twenty-fourth annual training 
programme organized by Unesco’s Inter- 
national Institute for Educational 
Planning (ITEP). The Institute, which 
celebrated its twenty-fifth anniversary in 
1988, has so far trained some 850 
specialists from 129 countries. It Is 
acknowledged as the world’s leading 
training institution in its field. 
The annual training programme 
acquaints participants with the most 
recent ideas and practices concerning the 
relationships between the educational 
system and economic, technological, 
social and cultural development. It is also 
designed to improve their knowledge of 
methods of administering educational 
systems as well as diagnosing and forecast- 
ing techniques. 
In practice this means that a statisti- 
cian from Ghana, grappling with a 
problem of cost analysis and budgetary 
processes. in his country’s technical 
education sector, can compare his 
experiences with those of colleagues from 
Brazil, Finland and Indonesia. An 
economist from India, who is particu- 
larly concerned with the relationships 
between education, employment and the 
labour market, is able to discuss her 
problems and learn from some of the 
solutions already worked out by her 
counterparts in Canada, the People’s 
Democratic Republic of Korea or 
Senegal. 
The first phase of the 1988-1989 
programme took place last September in 
the home countries of the participants, 
who began to study specially-produced 
teaching materials designed by the 
Institute. to update their knowledge of 
basic educational planning concepts and 
techniques. 
The training methods at the Institute 
are based on team work and the active 
involvement of each participant in exer- 
cises which, as far as possible, reflect 
actual working conditions. Simulation ex- 
ercises, seminars, and work in small 
groups are combined with lectures, dis- 
cussions, study visits, computer work and 
the presentation of experiences in differ- 
ent countries. 
During the final stage of the 
programme, scheduled for April and 
May, each participant will have the 
opportunity to make an in-depth analy- 
sis of an educational problem concerning 
his or her country. 
The annual training programme is 
only one component of the IIEP’s train- 
ing activities, however. Each year the 
Institute organizes several intensive train- 
Participation by nationality in IIEP training programmes and countries in which research and studies have been undertaken. 
Na 
 
  
2
 
g/ 
 
A. Participants in Annual Training Programme m Visiting Fellows ® Research Studies 
 

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 82434: Educational planners go back to school

ing courses on particular aspects of educa- 
tional planning and administration, such 
as the evaluation of educational systems, 
the utilization of microcomputers in 
educational planning or the financing of 
vocational and technical education. These 
courses, lasting a maximum of four or 
five weeks, are held not at the Institute’s 
Paris Headquarters but in different coun- 
tries. Each one caters for some thirty 
planners from the country in which it is 
held and often also a few participants 
from neighbouring countries. So far, 
fifty-one of these intensive courses have 
been held, in countries ranging from 
Jamaica to Thailand and from Burundi to 
China, providing specialized training to 
some 1,800 participants. 
IIEP offers a whole spectrum of other 
training opportunities, including an 
individually-tailored visiting fellows 
programme and a series of workshops 
and seminars. Yet training is only one 
side of the Institute’s activities: an equal 
share of its resources goes towards 
research. 
In carrying out its research 
programme, IIEP’s basic aim is to in- 
crease understanding of the social, eco- 
nomic and political aspects of education 
in order to facilitate planning for educa- 
tional development and reform. In the 
twenty-five years since its foundation, the 
Institute has carried out research projects 
on a wide range of topics in most of 
Unesco’s Member States. Some of these 
projects have been focused on the orien- 
tation and the organization of educational 
planning processes in individual coun- 
tries; some have been concerned with de- 
veloping the methodologies used in 
educational planning; and others have 
examined the implications for planning 
of specific policy issues. 
The Institute is currently drawing 
together the results of over twenty case 
studies undertaken during the past five 
years on subjects as diverse as education- 
al training policy for the computer indus- 
try in Mexico, the effects of literacy 
programmes in Kenya and the Republic 
of Tanzania, and the role and utilization 
of the information base in Tunisia. 
All these studies are reviewed and 
evaluated by the IIEP in preparation for 
the Institute’s third main activity—the 
dissemination of new concepts, methods 
and techniques in educational planning 
to individuals and institutions in all 
Member States. 
34 __ 
A constant effort is made to take 
account of the needs of different 
categories of clientele. IIEP’s traditional 
public, which includes decision-makers, 
planners and administrators, researchers, 
trainers and teachers, is continually 
changing and expanding to include 
development economists, sociologists, 
political scientists and other specialists in 
the many branches of the social sciences. 
The broad objective of the dissemina- 
tion programme is to ensure that this 
clientele is informed of the evolution of 
ideas, concepts, practices and techniques 
of planning and administration; that prac- 
titioners are kept up to date on impor- 
tant research concerned with their 
specialities; and that the results of signifi- 
cant national experiences in the field are 
brought to their attention. Special care 1s 
taken to satisfy the needs of the Institute’s 
clientele in developing countries, who are 
very often starved of relevant publica- 
tions and information. I 
 
Photo credits 
Front cover: Banri Namikawa/Unesco. Back 
cover, page 12: Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris. 
Page 2: Luc Joubert © Archéologie Vivante, 
Paris. Page 4: © D. Gander-Gosse & ]. Ber, 
Paris. Page 5: ©) Ali Tiuab, Karachi. Pages 6-7: 
Source: Sur les routes de la soie: Le grand voyage 
des ceuvres dart, by Cécile Beurdeley, Editions du 
Seuil, Paris/Office du Livre, Fribourg. Page 6 
(above left & right): © British Museum, 
London; (below left): © Ostasiatiska Museert, 
Stockholm. Page 7 (above left): © Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, Fletcher Fund, New York; 
(above right): © Dominique Darbois, Kabul 
Museum; (below right): © Ecole Franqaise 
d’Extréme-Orient, Paris. Pages 8, 9: © Monique 
Pietri, Paris. Page 10: (© Freer Art Gallery, 
Washington, D.C. Page 11: © Romanian 
Literary Archives. Page 13: (© Mali, Paris. 
Pages 14, 18 (below): © Bibliothéque Nationale, 
Paris. Page 15: © Edimédia, Paris/British 
Library, London. Page 16: (© Forschungs 
-bibliothek, Schloss Friedenstein, German 
Dem. Rep. Page 17: © Réunion des Musées 
Nationaux, Paris/Musée des Beaux-Arts de 
Rouen. Pages 18 (above), 21, 22: (© Bulloz, 
Musée Carnavalet, Paris. Page 19: © Bulloz, 
Bibliotheque des Arts Décoratifs, Paris. Page 20: 
© Bulloz, Maison de Victor Hugo, Paris. 
Page 23: (© Vasil Pilipiuk. Pages 24-25, 26 
(above), 28: Ted Spiegel © Rapho, Paris. Page 26 
(below): I.L. Atlan © Sygma, Paris. Page 27: 
Chip Hires © Gamma, Paris. Page 29: © Munoz 
de Pablos, Paris. Page 30: Christinn Weiss 
© REA, Paris. Pages 31, 32: © Libioulle, Paris. 
Page 33: Map: © IIEP, Paris. 
BOOKSHELF 
The Last Romantic: Mihail Eminescu, trans. by 
R. MacGregor-Hastie. Unesco Collection of Repre- 
sentative Works.University of Iowa Press, Iowa 
City, 1972. 
Pather Panchali: Song of the Road, by Bibhuti 
Bhushan Banerji, trans. by T.W. Clark & Tarapada 
Mukherji. Unesco Collection of Representative 
Works. George Allen & Unwin, London, 
1968/Lokamaya Press, London, 1987. 
The Fatal Shore, by Robert Hughes. Collins Harvill, 
London, 1987. 
A Treasury of Turkish Folktales for Children, retold 
by Barbara K. Walker. Linnet Books, The Shoe 
String Press, Connecticut, 1988. 
The Muslim Contribution to Mathematics, by Ali 
Abdullah Al-Daffa’. Croom Helm, London, 1977. 
Desktop Publishing, by Tony Bove, Cheryl Rhodes 
& Wes Thomas; : 
Publishing from the Desktop, by John Seybold & Fritz 
Dressler, Bantam Books, New York, 1987. 
Why Preserve the Past? The Challenge to Qur Cultu- 
ral Heritage, edited by Yudhishthir Raj Isar. Unesco, 
Paris/Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, 
D.C., 1986. 
The Historic City of Taxila, by Ahmad Hasan Dani. 
Unesco, Paris/ The Centre for East Asian Cultural 
Studies, Tokyo, 1986. 
Migration of Talent: Causes and Consequences of Brain 
Drain, Three Studies from Asia, edited by Yogesh Atal 
& Luca Dall’Oglio. Unesco Principal Regional 
Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, 1987. 
Acid Earth? The Global Threat of Acid Pollution, by 
John McCormick, 1985; Urban Land and Shelter for 
the Poor, by Patrick McAuslan, 1987; Beyond the 
Woodfuel Crisis: People, Land and Trees in Africa, 
by Gerald Leach & Robin Mearns, 1989. Earthscan 
Publications, London. 
World Prospects: A Contemporary Study, 2nd edition, 
by John Molyneux & Marilyn MacKenzie. Prentice- 
Hall Canada, Scarborough, Ontario, 1987. 
The International Foundation Directory, 4th edition, 
edited by H.V. Hodson. Europa Publications, 
London, 1986. 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION 
AND EUROPE 
An exhibition on the events 
of 1789-1799, organized by 
the Council of Europe 
with the support of 
Mr. Frangois Mitterrand, 
President of the French Republic, 
is to be held at the 
Grand Palais, Paris, 
from 18 March to 28 June 1989. 

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the Nationai Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
ALBANIA. '‘Ndermarrja e perpjes se libnt', Tirana ARGENTINA. Librena el 
Correo de la Unesco - EDILYR, SRL, Tucuman 1685, 1050 Buenos Aires 
AUSTRALIA. Books only Educational Supplies Pty Ltd, PO Box 33, 
Brookvale 2100, NSW, Periodicals Domine Pty Subscriptions Dept, P O 
Box 33, Brookvale 2100, NSW Sub-agents United Nations Association of 
Australia Victonan Division, 328 Flinders Street, Melbourne 3000 Hunter 
Publications, 58a Gipps St, Collingwood, Victona 3066 AUSTRIA Gerold 
and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. BAHRAIN United Schools Interna- 
nonal, Arab Regional Office, P O Box 726. Bahrain, The Arabian Agencies 
and Distnbuting Co , Al Mutanabi St. PO Box 156, Manama BANGLADESH 
Kanm injernational, GPO Box No, 2141 64/} Manipun Para, Tejgaon, 
Farmgate, Dhaka BARBADOS. Unversity of the West Indies Bookshop, 
Cave Hill Campus, P O Box 64, Bridgetown BELGIUM Jean de Lannoy, 202 
Ave duRor 1060 Brussels BOTSWANA Botswana Book Centre, PO Box 91 
Gaborone BRAZIL. Fundagao Getulo Vargas, Servigo del Publicagoes 
caixa postal 9 042-ZC-05 Praia de Botatogo 188, Rio de Janeiro (RJ) 2000, 
Books only Imagem Latinoamencana, Av Paulista 750, | andar, caixa postal 
30455, Sao Paulo CEP 01051 BULGARIA Hemus, Kantora Literatura, 
boulevard Rousky 6, Sofia BURMA. Trade Corporation no (9), 550-552 
Merchant Street, Rangoon CANADA Renouf Publishing Co Ltd, 1294 
Algoma Road, Ottawa, Ontano K1B 3W8 (Stores 61 Sparks Street, Ottawa. 
211 Yonge St, Toronto Sales office 7575 Trans Canada Hwy Ste 305, St 
Laurent, Quebec H4T 1v6 CAMEROON. Cameroon Book Cenire, PC Box 
123, Limbe, Commission Nationale, BP 1600, Yaounde CHILE. Editonal 
Universitaria S A, Departamento de Importaciones M Luisa Santander 
0447, casilla 10220, Santiago, Editorial "Andres Bello, Av, R Lyon 946, 
Casillo 4256, Santiago de Chile, Dipublic, Antonio Varas 671, 2° piso, casila 
14364, Correo 21, Santiago CHINA. China National Publications Import and 
Export Corporation, P O Box 88, Being COLOMBIA, Instituto Colombiano 
de Cultura (Colcultura), Carrera 3A, n° 18 / 24, Bogota, Books only Librena 
Buchholz Galeria, Calle 59, No, 13-13, Bogota CYPRUS. 'MAM', Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avene, PO Box 1722, Nicosia CZECHOSLDVAKIA.SNTL, 
Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1, For Slovakia only Alfa Verlag -Publishers, 
Hurbanovo nam 6 893 31 Bratislava, PNS-UED, Jindnsska 14, praha 1, 
Slovart, Gottwaldovo Nam 6, 805 32 Bratslawa DEM. REP. OF YEMEN 14th 
October Corporation, PO Box 4227, Aden DENMARK, Munksgaard Export- 
OG Tidssknttservice, 35 Norre Sogade, DK-1970 Kobenhavn K 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Libreria Blasco, Avemda Bolivar, No, 402, esq 
Hermanos Dehgne, Sante Domingo EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). Un- 
esco Publicattons Centre, No 1 Talaat Harb St. Caro ETHIOPIA, Ethiopian 
Natonal Agency for Unesco, PO Box 2996. Addis Ababa FINLAND, 
Akateeminen Kinakauppa, PO Box 128, SF-00100 Helsinki Suomalainen 
Kinakauppa Oy, Kowuvaarankuja 2 01640 Vantaa 64 FRANCE. Libraine de 
t Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Pans Periodicals only Unesco CPD / 
V-1, rue Miolis 75015 Pans GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchex- 
port, Postfach 140, Leninstrasse 16, 7010, Lepng FED. REP. OF GER- 
MANY For the Unesco Courier Mr H Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kuner 
Veririeb, Basaltstrasse 57, D5300 Bonn 3, UNQ-Verag, Simrockstrasse 23, 
D-5300 Bonn 1, S Karger GmbH Verlag Angerhofstrasse 9 Postfach 2 
D-8034 Germenng / Munchen For scientific maps only Geo Center, Postfach 
800830, 7000 Stuttgart 80 GHANA. Books only Presbytenan Bookshop 
Depot Ltd , PO Box 195, Accra, Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd , PO 7869 Accra, 
The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape 
Coast, The University Bookshop of Legon, PO Box 1, Legon Penodicals only 
Fides Entreprises, PO Box 14129, Accra GREAT BRITAIN. See United 
Kingdom GREECE. Eleftheroudakis SA, International Bookstore, 4 Nikis 
Street, Athens, John Mihalopoulos & Son SA, International Booksellers P O 
Box 10073, 541 10 Thessaloniki Greek National Commission for unesco. 3 
Akadimias Streel, Athens HONG KONG. Swindon Book Co, 13-15 Lock 
Road, Kowloon, Federal Publications (HK) Ltd , Tokwawan, Kowloon, Hong 
Kong Government Information Services, Publication Sectien, Hong Kong, 
Periodicals only Beaconsfield House 6th floor Queen s Road Central, Victor- 
12 HUNGARY Kultura-Bushimport-ABT, PO B 149-H-1382 Budapest 62 
ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson and Co, HF Haf tr 9, Reykjavik 
INDIA. Onent Longman Ltd , Karnaru Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038 
17 Chitaranjan Ave , Calcutta 13, 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road Madras 2 
5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh, Hyderabad 500001 (AP), 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd, 
Bangalore 560001, 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001 Sub-agents 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co , 17 Park St, Calcutta 70016, Scindia House, 
New Delhi 11 0001 INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers. 29, 
J1, Oto iskandardinata 111, Jakarta Indira P T, JI Dr Sam Ratulangie 37. 
Jakarta Pusat IRAN. Iranian National Commission for Unesco, 1188 Englab 
Ave, Rostam Give Building, PO Box 11365-4498 Teheran 13158 
IRELAND. Penodicals only The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd , PO Box 
43A, Walkinstown, Dublin 12, Books only TOC Publishers, 11 North Frederick 
Street, Dublin 7 ISRAEL. Literary Transactions, Inc , c/o Steimatzky Lid, 
PO Box 628, Tel Aviv, A B C Bookstore Ltd , P O Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd , 
Tel Aviv 61000 ITALY. Licosa (Libreria Commissionana Sansom, Sp A ), Via 
Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence, via Bartolim 29, 20155 
Milan, FAO Bookshop, via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome JAMAICA. 
University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kingston 7 JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc, 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku. Tokyo 113 JORDAN 
Jordan Distribution Agency, PO Box 375, Amman Periodicals only Jordan 
Book Centre Co Ltd , PO Box 301, Al Jubetha, Amman KENYA East African 
Publishing House, PO 30571, Nairobi, Afnca Book Services Lid, Quran 
House, Mangano Street, PO Box 45245, Narrobi KOREA. Korean National 
Commussion for Unesco, P O Box Central 64, Seoul KUWAIT, The Kuwait 
Bookshop Co, Ltd POB 2942. Kuwait, Periodicals only Faralalla Press 
Agency, P O Box SAFA 4541 Kuwait LEBANON Librairie Antoine A Naufal 
et Freres, BP 656, Beirut LESOTHO Mazenod Book Centre, PO Mazenod, 
Maseru LIBERIA National Bookstore, Mechiin and Carey Streets PO Box 
590, Monrovia, Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd , PO Box 286, Monrovia = 
LUXEMBOURG Books only Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rue, Luxem- 
bourg, Penodical Messageries Paul Kraus, BP 1022, Luxembourg MALAWI 
Malawi: Book Service, Head Office, PO Box 30044, Chichin, Blantyre 3 
MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop Kuala Lumpur 
22-11 MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic St, Valletta MAURITANIA GRA LI - 
COMA, 1 rue du Souk X, Avenue kennedy Nouakchott MAURITIUS 
Nalanda Company Lid , 30 Bourbon St, Port-Louis MEXICO. Librena Ei 
Correo de la Unesco, Actipan 66, Colonia del Valle, Apartado postal 61 164, 
06600 Mexico DF MONACO. British Library, 30 Bd des Moulins, Monte 
Carlo MORROCCO. Librairie "Aux belles images’, 282 ave Mohammed-V, 
Rabat, Librairie des écoles, 12 ave, Hassan-Il, Casaglanca, Societé chertfien- 
ne de distribution et de presse, SOCHEPRESS, angle rues de Dinant et St 
Saens, BP 13683, Casablanca 05 MOZAMBIQUE. Instituto National do Livro 
edo Disco (INLD), averida 24 de Julho, 1921 r/ d 1° andar, Maputo NEPAL. 
Saha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu NETHERLANDS Books only 
Keesing, Boeken B V , Hogehilweg 13, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam 
Periodicals Faxon Eurcpe, PO Box 197, 1000 AD Amsterdam 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. van Dorp-Edding N V, PO Box 200, Willem- 
stad, Curagac, NA NEW ZEALAND Government Publishing, PO Box 
14277-Kilbirnie, Wellington NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ife, The 
University Bookshop of Ibadan, P O 286, The University Bookshop of Nsukka, 
The University Bookshop of Lagos, The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of 
Zana NORWAY. Johan Grundt Tanum, PO B 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1, 
Universitets Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Biindern, Oslo 
3 Penodicals only Narvesen A/S, Litteraturt Jenesten, P O B 6125 Etterstad, 
N 0602 Oslo 6 PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-i-azam, 
P O Box No 729, Lahore 3, Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for 
Book Development in Asia and the Pacific, 3¢ Delhi Housing Society, P QO Box 
8950, Karachi 29 PANAMA. Distribuidora Cultura Internacional, Apartado 
7571, Zona 5. Panama PHILIPPINES National Book Store Inc, 701 Rizal 
Avenue, Mamla POLAND Orpan-import, Palac Kultury | Nauki, Warsaw, Ars 
Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No 7 00-068 Warsaw PORTUGAL. 
Dias & Andrade Lida Livrana Portugal, rua do Carmo 70 Lisbon ROMANIA. 
ARTEXIM Export-Import, Piata Scienten, no 1, PO Box 33-16, 70005 
Bucharest SAUDI ARABIA. Dar al Watan, Olaya Main Street, Ibrahim Bin 
Sulaym Building, Riyadh SEYCHELLES. New Service Ltd Kingsgate 
House PO Box 131, Mahe, National Bookshop, PO Box 48, Mahé SIERRA 
LEONE. Fourah Bay College, Njala University and Sierra leone Diocesan 
Bookshops, Freetown SINGAPORE. Righteous Enterprises, PO Box 562, 
Kallang Basin Post Office, Singapore 9133 SOCIALIST PEOPLE'S LIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA General Establishment for Publishing, Distnbution and 
Advertising, Soul Al Mahmoud, St. PO Box 959, Tripoli SOMALIA, Modern 
Book Shop and General, PO Box uad, Mogadiscio SPAIN. Mundi-Prensa 
Libros SA, apartado 1223, Castells 37, Madrid 1; Ediciones Liber, apartado 
17, Magdalena 8 Ondarroa (Vizcaya), Donare, Ronda de Outeiro, 20, 
apartado de correos 341, La Coruna, books only Librena Castells, Ronda 
Universidad 13 y 15, Barcelona 7, Librena de la Generalitat de Catalunya, 
Palan Moja, Rambla de los Estudios 118, 08 002 Barcelona SRI LANKA, 
Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sw Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, P O B 244, 
Colombo 2 SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, PO Box 1118, Khartoum 
SURINAME. Suriname National Commission for Unesco. PO Box 2943, 
Paramanbo SWEDEN. A/B CE. Fritizes Kung! Hovbokhandel, Regering- 
sgatan 12, Box 16356, S-103 27 Stockholm 16, For the Unesco Couner 
Svenska FN Forbundet. Skolgrand 2, Bex 150 50 S-104, 65 Stockholm, For 
p is only Wennergren-wi AB. Nordenflychtsvagen 70. 5-104, 25 
Stockholm, Esselte Tidsknftscentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62 -101, 20 
Stockholm SWITZERLAND Europa Verlag, 5 Ramisirasse, Zurich, Libraines 
Payol in Gensva Lausanne, Basle, Beme, Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and 
Zunch SYRIA. Aleppo Unversity Books Estabhishment University of Aleppo, 
Aleppo TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P OB 9030, Dar-es- 
Salaam THAILAND, Nibondh and Co Ltd, 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, 
Siyaeg Phaya Sn, PO Box 402, Bangkok, Suksapan Pant, Mansion 9 
Rajdamnern Ave , Bangkok, Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, 
Bangkok, ROEAP, PO Box 1425, Bangkok 10500 TRINIDAD AND TOBA- 
GO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St, St Cla, Port-of- 
Spain TURKEY. Haset Kitapevi A S , Istiklal Caddes!. No 469, Posta Kutusu 
219, Beyoglu, Istanbul UGANDA Uganda Bookshop, PO Box 7145 Kampa- 
la UNITED ARAB EMIRATES. Maktabat al Maktaba, PO Box 15408 Al Ain, 
Abu Dhatr UNITED KINGDOM. H M Stationery Office, PO Box 276, London, 
Swe 5DT, HM S O Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast, Manchester, 
Birmingham, Bristol, Third World Publi 151 Stratford Road, Brrming- 
ham B11 1RD. for scientific maps only McCarta Ltd , 122 King's Cross Rd 
London WC1X 9DS UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Bernan-UNIPUB, 
Periodicals Department, 4611-F Assembly Drive Lanham, MD 20706 4391 
URUGUAY. Ediciones Trecho, S A, Maldonado 1092, Montewideo USSR. 
V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga Ul Dirmtrova 39, Moskva 113095 
YUGOSLAVIA. Mladost, Ica 30/11, Zagreb, Cankarnjeva Zalozba, Zopitar- 
jeva 2, Lubliana, Noli, Terazye 13/ Vii, 11000 Belgrade, penodicals only 
Jugosolvena Kmga, PO Box 36, YU 1100! Belgrade ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co of Zambia Ltd, PO Box 2664, Lusaka 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd . 1 Norwich Union Centre, Harare 
The Courier II 
A window open on the world 
Published monthly in 35 languages by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization 
A selection in braille is published quarterly 
in English, French, Spanish and Korean 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700, Paris. 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, 
Aracelli Ortiz de Urbina 
Arabic edition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoud: 
Braille edition: 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
Liaisons with non-Headquarters editions: 
Solange Belin 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Non-Headquarters editions: 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Sri Ram (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Torkish: Mefra Ilgazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Abdul Manaf Saad (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjarta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Manni Késsler (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larrafaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi 
Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 90 French francs. 
Binder for a year’s issues: 62 FF 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from on Unesco Courter’; plus date of issue, 
and three voucher copies are sent to oe editor. 
Signed articles reprinted must bear author's name. 
Non-copyright A will be supplied on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions 
of the authors and 4 not necessarily represent the 
opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the 
Unesco Courier. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courter staff. The boundaries 
on maps published in the magazine do not imply 
oT aloe or acceptance by Unesco or the 
United Nations. The Unesco Courier is produced in 
microform (microfilm and/or microfiche by: 
(1) Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; 
(2) University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48100, US.A.; (3) N.C.R. Microcard 
Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, 
New-York, US.A.; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old 
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, US.A. 
All should be addressed 
to the -in-cnef in Paris 
Imprimé en France (Printed in France) - 
Dépor legal: C1 - Mars 1989. 
Photogravure-impression: Maury-Imprimeur S.A, 
Z.1. route d'Etampes, 45330 Malesherbes. 
ISSN 0041-5278 
N°3-1989 - OPI - 89 - 1 - 466 A

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/184070engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Alexander the Great as depicted in an Indian miniature. The Macedonian general's invasion of India in the 
4th century BC influenced Indian culture by initiating contacts with the Graeco-Roman world (see article p. 4).