# [102540](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

We invite readers to send us 
photographs to be considered 
for publication in this feature. 
Your photo should show a 
painting, a sculpture, piece of 
architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be an 
example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. 
Alternatively, you could send 
us pictures of two works from 
different cultural backgrounds 
in which you see some striking 
connection or resemblance. 
Please add a short caption to 
all photographs. 
"The mists of time 
Etching (39.5 x 49 cms) by Roland Maison 
Belgian artist Roland Maison's etching of a forest of figures riven 
by a vertical crevasse evokes the abyss of time. This haunting 
work has affinities with Maya art, especially with the masks of 
the sky-serpent in the palace at Kabah (Yucatan) and with certain 
Toltec sculptures with big, dreamy eyes. 
© Roland Maison, Belgium 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

CONTENTS 
JANUARY 1996 
4 
INTERVIEW WITH 
Maurice Béjart 
9 
MONTH BY MONTH 
by 
Bahgat Elnadi and 
Adel Rifaat 
i 
40 
COMMENTARY by 
Federico Mayor 
-~ 
42 
HERITAGE 
The tem ii 
Apollo the Helper 
by Takis Theodoropoulos 
GREENWATCH 
by France Bequette 
48 
The master puppeteer 
Isabelle Leymarie talks to 
Huang Hai-Tai 
90 
ASITWAS.. 
The UNEsco Courier 
DECEMBER 1955 
¢ 
ANCE 
the sacre 
10 AN IMPULSE FROM WITHIN 
by Dominique Dupuy 
1.3 THE LANGUAGE OF BODY AND soul " 
~ by Werner Lambersy a Sm TL. 
Cover: 
16 orama's HIDDEN DEPTHS 
: i choreographer Jorge Donn's 
by Martine L ca | 5 LE ia 
A spectacular nn 
RY Eugenio Barba the Argentine dancer- 
20 nunsky's REQUIEM a 
22 POST-MODERN DANCE: THE LATEST FIGURES 
ECE 
3 Tdi and renewal 
27 JAPAN REINVENTING THE BODY yA Am sh. . 
30 THE ARAB WORLD STEPS TO EMANCIPATION by Wendy Bonaventura 
34 GREECE A LIVING MUSEUM by Alkis Rafts 
Consultant: Romain Maitra 
THE UNESCO ( OURIER 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille 
“The Governments of the States parties to this Constitution on behaif of their peoples declare, 
“that since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed . . . 
“that a peace based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would not be a peace which could secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples 
of the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
“For these reasons, the States parties. . . are agreed and determined to develop and to increase the means of communication between their peoples and to employ these means for the purposes 
of mutual understanding and a truer and more perfect knowledge of each other's lives. . .." 
EXTRACT FROM THE PREAMBLE TO THE CONSTITUTION OF UNESCO. LONOON, 16 NOVEMBER 1945 
EE I 
M ot 
& , . . 
PLC - .

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 102499: Maurice Béjart: a journey of initiation

Maurice Beéjart 
HB When you started out in the 1950s, 
ballet was still very much in the 
classical mould. You gave it shock 
treatment, as Nijinsky had done. He 
shocked in order to rejuvenate dance. 
Maurice Béjart: My aim has never been 
to shoek, but rather to help awaken 
people’s sensibilities. My revolution has 
not been an aesthetie revolution, like 
Nijinsky’s, but a social one. Nijinsky 
introduced a eompletely new aesthetic 
in music, decor and acting. But he 
would give only four or five perlor- 
mances of cach ballet—in opera houses 
and before an audience of connoisseurs. 
What I wanted to do was to change 
the venue and the public. hired 5,000- 
seat sports stadiums for a month and 
offered seats at prices people could 
afford. I got danee accepted at the Avi- 
gnon Festival, in open-air amphitheatres 
and popular venues. In my view dance 
can no longer be elitist. It’s a universal 
language, a universal means of bringing 
people together. In popular dances all 
over the world, the first thing people do 
is join hands. Danee is a means of soeial, 
political and religious communication. 
And members of the public are caught 
up in that magic, in that moment of 
empathy. Their hearts miss a beat, their 
minds broaden and their bodies yearn to 
unfold. 1 agree—dance should break 
the mould and move to the rhythm of 
passions and impulses, death and 
rebirth. The aim should be to put 
across not a coded, highly symbolic mes- 
sage, but an inner élan, 
BH Hence one of your innovations: 
immobility and meditation within the 
framework of dance itself. 
M. B.: This is an arca where I have been 
greatly influenced by certain Oriental 
disciplines. My father spoke and wrote 
Chinesc. I myself studied Zen under the 
4 
master Deshimaru. Zen tcaehes us a 
bodily attitude to time and space whieh 
is very different from the Western onc. 
It is based on the principle that empti- 
ness is something beneficial. The idea of 
emptying the egg of the world of all its 
dross and filling it with the transparency 
of light and air is something that eon- 
ecrns the choreographer and the 
dancer. Through danee I try to make an 
offering of serenity and unity to Western 
man, who is so atomized, {ragmented 
and compartmentalized. 
HW You have also been influenced by 
the martial arts, haven't you? 
M. B.: Yes. The martial arts suggest one 
way of reintegrating our bodies into the 
cosmos. They are not about combat or 
eompetition, but rather an internal dis- 
cipline that enables us to regulate the 
energy within us. Human beings are suby- 
ject to a process of ebb and {low, yin and 
yang, and continuous change of one into 
the other, and the other into one. They 
are therefore closely bound up with the 
unity and multiplicity of the world, 
which abounds with possibilities and is 
at once unchanging and in a state of per- 
petual flux. They are subject to 
rhythms which mark their daily lives— 
and which dance tries to pnt across: 
activity and rest, absorption and elimi- 
nation, budding, flowering and death. 
They are an integral part of that uni- 
versal order. Danee should above all cel- 
chrate that fact. 
A drop of rain falling on the tree out 
there in the garden will change a leaf, 
Interview 
which will change a fragment of an 
oxygen molecule, which in turn will 
change the way we breathe. Everything 
is closely interconnected. We are 
nothing but flux, as we go from onc 
moment to the next. That is why itis so 
important to be present, undividedly 
and concentratedly, in each of those 
moments, in each of our actions. The 
smallest leaf or tiniest drop of water can 
contribute to the equilibrium of the 
world. Danee must beeome part of that 
general momentum. 
HM Is there a dividing line in your work 
between the sacred and the profane? 
M. B.: There is no such thing as the pro- 
fane. Everything is sacred, from eating 
and sleeping to making love and dancing. 
If God were not constantly present in 
each of our lives, there would be no 
point in giving him a name. God isn’t a 
bearded old man who rules the world 
from afar. He is among us, within each 
of us. That’s why fanaticism, intoler- 
anee and social exclusion are all insults 
to the divine. The divine is unity. To my 
mind, Islam answers that yearning for 
unieity, union and simplicity. Islam is a 
religion which is thoroughly integrated 
with the e¢osmos, a religion where every 
daily act is marked by a belief in indivi- 
sion, where the practice of the sacred 
is daily and constant. But all religions 
are linked to the divine. They are all of 
equal worth when we practise them 
with faith and purity, and when we 
strive to discover our divine essence 
through them. 
| try to make an offering 
of serenity and unity.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 102499: Maurice Béjart: a journey of initiation

The French-born dancer and 
choreographer Maurice Béjart 
is one of the great creative 
figures of modern dance. The 
hallmark of his ballets, from 
Symphonie pour un homme 
seul (1955) to Nijinsky, Clown 
of God (1990), has been a 
rejection of aestheticism in 
favour of dance as a universal 
language and total theatre. 
Here he talks about some of 
the themes that frequently 
crop up in his work, 
Bl Does the theme of the androgyne, 
which recurs again and again in your 
ballets, refer to that notion of unity, 
the unity of an absolute human being 
before division? 
M. B.: Precisely. Obviously it’s absurd 
and unnatural to try and argue in favour 
of some supposed superiority of man 
over woman, or vice versa. The world is 
inseparably male and female. Itis sheer 
madness to want one hall to commit 
genocide on the other. Man can do 
nothing without woman, and woman 
nothing without man. ln the beginning 
of time, their union existed within a 
single body. This theme has always 
obsessed poets, writers and painters. 
Honoré de Balzac’s masterpiece 
Séraphita treats that myth, in which 
opposites identify with and espouse one 
another. This is the vital prineiple of 
complementarity between yin and yang, 
and the constant resonance hetween the 
female and male poles that are in all of 
us. Separation of the two is a wound— 
which we try to heal through artistic 
expression. The essential thing is whole- 
ness, union and identity, not division. 
Bl Why are you so attracted to the Far 
East, and especially to Japan? 
M. B.:I’in drawn to the whole of Asia. 
It’s a continent that contains the origins 
of our past and of all the great religions: 
Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Bud- 
dhism, 1linduism, Shintoism. Asia con- 
sists of three and a hall billion men and 
women, who form a mosaic of peoples, 
languages and skills. But it is also the 
centre of tomorrow’s technological 
developments. Asia will be the third 
millennium’s centre of gravity. 
Then there is my personal experi- 
ence of the Far East. 1 was taught by a 
great Japanese master of Zen, and many 
of my dancers are Japanese. But | have 
also been deeply influenced by India 
and Iran. I'm of mixed blood. My 
maternal grandmother was Kurdish, my 
maternal grandfather Catalan, and my 
. 
paternal grandmother Breton. T have 
roots all over the world. I'm a nomad 
and feel at home wherever 1am. 1 don’t 
live anywhere. Wherever 1 go, 1 just 
pitch my tent, then set off somewhere 
else. But aren’t we all made up of a 
patchwork of cultures? 
HB Your father once said: ‘Space is 
more real than time’. That seems 
to be a theme that runs through your 
work. 
M. B.: We live in space, we project ony- 
selves into it, we inhabit it. Time, on the 
contrary, is something which inhabits 
us; and it slowly destroys ns. It grows 
up and grows old with us. Time is the 
heart, with its relentless tick-tock heat. 
Space, on the other hand, exists only 
5 
© 
C.
 
Ma
ss
on
/M
. 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

interview 


### 102499: Maurice Béjart: a journey of initiation

Maurice 
Béjart 
through objects. And we are an object 
like any other in that space—like that 
car over there in the car park, or that 
tree in front of me. Dance enables us to 
sculpt the space surrounding us, to 
structure it. As long as we live in the 
present tense. The present is linear, 
serene and pure. The present is time 
that has become eternity. 
MH You create your ballets intuitively. 
The body creates the substance of your 
figures, and the scenery is often 
reduced to a few lines in space. 
M. B.: Yes, first comes a corporeal intu- 
ition, which forms a canvas. But after 
that I need to work on the idea for a 
very long time. For some ballets, I gath- 
ered material for two years and read 
hundreds of books. Ultimately, intuition 
and knowledge go hand in hand. The 
dancers themselves also suggest figures 
to me as they project their bodies into 
space or inform them with certain 
rhythms. The architecture of dance is 
transparent, helping it to achieve grace 
and escape its material trappings. 
Modern dance means the end of an arti- 
ficial aestheticism tacked on from the 
outside. It still makes technical 
demands, but aims to be increasingly 
expressionistic and energetic. The torso 
is as bare as an unfurled sail; the gaze is 
more intense; the arms, which are also 
bare, suggest the flight of the body 
more effectively. Classical dance con- 
cealed the dancers’ bodies beneath 
tulle and embroidery. Today the flesh 
reveals itself; it glorifies impulses and 
passions that would have caused a 
- 
a 
. 6   
© 
C.
 
Ma
ss
on
/M
. 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s 
scandal in the past. If Nijinsky shocked 
the bourgeoisie, it was heeause the por- 
trayal of ecstasy had hitherto been 
regarded as obscene. With him it 
became maieutic, a catharsis to be 
shared with the public. Danee is now a 
ceremony of sharing, of participation. 
BH So how does Saturday night 
dancing in nightclubs fit in? 
M. B.: Nightclubs are ersatz. They are 
an artificial substitute, like the ersatz 
coffee we drank during the war instead 
of real coffee, the ersatz bread we ate 
instead of real bread. Iluman beings 
nced dance. But since it no longer exists 
in its truly ritual context, since there 
are no longer popular get-togethers in 
village squares or in churches, where 
people used to join hands so that they 
could open their hearts, since we have 
deprived ourselves of these simple, pow- 
erful joys, we make do with Saturday 
night revels. Iluman beings lose a cer- 
tain dimension of their presence in the 
world if they are deprived of dance. Sat- 
urday night substitutes are obviously 
“anti-dances”, yet in a very diluted way 
they do remain a form of dance—a way 
of releasing natural forees and sensing 
one’s body, which during the previous 
week has been little more than an 
empty husk dragged from onc seat to 
another, from office to car to home. Sat- 
urday night dances are full of sweat, 
drink, desire, high jinks and hidden 
exultation. I’m not sure what they all 
add up to, but they are necessary to 
people’s psychological equilibrium. 
HB People dance at times of ceremony, 
but also at times of crisis. 
M. B.: Times of ceremony are becoming 
less frequent. There are fewer and 
fewer festivals and more and more holi- 
days. Festivals were rituals, and were 
accompanicd by dances and communion. 
Holidays are no more than an cmpty 
a mechanical, robot-   moment in life 
like period of rest during which indi- 
viduals are even more divided and even 
more separated from their bodies, from 
others, from the cosmos. 
HM In your ballets there are often 
disjointed bodies which seem to suffer 
as though they were giving birth or 
emerging from a chrysalis. 
M. B.: In some ballets, such as Pyra- 
mide, 1 prefer more rounded body 
movements, with less rhythmic disrup- 
tion. But sometimes one needs to man- 
handle harmony and aim for a daring, 
baroque visual effect, with lopsided 
movements, twisted bodies, jerky ges- 
tures and arms that seem to reach up 
for some impossible flight. Iuman 
beings will always be tempted to follow 
Icarus, because they are like Sisyphus. 
We are all temporarily blind as we move 
from one threshold of our lives to the 
next, straining towards the eternal light. 
It is that initiatory journey which I 
portray on stage. Some dance figures 
show a man unfurling himself after 
nestling on his mother’s lap. Dancers seek 
their point d’appuiin a geometry that is 
at once pure and baroque, where lines arc 
broken and movements sometimes clash 
so as to show the dislocation of the world. 
Habit is a terrible straitjacket which I’ve 
always sought to destroy. As a result of 
habit, we can no longer see, smell, hear or 
sense. I try to show births, to write “the 
gospel of universal harmony” that Niet- 
zsche talked about. Modern dance has, I 
believe, the ability to tune in directly to 
the earth and to humankind. Thus, 
ballet’s quality of poetic celebration can 
temporarily dispel the misfortune of the 
modern individual. That miracle is pos- 
sible because the individual possesses all 
the components of his or her illumination 
and metamorphosis. Dance does no more 
than reveal them. 
HE And communication is achieved. 
The public is caught up in that 
We are all temporarily blind as we move from one 
threshold of our lives to the next, straining towards the 
eternal light.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 102499: Maurice Béjart: a journey of initiation

  
empathy where those who dance and 
those who watch, the mobile and the 
immobile, become one. 
M. B.: Theatre is about watching and 
being watched. It’s about a child who 
dances or acts out a La Fontaine fable 
for its mother. It’s that kind of contact, 
and nothing else. 
BM You're fascinated by kabuki. Is it 
because it's a complete art, whose 
components include make-up, words, 
theatre and philosophy? 
M. B.: Yes, I like complete theatrical 
forms. In Greek tragedy, the chorus sang 
and danced, the actors mimed, acted 
and spoke. The kabuki actor is a great 
dancer and a profound thinker. Ile 
shows us the ineffable, the point at 
which divisive thinking is stopped in its 
tracks and replaced by unifying silence. 
I am in love with unity. I work for the 
unity of human beings, who are torn 
apart because their bodies, souls and 
minds never have time to come together. 
Art must provide them with an opportu- 
nity for that union, so they can counter 
the daily threat of disintegration. 
The Rite of Spring (1988). 
Choreography by Maurice Béjart. 
BM You say we need myths. 
M. B.: Myths are not of secondary 
importance. They are central to our 
being and therefore to our art. No civi- 
lization can do without myths. Ours has 
tried and failed. Myths are phoenixes 
which always rise from their ashes 
but 
eternal. They are a compost of eternity 
transformed and travestied, 
which tells the modern generation 
about the gods of the distant past. 
Myths are human beings who sheathe 
themselves in a superior skin, beeome 
invulnerable, travel down the centuries 
and transport themselves from one 
point to another in time and space, but 
remain, with all their strengths and 
weaknesses, utterly human. The divine 
and the demoniac rub shoulders within 
human beings. That is their permanent 
duel. But they need that duel to 
emerge from nothingness, just as they 
need myths, icons and glimpses of a 
superior world to give their existence a 
name. Myths form the foundation on 
which people can shape themselves and 
find their creative energies. Dance 
sculpts those myths—on stage, live, and 
in front of audiences who will make 
that metamorphosis an integral part of 
their daily lives and a way out towards 
higher things. HN 
| work for the unity of human beings, 
who are torn apart because their bodies, souls 
and minds never have time to come together. 
© 
C.
 
Ma
ss
on
/M
. 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO 
COURIER 
Published monthly in 30 languages and in Braille by 
Unesco, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization. 
31. rue Francois Bonvin, 75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax: (33-1) 45.66.92.70 
Internet: unesco.couner@unesco.org 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features: Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Servat 
Mustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag (Tel. 45.68. 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel. 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel. 45.68.47.15), 
Administrative Assistant: Theresa Pinck 
Selection in Braille in English, French, Spanish and 
Korean: Mouna Chatta (Tel. 45.68.47.14) 
Artwork Consultant: Eric Frogé 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Irina Utkina (Moscow) 
German: Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: El-Said Mahmoud EI-Sheniti (Cairo) 
Italian: (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Akbar Zargar (Teheran) 
Dutch: Claude Montrieux (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Moacyr A. Fioravante (Rio de Janeiro) 
Urdu: Javaid Igbal Syed (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malay: Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Karg Woo-hyon (Seoul) 
Swahili: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene: Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Katri Himma (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egana (Donostia) 
Thai: Sudhasinee Vajrabul (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Nazer Mohammad Angar (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sckoto) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk (Kiev) 
Galician: Xabier Senin Fernandez (Santiago de Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. Fax: 42.73.24.29 
Subscriptions: Marie Thérése Hardy (Tel, 45.68.45.65), 
Jacqueline Louise-Julie, Manichan Ngenekeo, Michel 
Ravassard, Mohamed Salah El Din (Tel. 45.68.49.19) 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (Tel, 45.68.45.64) 
Accounts: (Tel. 45.68.45.65) 
Shipping: Daniel Meister (Tel. 45.68.47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. Tel.: 45.68.45.65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years: 3986 FF, 
Students: 1 year 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF, 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency to 
the order of Unesco or by Visa, Eurocard or Mastercard 
  
     
 
   
      
Individual artic'es and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted pro- 
2 th x 0 Couner”, plus date 
of, Signed articles 
" 10S will be supplied 
opinions of Ux 
Jniv ). Ann 
) Microcard Edition, Indian Head Inc., 
West 40th Street, New York, U.S.A 
Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, USA 
    111 
4) Bell and Howell Co.. Old Mansfield         
MPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - JANVIER 1996 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N® 71844 - DIFFUSE PAR LESN.M.P.P, 
Photocomposition, photogravure: Le Courrier de i"Unesco 
mpression: MAURY IMPRIMEUR, 
Z.). Route d'Etampes, 45331 Malsherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 N° 1.1996.0P195 544 A 
This issue compnses 52 pages and a 4-page insert between 
pages 2-3 and 50-51. 
MANAGING SOCIAL CHANGE 
UNESCO's Management of Social Transforma- 
tions (MOST) programme, which has heen 
operational since January 1994, is designed to 
promote international comparative research in 
the social sciences. Its primary emphasis is to 
support large-scale autonomous research, to 
transfer data te decision-makers and to 
encourage capaeity-building. MOST operates 
in three high-priority areas of social transfor- 
mation: cities; multicultural and multi-ethnic 
societies; and the effects of global changes at 
loeal and regional levels. This year, in associa- 
tion with UNESCO’ Man and the Biosphere 
(MAB) programme, it is launching a six-year 
programme on “Cities: management of social 
and environmental transformations”. 
The Most Newsletter, which is published 
quarterly in English, French and Spanish, pro- 
vides information on the programme’s activities 
and may be obtained on request. | 
«Unesco, MOST Secretariat, 1, rue Miollis, 
75732 Paris CEDEX 15, France. Tel.: (33-1) 
45 68 37 99; Fax: 45 67 82 06. E-mail: 
ssmost@[runes2].earn—Internet Web-server: 
http://Incie.enrs-bellevue.fr/most 
PLANET SOCIETY 
Young people from 35 conntries are taking 
part in UNESCO's Planet Society Programme 
which is seeking to set up a worldwide 
exehange network to eontribute to the sns- 
tainable management of the planet. The Pro- 
eramme’s first campaign, launched at the end 
of 1994, is called “The World’s Still in the 
Making”. It aims to eneourage 6- to 15-year- 
olds to initiate and take part in local projects 
to develop their eommunity’s natural and cul- 
tural environment. Planet Society has already 
set up a New Projects Data Bank containing 
data [rom projects submitted by children and 
has ercated an Exchange Market to enable 
children to exchange resources, ideas, experi- 
enees, [unds, aid and materials. An Informa- 
tion and Communication Service serves as an 
intermediary hetween the Exchange Market, 
the general public and the media. | 
# Planct Society, Ungsco-Patricom, 1, rue 
Miollis, 75732 Paris Cedex 15. Tel: (33-1) 45 
08 45 95. Fax: (33-1) 45 66 06 62. E-mail: 
e.fazzino@unesco.org 
A PRIZE FOR TOLERANCE 
AND NON-VIOLENCE 
The Unesco Madanjeet Singh Prize, which has 
been created on the occasion of the United 
Nations Year for Tolerance and the 125th 
anniversary of the birth of Mahatma Gandhi, is 
to be awarded biennially (beginning this year) 
to individuals, institutions or organizations who 
make outstanding contributions to the promo- 
tion of tolerance and non-violence and to the 
(families of intellectuals who, like Mahatma 
Gandhi, are victims of intolerance. The win- 
ners will be selected by the Director-General 
of Unisco on the basis of recommendations 
made by an international jury. Candidates will 
he nominated by Uxgsco Member States and 
intergovernmental and non-governmental orga- 
nizations with eonsultative status with 
UNESCO. Prize-winners will receive $40,000. 
The donor, Mr. Madanjeet Singh, is a well- 
known writer, painter and photographer who 
is special advisor to the Director-General of 
UNEsco. | 
1995 LITERACY AWARDS 
On International Literacy Day, 8 September 
19953, the Director-General of UNEsco, Mr. 
Federico Mayor, presented the three interna- 
tional prizes awarded by Unksco for literaey 
work. 
The “Community Academic Services Pro- 
gram” of Canada’s New Brunswick province, 
whose network of free literacy and elementary 
education services has obtained outstanding 
results, was awarded the International Reading 
Association Literacy Award. 
The Noma Prize went to the Family Wel- 
fare Movement (PKK—Pembinaan Kese- 
jahterann-Kelnarga) of Indonesia for pro- 
moting the mobilization of community mem- 
bers, especially women, and reducing poverty 
by integrating functional literacy into ineome- 
generating programmes. 
The King Sejong Literaey Prize was pre- 
sented to joint winners: the All-China Women's 
Federation for its literacy work among women, 
especially in rural areas, in a country where 
wonien constitute 70 per eent of the illiterate 
population; and to Ecuador's Pilot Literacy, 
Post-Literacy and Training Project for the 
improvement of the Quality of Life of Rural 
Women (PROCALMUC). | 
EXPOLANGUES—A WINDOW ON WORLD 
LANGUAGES AND CULTURES 
Lixpolangues, the annnal Paris Fair devoted to 
the study and use of languages and the dis- 
covery of world cultures, highlights a different 
country cach year. Turkey has heen chosen [or 
special attention at this year’s Fair, which will 
be held from 15 to 19 February in the Grande 
ITalle de la Villette. Visitors to Expolangues will 
have an opportunity to familiarize themselves 
with the latest language teaching techniques 
and to learn about other cultures via song, dance 
and theatre. This year sees the inauguration of 
a competition and a special award for transla- 
tors and interpreters. Among those taking part 
in Expolangnes will be the Uvesco Courier and 
its 30 language editions. [| 
* For further information, contact: O11, 62, 
ruc de Miromesnil, 75008 Paris. Tel.: (33-1) 
49 53-27 60; Fax: (33-1) 49 53-27 88. 
NOTICE 
You may have heen surprised {and, we hope, gratified) to 
receive two examples of our 8-page photo supplement “50 
years of Unesco”, in the November and December issues 
respectively. The colour reproduction on the paper used in 
the supplement inserted in the November issue was poor. 
The paper in question was chosen by our printer, who in 
view of the result later decided to reprint the supplement 
on more suitable paper at his own expense and insert it in 
the following number. This explanation should have 
appeared in fast month's issue. We hope readers will 
accept our apologies for publishing it a month late and 
that the mystery is now solved.     

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
1. 28 October 1995, no. 3488. 
2. Daniel Williams of the Washington Post 
discussed the significance of this piece of news in 
an article entitled, “An 01d Heresy Finds a 
Receptive Audience in the Catholic Church” 
{International Herald Tribune, 3 November 1995). 
onth by month 
“Is it possible to speak of ‘revelation’ in other [i.e. non-Christian] religions?” asked 
an article published in a recent issue of the Jesuit journal La Civilta Cattolical. The 
answer appeared to be yes. In other words, the voice of God is heard in other sacred 
writings than the Bible. 
Perhaps not everyone will grasp the full significance of this viewpoint. Yet it 
marks a real break with a tradition that runs through the history of the revealed reli- 
gions. It is true that a few great thinkers down the ages have dared to express such 
thoughts, in some cases risking their lives to do so. More recently, attempts to pro- 
mote a rapprochement between religions have been based on the same premise, but 
never until now has it been endorsed in a journal close to the Holy See2, 
There has always been a very strong temptation for the authorized interpreters 
of each of the revealed religions to consider themselves the sole repositories of the 
divine message, even though they may argue among themselves about its exact 
meaning. All too often this has sown discord between different religious communi- 
ties, each one claiming to be the only defender of God's true word. This situation 
exists today in many societies in the throes of crisis, where an extremist interpre- 
tation of a religious message can be used to mobilize and intensify the passions 
unleashed by a community's quest for identity. 
This is why the article in La Civilta Cattolica should be welcomed. In acknowl- 
edging that all the world’s great religions have access to revelation it accords equal 
dignity to all their followers, i.e. equal rights to respect and to a hearing. It is thus 
consistent with an intellectual approach that advocates in all fields, not only that of 
religion, open-mindedness and fraternity in opposition to the tyranny of exclusive 
truths: a higher spirit that unites people and the world against the divisions and 
afflictions of sectarianism. 
Something of this spirit informs the pages of the present issue devoted to dance. 
Readers may even feel that some of this month’s contributors, such as Maurice 
Béjart, help to explain its mystery. 
BAHGAT ELNADRI AND AREL RIFAAT 
9

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

© 
C.
 
Ma
ss
on
/M
. 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
rs
 


### 102500: An Impulse from within

an impulse from 
within 
The American dancer and 
choreographer Merce 
Cunningham during a 
rehearsal of Event (1976). 
10 
  
Modern people have a paradoxical rela- 
tionship with space. They may have 
reached to the stars, explored the ocean 
depths and fathomed the unfathomable, but 
they have also cut themselves off from their 
environment and the forces around them. 
They abandon the earth and risk becoming 
rootless, “extra-terrestrial” creatures. Long 
gone are the days when, as peasants, they had 
by Dominique Dupuy 
.
 
Dance 
renews the 
bonds that 
unite us to 
the world 
a
 
L
o
d
i
 
A 
an
il
 
8 
> 
ah
 
0 pposite page 
above, Rudolf Nureyev 
(foreground) in a 
1972 revival of 
Stravinsky's ballet 
Apoifon Musagetes, 
created by George 
Balanchine in 1928 
for the Ballet Russe. 
Opposite page, 
Merce Cunningham’s 
Enter{1992). 
physical contact with the land. Today, high on 
their tractors, they have become human 
machines. Long gone are the days when, as 
navigators, they were at one with wind and 
water. Today, as they wing peacefully, com- 
fortably and hygenically from continent to 
continent, they have lost touch with the 
dream of Icarus. 
They have hardly any active contact with

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 102500: An Impulse from within

the elements, with matter, or even with 
gravity. In their daily lives they do less and 
less of the things that once linked them to the 
world. Once upon a time they were used to 
walking; they strode up hill and down dale. 
Today, in lifts, escalators, cars and trains, 
movement is levelled. Many once-familiar 
physical  actions—beating, hammering, 
pounding, grinding and wood-turning—are 
now done by machines. 
Various kinds of recreation compensate 
for this loss. Some, such as funfairs with 
swings, Ferris wheels and roller-coasters, are 
not new. More recent forms of diversion 
include sporting activities such as jogging, 
skiing, water-skiing, surfing, windsurfing and 
hang-gliding, virtually all of which are marred 
by the spirit of competition. 
A ritual act 
Today people tolerate their bodies, reluc- 
tantly accept their weight and maltreat their 
vertebrae (although some civilizations still 
teach the art of sitting). They may become  
@ C. Masson/M. Enguerand, Paris 
restless as they passively consume sounds 
and images, but they avoid real movement. 
What about dancers? Once upon a time, 
like peasants and sailors, they were in tune 
with carth and sky, with seasonal activities, the 
lunar month, the weather, and the rhythms of 
life. But as traditional farm work disappears, 
this kind of dancing is also dying out, and so 
too is dancing as a form of festivity. 
Since the beginning of the century, how- 
ever, new dance forms have appeared that 
seck to revive the time-honoured relation- 
ships between people, their bodies and the 
natural world. Today, as part of the globaliza- 
tion process, dance more than any other form 
of expression is an area of exchange and under- 
standing where East, West, North and South 
are meeting, not without incident, perhaps, 
but with growing enthusiasm. Why is this so? 
Dance testifies that people belong to the 
universe and its profundities: gravity, silence 
and sanctity. Even when performed outside 
sacred precincts, it is full of ritual meaning. 
Performance is a rite whose preparation, 
rehearsal and production is a communion. 
Ritual is inherent in an activity that estab- 
lishes a special relationship between dancer 
and teacher, during a time of awakening and    initiation. Dance is a rite in which the body is 
11 
© A. Pacciani/C. Masson/M. Enguerand. Paris

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 102500: An Impulse from within

© 
Jo
e 
Vi
es
ti
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
rs
  
A dancer from Bali, where 
dance plays an important role 
in cultural life. 
DOMINIQUE DUPUY, 
a French dancer and 
choreographer, is in charge of 
dance at the Institute of Musical 
and Choreographic Education of 
the Cité de la Musique, in Paris. 
12 
listened to and cared for, calling to mind the 
ancient idea of the body as a temple. 
A dancing body establishes a relationship 
with the universe and becomes a point of 
contact with energies, forces and flows. In its 
extreme affirmation of verticality it points the 
way to ecstasy. 
Dancers do not take leave of their senses. 
On the contrary, they use their senses with 
great subtlety—not only the so-called objec- 
tive senses of sight and hearing but also the 
subjective senses, especially touch, by which 
they make contact with the physical world. 
Dancers are physically normal people 
who stand apart from the passivity of 
everyday life and the tension of sporting 
achievement. They occupy the middle 
ground between the interior and the exte- 
rior; they commune. They compete neither 
with themselves nor with others. Dancing 
together in a group is only possible if there is 
harmony. Dancers discover space in a state 
of rapture that is not far from the rapture of 
the soul. 
The element of dance is empty space; its 
instrument is the human body. There is no 
need for words, colours, earth, stone or 
wood. Dance lives in the present tense. Its 
life is one of loss and renewal. It vanishes and 
reappears. The dancer, the only begetter of 
the dance, is mortal. The body ages and one 
day will rot. Dance has no Stradivariuses, and 
there are no museums of ancient dance 
instruments. Constantly reinventing them- 
selves, intoxicated with perfection, dancers 
throw themselves headlong into their art. 
Art in the present tense 
The repository of the dance tradition is mainly 
the body and the spoken word. Knowledge is 
transmitted by one-to-one contact between 
master and pupil. The camera and written 
notation are useful tools, but they can never 
replace the moment of transmission, the 
unique instant of sublime pleasure when the 
core of a movement is communicated like a 
secret to a child or an adult. The dance master 
is something of a shaman. 
The essence of dance is rarity, quality 
rather than quantity, being rather than having. 
The way to perfection lies through 
learning by repetition, a long apprenticeship 
whereby a movement is rarefied from ordi- 
nariness into dance. Dancers do what anyone 
can do, but the way in which they do it makes 
their dance different and unique. 
They are transformed by their efforts. 
They embody in concentrated form all the 
movements of the plant and animal kingdoms. 
They are trees whose roots move; they are 
fish and birds. Tall moving trees, tall carth- 
bound birds, they progress through space 
horizontally and vertically, like great moving 
crosses. 
But the inner movement of dance is silent. 
Except in the rare cases where body sounds 
are heard—hammering feet, clapping hands, 
snapping fingers—it is a movement that 
emerges from silence and the void. Breathing 
provides its inner resonance. 
The embodiment of harmony between 
earth and heaven, the physical and the meta- 
physical, high and low, dark and light, the 
expressible and the inexpressible, dancers are 
enraptured and enrapture those who watch 
them. What they create is as dazzling and tran- 
sient as a flash of lightning. The dancer has and 
is a sacred fire. |

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

anguage 
 i INR Be 
© Valérie Damville, Paris 


### 102503: The Language of body and soul

Peaple dance to celebrate big occasions and 
express the pleasure of being together 
of body and soul, wemesamie 
Avove, a festival of aboriginal 
dance in Laura, Queensland 
(Australia). 
WERNER LAMBERSY 
is a Belgian writer, Among his many 
published works are Anvers 
“Antwerp”, Editions les 
éperonniers, Brussels, 1994) and 
Volti Subito (Editions Le Dé Bleu, 
1994). 
People dance to celebrate existence at 
festive moments which are cut off 
from ordinary time and bring them into con- 
tact with a timeless world. This experience is 
common to all those peoples who, whenever 
they want to mark a sad or happy event, do so 
by marching (a slow dance), taking part in 
processions (at different rhythms) or making 
merry. 
Even today, a dance is always the high 
point of a town or village féte. Weddings, 
communions and baptisms end in dancing. 
Philanthropic organizations organize charity 
balls, and dancing is a feature of informal get- 
togethers at conferences, at teenagers’ parties, 
and at match-making sessions held for young 
people in search of a partner. 
The pulse 
of society 
For the community concerned, the impor- 
tant thing is to get together and see who has 
turned up, who hasn’t, and who hasn’t been 
invited—to show itself to other communi- 
ties and to itself. Festive occasions, with 
their displays of finery and wealth, their 
social ostentation and their revelry help to 
establish and endorse a pecking order within 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
M.
 
Re
na
ud
ea
u/
Ho
aq
ui
, 
Pa
ri
s 
The Chilean town of Tirana 
honours the Virgin Mary 
during a six-day festival held 
in July. 
Joie de vivrein Dakar 
(Senegal). 
® Joe Viesti/Ask Images, Paris 
the group. At these times, dance dramatizes 


### 102503: The Language of body and soul

~ the often diffuse power relationships on 
which the group is based, even if it does not 
put its members on equal terms. 
When it dances, society functions like a 
body. Like the individual body, the social 
body has its needs that must be recognized 
and satisfied in good time. Dance restores its 
fluidity, encourages its members to circulate, 
and reveals its physical condition, its vitality 
and resilience. The dancers who take part in 
the Shrove Tuesday carnival held each year at 
Binche in Belgium, dress up in their heavy 
feather costumes at four o’clock in the 
morning and have to dance to a punishing 
tambourine beat for three days. Here we are 
not far from voodoo trances or ritual Indian 
dances—experiences in which dance com- 
municates with the invisible and flirts with 
the unsayable. 
Grape-pickers and harvesters would 
never dream of taking leave of each other 
without holding a dance to celebrate harvest 
home, thank the gods, commune with the 
elements and promise to meet again. Outside 
the family, social or ethnic context, dancing to 
celebrate national holidays is an avenue to the 
universal. 
Dance is not so much an aspiration to 
defeat the laws of gravity as a desire to be at 
one with the harmony of the spheres. Singly, 
in couples or in groups, dancers always 
express more than is strictly required by the 
occasion that brings them together. They 
tread beyond the bounds of real time and 
space. Pan is not dead; he has become a punk 
or a rapper. 
Where there’s dance 
there’s hope 
There was dancing in front of the ruins of the 
Berlin wall just as there was dancing at Wood- 
stock to protest against the Viet Nam War. The 
Middle Ages had a dance of the dead. Anything 
can be an occasion for dance, even horror. But 
where there’s dance there’s hope. There is no 
such thing as a dance of despair. This is why 
humanity’s immediate reaction to events is to 
dance. It may be a dangerous thing to do. It 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

Right, a couple dance the 
tango in the San Telmo 
district of Buenos Aires 
(Argentina). 
For centuries the people of 
Helston in Cornwall (England) 
have celebrated the arrival of 
springtime by dancing the 
Furry Dance. Below, the 
dancers make their way 
through the streets. 
  © 
Jo
e 
Vi
es
ti
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 


### 102503: The Language of body and soul

  
may be playing with fire. But in communicating 
with one another it is the alpha and the omega. 
Dance, rather than the written and spoken 
word, is the language of the soul. To dance is 
to take the pulse of the world and become 
attuned to its rhythm. Dance means listening 
to others, acknowledging the existence of 
common ground. 
All human society is based on this principle. 
Dance is a leitmotif of private and family life, of 
religious and social life. It is a crossroads of 
meeting and exchange between the irrational 
and the rational. Whenever men and women 
get together and dance, they save from extine- 
tion and standardization the untamed side of 
human nature that is indispensable to our sur- 
vival. To dance is to refuse the paralysis of con- 
formity and to rediscover the essence of 
democracy: diversity, potentiality, and freedom 
of movement. | 
15 
‘om 
© 
De
ga
s-
Pa
rr
a/
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Co
ur
ra
ul
t/
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 102504: Drama's hidden depths

drama’s 
hidden 
depths 
by Eugenio Barba 
In African and Latin American cultures 
dance is the vehicle that brings human 
beings close to the gods. While the gods do 
not necessarily dance themselves, dance is 
the elusive area, on the border of the physical 
and the spiritual worlds, in which their force 
is expressed. 
Theatre belongs to the same order. The 
French actor and director Jacques Copeau, 
who was, with Konstanin Stanislavsky, one of 
the leading innovators of twentieth-century 
drama, believed that dance is the essence of 
drama. Surprising though it may seem, there 
are many reasons to think that this is so. 
In the art of corporeal expression, the dis- 
tinction made between dance and theatre is a 
  
  
Rudo Nureyev in Arlequin, 
magicien par amour (1984). 
The choreography, by Ivo 
Cramér, was inspired by 
commedia dell arte. 
 
product of certain fairly recent European 
conventions. [t did not exist in ancient Greek 
and Roman theatre, in medieval or Eliza- 
bethan theatre, or in commedia dell’arte. Nor 
does it exist in the classic forms of Asian the- 
atre. It is ignored by actors in their practice of 
stagecraft. Actors all dance, although their 
dance is sometimes concealed from the audi- 
ence by their acting. 
Nor is dance “naturally” dependent on 
music. The author of an anonymous Italian 
pamphlet against carnivals that appeared four 
centuries ago (Discorso contro il carnevale, 
1607) condemned dance out of hand. To illus- 
trate what he regarded as the diabolical nature 
of dance, he suggests that one should look at a 
roomful of men and women dancing and 
then suddenly pretend that one can no longer 
hear the music. Observe the artificial move- 
ments, he says. Note the contortions the 
people make as they touch cach another, take 
cach other by the hand, lean towards each 
other, search for each other and lose each 
other. Do they look like civilized men and

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 102504: Drama's hidden depths

Mm embers of the Beijing 
Opera perform the dance of the 
courtesans at the court of the 
Tang dynasty. 
 
women? No, they are grotesque, jerky, 
affected or obscene. One might think they 
are mad. Unbeknownst to themselves, they 
are in the hands of the devil... . 
Let us take this idea of switching off the 
music a little further. I think it is an excellent 
exercise for directors and actors. What hap- 
pens? If dance only gives rise to forced, exag- 
gerated movements, it is not the kind of 
dance that springs naturally from the body 
but an attempt to apply a veneer of music to 
the body. When dance bubbles up from the 
body, it contains its own music. It does not 
matter whether the music is silent or whether 
it really provides delectation for the ear. 
The living body 
A performer trained in a classical Asian tradi- 
tion who dances without music loses none of 
his or her inwardness and ability to captivate 
the spectator. Add music, singing, the poetry 
of words and the fantasy of a story-line and 
the display becomes richer and more com- 
plete, a feast in which the spectator tastes only 
Although they are 
sometimes 
artificially 
compartmented, 
acting and dance 
spring from the 
same inner 
intensity 
© 
Wa
ng
 
Zh
ip
in
g/
AN
A,
 
Pa
ri
s 
a little of each dish. But even in the midst of 
this profusion, the performance retains its 
force and vitality by virtue of its inner naked- 
ness. 
This observation can be applied to any 
dancers, whatever their origin or training, 
who can find within themselves the music 
most appropriate to their physical action— 
the music of the body. This is not formal 
dance; but the dance of the body that has 
come to life. The word life is not used gratu- 
itously; it means presence, purely and simply. 
It is neither expression nor communication, 
but it makes both possible; it is inherent in 
each. It is what I call in my research on the 
anthropology of theatre, the “pre-cxpres- 
sive” level. 
And so even if there is a dividing line 
between theatre and dance today, it is not her- 
metic. On the contrary, there are many points 
of contact between the two. Theatre and dance 
form one vast territory, which can be explored 
both from the viewpoint of the geographer 
interested in neighbourhoods, crossroads and 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 102504: Drama's hidden depths

© 
S.
 
Gu
ti
er
re
z/
AN
A,
 
Pa
ri
s 
  
EUGENIO BARBA, 
of Denmark, is director of the 
International School of Theatre 
Anthropology (ISTA) which he 
founded in 1979. He is also 
director of the Odin Teatret, a 
research institute on acting, which 
is based at Hostebro (Denmark). 
Notable among his published 
works are The Paper Cange 
(Routledge, 1294) and (with Nicola 
Savarese) The Secret Art of the 
Performer (reprint; Routledge, 
1995), 
18 
panoramas and from that of the geologist who 
wants to explore the underground layers 
common to regions which are superficially 
divided and differentiated. 
It is the geologist’s approach that interests 
me. 
In all actors I look for the hidden dance 
that gives intensity to their presence. I try to 
discover the undulations of rhythm, of pow- 
erful action harboured in the depths of their 
bodies, even if they barely make any move- 
ment, if they are seemingly motionless and 
their behaviour is apparently quite “normal”. 
When actors conceal the violence and 
energy that infuse life into their stage pres- 
ence, even if they do not dance overtly 
something dances within them. Without this 
hidden dance, their acting is not authentic. 
For an actor, acting is not a matter of pre- 
tence. Acting is only real when it involves the 
whole body, when the slightest movement is 
rooted in the torso, not in a part of the body 
such as the hands, the eyes or the mouth, and 
springs from the unity of body and mind. 
This integrity, this unity of the living organism 
is what I call “dance”. 
When the hidden dance ceases to be latent 
and expresses itself freely in space, then 
rhythm, drums and music are required to 
create a dialogue. 
Shakespeare, 
Verdi and candomblé 
I should like to give an example from my 
own experience. Recently I worked for 
some time with a modern Brazilian dancer 
and choreographer who is also closely con- 
nected with the dances and ceremonies of the 
Afro-Brazilian candomblé cult. We decided 
that we would bring our two cultures into 
contact but not attempt to blend them. I 
come from the villages of southern Italy, 
where on festive occasions brass bands play 
tuncs or overtures from operas by Verdi, 
Puccini, Donizetti or Bellini. 
We staged a one-man show which juxta- 
posed the theme of Verdi’s Otello, based on 
Shakespeare’s play, with the stories and figures

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 102504: Drama's hidden depths

  
3 
a = 
Above, the Rio de Janeiro 
carnival. 
Above right, dancers of the 
Odin Teatret (Denmark) take 
part in an exchange with the 
Yanomami Indians of Brazil 
(1976). 
Rignt, Sanjukta Panigrahi 
(India) and Augusto Omoli 
(Brazil) in Theatrum Mundi, 
directed by Eugenio Barba 
(1994). 
     
   
of the Orisha, the gods of candomblé, who are 
summoned by drums. The orchestra played 
Verd: and the drums were beaten. The story 
of the Moor of Venice alternated with the 
invasion of the higher forces which take pos- 
session of him. 
To some extent I wanted to go back to one 
of the traditional interpretations of Othello: 
the man resplendent as night who bears 
within himself both the forces of the forest 
and those of the elegant city built on water, 
and who derives his charm and destructive 
power from their imbrication. Of course I 
also wanted the audience to understand that 
there is no unbridgeable gap between the cul- 
ture that produces Othello and that which 
produces the terreiro, the candomblé ritual 
in which drums summon the gods. 
But on an even more personal level I was 
trying to show what I see whenever I observe 
an actor or an actress who can reach down to 
the sources of life when on stage. It doesn’t 
really matter whether they are acting in a 
comedy or a tragedy—as soon as attention 
moves towards their bodies I can feel the 
beating of life. 
All T have to do is release myself from the 
grip of words and plot, facial mimicry and hand 
gestures, and concentrate on watching what the 
actor or actress is doing with his or her body. I 
sec nothing but the dance concealed beneath 
the veneer of theatricality. The dragon of life 
surfaces from the depths, expresses itself in 
ways that are by turns barely perceptible and 
violently explosive. It is then that I know that 
drama, with or without music, is dance. 
Let us remember what happened on stage 
in Shakespeare’s time. At the end of the 
grimmest play, after reducing to ashes the 
   
» ’ : . 
© 
Od
in
 
Te
at
re
t,
 
Ho
ls
te
br
o 
audience’s illusions about the great ones of 
this world and revealing the bestiality that 
lurks bencath the noble words of knights, 
after showing how love can be a bitter 
struggle, Shakespearc’s actors would sud- 
denly abandon their fictional characters and 
begin to dance to the lively rhythm of a gigue. 
At that moment, perhaps the scales would fall 
from the eyes of at lcast one member of the 
audience who would realize that the actors 
had, in spite of all appearances to the contrary, 
been dancing all through the play. | 
@E
. 
Lu
is
i/
Fo
to
gr
am
a

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

N inskY S requiem oN 
On 19 January 1919, in a Swiss hotel, a 


### 102505: Nijinsky's requiem

dancer dressed in white silk pyjamas 
advanced towards an audience of some two 
hundred people. The career of Vaslav Nijinsky, 
the century’s greatest dancer, would shortly 
end. Thirty years of mental illness would follow. 
As if to signal the catatonic immobility that 
.was about to claim him, Nijinsky made a 
strange, simple gesture that symbolically 
opened dance to the modern world. He 
grabbed a chair, sat down facing the audience 
and stared at them. The nervousness that elec- 
trified the dancer passed in a hypnotic current, 
and the magic of empathy swept over the audi- 
ence. When the pianist began a Chopin pre- 
lude, Nijinsky moved. He began to improvise 
a mystical ballet, a kind of requiem, a pacifist 
message in the wake of the First World War. 
“Overcome by the war, he placed on the 
floor a cross made of cloth, then danced on it to 
signify the crime that had been committed 
against humanity.” This, the “combat of life and 
death”, was Nijinsky’s last ballet, the day of 
what he called his “marriage with God”. 
The rebel 
On the verge of madness, Nijinsky laid bare his 
soul in the diary that he wrote in six weeks and 
took with him to the asylum. He insisted that it 
should be published. 
The French dramatist and actor Antonin 
Artaud called the diary an “exorcism”, a cry of 
anger, “a metaphysic of word, gesture and 
expression”, the savage pleasure of scraping off 
a veneer of varnish. Since Nijinsky’s spectac- 
ular leaps had not taken him beyond the con- 
fines of the stage, since people were incorri- 
gibly worldly and artificial, he would teach 
them a lesson or two. He would shake them 
up. He was a man of extremes who had long 
before broken out of the straitjacket of his cen- 
tury, its bourgeois conventionality and its 
numbing, blinding aestheticism. “I don’t want 
war. I don’t want state borders,” he wrote. His 
choreography, his expressionism and his life all 
broke the mould: “My madness is love for 
humanity.” An ecologist before the word 
existed, he felt that humanity was abusing the 
carth. “The planet is falling apart,” he wrote. 
“The earth is suffocating. People are covering it 
with ashes.” 
20 od 
  
© 
Mu
st
ra
ti
on
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

by Martine Leca 
Nijinsky was born into a family of Polish 
dancers, brought up in Russia, and worked in 
France. Not surprisingly, his Russian was pep- 
pered with Polish and French expressions. 
This explains the jagged structure of his writing, 
whose raw, direct, expressionistic language has 
much in common with his “wild, savage” 
dancing. What was important for him was not 
phrase-making but “transcribing thought”. His 
diary 1s a song, an invitation to all humanity. Itis 
like Gregorian chant sung in guttural tones. “I 
am not a revolver; I am God, I am love.” 


### 102505: Nijinsky's requiem

Nijinsky’s work as a dancer and choreogra- 
pher spanned ten years. It was hallmarked by 
four ballets which gave birth to contemporary 
dance: Debussy’s L’Aprés-midi d’un faune, 
Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring, Debussy’s Jeux 
and Richard Strauss’s Till Eulenspiegel. 
Under the leadership of Sergei Diaghilev, 
creator and grand master of the Ballet Russe, 
and later away from Diaghilev’s thrall, Nijjinsky 
took humanity back to essentials, to its pagan 
traditions. Tight embroidered costumes gave 
way to looser blouses. What mattered for 
Nijinsky, inspired as he was by the Greek tra- 
dition, was “to act as little and feel as much as 
possible”. Dance was to express inner feelings, 
to reveal the inner person. 
Once the mould of academic dance was 
broken, the day of the nincteenth-century 
conventions was over. The music of Debussy 
and Stravinsky was an extension of the revolu- 
tion in gesture that would be brought about by 
concrete dance. Stravinsky regarded Nijinsky 
as the only dancer who could put his music to 
movement, a performer who made direct 
contact with the audience, had no qualms 
about moving against the beat or the tempo, 
and rejected aesthetics in favour of expres- 
sionism. Nijinsky was not afraid to translate 
into sometimes disjointed movements and 
positions the violence that impelled him. After 
centuries of imprisonment in ornament and 
posturing, body and soul began to speak in the 
new vocabulary of dance. Nijinksy tore 
romantic smoothness to shreds with his 
chaotic and violent rhythms. 
The key moment in this revolution was the 
performance of The Rite of Spring in Paris on 
23 May 1913, which caused a sensation and trig- 
gered a head-on clash between the “old guard” 
The greatest dancer of bis time was 
a soul in torment 
and the “avant-garde”. Nijinsky’s innovations 
were profound. They sounded the death-knell 
of the romantic aesthetic. 
The masks of the human comedy were 
torn away. Nyjinsky asked dancers to transcend 
themselves, forcing them to adopt difficult 
positions. His choreographic language, which 
was more easily described in drawings than in 
words, was almost unperformable and puzzled 
more than one dancer. “I had a hard time 
learning my role by mechanically imitating the 
positions he showed me,” wrote ballerina 
Tamara Karsavina. “I had to keep my neck 
twisted to one side and my hands folded back 
on themselves, as if I had been born crippled.” 
The bombshell 
This abandonment of traditional form, mixed 
with Debussy’s impressionistic and Stravinsky’s 
violent music, made a high-powered avant- 
garde cocktail that was bound to arouse strong 
feelings. The bombshell of The Rite of Spring 
sparked off a revolt against vapidity, subtlety, 
chiaroscuro, elegance and refined harmonies. 
Nijinsky challenged the established author- 
ities and lifted life and feelings to a more spa- 
cious realm of freedom and creation. His 
dancing signalled a return to the primitive magic 
of rhythm and a systematic simplification of 
construction accompanied by a determination 
to do away with hierarchies and privileges. 
After The Rite of Spring Nijinsky showed 
his taste for independence in another pio- 
neering ballet, Jeux, in which four dancers 
obey a quadrangular geometry. “Nijinsky has 
given a strangely mathematical twist to his way- 
ward genius,” Debussy noted. 
His genius cast a huge shadow over the 
century and today’s dancers and chorcogra- 
phers follow in his wake. Nyjinsky wanted to 
have done with the ballet as a spectacle. He 
wanted to bring the audience into contact with 
the birth-throes of reality, the fluctuations of 
the inner life and the leap towards the absolute. 
He brought to an end the day of trompe-Poeil 
and art that copied reality. The eyes of the audi- 
ence became part of the action. The depths of 
consciousness began to stir. | 
1. Nijinsky’s diary was published as The Diary of 
Vaslav Nijinsky in 1968 (Berkeley, University of 
California Press). 
MARTINE LECA 
is a French journalist and writer. 
She is the author of a play, La 
soupe et les nuages (Editions Le 
Pont de I'Epée, 1983). 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

® 
Ma
rc
 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s  
Five stone wind (1988). 
Choreography by Merce 
Cunningham. 
  
JOCHEN SCHMIDT, 
German writer and journalist, is 
artistic director of the 
International Dance Festival of 
North Rhineland-Westphalia. He is 
the author of Tanztheater in 
Deutschland (“Dance Theatre in 
Germany”, 1992) and has made a 
documentary film on Pina Bausch. 
22 
“Post-modern” must be the hardest 
term to define in the world of dance. 
The notion of “modern dance” was already 
unpopular enough, and Martha Graham, for 
instance, never accepted it as a description of 
her art. But at least we knew what it meant— 
a form of stage dancing that was created in the 
carly twentieth century and broke with the 
rules of classical ballet. 
Very few people have any idea what the 
term “post-modern dance”, which made its 
appearance in American dance literature in 
the late 1970s, actually means. To my mind, 
the best definition of it was given by the 
choreographer Alvin Ailey some years ago at 
a press conference. “Post-modern dance?” 
he said. “Easy. It means dance after Merce 
Cunningham.” This seems to denote no 
more than a time frontier, but in fact the term 
describes the position of not just one but sev- 
eral generations of choreographers in relation 
to the American dance genius of the second 
half of the century. They have either taken up 
the torch handed on by Cunningham or 
rebelled against his style and aesthetic. 
For America this makes sense but prob- 
ably not for Europe. It is true that Cun- 


### 102506: Post-modern dance: the latest figures

post-modern 
dance: 
the latest 
gures 
by Jochen Schmidt 
CE LR h 
flee HE | 
ningham has been extremely influential in 
France since the 1960s and has inspired many 
young choreographers. But in France and 
almost everywhere else in Europe, in the last 
fifteen years at least, the influence of the 
German choreographer Pina Bausch has 
been stronger than Cunningham’s. 
Many new forms and trends 
Of course, Pina Bausch herself is not free 
from foreign influences. She was trained in 
Essen and at the Julliard School of Music in 
New York. However, there is more to post- 
modernism than the “dance theatre” which 
she created in the 1970s and which became a 
style model all over the world. 
The fact 1s that contemporary dance has 
no stylistic and aesthetic unity; it is a highly 
‘complex edifice with many rooms, all fur- 
nished differently. It cannot be limited to 
post-modern American dance, which 
encompasses the pale neo-classicism of 
Karole Armitage as well as the early mini- 
malist exercises of Trisha Brown, or to Euro- 
pean dance theatre, whose variants in Ger- 
many and France, Belgium and Spain differ 
widely from one another. 
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 102506: Post-modern dance: the latest figures

  
 
   
Contemporary 
dance finds 
inspiration all 
over the world 
There are many other trends in contem- 
porary dance as well as these two major cur- 
rents. A list of them would include Japanese 
Butd (see article page 27), and chorcogra- 
phers such as Saburo Teshigawara who have 
tried to go further than Butd; the first, occa- 
sionally timid, but highly fertile and deter- 
mined excursions of non-Western cultures 
into modern dance, e.g. the alchemy with 
which Lin Hwai-min in Taiwan has fused the 
Chinese tradition and Western dance tech- 
niques; the demythification of Indian dance 
by Chandralekha in Madras; the revolu- 
tionary blend of Indian Bharata Natyam 
dance and Western music created by 
Shobana Jeyasingh in London; African dance 
as performed by Iréne Tassembedo and her 
Ebene group from Burkina Faso; and the 
opening of traditional dance forms of Aus- 
tralian Aborigines to contemporary themes 
by the Aboriginal and Islander Dance The- 
atre and the Bangara Group in Sydney. 
Dancing on turf, earth and water 
This variety of contemporary dance, which 
is not even remotely covered by the label of 
post-modernism, is such that it is hard to 
predict how dance will develop. At the same 
time it gives grounds for hope that when one 
form or another runs out of steam the devel- 
opment of dance will not come to a standstill. 
Anove, the Russian dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov 
in 1977 in Push Comes to Shove, by the American 
choreographer Twyla Tharp. 
Below, German choreographer Pina Bausch’s 
The Rite of Spring (1995). 
 
Whatever happens, however, the free- 
doms won by the two dominant figures of 
recent decades, Merce Cunningham and 
Pina Bausch, are sustainable acquisitions that 
will shape the future of dance. In Cun- 
ningham’s case they include the abolition of 
the one-dimensional perspective and its 
replacement by an open, spatial view which 
corresponds in a sense to the world-view of 
modern physics. Bausch has raised the possi- 
bility of turning every human movement, 
however banal or routine (including the 
spoken word and singing) into choreography 
and of abandoning the classic dance stage in 
favour of more natural surfaces such as turf, 
carth and even water. 
© 
C.
 
Ma
ss
on
/M
. 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Gé
ly
/B
er
na
rd
, 
Pa
ns

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 102506: Post-modern dance: the latest figures

© 
Ha
ns
 
Ge
rr
it
se
n,
 
Ni
mw
eg
en
 
Concertante (1994), 
by the Dutch choreographer 
Hans van Manen. 
© 
Di
rk
 
Bu
wa
ld
a,
 
Ed
am
 
In future, there will be more and more 
dance pieces that will not be designed for the 
traditional theatre stage but for theatre in the 
round; more and more pieces in which the 
dancers speak and sing when movement 
alone is not enough to explain their action; 
more and more pieces that are not dedicated 
to a single dance code (such as the Martha 
Graham style or the José Limon technique); 
and many others in which mastery of con- 
ventional dance movements will not even be 
essential. It does not interest us here whether 
aquatic ballets in swimming pools and aerial 
ballets in which the dancers climb up and 
abseil down walls are an aesthetic fad or rep- 
resent genuine artistic progress. The fact is 
that they exist and are likely to become more 
widespread in the future. Falling Angels (1989), 
by the Czech choreographer 
Jiri Kylian. 
  

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  


### 102506: Post-modern dance: the latest figures

A list of the ways in which modern 
Western dance has fused with non-European 
dance forms may give the impression that 
Western style is increasingly influencing 
dance in non-Western cultures via a modern 
form of cultural colonialism. That impression 
is not totally incorrect, but in dance aesthetic 
influence is not a one-way street. Dance styles 
from outside Europe are increasingly gaining 
ground in the West. African and Asian dance 
forms are being transplanted to the West by 
migrants from those continents to their new 
homes in the West, and today a European or 
an American who wants to see authentic 
African or Asian dance does not necessarily 
have to travel to Africa or fly to Asia. Cities 
like New York, Los Angeles, London and 
Paris have much to offer in these fields. 
More and more Western dancers are 
beginning to study non-European dances as 
well as or instead of Western techniques, and 
their studies are naturally having an impact on 
their work. Today, many Western groups 
have assimilated Japanese Butd, and it is not 
Picture (1984), 
by Merce Cunningham (right). 
Gamia Barn (1990), 
by the Swedish choreographer 
Mats Ek. 
  
 
© 
C.
 
Ma
ss
on
/E
ng
ue
ra
nd
, 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
Ha
ns
 
Ge
rr
it
se
n,
 
N
i
m
w
e
g
e
n

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

© 
G.
 
St
ep
he
ns
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
© 
G.
 
St
ep
he
ns
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
 
Sécheresse et pluie (1995), 
by the Vietnamese 
choreographer Ea Sola. 
Naniakou (1995), 
a dance hased on Voodoo 
rites, by the Haitian 
choreographer Kettly Noél. 
 
 
necessary to have been born in Madras or 
Jaipur to master the subtleties of Bharata 
Natyam or Kathak. Influences of this sort can 
only enrich dance. The multicultural society 
of the kind which is developing in the capitals 
and big cities of many Western countries will 
also develop its own special dance profile and 
its contours will no longer be purely Western, 
something from which everyone will benefit. 
However, the influence of classical ballet 


### 102506: Post-modern dance: the latest figures

cannot be disregarded. Since modern dance 
and ballet buried the hatchet (in Episodes, 
staged jointly by Martha Graham and George 
Balanchine in New York in 1959), the two great 
Western concepts of dance have moved closer 
together. The spectator who sees choreog- 
raphy by the Swede Mats Ek, the Czech Jiri 
Kylian, the American William Forsythe, or the 
Dutchman Hans van Manen, will often not 
La la Ia Human Steps 
Infante (1991), 
by the Canadian 
choreographer 
Edouard Lock. 
© 
T. 
Va
lé
s/
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ns
 
know whether it is an example of ballet or the 
new form of dance. In any case, it does not 
really matter into which particular compart- 
ment the critics try to place Jiri Kylian’s solo 
Double You or Ek’s duo-ballet Grasse. 
Through their sheer quality such pieces influ- 
ence the neighbouring field of free dance. 
One thing is perfectly clear. In dance as in” 
pictorial art, the tendency to put less and less 
substance into the frame has gone. Mini- 
malism has had its day. It was probably neces- 
sary in order to chart the extreme limits of 
what could still just be described as dance. The 
trend today—in Japan and America, Germany 
and France—is back to more movement—all 
kinds of movement in all kinds of surround- 
ings. Dancers will have to dance and not stand 
still or sit motionless if we are to accept their 
performance as dance. _§

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

    
No and But are 
two very different 
forms of 
expression united 
by a common 
philosophy 
Above, “Eggs”, (1986), a 
Butod dance performed by the 
Sankai Juku Company. 
In N§, the most typical form of tradi- 
tional Japanese dance drama, there are no 
acrobatic leaps, no pirouettes, no movements 
intended to surprise the audience. The actor, 
whose body is not even fully stretched, moves 
about the stage with almost irritating slowness. 
It is hard to imagine what No could have 
in common with But, one of the leading 
contemporary forms of Japanese dance. On 
the face of it the two seem totally different. 
But when they are examined more closely it 
becomes clear that a conception of the body 
rooted in tradition is part of the philosophy 
of But. 
The body in N& 
Zeami Motokiyo (1363-1443), the author of 
the finest No& plays,” metaphorically 
tradition and renewal 
JAPAN 
i 


### 102513: Japan: reinventing the body

reinventing | 
the body 
I" 
RK Akira ina 
ti 
    
® 
C.
 
Ma
ss
on
/M
. 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s 
described the three essential qualities of a N& 
actor as “skin, flesh and skeletal structure”. 
The “skin” is visible beauty, the beauty of 
physical appearance and movements. 
“Flesh” is the range of techniques that the 
actor learns to master. “Skeletal structure” is 
the most important of the three. It refers to a 
physical intensity which must not be relaxed 
at any point in the performance. 
This intensity is the result of an inner ten- 
sion, not liveliness of movement or physical 
strength. It must exist even when the body is 
completely immobile, as when the dancer 
adopts the fundamental posture of NJ, 
kamae. Actor Hisao Kanze says that when a 
beginner is trained to practise kamae, “even 
in an unheated place in the depths of winter, 
all he has to do to forget the cold is to adopt

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

© 
J. 
Ma
rt
he
lo
t/
Sc
op
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
A Né performance in Kyoto. 
Actor in foreground is wearing 
the mask of an old man. 
” 
the posture”. No particular psychological 
effort is required. 
In fact, the exercise is not focused on the 
position of the body, but on muscular ten- 
sion and breathing technique. It is said that 
the powers of a N6 actor can be assessed 
simply on the basis of his kamae. The kamae 
of the greatest actors gives an impression of 
unshakable balance and a very strong pres- 
ence. The actor must achieve this physical 
intensity before he starts to perform on 
stage. 
For centuries, audiences all over the 


### 102513: Japan: reinventing the body

world have regarded the movements of the 
dancer’s body as transcending the everyday 
world. Japan is no exception to this rule. 
The lineage of traditional Japanese dance 
includes certain religious ceremonies during 
which a divinity borrows the carnal enve- 
lope of a miko, a female shaman, in order to 
 
appear in this world. During the ceremony, 
the body of the miko hovers on the edge of 
ordinary space and obeys principles dif- 
ferent from those that are familiar to us. 
In everyday life we only exploit the pos- 
sibilities of our bodies to a very limited 
extent. In Japan, the traditional martial arts, 
especially kendo (“the way of the sword”), 
attach great importance to the static “guard” 
position which is designated by the same 
name as the basic N& posture, kamae. 
Again, it is said that the strength of a budéka 
(a person who practises the martial arts) can 
be gauged simply from the way in which he 
adopts this posture. In the kamae position, 
the body of the budéka does not move an 
inch. Inwardly, however, all his muscles are 
poised to mobilize the maximum amount of 
energy. This does not mean that each 
muscle 1s tense but rather that not one is at 
rest. Consciousness is not focused on any 
single point of the body, but on all of them. 
Kamae is thus defined as a posture open to 
all eventualities, as virtual movement. 
Virtual movement 
In the same way, the kamae of a No actor 
contains latent energy that the spectator 
perceives in the form of corporeal intensity. 
This energy is revealed in static postures and 
slow movements. When the actor moves, 
the economic yield is particularly great 
because he knows how to use inertia and 
forces of reaction. 
Far greater tension and energy are 
needed to prevent a stick held vertically in 
the palm of the hand from toppling over 
than to stop it from falling to the ground. In 
the same way, a tremendous amount of 
inner control is needed to keep the body on 
an even keel while moving horizontally, and 
this means controlling the slightest physical 
mechanisms and expending considerable 
energy. It is important that the spectators 
should be able to realize that this inner effort 
1s taking place. Through this process, which 
is not rational in itself, the body appears to 
be completely controlled and reveals both 
its latent possibilities for movement and the 
amount of energy within it. Hence the 
impression of intensity that radiates from it. 
The prime objective of Nb is not so much 
movement as the creation of this corporeal 
intensity. Paradoxically, the surest way to 
achieve this goal is to restrain one’s move- 
ments. This is why Zeami’s teaching is based 
on the following principle: “Move the mind

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

A Butd dance performed by 
Kazuo Ohno. 
AKIRA AMAGASAKI 
is a Japanese university teacher 
whose published works include 
Kotoba to Shintai (“Language and 
the Body”, 1990) and En no 
Bigaku (“The Aesthetics of 
Relationships”, 1995). 
© Bernand, Pans 


### 102513: Japan: reinventing the body

ten tenths, the body seven tenths.” The 
remaining three tenths constitute potential 
movement and give the body its intensity. It 
is only later that the “flesh” of virtuosity and 
the “skin” of beauty arc engrafted onto the 
“skeletal structure” of the body. These arc 
the three elements without which N6 dance 
cannot achieve fulfilment. 
A cultural straitjacket 
Butd appeared around 1960, when it was 
created by Tatsumi Hijikata, a modern 
dancer without any experience of traditional 
Japanese dance. He wanted to base this new 
form of dance on his experience of life in his 
native village. Butd was a reaction against 
Western dance and traditional Japanese 
dance forms, both of which are part of an 
urban and aristocratic culture. 
The environment in which the young 
village boy grew up was grotesquely frag- 
mented. Everything was imperfect: nature, 
home, daily life. The only thing he was sure 
of was his vulnerable body. From childhood 
on his body was imprisoned in a cultural 
straitjacket by education. The prime func- 
tion of dance should thus be to reawaken 
the potential of a body stifled by culture. 
This is difficult because people cannot 
imagine possibilities that they have never 
known or imagined. All he knew was that 
he had to bring these lost opportunities back 
to the surface by a process that had nothing 
to do with reverting to childhood or to the 
state of primitive man. 
Performing and 
becoming 
“Butd 1s a corpse which gets to its feet at 
great risk to itself,” says Tatsumi Hijikata. If 
people rejected all the routine movements 
imprinted in their bodies, they might find it 
hard to stand upright. And yet they have to 
get to their feet and then stay upright. This is 
how their bodies can discover new possibil- 
ities, and this 1s the essence of Butd. Pre- 
cisely because it 1s utterly graceless and the 
antithesis of the cultural refinement 
achieved by No6 and kabuki, it should 
demonstrate the falsity of contemporary 
culture. If refined bodies are the products 
and victims of culture, the ugly, clumsy 
bodies of Butd destroy our conventional 
ideas about bodies and thence about the cul- 
tural system itself. 
Of course the body of each Buté dancer 
is unique. One may skilfully repress a feeling 
and let it simmer away inside himself in order 
to heighten the impact when it suddenly 
erupts to the surface. Another has the trans- 
parent vulnerable body of an angel. A third 
changes in response to a given place, time and 
audience. This has less to do with style or 
choreography than with individual talent. In 
every case, however, the Butd dancer must 
first kill his cultural body, become a corpse, 
and then stand upright. Only then does he 
have to know how to move. 
Whereas the Western dancer can be 
defined as someone who “performs” move- 
ments that are beyond the capacities of ordi- 
nary people, the N6 actor “becomes” 
someone on the edge of ordinary life. The 
Western dancer is above all a specialist in 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 102513: Japan: reinventing the body

movement. His training is largely based on 
acquiring great virtuosity by subjecting his 
body to strict discipline. The N6 dancer, on 
the other hand, lives his daily life with a per- 
fectly ordinary body, and on stage brings to 
life a body that is out of the ordinary. Con- 
trary to what happens in Western theatre, the 
artist does not use an actor’s skills to play the 
role of someone else or reproduce their feel- 
ings. His body starts to function according to 
a different principle. 
And so although Butd is at odds with 
accepted aesthetic models, it has certain 
similarities with N& in the sense that it is 
concerned with becoming rather than per- 
forming. It seeks primarily to bring to the 
surface a body which has hitherto been 
latent. “Performing” takes second place. 
Only the presence of this particular body 
(Zeami’s “skeletal structure”) allows the 
“flesh” (movement) and the “skin” (expres- 
sion) to come into play. When they do, says 
Zeami, “the instants when nothing is done 
become captivating”. Both Né and Buté 
dancers thus concentrate entirely on their 
inner selves; they try to capture the subtlest 
sensations of their bodies and control their 
slightest movements. Hence their extreme 
slowness. 
The elegant movements of N6, which 
are described by the adjective yiigen 
(obscure and profound) can only be made 
when the dancer has a vigorous body. By 
executing these movements the ballet 
dancer seems to float weightlessly. The N6 
dancer must be full of intensity before he 
can perform ydgen movements. It is clear 
that But6 has inherited N&’s conception of 
the body. This approach is not specific to 
Buté. Many teachers of modern Japanese 
dance, inspired by American and German 
schools, are not primarily concerned with 
movement but with increasing awareness of 
the body. 
Discovering the body means concen- 
trating on parts of it that usually escape per- 
ception, consciously making gestures that 
are usually made mechanically and thus 
becoming alert at every moment to what 
the body is saying. As a result of this dis- 
covery, which 
expression, the body must be consciously 
repossessed. This is the fundamental goal of 
dance. Expression is achieved through 
repossession of the body. | 
20 
is neither creation nor 


### 102514: The Arab world: steps to emancipation

ng fo 
Saki ii 
 
Women dancers 
in the Arab world 
are both admired 
and rejected 
by society 
The Tunisian dancer, teacher 
and choreographer Leila 
Haddad during a performance 
of Oriental dance in 1995. 
  © 
In
st
it
ut
 
du
 
Mo
nd
e 
Ar
ab
e,
 
Pa
ni
s 
Some years ago, at a wedding in 
Morocco, I was invited to go and see 
the hired dancers perform for the men (the 
women of the house having retired to their 
own quarters to entertain each other). Whilst 
I was watching one of the performers dance 
with a tray of lighted candles on her head, I 
became aware of a rustling and whispering 
above my head. I looked up at the balcony 
and caught a glimpse, between the wooden 
bannisters, of the women in their brightly 
coloured dresses. So eager were they to sce 
the hired troupe that they had crept softly out 
of their room and were crouched there, out 
of sight, enjoying the performance. 
Later, my Moroccan friend, knowing that 
I myself performed and wrote about Arabic 
dance, invited me to give a short improvisa-

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

tradition and renewal 
tion. Afterwards several of the Moroccans 
went over to my partner and shook his hand, 
congratulating him on my dancing and telling 
him I had danced “like a real Moroccan”. 
When they learned that I had danced in the- 
atres in my own country, they looked at me 
with curiosity. Why was I, a European, 
dancing in such a way and, moreover, in 


### 102514: The Arab world: steps to emancipation

front of strange men? And why, with my 
education, did I not belong to a “respectable” 
profession such as teaching? 
It was ten years ago that this happened, 
but almost the same situation obtains today 
vis-a-vis professional dance as it did then. 
For an Arab woman of my background it is 
almost unthinkable to contemplate a career 
as a professional dancer. It 1s uneducated 
women from the poorer classes who 
become dancers. Dancing in the home is one 
thing. Dancing in public is something else. 
Dancers may bring a sense of celebration and 
delight to social gatherings. They may thrill 
their audience with their grace and beauty 
and earthy sensuality, yet in the eyes of 
society they are nonetheless engaged in the 
lowest of professions. Indispensable at every 
wedding, they themselves are hardly consid- 
ered marriageable material. 
In this, their situation is no different from 
that of Western ballerinas a hundred years 
ago. Whilst opera was a popular art form, 
upper-class girls were not allowed to attend if 
a ballet was included in the opera. A balleri- 
na's costume in particular, which revealed 
her legs up to the thigh clad in salmon- 
coloured “fleshings”, was considered far too 
risqué for the innocent eyes of well-bred 
young ladies. 
Social outsiders 
Traditionally, Arab women dress splendidly 
in private, yet in public they are expected to 
conceal their charms beneath all-enveloping 
robes. If they display themselves in public 
and look about themselves too freely they 
lay themselves open to being dishonoured. 
Most Islamic societies have never looked 
kindly on dancers. In Islamic thought the 
sacred and the secular are indissolubly linked, 
and it follows that recreational pursuits must 
be reconciled with ethical principles. In tradi- 
tional Islamic society a woman's place is the 
home. 
Dancers have been the only women who 
have not only intruded upon a male environ- 
ment, but appeared unveiled in public. They 
are doubly disturbing to men in that their 
     
  h
a
 
Ja
 
E
e
 |
   — 
a
 
i
 
-
a
i
 
i: 
Samia Gamal, a legendary 
Egyptian dancer, in You're My 
Love (1949), a film by Ahmed 
Badrakhan. 
T
e
 
ie
 
a
 
0 
S
n
 
E
R
 
  
  
dance includes a strong sensual element. A 
woman who performs in public in front of 
strangers thus transgresses a traditional pro- 
hibition. Yet, paradoxically, she performs a 
necessary function in her society. For the 
presence of sensuality must be acknowl- 
edged somewhere in public life, and dancers 
are the expression of it. 
Professional performers were often out- 
siders, women from Gypsy and other 
minority groups, and while they paid lip ser- 
vice to Islam, they often maintained their old 
customs. 
In a sense, condemnation of public 
dancing by “respectable” women was advan- 
tageous to the poor, opening up a place for 
them in society which could not have been 
31 
r 
© 
Fi
lm
s 
Re
ge
nt
, 
Me
ud
on
, 
Fr
an
ce

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 102514: The Arab world: steps to emancipation

® 
Br
un
o 
Ba
rb
ey
, 
Ma
gn
um
, 
Pa
ri
s 
288 | 
 
filled by anyone else. And today, dancers 
enjoy benefits which counteract their pre- 
carious position in society. Their status as 
breadwinners inevitably lends them sclf- 
confidence and authority, as well as a 
freedom not permitted other women. This is 
reflected in popular descriptions of them. 
The Moroccan chikhat who travel from 
village to village, entertaining at family festiv- 
ities, are known as “women who do not want 
men to tell them what to do”. They are not 
necessarily denied marriage themselves, nor 
the rewards of a family, and indced, their 
male relatives are likely to be dependent on 
them for a living. It is an interesting reversal 
of the normal order in which men are the 
breadwinners and women, confined to the 
home, arc considered in their own society to 
be protected from the harsh realities of a 
cruel world. 
Mobility and independence 
In the Arab world a family generally hopes 
for the birth of a son rather than a daughter. 
Yet in an interview some time before his 
death, Yousef Maazin, the father of a famous 
Egyptian troupe, said that he had been lucky 
to have been blessed with so many beautiful 
daughters, for they had provided him with a 
handsome living. 
Yet despite their fame the Maazin sisters 
are acutely aware that, among their own 
people, they are not considered acceptable 
marriage partners. As one of them says: 
“The only time I wish I wasn’t a dancer is 
when a man from another tribe falls in love 
with me or one of my sisters. His family 
“would fight a war to stop him marrying a 
dancer, a girl who performs in front of 
others. They call us ghawazee, which means 
‘outsiders’, ‘invaders’. To them it’s a dirty 
32 
100 WIR 
An Oriental dance at a 
marriage in Fez (Morocco). 
word. But to us it means we invade their 
hearts and minds with our dancing.” 
In many respects dancers like the Maazin 
sisters can be regarded as fortunate. They are 
not obliged to conform to all the rules of 
society; their work gives them social 
mobility and independence; and though their 
position may be ambivalent, that in itself can 
be a kind of freedom. 
Arab films offer a fascinating insight into 
the social status of dancers, and also give a 
good idea of street morality and aspirations. 
They testify to the popularity of dancing by 
very often making the heroine a performer. 
The film Balak Min Zouzou (“Beware of 
Zouzou”, sec box) is one of the few Arab 
films which advances the proposition that 
there is nothing inherently shameful about 
being a dancer. But such a film is rare, and 
today Islamic fundamentalist groups are 
seeking to eradicate the public expression of 
sensual female dancing. Some performers 
have been bribed to stop dancing, and in 
some cases less protected dancers have been 
beaten up. 
  
A career in dance 
At the other end of the spectrum, the situa- 
tion is more encouraging. For a new genera- 
tion of dancers is emerging among educated 
women from middle-class families who have 
such a love of Arabic dance that they are pre- 
pared to withstand convention and family 
pressure in order to pursue a career about 
which they are passionate. In the Middle East 
a theatre structure does not exist for the bold, 
sensual women’s solo dancing known as rags 
sharqi; folk dance alone is encouraged and 
sponsored by the government in countries 
such as Egypt, Lebanon and Tunisia. 
Dina is a celebrated performer in her 
twenties. She has a university degree, studied 
ballet as a child and danced in a government- 
A LYRIC OF LOVE 
The solo dance of Arab women, known as rags shargi or oriental dance, has for centuries exercised 
a fascination on men and women alike, both in the West and in the Arab world. Western travel liter- 
ature is full of lengthy descriptions of it. In the mid-nineteenth century, an American journalist, G. 
W. Curtis, witnessed a performance by the legendary Kutchuk Hanem, whom many travellers jour 
neyed up the Nile to visit at Esna. He wrote: 
“The sharp surges of sound swept around the room, dashing in regular measure against her 
movelessness, until suddenly the whole surface of her frame quivered in measure with the music. 
Her hands were raised, clapping the castanets, and she slowly turned upon herself, her right leg the 
pivot, marvellously convulsing all the muscles of her body. There was no graceful dancing—only the 
movement of dancing when she advanced, throwing one leg before the other as gypsies dance. But 
the rest was most voluptuous motion—not the lithe wooing of languid passion but the soul of 
passion starting through every sense, and quivering in every limb. It was the very intensity of 
motion, concentrated and constant. It was profoundly dramatic; a lyric of love which words cannot 
tell; profound, Oriental, intense and terrible,” W.B.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 102514: The Arab world: steps to emancipation

   
Souad Osny, the star of Beware of Zouzou (1972), 
 
EDR FATED REA EEE LEAR ETE 
ZOUZOU DEFENDS HER ART 
In the film Khali Balak Min Zouzou {Beware of Zouzou), Zouzou is a student who has paid her way 
through college by dancing in her mother’s troupe. She has kept this fact a secret, but has decided 
to give up dancing because she has fallen in love with a college professor. Zouzou's lover breaks 
off a former engagement, and his ex-fiancee discovers Zouzou's secret. A wedding is to be cele- 
brated at the lover's home. Unknown to Zouzou, the abandoned fiancee arranges for Zouzou's 
mother's troupe to entertain at this wedding. Meanwhile, there is a poignant scene in which 
Zouzou admits that she has loved working in the troupe, and tells her mother, “I used to sit at your 
feet and watch you dance. You were so beautiful. Why should we be ashamed of what we do?” 
The day of the wedding dawns. Zouzou, who is there as her lover's guest, sees her mother's 
troupe arrive, and in a moment of grand confusion everyone realizes Zouzou's connection with 
them. Her mother is so humiliated for her daughter that she stops dancing. But Zouzou, rising mag- 
nificently to the occasion, ties a scarf round her hips and performs in her mother's place. She 
ends by giving a dignified defence of her art. 
When this film was originally screened in Lebanon some years ago it created quite a stir. For the 
first time, rags shargi was portrayed as being acceptable for its own sake. That women should 
dance for the joy of it, and even take it up as an honourable profession, were startling notions. 
Many women in the audience jumped up and began to applaud, and it would be nice to think that 
some of them danced in the aisles. W.B. 
funded folk troupe early on in her career. 
Today she is one of the most popular cabaret 
performers in Egypt. Her family still has not 
accepted her change of career, despite her 
fame. She says her ambition is to open a 
dance school for children. But she knows 
that she will not be able to obtain a licence 
from the government to do this. And even if 
it were possible, no women would send their 
little girls along to her school. 
Yet who knows what will happen in the 
future? For, ten years ago, it would have 
been unthinkable for a woman with her 
background to even contemplate such a 
career. I know and have worked with 
women from similar backgrounds to Dina’s, 
women from Egypt, Iran, Lebanon and 
Tunisia who are treading the path of profes- 
sional dance, but this time with significant 
differences. 
One difference is that they are sccking 
ways in which to develop and expand rags 
sharqi in a theatrical context. They perform 
not in cabarets but at festivals of the per- 
forming arts. They teach at dance studios in 
© 
In
st
it
ut
 
du
 
Mo
nd
e 
Ar
ab
e,
 
Pa
ns
 
 
Europe and America, where a craze for this 
dance has spread like wildfire over the past 
ten years or so. They have to contend with 
considerable family pressure in order to go 
this way, and more than one of them has not 
felt able to tell her family back home what 
she does for a living. For these women all 
have one thing in common: they have left 
their native countries, and are working 
within a context of Western art and theatre. 
A Tunisian friend with whom I have per- 
formed has found opposition from an unex- 
pected quarter. Performing at an arts festival 
in Tunis she encountered a group of Tunisian 
feminists who said to her, “Why do you try 
and take this dance into the theatre? Why not 
leave it where it belongs? In cabarets and 
clubs?” My friend went on, “For them, intel- 
ligent women must only use their heads, sac- 
rificing their bodies and denying their sensual 
side.” 
In the non-Christian world the sensuous 
arts have always been celebrated. Ironically, 
by accepting the puritan cthics of their 
Western counterpart, feminists such as these 
deny a vital, life-enhancing aspect of their 
own culture. And it is this sensual aspect of 
the dance that has proved such an attraction 
to the thousands of Western women who 
are now flocking to studios in the major 
cities of Europe and America to learn Arabic 
dance. nu 
Tania Carioca, one of the 
great exponents of Oriental 
dance, in Niazi Moustafa’s 
film The Magic Bonnet (1942). 
© 
Fi
lm
s 
Re
ge
nt
, 
Me
ud
on
 
WENDY BUONAVENTURA 
is an Anglo-Italian dancer, dance 
troupe director and teacher of 
Oriental dance in the United 
Kingdom. 
a3

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 102515: Greece: a living museum

        
  
- 
A unique theatre 
1S preserving 
anation’s folklore 
A carnival dance from 
Naousa, northwestern Greece. 
ES 0 Lm Ss 
ALKIS RAFTIS 
is a Greek sociologist who is 
president of the Dora Stratou 
Theatre of Greek Dances, in 
Athens. A member of the 
International Dance Council, he 
has published several works on 
dance, including The World of 
Greek Dance (1987). 
prey 
  
He 
On the pine-covered Philopappus Hill 
opposite the Acropolis in Athens 
stands an open-air theatre that has become an 
institution now almost as famous as its neigh- 
bour across the road. It houses the Dora 
Stratou Theatre of Greek Dances, which was 
founded in 1953. Justly called “the living 
museum of Greek dances”, it is at the same 
time a museum, a theatre, a research institute, 
a school and, of course, a dance troupe. 
The theatre is unique in many ways, not 
least in the way it recruits its dancers. Every 
year in January, dancers from all over Greece 
come to the theatre and rchearse alongside 
the older members of the company. They 
N Y 
Ly 
1% 
Alkis Raftis      ed 
© The Dora Stratou Theatre of Greek Dances, Athens 
continue to do so for about three months, by 
which time the ones who don’t make the 
grade will have left, a process which brings 
the numbers down to around thirty. From 
this group a final selection of new dancers 
can be made before performances begin in 
May. 
Once they are in the company, dancers 
are required to work three hours a day 
(including rehearsals and performances), 
seven days a week for the five months of the 
summer season. Since they are paid only a 
small fee for expenses, it is obvious that for 
the dedicated core of dancers this is a labour 
of love.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 102515: Greece: a living museum

What the audience sces on stage each 
night is the result of months of painstaking 
work—not only in the form of rehearsals but 
also research. Every step a dancer performs 
has its roots in history and village culture. 
The process begins when the theatre 
decides on a particular village or island it 
wants to include in its programme. A team of 
folklorists is sent to gather information about 
the history and folk customs of the area. 
Then a team from the theatre, often joined by 
a few dancers, goes to the village and stays 
there for at least a few days in order to make 
contact with the local people and study their 
culture. 
They conduct informal interviews with 
the older members of the village, who are 
encouraged to play traditional music and 
dance for their guests. The music and dances 
are recorded and the recordings are taken 
back to Athens to be studied by musicians 
and dancers from the theatre. 
A group of villagers is also invited to 
Athens, where members of the company 
have the opportunity to dance and play 
music with them and absorb their particular 
style of execution. As unofficial “goodwill 
ambassadors” for their local culture the vil- 
lagers are usually filled with pride, and feel a 
renewed interest in keeping it alive at home. 
At present the company has eighty different 
villages in its repertoire and each year onc or 
two more are added to the list. 
The principle used for dance research is 
applied to music as well. Special attention is 
given to the unique style of singing and 
playing in each village and the particular 
instruments that are popular there. The the- 
atre has two singers and fifteen permanent 
folk musicians who play for rehearsals and 
performances every day. No recorded music 
is used, in order to maintain the personal rap- 
port between dancers and musicians which is 
inherent in folk culture. 
Great emphasis is also placed on the per- 
formers’ attire. The theatre houses the 
country’s biggest collection of traditional 
Greek costumes—2,500 at the last count— 
half of which are between fifty and a hundred 
years old. The costumes cannot be bought in 
shops and are either sold to the theatre by 
elderly villagers or else the villagers are asked 
to make them, using traditional weaving, 
dyeing and embroidery techniques. 
As the “preserver of traditional Greek 
dance” and a cultural centre for Greek folk- 
lore, one of the most important of the the- 
atre’s activities is spreading the dance mcs- 
sage via courses for beginners, advanced 
dancers and children. Regular weekend 
workshops are held featuring dance, music 
and costumes from a particular region. The 
- -~ > a 
= — 3 ri CAD 7 
© The Dora Stratou Theatre of Greek Dances, Athens 
A couple performing a dance 
from Kimi, a village on the 
Theatre also holds summer courses for non- island of Euboea. 
Greck dance teachers from other countries 
who want to incorporate Greek traditional 
dance into their teaching programmes; this is 
a particularly good way of ensuring that the 
traditions of Greek dance are kept alive the 
world over. 
Finally, the Theatre acts as a publishing 
house. It has produced forty-five records and 
cassettes, as well as numerous ethnographic 
books, all dealing with the different aspects of 
Greek dance, costumes and music. | | 
  
The International Dance Council (IDC) 
“Dance,” wrote the French philosopher Roger Garaudy, “is a way of existing.” By 
changing with the times and being receptive to a wide range of cultures, it can 
express life in all its richness and diversity. Studying dance in other cultures than our 
own does not involve copying but enriching the vocabulary of dance by asking new 
questions and giving new answers to prepare the body to translate our relationship 
with the world into movement. 
The International Dance Council, which was founded with UNESCO support in 
1973, has taken this concept of dance as a total art and a universal language as the 
framework of its activities. The Council seeks to promote all forms of dance by safe- 
guarding it as part of the intangible artistic heritage, and by encouraging choreo- 
graphic and choreological creation and research and their integration into general 
education. In collaboration with UNESCO, it also encourages the creation of spe- 
cialized documentation centres, the setting up of national committees, the organi- 
zation of congresses, festivals and competitions and the training of dancers. 
IDC-UNESCO, 1 rue Miollis, 75015 Paris, France. Postal address: 75732 Paris Cedex 15. 
Tel.: (33-1) 45 68 25 53; Fax: (33-1) 43 06 87 98.   

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 102516: India: the dancer's dilemma

         
    
    
lt ET i me TE 
tradition and renewal 
the dancer 5 deine: 
by. Romain Mims 
Can the sacred 
language of Indian 
choreography be 
adapted to the 
modern world? 
Fa right, Kumari Alarmel 
Valli, an exponent of Bharata 
Natyam, a form of classical 
dance drama from southern 
India (1995). 
Right, Indian dancer 
Shantala Shivalingappain a 
figure from kuchipudi, a form 
of Bharata Natyam performed 
in Andhra Pradesh (1995). 
© 
Ma
rc
 
En
gu
er
an
d,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 102516: India: the dancer's dilemma

fol" 
3 
  
Hl 
=i" 
Il 
q 
Indian classical dance reveals a world 
that is normally beyond the reach of 
our senses. Every aspect of it has a sacred 
dimension, reflecting its origins as a sacred 
temple ritual designed to propitiate the gods. 
The two chief Hindu gods, Shiva and 
Krishna, are closely associated with dance, 
which is described in an ancient treatise, 
Bharata’s Natya Shastra, as an offering to God, 
a cleansing of the soul, a path to salvation and 
an expression of God within oneself. 
The overwhelming impact of a perfor- 
mance of Indian classical dance today is made 
by its sculptural quality, its symmetrical 
beauty and its stylized grace. Following intri- 
cate rhythms the dancer makes sinuous con- 
vulsions which culminate in timeless poses 
when he or she seems solidified, a statue with 
the unresisting density of honey poured 
upon honey. 
Sensuous and spiritual 
The ethos of Indian dance is both sensuous 
and spiritual. The dynamism of the human 
form becomes a vehicle in which the dancer 
embodies imperishable spirit and noble sen- 
timent. In the Natya Shastra, Bharata writes: 
“Having made the invocation, the dancing 
must begin. The song should be sustained in 
the throat; the mood (bhava) must be 
shown by the glances and the time (tala) be 
marked by the feet. Wherever the hand 
moves, there the glances follow. Where the 
glances go, the mind follows. Where the 
mind goes, the mood follows. Where the 
mood goes, there lies the flavour (rasa).” It is 
said that the ideal spectator relishes this rasa, 
or rather that the rasa is reflected in the 
  
spectator. To witness classical dance-forms 
such as Bharata Natyam, Odissi or Kathak 1s 
to face a mirror in which one’s spiritual self is 
reflected. 
In classical dance a distinction is made 
between pure dance sequences (nritta) and 
mimetic and interpretative gestures (nritya). 
The dancer uses his or her entire body for 
abhinaya or dramatic interpretation, but 
chiefly the face and the hands, with two 
modes of interpretation—lokadharmi (real- 
istic) and natyadharmi (stylized). It is 
through the latter mode that imaginative sug- 
gestions are made, much to the aesthetic 
delight of the rasika (connoisseur). 
The legendary Bharata Natyam dancer 
Balasaraswati believed that dignified restraint 
was the hallmark of abhinaya. In her own 
words, “Even in the best of laughter, there is 
a restraint on the mouth movement, even at 
the height of wonder, there is a limit for 
opening the eyes, even in the white heat of 
amorous sport, the danscuse has no use for 
movements of the torso but gestures only 
through the face and hands. This decency, 
decorum and dignity impart to Bahrata 
Natyam its divine character.” 
Fixed in time 
Unlike other Indian art forms such as 
painting, sculpture and theatre, the dominant 
dance culture of urban and modern India has 
not entered into dialogue with changing 
times. For centuries Indian dancers have 
been evoking Krishna’s divine pranks and 
the moods of archetypal nayikas (heroines). 
Why does Indian dance not reflect the issues 
of contemporary life? 
nr = 1a : 
ig J 3 ar bs 
: rn Ade 4 fe Lo i 
: 2 . 
37 
© 
Co
le
tt
e 
Ma
ss
on
/M
. 
En
gu
er
an
d.
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 102516: India: the dancer's dilemma

    
@ 
La
ur
en
t 
Pi
ns
ar
d,
 
Av
ig
no
n 
 
   
—— 
   
obo t avin 
© Roben Renard, Cheval-8lanc 
Lett, a sketch made by French 
artist Robert Renard during a 
performance of the sacred 
Indian dance form known as 
Odissi at the 1995 Avignon 
Festival (France). © 
Ra
gh
ub
ir
 
Si
ng
h/
AN
A,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 102516: India: the dancer's dilemma

  
Lett, Manakal (Invoking time), 
a modern Indian dance based 
on Hindu tradition. 
Choreography by 
Chandralekha (1995). 
Opposite page below, a 
Bharata Natyam-style dance in 
honour of Shiva, performed in 
a Tamil Nadu temple. 
Below, dancers Vampati Ravi 
Shankar and Shantala 
Shivalingappa flank their 
teacher, Vampati Chinna 
Satyam, during a performance 
of kuchipudidance. 
In view of the freedom that modern 
choreography demands, its natural place is in 
the Western dance idiom, a salient feature of 
which is the organization of horizontal space. 
It could be said that Indian classical dance is 
organized along vertical lines. The dense 
vocabulary of its movements is not the stuff 
for free-flowing exploration of space. Rather 
it aspires to move in time, from rhythmic 
time to timeless frozen postures. 
However, if the dominant dance culture 
in modern India is to find creative vitality and 
freshness, perhaps it should redefine some 
of its values and articulate a conviction for 
creative freedom. A new synthesis should be 
created. 
And yet quite a few independent Indian 
dancers and choreographers have forged 
links between their traditional roots and their 
experiences and feelings of contemporary 
life. Some have searched for new repertoires 
and texts; others have sought inspiration 
from the myriad forms of folk dances in 
India or have made a fusion of Indian and 
Western dance genres. 
One hopes, then, that the timeless theatre 
of the Indian spirit will increasingly be dotted 
with niches of individual creative statements 
of dance, without tipping Saraswati or 
Ganesh from their pedestals. Like its dancers 
who bend and angle their physiques so 
gracefully, let Indian dance culture be more 
flexible today. | 
EE ETE TE 
ROMAIN MAITRA 
is an Indian journalist and critic 
specializing in dance and the 
visual arts. 
  © 
Gé
ly
/B
er
na
nd
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

Un
es
co
/G
il
 
Ja
cq
ue
s,
 
Mo
nt
re
al
 
  
  
he construction of peace must begin at 
the moment when life begins. More than 
ever before, we must struggle to ensure 
that the inalienable principle of the right to rights 
applies to all citizens; more than ever before, soci- 
etics must reject violence and corruption; more 
than ever before, all social forces—civil, military 
and religious—must combine their efforts, skills 
and imagination in the search for new solutions to 
new problems which can only be solved by spiri- 
tual force. More than ever before, we must turn 
our backs on inertia and routine, and become the 
architects of our own destiny. 
We must make constant efforts to identify and 
address the economic, social, ideological and polit- 
ical causes of all forms of discrimination, humilia- 


### 102533: A New outlook for humanity

tion and deep-rooted inequality that can give rise 
to rivalry and confrontation. 
If there is to be a fresh flowering of life on earth 
it will need to grow out of a firm alliance between 
culture and nature, in which knowledge and pop- 
ular wisdom must play their part alongside the 
great advances of science and technology. 
We are now approaching the end of the twen- 
tieth century, one of the most violent in the history 
of humanity. Between two Balkan wars we have 
COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR 
ANEW OUTLOOK FOR 
HUMANITY 
witnessed two worldwide conflagrations and 
dozens of regional and local conflicts. It has been a 
century tragically marked by violence. At the same 
time, the good sced that lies dormant in humankind 
has sprouted into hope for the future, based on an 
awareness of our common destiny as a planetary 
society and the realization that we are all citizens of 
the world, with the rights and duties this entails. 
Educating by example 
At the dawn of a new century and a new millen- 
nium let us assume the responsibilities of this new 
citizenship which does not conflict with our citi- 
zenship of birth, but enriches and complements it. 
One of the dilemmas we must overcome is the 
apparent contradiction between the universal and 
the local, the global and the national. We must 
respect, safeguard and nurture diversity. The elim- 
ination of differences is dangerous not only in cul- 
tural terms, because it leads to standardization and 
uniformization; worse still it contributes to the 
creation of an indifferent, undifferentiated world. 
We can only aspire to universality if we have a 
strong awareness of our local roots. And the more 
generous we are in universal terms and the more 
respectful of others the stronger our national iden- 
tity will become. As the Spanish poet Antonio 

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 102533: A New outlook for humanity

Machado put it: “A good description of your own 
village will make you universal”. And an old adage 
reminds us that “In the beginning was our region; 
the world was given to us as a bonus”. 
High walls which once seemed impregnable 
have been brought down by the irresistible force 
of the human longing for freedom, dignity and the 
affirmation of identity. But new walls have been 
built by the uneven distribution of wealth between 
and within nations, and by disparities arising from 
the production and use of knowledge and from 
ethnic and religious differences. 
To combat racism, xenophobia and discrimina- 
tion, we must teach by example. Children will not 
take their cue from what we say to them, but from 
what we do. Youth, sport, music, unselfish com- 
petition, learning to win and lose—all these activi- 
ties, together with “history without war” must 
now become the core of a new kind of teaching— 
and nothing teaches more than love—for the 
world’s children and young people. 
Ethical principles 
If we are to construct a culture of peace, we must 
be inspired by ethical principles, not market forces 
or opinion polls, since what really matters in the 
final analysis 1s not the free market but free people. 
Ethics signifies coherence between what we preach 
and what we do, between what we say and our real 
motivations. And, to quote Bolivian stateman José 
Luis Tejada, we must not remain silent “when we 
could have spoken and should have spoken, and 
loudly at that”. “I should have cried out when I saw 
that the dawn was under threat, but I felt sadness 
and fear.” Our concern with economic deficits 
must not allow us to forget that spiritual deficits are 
at the root of the problems that beset us. 
The twenty-first century can be the century of 
“justice and dignity” proclaimed in UNESCO's 
Constitution. It will be a century of peace or it will 
be nothing; it will be a century of lasting develop- 
ment or it will be nothing; it will be a century of 
imagination and creativity or it will be nothing; it 
will be a golden age of solidarity and love or it will 
be nothing; 1t will be a century of reconciliation 
and the rehabilitation of the excluded or it will be 
nothing. If the twenty-first century is to be equal 
to our dreams and hopes and Utopia is to be made 
possible, we must be bold and dare to change. 
The twenty-first century will come into its own 
if we are capable of demolishing the barriers within 
us that deny access to a new form of civilization. It 
will come into its own if we can surmount new 
obstacles such as those preventing the full, just and 
egalitarian development of women; those that 
hamper the legitimate aspirations of young people 
to play a full part in society; and those that discrim- 
inate against ethnic minorities and condemn them 
to wretched and hopeless lives. The Indian scholar 
and statesman Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan warned 
us of this at the very first session of UNESCO’s Gen- 
eral Conference, when he said: “UNESCO stands not 
merely for a new set of adjustments but for a new 
way of life, a new outlook, a new philosophy which 
will inspire humanity. . . . What 1s essential today 1s 
not so much the rehabilitation of schools and 
libraries, or shops and factories, as the rehabilitation 
of man. We must recreate man if we are to recreate 
a new world community. | 
41 
 

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 102534: The Temple of Apollo the Helper

& 
The temp! & e templ
of Apollo 
the Helper 
by Takis 
Theodoropoulos 
On a grandiose and lonely site in the 
Peloponnese, the majestic ruins of an 
ancient Greek temple registered on the 
World Heritage List in 1986  
© Andritsaina/ICOMCS 
LB : I I first set eyes on the temple of perched on the edge of steep cliffs or 
: - Apollo Epicurius (the Ilelper), at hidden away in remote places, seemingly 
i \ Bassac in Arcadia, in the late 1970s. At at the mercy of a landscape ready to 
: ~ that time it was not covered by the tar- engulf them. 
~ paulin which shrouds it during restora- The temple’s architeet—whether it 
~ tion work today. was letinus, the architect of the 
ls columns came into view atabendin ~~ Parthenon, as is widely thought, or 
Bassae ® b the road that climbs from Andritsena to someone else—did not [eel that kind of 
Bassae. A set of slender shadows in a 
lonely place, silhonettes designed to cap- 
ture the essential relationship of the 
haman body with space, they seemed pre- 
destined to occupy this lofty site which 
dominates the surrounding countryside. 
But had not the temple of Segesta in 
Sicily inspired the same thoughts? Do I 
not feel the same whenever 1 sce the 
ruins of Delphi appear beneath the 
Castalian rocks? Do I net always come 
to the same conclusion in snmmer when 
I sit on the tiered scats of the theatre at 
Epidavrus and contemplate the sunset 
while waiting for the performance to 
begin? Before they devoted themselves 
to the joys of arithmetic and geometry, 
the ancient Greeks had carefully 
observed the landscape aronnd them. 
But in choosing to build the temple 
of Apollo Epicurins on this isolated site, 
devoid of any trace of human presence, 
they laced a particular challenge. This 
is a [ar cry from Byzantine monasteries 
humility. lle had no need of a mediator 
to converse with his god, a god of light 
and observation. 
A MOMENT OF HARMONY 
On my way to the summit, among the 
builder’s ruhble—a jumble of rocks left 
by time and the elements—I discovered 
the surrounding countryside. In the dis- 
tance I could see the massif of 
Taygetus, and beneath it the oval bulk 
of Mount Ithomus, then a stretch of the 
Ionian Seca, and the peaks of Arcadia 
beyond. Through some miracle of light, 
this immense landscape had become 
accessible. 
This impression is familiar to those 
who know and love the rugged outlines of 
the Peloponnesian landscape. If you see 
it steadily and sec it whole, then the 
horizon, without ever losing its depth, is 
never [ar away. But on the pitted lloor of 
this ancient temple, through columns 
which scemed to have absorbed into their

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 102534: The Temple of Apollo the Helper

flesh the shadows of the setting sun, the 
phenomenon was at last explained. The 
temple seemed to have been designed to 
be the virtual centre of a world which had 
become circular and complete. 
Built in grey Arcadian limestone and 
not in the white marble from Pentelicus 
which gives the Parthenon its trans- 
parency and brilliance, the temple of 
Apollo Epicurius sharpens your powers 
of observation and whets your curiosity. 
Its architecture encourages one to 
look at the landscape in a new way. Secn 
from this temple built I,I100 metres 
above sea level, mountain peaks, sca, 
and patches of dark green stipple the 
harsh grey-green tones of the Arcadian 
landscape, so that a world which a 
moment earlier seemed indifferent, like 
  
Opposite page, 
the temple of Apollo the Helper near Bassae in the 
Arcadian mountains of Greece. 
Above, one side of the Doric outer colonnade. 
Above right, a tentlike tarpaulin covers the 
temple during restoration. 
a story without beginning or end, 
beeomes an open book and can at last 
be properly observed. 
The French 
described ancient architecture as “the 
philosopher Alain 
moment of harmony between the view- 
point of everyone and the unique world 
® 
St
ud
io
 
Ma
no
s 
Ga
ll
eg
os
, 
At
he
ns
 
which is common to all and different for 
all.” 
AN OUTBREAK OF PLAGUE 
But without their history, without the 
many histories that jostle behind their 
barrier of silence when we discover them 
in an undulating landscape, ancient roins 
would doubtless he no more than beau- 
tiful objects. That is why 1 have always 
preferred archaeological sites to 
museums. In their native disorder, in the 
midst of their natural surroundings, old 
stones are redolent of human activity, 
reminding us that they are the traces of 
a bygone age which can be eonjured up 
by looking at them with eare. 
As 1 look at the temple of Apollo 
Epicurius and as 1 learn about Ictinus, 1 
find myself imagining the Parthenon’s 
exiled architect walking the paths of 
Arcadia, a region set apart from his- 
tory’s great highways, where stories of 
werewolves were still told and the loeal 
soat-legged god, Pan, held sway. 
Why did letinus have to leave 
Athens? Perhaps he was afraid of 
meeling the same fate as his ailing eol- 
league Phidias, whom the Athenian 
democracy, suspicious of those who had 
the temerity to distinguish themselves, 
accused of stealing gold from the statue 
 
i 
@ Studio Manos Gallegos, Athens 
of Athena Parthenos and then threw 
into prison where he died. Perhaps he 
simply needed work. Perhaps, as he saw 
the Pcloponnesian War drag on and state 
money being spent on building more and 
more ships, he deeided to leave Athens 
and earn his living in Areadia. 
Whatever the truth may have heen, 
itis known thatin 420 B.C., around the 
time when the temple was built, there 
was an outbreak of plague in Arcadia. 
In order to escape the danger of 
infeetion, the inhabitants of the nearby 
city of Phigalia sought protection from 
Apollo. Like other Greek divinities, this 
god from the north, who had learned 
the art of divination from Pan and 
ordained the fate of the Greek world by 
returning the Pythian oraeles to Delphi, 
had many, sometimes contradictory, 
functions. One of his leading roles was 
to proteet medicine, and it was in grati- 
tude for his qualities as a healer that 
the Phigalians referred to him as “the 
Helper”. To thank him for delivering 
them from the plague, they built a 
dwelling for him at Bassae. 
“The city of Phigalia is surrounded 
by mountains. . . . Mount Kotilion is 
located about forty stages from the city 
where there is a place called Bassae, 
and the temple of Apolle Epicurius”, 
43

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 102534: The Temple of Apollo the Helper

wrote the 2nd-century-A.D. Greek trav- 
eller and historian Pausanias (Arcadia, 
XLI, 7). Pausanias noted that the 
temple was more harmonious and beau- 
tiful than all others in the Peloponnese, 
but only devoted a few sentences to it. A 
little further on he admits that he jour- 
neyed to Phigalia to make a sacrifice to 
Demeter in her sanctuary. 
AN UNUSUAL SANCTUARY 
I wonder whether Pausanias actually 
went as far as Bassae. If he had, would 
he not have written a few lines to 
describe the low-reliel sculptures on 
the pediments and the frieze inside the 
temple showing Greeks fighting the 
Amazons and Centaurs fighting the Lap- 
iths? Would he not have been surprised 
by the building’s unusual orientation, 
which breaks one of the ground-rules of 
the sacred architecture of Antiquity, 
namely that the entrance to a temple 
should be in the east and that the 
statue of the god should be at the far 
end of the building, on the western side, 
looking towards the entrance? 
Built on a narrow platform in a moun- 
AN ORIGINAL TEMPLE 
BW Built at Bassae {altitude 1,130 metres) in 
the Peloponnese on the territory of the Arca 
dian city-state of Phigalia. 
BW Begun in the second half of the 5th cen 
tury B.C. by lctinus (according to the Greek 
geographer Pausanias) and completed by 
another architect in the first quarter of the 4th 
century B.C. 
HB A peripteral temple (i.e. with a single row of 
columns around it), with an extremely elon- 
gated ground-plan (39.87 metres by 16.13 and 
6 x 15 columns), and an unusual north-south 
alignment; built largely in local grey limestone. 
HB Most remarkable innovation: first recorded 
use of a Corinthian capital. 
HB An outer Doric colonnade surrounds the 
inner portico (pronaos) and the cella (naos), 
interspersed at regular intervals by engaged 
lonic columns acting as buttresses. A long 
frieze of sculpted marble (now in the British 
Museum) adorned the interior of the naos, por- 
traying combat between Greeks and Amazons 
and Lapithae and Centaurs. 
Hl The temple had a considerable influence on 
the monuments built in the 4th century B.C. at 
Delphi and in the Peloponnese, especially at 
Epidaurus. 
a4 
tainous valley (the ancient meaning of 
the place-name assae or Bessae is 
“small valley”)—the temple is aligned 
from north to south. This unusual ori- 
entation, imposed by the lie of the land, 
confirms the ancient Greek adage 
whereby one should not break the rules 
unless compelled to do so. 
When the temple was finished, the 
Phigalians and their architect faced the 
tricky problem of where to put Apollo. 
They had chosen this lofty site so that 
the god could dominate the surrounding 
countryside, but they could not have 
him look towards the remote and 
sombre north whenee he had come. This 
seems to have heen why they chose the 
most economical solution. The statue 
was duly placed at the far end of the 
temple, but facing the east wall, where 
a hole was pierced so that the god could 
see the sunlight, and, I imagine, present 
a fine Greek profile to visitors. 
I fear that Apollo may have felt 
slighted at having to endure this 
unusual location for so many eenturies. 
It is certain that these stories, these 
infringements of the rules, reveal the 
  
    
                   
  
9 ®@ @®@ ® @ © T 
i 
|| @ 
1 ! 
H 
| @ ® 
[) 
1 
||@ ® 
: : 
i : 
3 
i 
| @ ® 
i i 
le ® 
. a 
l® ol i { o 
Q 
! = 
L7] 
] EF] 
i||@ = 
1 p=} 
L 5 
“ 
i 2 
i) ® z 
ks 
bt 
[2] 
@ ® @®| = 
tv 
0 
o 
£ ° ol : 2 
@ 
8 
© 
Qo @® = 
| = 
Qo 
> 
8 
© ® 0 © 6 © & = 
fr} 
g 
ritual of a religion whose laws were not 
recorded in writing, whieh left the 
sweet smell of anareliy behind it as well 
as great works of art, thus confirming 
the impression that it was designed to 
accept life on a ruman scale and not cut 
it down to size in Procrustean fashion, 
or magnify it to emulate the gods. 
A WOUNDED BODY 
Today, beneath its white tarpaulin, the 
temple of Apollo Epicurius looks like a 
massive wounded body lying in an oper- 
ating theatre while it receives emergency 
treatment. It has many wounds, and for a 
life that has lasted so many eenturies 
intensive care may take decades. 
Many of the Dorie columns on the 
outside are dangerously askew. Inside 
the temple, the engaged lonie columns 
forming buttresses rest on ground rav- 
aged by time, winter snow and eartl- 
quakes. The last two frame a single 
Corinthian column, perhaps the oldest 
specimen of its kind, near to which the 
statue of the god once stood. 
This isolated temple long remained 
in the shadows. It was not until 1765 
that it was discovered by the Freneh 
architect Joachim Bocher. In 1812 the 
site was visited by the Society of Dilet- 
tanti, a group of antiquarians from 
Britain and other European eountries. 
The visitors drew the bas-reliefs of the 
metopes and any transportable object 
that came to hand—including the 
marble parts of the wooden statue of 
Apollo—and returned two years later to 
remove them, on the orders of the 
future King George IV. Since then their 
booty has been in the British Museum, 
near the Parthenon friezes. Fortunately, 
the temple columns were solidly 
implanted and were too massive to he 
carried by the mules which transported 
the bas-reliefs to the port of Kyparissia. 
The columns have stayed where they 
arc, stubbornly resisting the passage of 
time, pillars of authentieity amidst the 
luminous lines of the landscape which 
saw their birth. nN 
TAKIS THEODOROPOULOS 
is a Greek journalist and novelist.

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### IGNORE

M.
 
Ph
il
ip
po
t ©
 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
nitiated in 1992 in Rio de 
Janciro (Brazil) at the United 
Nations Conference on Environ- 
ment and Development, Green 
Cross International (GC1) was offi- 
cially launched in Kyoto (Japan) in 
1993 by its president, Mikhail 
Gorbachev. It is an open, net- 
working forum of deetsion-makers 
and grassroots movements eon- 
cerned with implementing the 
Action 21 Programme that issned 
from the Rio Conferenee. 
In November 1994 the Director- 
General of UNEsco, Federico 
Mayor, and Mikhail Gorbachev 
signed a three-year contract of 
agreement to co-operate in the 
areas of sustainable tourism and 
water resources management and in 
creating a data bank on the envi- 
ronment. Today, eighteen eountries 
in Africa, the Americas, Asia and 
Europe already have national GCI 
branches and are ready to develop 
a variety of original projects. 
  
Green Cross Bolivia, for 
example, has used Bolivian Army 
radio to broadcast nationwide all 
kinds of practical information and 
ideas on environmental issues. At 
the same time 400 high-ranking 
officers have taken environmental 
courses then 
trained 500 sergeants, who in turn 
taught 15,000 soldiers. In a year’s 
time more than 30,000 conscripts 
edueation and 
aged between eighteen and 
twenty-one from all over the 
country will have been informed of 
the environmental problems in 
their home regions. Military bases 
can also be used to protect 
national parks and biosphere 
reserves. Ulla Ulla National Parl, 
where a training centre was 
opened in August 1995, is a case 
in point. 
GCI is also concerned about 
the aftermath of the Cold War. Its 
Legacy Programme, now well 
underway, seeks to encourage 
  A.
 
Tu
rp
au
lt
 
© 
AN
A,
 
Pa
ri
s 
A primary school 
class in El 
Salvador. 
Decontamination 
of toxic waste 
(France). 
A well in Douz 
(Tunisia). 


### 102536: Green Cross International

Green Cross International 
by France Bequette 
efforts in both East and West to 
inventory and destroy stockpiles of 
chemical and nuclear weapons. 
Working groups are already 
engaged on this task in the United 
States, Russia and Western 
Europe. Experts have met, and 
two pilot projects have heen insti- 
gated in Russia. 
Although itis active on all envi- 
ronmental fronts, GCI attaches 
particular importance to data- 
  
edncation. Its 
FACT information network 
enables teachers all over Russia 
who are concerned about the envi- 
ronment to have e-mail access to 
au education resource centre in 
Moscow. In Argentina a school spe- 
cializing in environmental ques- 
tions offers a three-year training 
programme, held after school 
hours and during the summer hol- 
idays, to students aged 18 to 25. 
Theoretical teaching goes hand in 
hand with practical workshops 
and on-the-ground training 
eourses. GCI has also opened an 
Internet forum called Green 
CrossRoads which is currently 
focusing on international trade and 
sustainable development. 
cathering and 
Green Cross International 
Route de Florissant 160a, BP 8C, 
1231 CH-Conches-Geneva, Switzerland. 
Tel.: (41-22} 78916 62. 
Fax: (41-22) 789-16 95. Email: gci@unige.ch. 
World Wide Web Home Page: http://greencross.unige.ch/ 
a5 
© 
Oc
ci
t’
 
Me
di
a/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 102536: Green Cross International

  
© 
IN
RA
, 
Pa
ns
 
M.
 
Do
wn
ey
 © 
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Tr Ar 
-
 . \
 
A CROSS-GRAINED 
SUCCESS 
France's National Institute for Agronomic 
Research (INRA) announces that it has 
created a promising new plant variety, 
which it has called “triticale”, a cross 
between Triticum (wheat) and Secale 
(rye). The basic idea was to combine 
rye’s hardiness (its resistance to 
humidity, cold and acid soils) with 
wheat’s abundance. Already 200,000 
hectares of triticale are growing in France, 
Previously, unsuccessful attempts had 
been made since the end of the last cen 
tury—notably in Scotland, Germany, 
Russia and North America—to cross 
soft wheat with rye. Research is contin- 
uing to improve the variety, which has 
numerous advantages as animal fodder, 
but does not replace wheat for making 
bread. 
CALLING THE SHOCKS 
A number of phenomena that act as 
warning signs of earthquakes have been 
identified by modern seismologists. They 
include ground deformation, variations in 
the temperature and level of water in 
wells, an increase in the chlorine content 
ELL. TST 
FRANCE BEQUETTE 
is a Franco-American 
journalist 
specializing in 
environmental 
issues,   P. 
La
bo
ut
e 
® 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ri
s 
of spring water, emissions of radon (a 
radioactive gas given off by volcanic soil) 
and changes in the earth’s magnetic 
field. Laboratories have been set up in 
Chile, Tibet, Greece and other countries 
to study these phenomena, and as part 
of a European project known as GAIA 
(Geotectonic Activity Instrumentation 
and Analysis) a battery of sensors to 
monitor them has been installed in a cave 
in the Gulf of Corinth (Greece), a seismi- 
cally active region. However, scientists 
are still unable to predict with precision 
the date, epicentre and scale of an 
earthquake. 
MY BELOVED 
PLANET 
A 250-page book providing a factual pre- 
sentation of major environmental issues 
via a blend of illustrations and simple 
texts has just been published with aid 
from Unesco in French and Spanish (an 
English version is in preparation). Entitled 
My Beloved Planet, it is a useful source 
of ideas for teachers and their pupils, 
giving practical advice and down-to-earth 
explanations of some of the harm inflicted 
on the planet by human activity. 
AT LOGGERHEADS 
Loggerhead turtles need beaches to 
propagate, and every year Sekania Beach 
on the Greek island of Zakynthos is the 
site of the Mediterranean’s largest con- 
centration of nesting females. However, 
although a law to protect these tiny crea 
tures has been on the books for fifteen 
years, local people have built a road to 
the beach to facilitate access for 
tourists. According to the Greek branch 
of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), 
TT SE 
  
pl 
Q QA he a A > 
al, “ape v 
8 yt pe © No 
o 
the problem is that it takes less time to 
build a road than it does for the bureau- 
cracy to act. Time is not on the side of 
the loggerhead, which does not repro- 
duce until it is thirty years old. 
OLD KING COAL 
According to the 16th World Energy 
Council, which was held in Tokyo (Japan) 
in October 1995, fossil fuels will rconsti- 
tute 75 to 80 per cent of world energy 
sources until the year 2050. The most 
popular of these will be coal, the earth's 
most abundant fossil energy source, 
worldwide consumption of which will 
double by the year 2020 and overtake 
that of oil. The Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) predicts a 1.5 
per cent annual increase in the volume of 
world carbon dioxide (C02) emissions 
until the year 2025. In view of these 
problems, industrialists are carrying out 
research into more economical and less 
polluting equipment and into the devel- 
opment of new energy sources. 
FLEXING MUSSELS AGAINST 
POLLUTION 
On 18 September 1995, the French 
Research Institute for Exploitation of the 
Sea (IFREMER) and the Rhone-Mediter- 
ranean-Corsica Water Company began an 
unprecedented experiment to monitor the 
quality of France's Mediterranean coastal 
waters, 82 yellow buoys, each with two 
baskets containing a few kilograms of live 
mussels, were anchored in waters 20 to 
30 metres deep. Since mussels concen- 
trate the chemical contaminants that pol- 
lute sea water, they will be used to mon- 
itor water quality over a one-year period. It 
is hoped that the operation will eventu- 
Fy 
- 
  
|S dl 
: "a # 
438 Br i. 
i 
re iy > 
- 
. 
Ra” 
A

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 102536: Green Cross International

  
  
  
ally lead to reduced waste disposal in the 
Mediterranean. 
THEIR WORLD 
IN THEIR HANDS 
In Papua New Guinea ownership of 90 to 
97 per cent of the land remains with com- 
munities rather than individuals or the 
state. Nearly all the country’s rainforest 
is thus in the hands of the people who 
have a real interest in preserving it. 
Recent deforestation rates are no higher 
than about 0.1 "per cent annually, 
whereas other Asian countries experience 
rates from ten to twenty times higher. 
FATHERS WHO GIVE BIRTH 
The male seahorse has the extraordinary 
capacity of getting pregnant and giving 
birth. After the female deposits eggs in 
his brood pouch, he fertilizes them, car- 
ries them for twenty-one days, then expels 
from 4 to 1,572 babies {a world record) 
depending on the species. Couples mate 
for life and reinforce their bonds with ritual 
“greetings”. Each morning the female 
visits her pregnant spouse, both sexes 
brighten in colour and wrap their tails 
round a blade of sea-grass, and then sway 
gently back and forth face to face. But 
this harmony is threatened by a legal 
global trade along the shores of six conti- 
nents that nets 20 million seahorses 
every year for use in traditional Chinese 
medicines and aphrodisiacs, in aquariums 
and in food. 
© 
IF
RE
ME
R,
 
To
ul
on
 
P. 
Za
hl
 
@ 
Ja
ca
na
, 
Pa
ns
 
ENVIRONMENT FRIENDLY TUNISIA 
In 1993 Tunisia produced a report listing 
all its environmental problems. A second 
report, published in September 1995, 
confines itself to just three of them: 
water, desertification and energy. The air- 
pollution problem, according to 
Mohamed Mehdi Mlika, Tunisia's Min- 
ister of the Environment and Land Use 
Planning, has been sclved by a 60-million- 
dinar ($65 million) investment, and the 
waste-water problem is on the way to 
solution. Beach management is a 
thornier problem because local govern- 
ment lacks sufficient funds to clean pop 
ular beaches, and there have been 800 
infringements of waterfront building 
codes. Although there is no lack of water 
at present, there are fears that it will be in 
short supply by the year 2025. Esti- 
mated costs of environment-protection 
programmes are put at $3 billion for a 10- 
year period. 
EARTHY COLOURS 
Heavy metals such as lead, chromium and 
cadmium are used by industry to produce 
the pigments used in the manufacture of 
paints and coloured plastics. However, 
mere and more countries are prohibiting the 
G.
 
Co
zz
i 
© 
AN
A,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 
  
  
use of these metals because of their toxic 
effects. Anticipating a tightening of legisla- 
tion in France, the Rhdne-Poulenc company 
is looking for ways to replace heavy metals 
with rareearth metals {the lanthanide 
series) and relatively abundant minerals like 
tritium, cerium and lanthanum, which are 
aready used for making halogen lamps, cat: 
alytic converters for automobiles and 
colour screens for televisions and com- 
puters. Whether this means lower paint 
prices is another matter entirely. 
A NEW BROOM FOR 
NORTHWESTERN RUSSIA 
The European Commission has agreed to 
provide 50 million ECUs to aid projects 
recently adopted by the six Foreign Minis- 
ters of the Euro-Arctic Council of the Bar- 
ents Sea (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, 
Norway, Russia and Sweden), including 
the refurbishment of the Kola nuclear 
plant near Murmansk (Russia), the 
recovery and reprocessing of nuclear 
waste that has been jettisoned around 
the Barents Sea, and the modernization 
of the region's factories and road net- 
work. The Euro-Arctic Council has already 
embarked on 60 of 84 projects proposed 
at its first two annual conferences. 
ARID ZONES AT RISK 
A booklet entitled Les zones arides dans les 
programmes de "Unesco (“The Arid Zones 
in Unesco’s Programmes”) has just been 
issued (in French only) by UNgsco’s Divi- 
sion of Ecological Sciences. Clear, well illus- 
trated and easy to read, it will be of interest 
to all concerned with the fight against 
desertification. 
47 
 

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

  —— 
—— 5 
Ninety-four-year-old Huang Hai-Tai, 
who comes from Yunlin in central 
Taiwan, hears the secrets of a very 
ancient tradition. Ile is probahly the 
oldest band-puppeteer still at work, and 
bas trained and influenced many others. 
Ilis wife and some of bis twelve children 
work with bim, and several of his grand- 
sons are also puppeteers. One of his 
daughters is currently in Budapest 
studying the tradition of Iungarian 
puppetry. 
As well as being bighly entertaining, 
his puppet shows have a sacred pur- 
pose. They are accompanied by catchy 
music and are full of symbols that have 
profound significance for those who 
know their language and context. 
“Almost in spite of himself,” one spe- 
cialist has written, “the puppeteer is 
the High Priest of popular ritual. Ile is 
invited to inaugurate temples, attract 
the blessings of Ileaven, ward ofl evil 
and generally fulfil his role as a creator 
and provider of good things.” 
In September 1995, at the Maison 
des Cultures du Monde, a Paris cultural 
centre, lluang Iai-Tai put on several 
shows based on two classics of Buddhist 
literature, Legends of the Mad Monk 
and Journey to the West. 
Even for the uninitiated, Ifuang Hai- 
Tai’s subtle art has great fascination. In 
Paris, the audience was particularly 
delighted when, at one point in the 
show, the Master came out from hehind 
his curtain, sat down siniling in frent of 
the stage and manipulated some of his 
puppets. At the end of the evening he 
asked the gods to bestow good fortune 
and happiness on the audience. 
_ During the following interview I was 
struck by his fine, slender hands, the 
pride of his hearing and his mobile, 
radiant features. 
48 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Is
ab
el
le
 
Mo
nt
an
é,
 
Pa
ns
 


### 102538: The Master puppeteer: Huang hai-Tai

The master puppeteer 
 
HB You are a singer and musician as 
well as a puppeteer. What are the 
origins of your art? 
—My father taught me bei-guan, the 
singing style I use to accompany my 
shows. It probably originated in the 
Fujian region, on the east coast of 
China, and crossed the Straits of For- 
mosa in the seventeenth century. The 
words are a blend of Taiwanese and Bei- 
Isabelle Leymarie talks to H U A N G H A | -TAI 
jing dialects, but their origins go back 
to very ancient times. They have reli- 
gious overtones, and although this form 
of puppet theatre has popular appeal, 
its purpose is profoundly moralistie. It 
aims to encourage virtue and to teach 
values such as kindness, justice and 
fidelity. Some of the musicians’ instru- 
ments come [rom Hunan province in 
southern China. My father knew how to 
play them all, exeept the violin. 
WH If someone wanted to enter your 
profession, what would they have to 
do? 
— First of all, they would have to learn 
how to work the puppets’ hands, which 
are articulated. Then they would have 
to learn the dialogue and the different 
voices, which are conventionalized. As 
in Chinese opera, there are arehetypes: 
the female servant, the monk, the 
scholar, the devil, the Taoist, the young 
bride and the monkey. Each one has a 
specific vocabulary and vocal range. You 
have to know how to bring the charac- 
ters to life and give them their specific 
colour. Then you have to learn the bei- 

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 102538: The Master puppeteer: Huang hai-Tai

  
guan style of music, which is the most 
widely used today in Taiwan, and how 
to play the instruments, first the pei-gu 
drum (the drummer leads the band), 
then the cymbals and the violin. There 
arc five musicians, whose role is essen- 
tial although they are hidden behind 
the curtain. Then you have to learn how 
to sing. As in the Beijing Opera, there 
are specialists for each role. I have 
three or four assistants, but I’m the one 
who does all the voices; this is very rare 
in my profession. 
HM It’s astonishing that you can vary 
your register so much! Could you do 
the monkey’s voice for me? 
[Huang Hai-Tai bounced up and down, 
laughing and making the piercing 
squeals of a chimp, accompanied with 
vivid expressions and gestures. | 
HM During your shows, are you 
allowed to create, to introduce new 
elements? 
— Basically, no, because we perpetuate 
an ancient and ritualized art form. Pro- 
duction is traditional and gestures are 
codified, corresponding to a given pro- 
fession or social class. A mandarin 
doesn’t act or express himself like a ser- 
vant or a thicf. But ou the basis of what 
my father taught me, I sometimes add 
topical touches. I sometinies modify 
dialogue or characterization. The audi- 
ence knows tlhe repertoire by heart, and 
if we didn’t introduce a few changes, we 
would be in danger of losing it. 
HM Several scenes feature martial-arts 
combat, pitting, for example, a 
Buddhist monk against Taoists. The 
puppets leap from the street into a 
house, diving backwards through the 
window as in a kung-fu movie. Is it 
hard to get that right? 
— [lle laughed] Jumping through a 
window is the easiest part! Bat fighting, 
especially with swords and clubs, is very 
complicated and exacting. It takes 
about three and a half years of practice 
just to rehearse that! 
BM In bunraku, the classic puppet 
theatre of Osaka in Japan, the 
musician and the narrator are visible 
at the side of the stage. Why are your 
musicians hidden? 
— Beeausc tradition requires it, but 
also for aesthetic reasons. With us it is 
the puppet that sings, and the puppets 
lead the musicians. If the musicians 
were visible, it would disturb the 
smoothness of the performance. The 
puppets’ actions and the rhythm of the 
singing set the tempo of the music, the 
speed of the drumbeat. 
[Huang Hai-Tai handed me two pup- 
pets dressed in brightly coloured cos- 
tumes: green, pink, red and blue bro- 
cade with appliqué, inlayed mirror 
fragments and fur trimming. They had 
aristocratic faces and thin, delicate fin- 
gers. | 
— In the past the costumes were made 
in southern China. We still have some 
of the old puppets, but today, modern 
costumes have been simplified and are 
made in Taiwan. Unfortunately the 
hands are no longer made of wood as 
they used to be, but of plastic. You can 
Duy them anywhere for a small sum. 
HM And what about the monkey? 
— The Beijing Opera monkey is very 
stylized, while this one is more realistic. 
HM Your theatre puts Confucianists, 
 
Buddhists and Taoists on the stage. 
Do you belong to one of these 
religions? 
— I believe in all three and practise 
them all! 
Hl Are you planning to perform 
abroad again? 
— The heavens have allowed me to live 
this long. I'd very much like to travel 
some more! | 
v pa 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
is a Franco-American musicologist. 
49

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

As it 
THLE 
December 1955 
was... 
1 INIL 
    
  
- an BP 
RF A ) 
4 | ¥ @Q A | 
Whh JW (OURIER 
  
The custom of making New Year gifts has both a 
simple and complicated history. It is simple enough if 
we merely think of the general meaning of the custom 
itself, and examine, for example, Japan's New Year 
wish, “O-ni wa soto—fuku wa uchi” (Out, all demons! 
Let good luek come in). Just as the old year should 
take ill luck away with it, so the enrichment and hap- 
piness brought by the exchange of gifts on New Year's 
Day are regarded as an omen, almost as a magic spell, 
to ensure that the New Year will continue as joyfully 
as it has begun. 
It is more difficult to trace the exaet origin of the 
custom of New Year gifts in the Western world. The 
ancient Celtic Druids had a ceremony which they per- 
formed on the day which corresponds to January 1. 
They cut mistletoe, which was considered to be a mag- 
ical plant with protective powers from the oak trees, 
and distributed it to the people. lence the name given 
in certain parts of France, until quite recently, to New 
Year gifts: guy-lan-neuf, corrupted sometimes into 
aguignette (from the French gui: “mistletoe” and l’an- 
neuf: “New Year”). 
In Rome during the second half of December and 
the early part of January, festivals took place at which 
gifts were exchanged; those offered in December were 
usually of two kinds—wax candles (which we have 
adopted for our Christmas trees) and dolls made of 
clay or some edible substanee, which were given to 
children. There were others, too, described in great 
detail by Martial in his epigrams; Roman chroniclers 
rclated that the patricians received gifts from their 
plebeian dependents, and the Emperors from the cit- 
izens. Caligula took possession of his gifts in person 
and spent the whole day in the vestibule of his palace 
for this purpose. 
Traces of their dual origin—in pagan customs and 
Roman rites—seem long to have been preserved by 
New Year gifts. Why otherwise would the Church 
throughout the Middle Ages have tried—in vain—to 
abolish them as a barbaric survival? 
New Year gilts, as we know them today, are not so 
much a relic of these popular customs as the democ- 
. ratization of an aristocratic tradition. 
It is well known that Elizabeth I of England relied 
on her New Year gifts for her pocket money and the 
 
  
  
  
    


### 102539: How the gift idea started

How the gift idea started 
- by Claude Lévi-Strauss 
  
upkeep of her wardrobe; the archbishops and bishops 
each used to give her from ten to forty pounds, while 
she received dresses, skirts, silk stockings, garters, 
cloaks, mantles and furs from her noblemen and such 
presents as precious caskets, pots of ginger, orange- 
flower and other confections from her doctors and her 
apothecaries. 
During the European Renaissance, metal pins 
became a favourite form of present as they were then 
a great novelty; until the fifteenth century, women had 
used wooden pins to fasten their clothing. As for New 
Year cards with pictures and ornamental texts, they 
are known to have been in use from Europe to Japan. 
To understand why the practice of exchanging New 
Year gifts is so persistent and so widespread we must 
look beyond these entertaining details for the under- 
lying significance of the custom. “The manner of giving 
is more important than the gift”, the saying goes, and 
all peoples appear to believe that it is better to receive 
objects as presents than to acquire them oneself, as if 
the act of giving—or receiving—has added to the value 
of the object. The Maoris of New Zealand believed 
that a magic power, which they called hau, entered 
into the present and created a permanent link between 
the giver and the receiver. Similarly, the Roman 
custom of offering gifts seems to have grown out of a 
like belief. It originated in the offering of green 
boughs to the Sabine king, Tatius, who shared the 
royal power with Romulus. These boughs were taken 
from the saered wood of the goddess Strenia, and were 
thus called strenae in Latin, from which is derived the 
French étrennes. 
Strenia was the goddess of strength. For the 
Romans and for the Maoris alike, presents were 
objects endowed with a special power through the act 
of giving. From where did this power come? By the 
exchange of gifts, often of mere token value, people 
give expression in outward and visible form to the inner 
spirit of community life—spontaneous aceeptance of 
interdependence one with another. This annual New 
Year festival at which flowers and sweets, ties and 
illustrated cards change hands, is not then to be 
derided. Itis an occasion when all men realize that the . 
society in which they live is based on this very prin- 
ciple of give-and-take. [| 
  
  
  
 

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

  
       RT PROFESSIONNELL 
gE BAS EE ja 
Pour recevoir un dossier dinscription exposant, renvoyez ce coupon a: 
OIP - 82, rug de Miromesnil - 75008 Paris - Tél. . (1) 49 53 27 60 - Fax ; (1) 4953 27 88 
Nom Prénom 
Société 
Adresse 
Téléphone Activité 
ii eochgos| 
2 la grande ha 
A WORLDWIDE 
EMERGENCY 
Joi in the fight aginst Aids by 
buying a T-shirt 
Proceeds will go to the World 
Foundation for Auls Research and 
Prevention, established by Unesco and 
 

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/102540engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

  
MAKING SENSE OF 
COMPLEXITY 
Vv 
INTERVIEW WITH GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ 
HERITAGE: OLINDA, JEWEL OF BRAZIL'S NORTHEAST 
ENVIRONMENT: MAURITIUS—PARADISE REGAINED? 
  
  
three good 
CECI CR(d 
offering your 
& | friends a gift 
| subscription: 
~The Unesco Courier is the only international magazine published in 30 
languages and read by hundreds of thousands of people in 120 countries 
| | hs ors fon rn vo te 
Each month, essential a i bowwisvgs; | 
‘reading for an 
understanding of the | 
~ problems of Fioday and 
‘tomorrow a: freedoms...wthout distinction of race, sex, language or elgin...” 
It associates its readers with Unesco's mission of furthering “universal 
respect for justice, for the rule of law and for human rights and fundamental 