# [146744](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/146744engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/146744engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
¢ - 
  
5 
  
 
OFFI~** PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANISATION 
—     
VOL. 1—No. 1 UNESCO HOUSE, PARIS ATL 
- wt A, 1947 
Paris Newsletter 
After months of necessary preparation, as the Director- 
General declared recently in an address to the Secretariat, 
Unesco is now moving forward, carrying out in many fields 
of action the tasks assigned to it as one of the specialised 
agencies related {o the United Nations. 
‘In addition to working in the closest co-operation with 
the appointed representatives of its 31 Member States, 
relations have been established for the execution of thel- 
programme with a certain number of non-member States, 
notably, Austria, Hungary, Italy and Switzerland, which 
have applied for membership within the organisation. Both 
. Switzerland and Italy have appointed officials of their 
diplomatic representations in Paris to maintain liaison 
with Unesco House. 
The Vatican has established in Paris an International 
Catholic Co-ordination Committee to ensure liaison with 
Unesco and to inform Catholic circles throughout the world 
of its activities. 
During the past weeks, Unesco has participated in, or 
has been represented at, a number of United Nations con- 
ferences and activities at Lake Success. These include: the 
First Session of the Trusteeship Council, the Temporary 
Social Welfare Committee, the Sub-Commission on Free- 
dom of Information and the Press, the-informal Committee 
on Housing and Town Planning, the Commission on the 
Status of Women, and the Drafting Comunittee of the Com- 
. mission on Human Rights. 
“United States. 
the projec 
Unesco is negotiating agreements with the World Health 
Organisation, the International Labour Organisation, the 
Food and Agriculiure Organisation. 
An information office of the United Nations has been 
established in Paris, with offices in Unesco House, to 
strengthen liaison between the two bodies. 
The National Commissions 
"As regards National Commissions and Co-operaticg 
bodies, the Netherlands became the seventh nation to 
‘establish a Commission and plans are progressing for the 
creation of Commissions in Canada, China, Denmark, New 
Zealand and Turkey. National Commissions;are function- 
ng in Brazil, _France, ‘Haiti, 
} National Co-operating Bodies for Education. Mass 
Media, Museums, Social Sciences, Arts and Libraries, and 
an Inter-Departmental Committee, have been set up in the 
United Kingdom in the place of a National Commission. 
Plans have been made for active association of National 
Commissions with the execulion of the programme of 
Unesco. Practical proposals are being worked out for each 
coun y 
national conference on Unesco, at which more than 
500 Voluntary Organisations were represented, was held at 
Philadelphiaarch 24-26, under the auspices of the U.S. Na- 
tional Commission, and the first U.S. regional conference, 
attended by 1,780 delegates and guests from the Rocky 
Mountain and Plains States, was held at Denver, Colorado, 
in- May. 
_ Dr. Julian Huxley, the Director-General of Unesco, was 
‘able to describe the work and importance of the Na- 
tional Commissions, as well as report on the progress of 
Unesco, on his tour of ten Latin American countries during 
June and early July. The Director-General had the op- 
portunity to present his views on the official as well as the 
academic and cultural levels. and as a result of the interest 
shown in the Unesco programme, fuller participation of 
Latin American countries in the forthcoming General Con- 
ference at Mexico City and in Unesco work generally is 
anticipated. 
$72,000,000 Raised 
The campaign for reconstruction and rehabilitation of | 
educational, scientific and cultural institutions in war- 
devastated countries by Unesco and Co-operating groups is 
proceeding on a wide scale. The American Commission for 
International Educational Reconstruction (CIER), com- 
prising 200 rational voluntary organizations, had raised 
$72,000,000 for educational reconstruction by the end of 
July and estimates contributions will have reached around 
$100,000,000 by June, 1948. Reports of Unesco field teams 
who made surveys of needs in six European nations during 
the Spring and Summer are being compiled now. Mean- 
time, questionnaires and letters have been sent to govern- 
ments, ministries of education and others in the potential 
recipient couniries to ascertain exact needs. 
There have been a number of contributions to the re- 
habilitation programme and many others are in prospect. 
In the limitéd space available here, not all can be men- 
tioned. but examples are 300 sets of the Encyclopedia 
Britannica, most ot which have been distributed, 38. 000 
post-liberation books from the French Government, 2.000 
tons of educational equipment from Canada. The Council 
for Education in World Citizenship has agreed to use the 
£4,000 unspent balance of a £13,000 fund for educational 
reconstruction in collaboration with Unesco. 
A mission in London this Spring purchased workshop 
machinery and tools to be assembled in 50 complete work- 
shop sets for use in construction of .their own apparatus 
and equipment by University science faculties and technical 
colleges in devastated countries. 
Hylean Amazon Project 
Considerable progress has been made with the Hylean 
Amazon project. This was raised to the status of a Unesco- 
wide project at the April ‘meeting of the Executive Board, 
end Dr. Alfredo. Metraux, the -social anthropologist, was 
loaned by the United Nations Economic and Soctal Council 
to act as expert consultant to Unesco.» Dr. Bernard Mish- 
kin’ was named consultant’ on the educational aspects of 
 (Contined on Page 3; 2] 1) 
_ Norway. Pojand. .and_the | 
  
CALENDAR 
| (July—December) 
Conference of International Voluntary Organisations, 
Paris, July 1. 
Executive Council of the International Council of 
Museums, Paris, July 18-19. 
Seminar on Education for International Understanding, 
Sevres, July 21-August 30. 
Executive Board, Unesco House, July 24-29. 
Theatre Sub-Section: Expert Committee on the Organ-. 
ization of an International Theatre Institute, Paris, 
July 28- August 1. 
Radio Sub-Section: Programme Nefwork 
Paris, August 4-9. 
Committee for Cultural Reconstruction, Paris, July 22. 
Temporary International Committee for Education and 
Reconstruction, Paris, September 23-24. 
Technical Needs Commission, Paris, August 25-30. 
Experts on Humanities and Philosophy: Committee in 
relation to Unesco, Paris, September 22-26, 
Executive Board, Mexico City, November 3-5. 
General Conference, Mexico City, Nov. §-Dec. 8. 
International Council of Museums Conierence, Mexico 
City, November 12-17. 
  
Committeas, 
  
UNESCO Represented: 
International Union of Physics, International Union of 
Chemistry, London, July 21-23, 
International Union of Biology, Copenhagen, July 28-29. 
International Congress of Chemistry, London, July 17-25. 
International Congress of Experimental Cytology, Stock- 
holm, July. 1-17. 
International Congress of Microbiology, Copenhagen, 
July 20-29. 
International Congress of Physiology, Oxford, July 22-25. 
VIIth. International Congress of Administrative 
Sciences, Berne, Switzerland, July 22-30. 
International Symposium of (British) Societies « of a 
erimental Biology. Oxford, July 28-30. .. -- 2" 
Wortd Cone of Churches, Oslo, July. 
International Union of Local Authorities, Paris, July 7-12, 
International Students Service, Aarhus, Denmark, July. 
World Federation of Democratic Youth, Prague, July 20- 
August 17. 
International 
August. . 
World Jewish Conference, Geneva or Paris, August. 
W.FUMN.A, Summer School, Geneva, August 3-10. k 
world Organisation of the ‘feaching Profession 
"Glasgow, August 7-13. 
International Federation of University Women, Toronto, 
August 11-16. 
World Federation of United Nations Associations, 
Marienbad, August 18, : 
International Bureau of Boy Scouts, Chateau de Resny, 
August 19-22. 
International Union of Students, Paris, ‘August 24-31. 
International Festival of Documentary Films, Edin- 
burgh, August 31- September 7. 
International Federation of Youth Hostels, Blaricum, 
Holland, September 1-5. 
International Catholic Union of Boclal Service, Lucerne, 
© September 4-10. 
Scientific Films Association, Paris, September. 
Friends’ World Committee, Richmond, Indiana, Sept. 5-15. 
Associated Country Women of the World, Amsterdam, 
September 8-13. 
International Council of Women, Philadelphia, Sept. 5-12. 
International Congress of the History of Science, 
Lausanne, end of September. 
International Academic Union, Brussels, Sept. 
World Young Women’s Christian Association, 
October, 
United Jewish Educational and Cultural Organisation, 
Paris, October 23-30. 
Federation of Documentation, Berne, 
20-30. 
China,     
Executive Board 
THIRD SESSION 
The Executive Board of Unesco convened in its third 
session July 24-29 to hear a report by the Director-General 
on developments since its second meeting in April, to con- |- 
sider the 1948 program and deal with™ administrative 
financial and personnel matters: 
The Board unanimously voted to recommend to the 
General Conference in Mexico City a budget not to exceed 
$9,000,000. The 1947 budget was $6,000,000. 
Several members of the Board, including Sir John 
Maud (UK.) and Dr. Richard McKeon (U.S.A), com- 
mended the way the organization had begun work on the 
1947 program. 
Members of the Executive Board who took part in this 
meeting were: 
Mr. Victor Doré (Canada), Chairman; Dr. Jan Opo- 
censky (Czechoslovakia), M. Plerre Auger (France), Mr. 
Chen Yuan (China), Mr. Marian Falski (Poland), Mr. Gun- 
tekin (Turkey), Mr. Kruyt (Netherlands), Sir John Maud 
(United Kingdom), Mr, Photiades (Greece)s Mr. Alf ‘Bom- 
merfelt (Norway), M. Vernlers (Belgium); the following 
are substituting-for regular members: Mlle. Allegria (Mex- 
ico), Dr. H. F. eI Diwan{ (Egypt), Dean Richard McKeon 
(U.S.A), Mr, P. N. Kirpal (India), Dr. E, Marturet (Vene- 
zuela). and Professor Osorio de Almeida (Brazil). 
fo moor 
| 
LF i 
  
UN-Unesco Accord 
Agreement Between the United Nations and 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organi ion 
A a Es 47 
i 
1—Article 57 of the Charter of the United Nations . 
provides that specialized agencies, established by inter« 
governmental agreement and having wide international 
responsibilities as defined in their basic instruments in 
economic. social, cultural, educational, health, and related 
fields, shall be brought into relationship with the United 
ations, 
2—Articles x and IV paragraph B, sub-paragraph 5 of 
the constitution establishing the United Nationiy Educa~ 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization pkvide that 
this Organization shall be brought into relation with the . 
United Nations as soon as practicable, as one of the speciale 
ized agencies referred to in Article 57 of the Charter of 
the United Nations with the function of advising the: 
United Nations on the educational, scientific and cultural 
aspects of matters of concern to the latier. 
Therefore the United Nations and the United Nations. 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization agrea 
as follows: 
3 
ARTICLE 1 
The United Nations recognizes the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) as a specialized agency responsible for taking 
such action.as may be appropriate under its basic instrit 
ment for the accomplishment of the purposes set. forth 
therein. 
ARTICLE IIL » 
agnsstox.or STATES NOT: MEMBHIS OFTHE. 
UNITED NATIONS 
Applications submitted by States not Members of the 
United Nations for admission to the United Nations Edu- 
cational, Scientific and Cultural -Organization shall pa 
| immediately transmitted by the secretariat of the Organ- 
ization to the Economic and Social Council of the United 
Nations (hereinafter called the Council). The Council 
may recommend the rejection of such szpplications and any 
such recommendation shall be accepted by the Organiz- 
ation. If, within six months of the receipt of an applica- 
tion by the Council, no.such recommendation has been 
made, the application shall be. dealt with according to 
Article II, Paragraph 2 of the constitution of the Organ- 
ization. 
ARTICLE III 
RECIPROCAL REPRESENTATION 
1— Representatives of the United Nations shall be ine 
vited to attend the meetings of the General Conference of 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization and its committees, the Executive Board and 
its committees, and such general, regional or. other special 
meetings as the Organization may convene, and to particip- 
ate, without vote, in the deliberations of these bodies. 
2—Representatives of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific: and Cultural Organization shall be invited to_. 
attend meetings of the Economic and Social Council ar: 
of its commissions and committees and to partic pate, 
without vote. in the deliberations of these bodies vith re 
spect to items on their agenda relating to educational, 
scientific and cullural matters. 
" 3—Representatives of the United Nationis Educational, 
Bcientific and Cultural Organization shall be invited to 
attend meetings of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations for the purposes of consultation on educational, 
scientific and cultural matters. 
4—Representatives of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization shall be invited to” 
attend meetings of the main committees of the General 
Assembly when educational, scientific or cultural matters 
are under discussion, and to participate, without vote, im 
such. discussions. 
5—Representatives of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization shall be invited to 
attend the meetings of the Trusteeship Council of the 
United Nations and to participate, without vote, in the 
deliberations thereof, with respect to items on the agenda 
| relating to educational, scientific and cultural matters. 
6—Written statements of the United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization shall be distri: 
buted by the Secretariat of the United Nations to all 
Members of the General Assembly,: the Council and its 
commissions, and the Trusteeship Council as appropriates 
ARTICLE IV 
¥ 
Tn 
PROPOSAL OF AGENDA ITEMS 
- Bubject to such preliminary consultation as may be : 
‘necessary, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization shall include on the agenda of the 
Genera] Conférence or Executive Board items ‘proposed to 
it by tHe United Nations. Similarly, the Comacd tnd 4 
- (Continued on Page 3,.Col. a, 5 
a. 
rs 
od

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/146744engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
AGREEMENT 
(Continued from Page 1) 
conmissions and the Trusteeship 
uncil shall include on their 
+Mgenda {tenis proposed by the Gen- 
al Oonferénice or Executive Board 
the Organtzation. 
' ARTICLE v 
INDATIONS' OF THE 
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
     
 
   
   
    
   
    
    
   
The {United Nations Educa- 
+ Bolentific and Cultural Or- 
ving regard to the 
he United Nations to 
y
l
 
y der Article 62 of the Charter, to 
: ake or initiate studies and reports 
2 Saikh respect, international eco- 
WT Iomic; PO A are, educational, 
lth andl related matters and to 
§ recommendations concerning 
ie matters to the specialized 
encies contérned, and having re- 
, also, to the responsibility of 
¢ United Nations, under Articles 
58 and 63 of the Charter, to make 
. .Yecommendations for the co-ordina- 
“tion. of the policies and activities of 
“such specialized agencies, agrees to 
. arrange for the submission, as soon 
Hs-passible, tosthe appropriate organ 
of the zation, of all formal 
recommenanations which the United 
Wations may make to it. 
. ‘3_The ‘United Nations Educa 
: tional, Scleptific and Cultural Or- 
to enter into con- 
Hon the United Nations 
up request. with respect to such 
mendations, . and in due 
yITse to repari to the United Na- 
ing on the action taken by the 
anization vr by its members 0 
© givelaffect (0 such recommenda- 
-» tions; or. on the other results of 
." thelr “onsideration. 
3--The, Pmited Nations Educa- 
$onal, Scieitific and Cultural Or- 
pe ganizgtion “affirms its intention of 
lif ‘ep-operating In whatever further 
»- I0easures May be necessary to make 
: i ‘to-drdiniglion of the activities of 
“A Yoel agencies and those of 
4 . Lions, fully effective. 
 
     
    
ar
en
 
- 
%. 
s 
x 
A
W
 
a
 
E
a
 
on
 
[a
r 
\ 
P
T
R
 
  
      
   
y body oF 2 bodics which the Coun- 
may establish for the purpose of 
h co-ordination and 
information as 
LL “ARTICLE VI 
3 "EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 
“ AND DOCUMENTS 
:  3—Bubjéet, to such arrangements 
5 a may be pbeessary for the safe- 
i. guarding of confidential mat. rial 
=" the fullest andl promptest exchange 
- ¢f information and documents nll 
. be made between the Wnied Na- 
.- tions and the United Natioas Edu- 
‘. cational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 
f° 3—Without 'fprejudice to the 
generality of the provisions of Pa- 
 yagraph I: 
~ (a) the United Nations Edu -a- 
g ‘Béonal, Scientific and Cultural Or- 
an.zatlor agrees to transmit ro 
o United Nations regular repo ts 
on the activities of the Orzaniza- 
1 ; 
“b* Ihe United Nations Educa- 
Yonal, Scientific and Cultural O-- 
a ganization agrees to comoly to the 
{ fullest extant practicable wilh any 
request wiidh. the United Naticns 
#. may inake for the furnishing of 
ho special reports, studies or inform- 
ation subject to the conditions set 
fort in Article XVII; 
LJ 
% 2 (0 the Becretary-General shall, 
‘ upon request, consult with the 
Director-Gangeal regarding the 
gt “provision tothe United Nations 
. Eéuéational, Bclentific and Cultural 
. Organization ’ of such information 
    
 
   
ule Jmay ho special interest to the 
2 Bniz pe 
, W ARTICLE VII 
PUBLIO "INFORMATION 
Having regard to the functions 
of the United Nations Educational, 
Bcientific and Cultural Ocganiza- 
tion, as defined in Article I, Pa- 
ragraphs 2 (a) and (c) of its con- 
stiLution, to collaborate in the 
work of advancing the mutual 
knowledge and understanding of 
peoples through all means of mass 
communication, and with a view to 
co-ordinating the activities of the 
Organization in this field with the 
operations of the information ser- 
vices of the United Nations, a sub- 
Mdlary agreement regarding these 
matters shall be concluded as soon 
as possible after the coming into 
force of the present agreement, 
  
ARTICLE VI 
ASSISTANCE TO THE SECURITY 
COUNCIL 
The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Oeganiza- 
tion agrees to co-operate with the 
Economic and Social Council in 
furnishing such information and 
rendering such assistance to the 
Security Council as that Council 
may request, including assistance in 
carrying sult decisions of the Secue- 
ity Council for the maintenance 
or restoration of international 
peace and security. 
ARTICLE IX 
ASSISTANCE TO THE 
TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL 
The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organiza- 
tion agrees to co-operate with the 
Trusteeship Council in the carry- 
ing out of its functions and in par- 
ticular agrees that it will, to the 
greatest extent possible, render 
such assistance as the Trusteeship 
Council may request in regard to 
matters with which the Organiza- 
tion is concerned. 
ARTICLE X 
NON-SELF-GOVERNING 
TERRITORIES 
The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organza- 
tion agrees to co-operate with the 
United Nations in giving effect {0 
the principles and obligations set 
forth in Chapter XI of the Charter 
with regard to matters affecting 
the well-being and development of 
the peoples of non-seli-governing 
territories 
ARTICLE XI 
RELATIONS WITH THE INTER- 
NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE 
1—The United Nation: Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Oc- 
ganization agrees to furnish any 
information which may be Te 
quested by the International Court 
of Justice in pursuance of Article 
34 of the Statute of the Court. 
2—The General Assembly author- 
izes the United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Or- 
ganization to request advisory 
opinions of the International Court 
of Justice on legal questiofis arie- 
ing within the scope of its activ- 
ities, other than questions councern- 
ing the mutual relationships of the 
Organization and the United Na- 
tions or other specialized agencies. 
3—Such requests may be ad- 
dressed to the Court by the General 
Conference or by the Executive 
Board acting in pursuance > an 
authorization by the Conference. 
4—When requesting the Inter- 
national Court of Justice to give 
an advisory opinion, the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization shall inform 
the Economic and Social Council 
of the request. 
ARTICLE XII 
REGIONAL OFFICES 
Any regional or branch offices 
which the United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Or- 
ganization may establish shali, so 
far as practicable, be closely as- 
sociated with such regional or 
branch offices as the United Na- 
tions may establish. 
ARTICLE XIII 
PERSONNEL ARRANGEMENTS 
1—The United Nations and the 
United Nations Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Organization re- 
cognize that the eventual develop- 
ment of a single unified interna- 
tional civil service is desirable from 
the standpoint of effective ad- 
ministrative co-ordination, and 
with this end in view agree to de- 
velop common personnel standards, 
methods and arrangements design- 
ed to avoid serious discrepancies in 
terms and conditions of employ- 
ment, to avoid competition mn re- 
cruitment of personnel, and to fa- 
cilitate interchange of personnel in 
order to obtain the maximum bene- 
fit from their services. 
2—The United Nations and the 
United Nations Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Organization 
agree to co-operate to the fullest 
extent possible in achieving these 
ends and in particular they agree 
to: ‘ 
(a) consult together concerning 
the establishment of an Interna 
tional Civil Service Commission to 
advise on the means by which com- 
mon standards of recruitment in 
the secretariats of the United Na- 
tions and of the specialized agencles 
may be ensured; 
(b) consult together concerning 
oiher matters relating to the em- 
ployment of etheir officers and 
stalf, including conditions of aer- 
vice, duration of appointments, 
  
cthssi¥ication, salary scales and. al- 
lIowances, retirement‘ and pension 
ts and staff regulations and 
rules’ with a view to securing as 
much uniformity in these matters 
as shall be found practicable; 
(¢) co-operate in the interchange 
of personnel when desirable on a 
temporary or permanent basis, 
making due provision for the reten- 
tion of seniority and pension rights, 
d) co-operate in the establish- 
ment and operation of suitable 
machinery for the settlement of 
disputes arising in connection with 
the employment of personne} and 
related matters. 
ARTICLE XIV 
STATISTICAL SERVICLS 
1—The United Nations and the 
United Nations Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Organization 
agree to strive for maximum co- 
operation, the elimination of all 
undesirable duplication between 
them, and the most efficient use 
of their technical personnel ir their 
respective collection, analysis, pub- 
lication and dissemination ot sta- 
tistical information. ‘Thev agree 
to combine their efforis lo secure 
the greatest possible usefulness and 
utilization of statistical information 
and to minimizz the burdeas placea 
upon national governments and 
other organizations from which 
such information may be collected. 
2—The United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Oc- 
ganization recognizes the United 
Nations as the central agency for 
the collection, analysis, publication, 
standardization and improvement 
of statistics serving the general 
purposes of international organ- 
izations. 
3—The United Nations recognizes 
the United Nations Educational 
Scientific and Cultural Organiza: 
tion as the appropriate agency for 
the collection, analysis, publication, 
standardization and improvement 
of statistics within its special sphere 
without prejudice to the right of the 
United Nations to concern itsel! 
with such statistics so far as they 
may be essential for ite own pur- 
poses or for the improvement of 
statistics throughout the workl 
4—The United Nations shall de 
velop Administrative instruments 
and procedures through which ef- 
fective statistical co-operation may 
be secured between the United Na- 
tions and the agencies brought into 
relationship with it 
5—It is recognized as desirable 
that the collection of statistical in- 
formation should not be duplicated 
by the United Nations or any of 
the specialized agencies whenever it 
is practicable for any of them to 
utilize information or materials 
which another may have available. 
6—In order to build up a central 
collection of statistical information 
for general use, it is agreed that 
data supplied to the United Na- 
tions Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization for incor- 
poration in its basic statistical 
series or special reports should, so 
far as practicable, be made avail- 
able to the United Nations. 
ARTICLE XV 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND 
TECHNICAL SERVICES 
1—The United Nations and the 
United Nations Educational, Bcien- 
tific and Cultural Organization re- 
cognize the desirability, in the in- 
terest of administrative and tech- 
nical uniformity and of the most 
efficient use of personnel and re- 
sources, of avoiding, whenever pos- 
sible, the establishment and opera- 
tion of competitive or overlapping 
facilities and services among the 
United Nations and the special- 
ized agencies. 
2—Accordingly, the United Na- 
tions and the United Nations Edu- 
cational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization agree to consult to- 
gether concerning the establish- 
ment and use of common  ad- 
ministeative and technical services 
and facllities in addition to those 
referred to in Articles XIII, XIV 
and XVI, in so far as the establish. 
ment and use of such services may 
from time to time be found prac- 
ticable and appropriate. 
3—Armrangements shall be made 
between the United Nations and 
the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organiza- 
tion in regard to the registration 
and deposit of official documents 
ARTICLE XVI 
BUYDGETARY AND FINANCIAL 
ARRANGEMENTS 
1—The United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Or 
ganization recognizes the desirabil- 
- 
ity of establishing close budgetary or non-governmental organization, 
  
and financial relationships with’ 
the United Nationg jn order that 
the administrative operations of' 
the United Nations and of the spe] 
clalized agencies shall be carried 
out in the most efficient and éco- 
nomical manner possible, and that 
the maximum measure of co 
ordination and uniformity with re- 
spect to these operations shall be 
secured. 
2--The United Nations and the 
United Nations Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural] Organization 
agree to cooperate {0 the fullest 
extent possible in achieving these 
ends and, in particular, shall con- 
sult together. concerning appro: 
priate arrangemebts for the in- 
clusion of the hudget of the Or- 
ganization within a general budget 
of the United Nations, Such ar- 
rangements shall be defined in a 
supplemeniary agreement between 
the two organizations. 
3—Pending the conclusion of 
such agreement, the following ar- 
rangements shall govern budgetary 
and financial relationships be- 
tween the United Nations and the 
United Nations Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Organization: 
(a) In the preparatoin of the 
pudget of the United Nations Edu- 
cational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, the Organization 
shall consult with the United Na- 
tions. 
(b) The United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Or- 
ganization agrees to transmit its 
proposed budget to the United Na- 
tions annually at the same time as 
such budget is transmitted to its 
members. The General Assembly 
shall examine She budget or pro- 
posed budget of the Organization 
and may make recommendations to 
it concerning any item or items 
contained therein. 
(¢) Representatives of the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization shall be en- 
titled to participate, without vote, 
in the deliberations of the General 
Assembly or any committee there- 
of at all times when the budget of 
the Organization or general ad- 
ministrative or financial questions 
affecting the Organisation are 
under consideration, 
(d) The United Nations may 
undertake the collection of contri- 
butions from those members of 
the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organiza- 
tion which are also Members of the 
United Nations in accordance with 
such arrangements as may be de- 
fined by a later agreement ptiween 
the United Nations and the Organ- 
ization. 
¢¢) The United Nations shall, 
upon its own mitiative or upun the 
request of the United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Or- 
ganization, nrrange for studies to 
be undertaken concerning other 
financial and fiscal questions of in- 
terest to the Organization and {o 
other specialized agencies with a 
view to the provision of common 
services and the securing of uni- 
formity in such matters 
({) The United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific an¢ Cultural Or- 
ganization agrees to conform, as 
far ag may be practicable, to stand- 
ard practices and forms recom- 
mended by the United Nations, 
ARTICLE XVII 
FINANCING OF SPECIAL 
SERVICES 
1—In the event of tre United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization being faced 
with the necessity of incurring sub- 
stantial extra expense as a result 
of any request which the United 
Nations may make for special re- 
ports, studies or assistance in ae. 
cordance with Articles VII, VII 
or IX, or with other provisions of 
this agreement, consultation shall 
take place with a view to delen 
mining the most equitable manner 
in which such expense shall be 
borne. 
2--Consultation between the 
United Nations and the United Na. 
tions Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization shall simi- 
Jarly take place with a view to 
making such arrangements ag may 
be found equitable for covering the 
cosls of central administrative, 
technical or [fiscal services or 
facilities or other special assisiance 
provided by the United Nations. 
ARTICLE XVIII 
INTER-AGENCY AGREEMENTS 
The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organiza- 
tion agrees to Inform the Council 
of the nature and scope of any 
formal agreement between the 
Organization and any other spe- 
cialized agency, inter-governmental 
and in particular agrees to inform 
‘the Council before any such agree- 
ment is concluded. 
ARTICLE XIX 
LIAISON 
1—The United Nations and the 
United Nationg Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Organization 
agree to the foregoing provisions 
in the belief that they will contri- 
bute to the maintenance of effper 
tive liaison between the two organ- 
izations, They affirm their intem- 
tion of taking whatever further 
measures may be Necessary “wo 
make this liaison fully effective. 
2—The liaison arrangements pro- 
vided for in the foregoing articles 
of this agreement shall apply as 
far as appropriate to the relations 
between such branch or regional 
offices as may be established by 
the two organizations as well as 
between their central machinery. 
ARTICLE XX 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
AGREEMENT 
The Secretary-General and the 
Director-General may enter into 
such supplementary arrangements 
for the implementation of this 
agreement as may be found desir- 
able in the light of the operating 
experience of the two organiza- 
tions. 
ARTICLE XXI1 
REVISION 
This agreement shail be subjeet 
to revision hy agreement betweem 
the United Nations and the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, and shal be 
reviewed not later than three years 
after the agreement has come into 
force. 
ARTICLE XXII 
ENTRY INTO FORCE 
This agreement shall come inio 
force on its approval by the Gen 
eral Assembly of the United Na- 
tions and the General Conference 
of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Orgaviza- 
tion, 
Dr. Huxley’s Tour 
Dr. Julian Huxley, Director-Gen- 
eral of Unesco, lef Paris oa 
June 4 for a month's tour by air of 
Latin America. The main object 
of the trip was to secure the full- 
est participation by ‘countries of 
Central and South America in the 
Second General Conference of 
Unesco in Mexico City. 
Dr. Huxley was accompanied by 
Dr. Samuel Ramos, representing 
the President of Mexico, and by 
two Latin-American members of 
the Unesco Secretariat. The 
itinerary ‘of the hit included 
Mexico, Guatemala, Panama, Oo- 
lombia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Mr- 
gentina, Uruguay, and Brazil, 
-— * 
  
Second General Conferences 
The Second General Conference 
of Unesco will be held in Mexico 
City November 6 to December 3. 
English, French and Spanish will 
be the working languages. 
Address of the Unesco office 
in Mexico City is: Oficina de 
Unesco, Secretaria de Educacion, 
Calle Gonzales Obregon, Mexico, 
D.F., Mexico. States Members 
have been requested to send dupli- 
cates of any correspondence {o the 
General Conference Section in 
Paris, dealing with participation in 
the Conference, to the Mexico ad- 
dress and so specify on the cor- 
respondence. 
The Conference will be held in 
the new Normal High Schoo}, about 
20 minutes from the center ol the 
city. 
——   
DDG in Scandinavia 
Early in July, Mr, Walter H. C. 
Laves made official visits to Den- 
mark and Norway. He met with 
members of the governments and 
with the Norwegian Unesco Com- 
mission. In addition, many meet- 
ings of voluntary groups and indivi- 
duals were arranged for discussion 
of ways by which the ends set forth 
in Unesco's constitution can be fur- 
thered through national efforts,   both governmental and private. 
U.S. Regional Meeting 
Sponsored by the U.S. National 
Commission a three-day Regional 
Conference on Unesco was held at 
Denver, Colorado, in May. The 
conference was attended by nearly 
2000 representatives of national 
organizations from eight states in 
the Mountain-Plains region. 
 
 
Liberia 31st Member *   Liberia has become the 3iab 
member of Unesco.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/146744engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
: NEWSLETTER 
(Continued from Page 1) 
. Dr. Paulo Carneiro, the Brazilian 
member of the Executive Board, 
deft for South America, May 19, to 
aot as special consultant to Unesco 
in the preparation of the Hylean 
Amazon Sciendific Commission, with 
which much of the work of Unésco 
Field Science .Co-operation Office 
  
in Latin America will, for the pres-| 
ent, be concerned. The Commis- 
sion, which the Brazilian govern- 
ment has been asked to convoke, 
will consist of representatives of ten 
countries of the area, together with 
representatives of the United Na- 
tions, Unesco and certain other 
U.N. specialised agencies (WHO, 
FAO, ILO) and other bodies such as 
the Pan-American Union, and the 
Pan-American SanitaryCommission. 
The meeting is to take place 
jin August at Belem do Para. 
and its recommendations as to the 
establishment of an institute, the 
undertaking of collaborative 
scientific work and other activities 
in the region will be brought to the 
General Conference at Mexico City. 
While the decisions await the Con- 
ference, it can be said that the 
general plan is one of research and 
survey in two broad fields—natural 
resources of the area, and op- 
portunities for human development. 
With the arrival of Dr. W. E 
Purnell (industrial chemist, Aus- 
tralia), on April 30, to be counsel- 
lor for Field Operations, it was 
possible to begin setting up the 
system of field liaison offices. Mr. 
E. J. H. Corner (tropical botanist, | 
U. K.) had already gone to South 
America as Principal Field Scienti- 
fic Officer and Dr. B. Malamos 
(parasitologist, Greece) left as 
Field Scientific Officer on May 2. 
Dr. L. ¢ M. Thuriaux (Agricul- 
tural chemist, Belgium} has gone 
to Cairo to establish the Field. 
Science Co-operation office for the 
Middle East. A third Field Science 
Co-operative Office, for the Far 
East, will be located in China under 
the direction of Dr. F. Cernuschi. 
Teams from the Technical Needs 
Commission have conducted wide- 
spread surveys in Europe, Asia and 
the Philippines and ali will have 
returned in July, so that their re- 
ports on requirements of press, 
radio and communications in the 
countries they have visited will be 
in and processed for the meeting 
of experts in Pacis August 25-30. 
Questionnaires employed by 
these field teams contained ques- 
tions on such subjects as quotas, 
tariffs, currency restrictions and 
censorship, with the view not only 
of ascertaining the technical needs 
in mass communications of coun- 
tries which have suffered in the 
war, but also of obtaining inform- 
ation which might lead to removal 
of obstacles to the free flow of in- 
formation. Almost 60 per cent of 
the questions concerned free [flow 
of information. There were 167 
questions dealing with legislation of 
the press and news agencies In- 
cluding queries on such subjects 
as responsibility for press offences, 
libel laws, banned publications, 
laws controlling the administrative 
and financial operation of the 
press, foreign correspondenis and 
the position of governments in con- 
trolling the, press. The same gen- 
eral line of enquiry, with necessacy 
technical differences, was pursued 
in the field of radio and films. 
For Free Flow of Information 
It is Lhe first time in history 
that a widespread survey of this 
sort, under international supervi- 
sion and control, has been under- 
taken, and the massive documenta- 
tion gathered contains information 
of considerable interest and value. 
The information will aid in the 
drawing up of practical plans for 
diminishing the economic, technical 
and other barriers to the free flow 
of information. 
Unesco has made representations 
at several conferences of world- 
wide organisations dealing with the 
technical facilities required for the 
free flow of information. These 
included the Congress of the Uni. 
versal Pos!al Union in Paris, at 
which Unesco recommended suppres- 
sion of extra charges for airmail 
of newspapers, periodicals and pub- 
Yications, sought lower postage rates 
generally for information material 
and lower charges on transport and 
distribution of newspapers and 
magazines. Priorities and Jower 
Tales for the press were re 
  
quested at the International Tele- 
communications Union conference 
held at Atlanti¢ City. At the con- 
ference of Experts on Passports and 
Frontier Formalities, Geneva, 
Unesco solicited greater facilities 
for the unrestricted movement of 
persons engaged in educational, 
scientific, cultural and mass com- 
munications work. Special con- 
sideration’ with respect to quotas, 
customs, tariffs and freight charges 
affecting information material was 
proposed at the International Trade 
Conference in Geneva. 
Delegates from 19 governments 
have been invited to attend a con- 
ference on August 4, to consider the 
advisability and feasibility of a 
world radio network and Unesco's 
pacticipation in any form of U.N. 
world broadcasting system. 
Types of programmes suitable for 
international use, either by inter- 
change between existing national 
radio organisations or emanating 
from Unesco, are being examined. 
For Exchange of Films 
The United Nations Film Board, 
of which Unesco is a founder mem- 
ber, has held two meetings at Lake 
Success. The Board was estab- 
lished to co-ordinate the film activ- 
ities of the United Nations, Unesco, 
and the other Specialised Agencies, 
and to stimulate the production, 
distribution and use of films and 
other visual media for the purposes 
of the United Nations and the 
Specialised Agencies. The_ other 
agencies represented at the meet- 
ings were: the Food and Agricul- 
ture Organisation; World Health 
Organisation; International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Develop- 
ment; the International Monetary 
Stabilisation Fund, and the Pre- 
paratory Commission of the Irter- 
national Refugee Organisation. 
Plans have been approved for 
joint action in the production of 
films by the United Nations De- 
partment of Public Information, 
and for the collection and inter- 
national exchange between member | 
nations of information about 
films, including the preparation of 
international lists of films in the 
fields of international understand- 
ing and health, agriculture, 
dustrial welfare, and fundamental 
education. Unesco's special activ- 
ities relating to the technical needs 
of the war-devastated countries, and 
fellowships for the training of film 
personnel’ were reported to the 
Board. The executive work of the 
Board on behalf of the members is 
being done by the film staff of the 
United Nations, under the direction 
of M. Jean Benoit-Levy, and the 
film staff of Unesco, under the 
direction of Mr. William Farr 
Unesco’'s Fundamental Education 
staff is building up a center in 
Paris, through which information 
and ideas are beginning to be 
received from and radiated to gov- 
ernments, organizations and indiv- 
iduals engaged in campaigns and 
enterprises of mass education and 
social improvement throughout 
the world. Fundamental Education 
is especially and immediately con- 
cerned with less advanced com- 
munities or groups where poverty, 
disease and ignorance are a barrier 
to human progress and interna- 
tional understanding. 
Among the initial undertakings 
are Pilot Projects in backward 
areas where Unesco’s consuliants 
are co-operating with local teams 
of experts in the application of the 
latest techniques of Fundamental 
Education, drawing on the expe- 
rience of all sections of the Unesco 
Secretariat and reporting progress 
to all nations and groups concerned 
in the campaign. Plans for the 
Pilot Projects in China and Haiti 
are well advanced. Discussions 
with the British Colonial Office are 
well advanced on the establish- 
ment of a Pilot Project in British 
Africa and the eventual co-opera- 
tion of Unesco in the large-scale 
East African “Groundnuts” Deve- 
lopment scheme. 
A conference of experts on lan- 
guage problems in Pundamental 
Education was held at Unesco 
House early in July 
Two regional study conferences 
will be held, at Nanking in Septem- 
ber, and Mexico City in November, 
at which experts in Pundamental 
Education from the Far East and 
the Americas will meet, 
‘The English version of Funda- 
mental Education -— Common 
Ground fc © All Peoples (Report of 
a social committee to the Prepara- 
tory Commission)—has been pub- 
lished and the French and Amer- 
can editions will be out soon. 
More than 250 replies have been 
received to date to 4,843 question- 
naires sent to libraries in more 
than 40 countries in the project to 
in- 
  
survey and fill library needs on an 
international scale, . 6 .. , 
Four International Youth Service 
Camps are being opened in Europe 
in which Unesco :is associated in 
sponsorship. 
Grants-in-Aid 
To date Unesco has made avajl- 
able $55,465 in grants-in-aid which 
are facilitating attendance of 
scientists at international scientific 
conferences scheduled this year. 
Ald to International scientific and 
technological organisations is one 
of the main pillars of the pro- 
gramme of Unesco in the field of 
natural sciences. Of these organ- 
isations, the . best-established and 
most effectively integrated is the 
International Council of Scientific 
Unions (ICSU) and the bodies 
which it federates. Unesco has al- 
located provisionally about $250,000 
in grants-in-aid to some twenty 
organizations affiliated to ICSU. 
This is intended to permit execu- 
tion of some 140 specific projects, 
including the travel of over 500 
outstanding scientists to 60 im- 
portant international conferences, 
publication of around 80 reports of 
international importance and as- 
sistance to the rehabilitation and 
operations of 30 international la- 
boratories, bureaux and stockrooms. 
To date allocations have been 
made to the following groups, to 
make il possible for specified 
scientists to attend thirty-eight 
international meetings this year: 
International Council of Scienti- 
fic Unions, International Union for 
Pure and Applied Physics, Interna- 
tional Physiological Congress Com- 
mittee, International Society of 
Microbiology, International Acade- 
my and Union of the History of 
Science, International Congress for 
Experimental Cytology, Internatio- 
nal Union of Scientific Radio. 
International Union of Biological 
Sciences, and International Union 
of Chemistry. 
Scholarships and Fellowships 
Unesco is associated in the spon- 
soring of a number of scholavsnips 
and fellowships, both new ard old. 
Included in these are tem film 
scholarships by the British Film 
Producers Association and five 
press scholarships by British news- 
papers. 
Fellowships have been offered by 
the Rotary International, the Anier- 
ican Chemical Society, the Belgian 
Government, the French Ministry 
of Education and the Britisa Min- 
istry of Education. Mr John Mar- 
shall, of the Rockefeller Fainda- 
1:0n, has been on loan to Unesco to 
assist in planning the organization 
of the fellowship programme. 
Dr. Howard E. -Wilson, of the 
Carnegie endowment, 
Deputy Executive Secretary of 
Unesco’s Preparatory Commission, 
came to Paris this month to act as 
director of Unesco's Seminar on 
education in international under- 
standing. Nearly one hundred pro- 
minent educationists, sent by 
thirty member states to exchange 
ideas and techniques in teaching 
for international understanding, 
were to attend this meeting, from 
July 21 to August 30, at Seévres. 
Personne! of the Arts and Le'ters 
section were named to act as 
secretariat for the interoarional 
conference of theatre experts at 
Unesco House .Tuly 28- August 1. 
under the chairmanship of Mr. 
J B. Priestley, for the purpose of 
considering the foundation of aa 
International Theatre Institute. 
A meeting of experts assembled 
by the Arts and Letters section of 
Unesco here in May recommended 
that Unesco continue the inquiry 
undertaken before the war by the 
International Institute of Intellec- 
tual Co-operation on Folk Arts, the 
living expression of a country’s cul- 
ture. 
A fully-prepared scheme for a sa- 
tisfactory survey of the conditions of 
artists and the arts in selected 
areas of the world will be pre- 
sented to the Mexico Conference, 
with a view to its implementation 
in 1948. 
The calendar of Unesco confer- 
ences and activities on the first 
page of this issue is an indicator of 
where and how the programme is 
being implemented at this date 
The 1948 programme of Unesce, 
prepared for the General Con- 
ference by the Executive Board 
this month, will be published in 
the next issue of the Monitor. 
The Secretariat now nuinbers 
495, not including loaned person- 
nel, from 31 nations. Dr. Julian 
Huxley (United Kingdom) is Di- 
rector-General; Mr. Walter H C. 
Laves (United States) Deputy Di- 
rector-G.snecal; Professor Jean Tho- 
mas (France) Assistant Director- 
Qeneral, 
previously. 
Unesco Faces 
‘By BYRON 
people. 


### 146885: UNESCO faces two worlds

Two Worlds 
! ‘ie bi NEY . res (EDITOR'S NOTE: The following is d condensation of an article 
writteh' by Byron Dexter, the assistant editor of Foreign Affairs, 
in the April issue of that American quarterly review. It is ‘not given. 
here as an official representation of Unesco, but as a rather 
brilliantly-presented view of Unesco as seen from the outside.) 
DEXTER 
THE new international body which is khown for convenience as. 
Unesco is a product of the widespread belief that; only to the,,, 
degree that there is a world community will world law be practicable. ' 
and a world political organization be effective, 
devised to help build that community by. working directly to mould 
men's ideas. But in addressing itself to that apparently berieficent task, -: 
it finds—perhaps a little to its surprise—that it is dealing with some 
of the most explosive political issues now confronting statesmen and 
It is the instrument 
The first General Conference of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (to give it its full name) was held 
in Paris in November and December of last year and was attended by 
delegates of the 44 member states, 
It selected four major, immediate 
objectives: 1) Rehabilitation of 
shattered cultural and educational 
centers; 2) Reduction of illiteracy, 
3) Revision of textbooks, and 4) 
Removal of barriers to world com- 
munications and extension of the 
use of the “mass media.” It also 
adopted a budget of $6,000,000 for 
the first year, elected a Director- 
General to serve a two-year term 
(an English scholar, Julian Hux- 
ley), located its permanent head- 
quarters in Paris and chose Mexico 
City as the site of the 1947 general 
conference. By agreement with the 
Economic and Social Council of 
the United Nations, it is officially 
a specialized agency of the United 
Nations, under Articles 57 and 63 of 
the Charter. And in the United 
States, a National Commission io 
supply a propulsive farce in its 
work in this country has been 
formed by act of Congress. The 
new agency is a going concern. 
Clearing-House Raéle 
The first role of the new organ- 
ization is the relatively non-contro- 
versial one of acting as a clearing- 
house, particularly in regard to the 
projects of educators. As outlined 
in Unesco’s constitution, it may 
be described more or Jess as an ex- 
tension of ithe role of the old Inter- 
national Institute of Intellectual 
Co-operation of the League of Na- 
tions. A project for an exchange 
of student fellowships, which might 
be expressed in bilateral agree- 
menis between states, is an exam- 
ple of activities of this sort. 
The second role is new, unde- 
fined, challenging. and dangerous. 
The door is opened for it in 
Unesco because it leads to the 
heart of the complex forces which 
represent the hope of these post 
war years, as well as their dangers. 
Is is the role which has been well 
suggested by Messrs. White and 
Leigh in the title of a book: “Peo- 
ples Speaking to Peoples” It is 
the one-world idea, particularly 
vivid in the imaginations of Amer- 
icans and heralded by the new 
technical devices which can be de- 
scribed soberly enough as introduc- 
ing changes in communication 
comparable in importance to those 
effected five centuries ago by the 
invention of movable type. As part 
of this second function, the new 
agency has the task of promoting 
the use of the mass media in order 
to induce the greatest possible de-] 
gree of understanding among the 
men and women of the world. 
Though numerous activities in 
this category would be implemented 
by agreements between states for 
wifich Unesco would act as clear- 
ing house, they obviously also im- 
ply a different type of international 
action, distinguished by its ten- 
dency to disregard the formal divi- 
sions of states and to cut across 
national boundaries. The proposal 
for a global network to be operated 
by the new agency is an example, 
The Great Paradox 
Unesco’s second major problem, 
and great paradox, can be put in 
a few sentences. The U.S.SR. ab- 
sented itself from the general con- 
ference at Paris. But it was gen- 
erally accepted that the USSR, 
made its views known through a 
Jugoslay observer at the confer- 
ence, and that spokesman turned 
inside out the premise upon which 
Unesco is founded, namely, that 
the free flow of ideas among men 
is a primary ideal. The depth of 
the gulf that separates Communist 
apd “western” views of free speech, 
already very plain, was suddenly 
accentuated. The question is, ean 
the gulf be bridged? In attempt 
ing to bridge it, may not Unesco 
cut the world more sharply Into two 
communities. ..? 
If it was Hitler who gave the     League its death blow, it was Hit- 
ler who, in left-handed fashion, 
made certain that the task of intel- 
lectual co-operation would be re- 
sumed with new strength and con. 
viction at the end of the second 
World War. 
lectuals of Europe a fine compli- 
ment: he recognized them as his 
primary enemies. He and Goeb- 
bels saw clearly that teachers, 
scientists, men of letters—"intellec- 
tuals” or ‘professional men,” which- 
ever label one prefers—first had to 
be exterminated in the conguered 
nations before the New Order could 
become a political possibility. The 
intellectuals of Europe went under- 
ground, and when those who lived 
finally emerged, it turned out, of- 
ten enough, that they were the poli- 
tical leaders of their countries, 
That new morale among profes- 
sional men, and the clearer under- 
standing of the political power in- 
herent in cultural affairs, account 
for no little of the drive and con- 
fidence that have brought Unesco 
into being. 
Postwar Trend Reflected 
The constitution of this specials 
ized agency is an interesting docu- 
ment. It reflects the great political 
trend of the postwar years, and 
reflects it in just about the propor- 
tions that it seems to assume in 
the thoughts of men and in the 
events of the day. The constitu- 
tion is explicitly an arrangement 
among sovereign states. And it ls 
something more. Vaguely, ambi- 
guously, yet with unmistakable in- 
tent and with the stirrings of power, 
it reaches for an ordering of indi 
viduals to individuals within a 
world organization in which ne. 
tional governments are secondary; 
This: perhaps, is why Henri Bon- 
net has called Unesco “the spear- 
head of the United Nations.” The 
opening and closing phrases of the 
Preamble are typical: 
The governments of the 
States parties to the constitu- 
tion declare... That a peace 
based exclusively upon the poli 
tical and économic arrange- 
ments of governments would 
not be a peace which could 
secure the unanimous, lasting 
and sincere support of the peo- 
ples of the world, and that the 
peace must therefore be found- 
ed, if it is not to fail, upon the 
intellectual and moral solidarity 
of mankind. 
“Governments of States” is writ 
large; and so is “mankind.” Be- 
tween Stretches a vast area io be 
given meaning. = 
A few places in which the inter- 
play of the two approaches to world 
organization is especially visible 
may be noted. The General Con- 
ference is composed of the “repre- 
sentatives of the States Members 
of the Organization,” but it may in- 
vite representatives of international 
organizations—that is to say, indi- 
viduals—to attend specified ses- 
sions of the Conference as obser- 
vers. The General Conference of 
sovereign-state delegates is the 
formal seat of power in the agency, 
it determines policies, takes deci 
sions on programs drawn up by 
the Executive Board, and appoinis 
the Director-General. This is or- 
thodox procedure. But from this 
body to the Executive Board and 
Secretariat—the next instruments 
of power—is a good-sized jump. The 
Executive Board of 18 is wholly a 
board of individuals—"persons come 
petent in the arts, the humanities, 
the sciences, education and the dif- 
fusion of ideas and qualified by 
their experience and capacity to 
fulfill the administrative and exe- 
cutive duties of the Board.” (Ark 
cle V Section 2). It is to be 
formed with regard to diversity of- 
cultures and “a balanced geogra- 
phical distribution”; but hierarchigs 
of Powers and the familiar devices 
(Continued on Page 4, Cal. 3) - 
Hitler paid the intel- 
A     
= 
A MN 
Lo 4 A 
x |

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/146744engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
PI 
. UNESCO MONITOR © 
  
    
  
FE 
 
 
    


### 146885: UNESCO faces two worlds

TWO WORLDS, 
~ (Continged from Page 3) 
$0 maintain them are conspicuously 
unprovided for. Vote is by ma- 
jority, save when international con- 
ventions, e.g., a copyright conven- 
tion, are to be submitted to states, 
when a two-thirds majority is re- 
quired. Article V, Section 2 spells 
out the idea: “The members of the 
Executive Board shall exercise the 
powers delegated to them by the 
General Conference on behalf of 
the Conference as a whole and not 
as representatives of their respect- 
ive Governments.” 
The Real Leverage of Power 
The Secretariat is wholly non- 
governmental. This follows United 
Nations precedent; but the Director- 
General of this agency is perhaps 
more explicitly endowed with power 
than is his prototype, the Secretary- 
General; he is succinctly instructed 
to “formulate proposals for appro- 
priate action by the Conference and 
the Board.” Whether he or the 
Executive Board will be the power 
behind the throne remains to be 
seen, The real leverage of Unesco 
in whatever it does must be the 
power of public opinion, and the 
two requirements for the effective 
application of that force are expert- 
ness and unremitting attention to 
the business in hand-—virtues which 
the Director-General and his staff|’ 
are designed to embody. At Paris, 
however, the term of the first 
Director-General was, by informal 
agreement, limited to two years in- 
stead of the six prescribed by the 
constitution, and it was specified 
that all appointments by the Di- 
rector-General must be approved by 
the Executive Board. 
In any event, much of what 
Unesco does, and no matter 
whether it be done through indi- 
vidual states, or through individual 
men and women, will be done by 
an appeal to the mind of the com- 
munity. The agency is enjoined 
by its member states from “inter- 
vening in matters which are es- 
sentially within their domestic 
jurisdiction.” But the General Con- 
ference can summon international 
—corferences on education, on the 
sciences and humanities and (a 
broad phrase) on “the dissemina- 
tion of knowledge.” It can submit 
recommendations and international 
conventions to governments. Every 
member state is obligated to submit 
to it reports “relating to educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural life 
and institutions.” It is instructed 
to “advise the United Nations Or- 
ganization on the educational, 
scientific and cultural aspects of 
matters of concern to the latter in 
accordance with the terms and pro- 
cedure agreed upon between the 
appropriate authorities of the two 
Organizations,” All this is the ap- 
paratus for moulding public opinion. 
To aid in summoning that twen- 
tieth-century genie, Unesco has 
also the instrument of the National 
Commissions, the formation of 
which is recommended to the mem- 
ber states by the constitution but 
not made compulsory. (In 
United States, the Commission is 
composed of representatives of 70 
organizations, and 40 individua - 
appointed by the Secretary 
State.) Given strong’ leadersh.p, 
wise selection of issues and skilled 
Presentation, these Commissions 
could conceivably exert much in- 
fluence. 
Portentous “Mass Media” 
And then, there are the porten- 
tous “mass media.” which Unesco 
is so emphatically instructed to 
cultivate. The purpose of the or- 
ganization is to “collaborate in the 
work of advancing the mutual 
knowledge and understanding of 
peoples, through all means of mass 
communication and to that end 
recommend such international 
agreements as may be necessary 
to promote lhe free flow of ideas 
by word and image.” 
For some of the concrete 
sibilities inherent in all this 
chinery we must turn to the 
gram recommended at Paris, 
the four main projects which may 
be taken to represent Unesco's 
purpose and funclions as now con- 
ceived, those relating to reconstruc- 
tion, a literacy campaign and text- 
book revision seem almost exclus- 
ively “clearing house” activities. In 
regard to the first, the Conference 
was careful to make plain that 
Unesco is not a rellef agency. It 
may purchase some -scientific ap- 
tug with its own funds for 
titutions especially in need of it, 
“but its efforts will be directed pri- 
marily to surveying the needs of 
pehabllitation of schools, museums 
pos- 
ma- 
pro- 
Of 
the: 
and libraries, co-ordinating the work 
of other agencles, publicizing the 
campaign and raising Yands. (The 
sum of $100,000,000 is named as the 
goal) ~~ 
The campaign to make available 
a minimum degree of education to 
all the people of the world—about 
half of whom can now neither read 
nor write—is ‘a long-term project, 
to be initiated by a survey by the 
staff of the agency in collaboration 
with experts from all countries. 
The program envisages education 
for adults in such fields as agricul- 
ture and public health, as well as 
instruction for young and old in 
the rudiments of reading and writ- 
ing. This should be one of Unesco’s 
great projects. 
The project for the world-wide 
revision of textbooks is more con- 
troversial. It calls for a clearing 
house for the collection of in- 
formation on the subject, in- 
cluding copies of school books 
most commonly used, the for- 
mulation of a code of ethics for 
writers of textbooks, and a world- 
wide conference which would focus 
attention on the subject. The ef- 
fort would presumably be imple- 
mented by bilateral agreements 
between states. Unesco will, more- 
over, “call to the attention of the 
member nations any misuse of the 
facilities of teaching which it con- 
siders dangerous to the peace.” 
The Explosive Element 
The fourth major project in its 
program—the elimination of bar- 
riers to world communications and 
the extension of the use of the 
mass media—lies in the new, broad 
category of ‘peoples speaking to 
peoples.” Inherent in every action 
to be taken by Unesco is the pos- 
sibility of appealing to world opi- 
nion to achieve the desired ends. 
But though that explosive element 
is present to some degree in all 
concentrated in the proposals for 
action in the field of communica- 
tions. The question of a global 
network, by which the people of 
all the world would be addressed 
at one signal from a world center, 
is merely one of the controversial 
issues which focus upon this part 
of the program. Even were jt re- 
moved, there would remain the in- 
sistent problems of the commercial 
and cultural use of the new devices 
of telecommunication (a word 
which takes its full significance. if 
it is remembered that the first two 
syllables mean “far-away”); the 
troublesome question of interpene- 
tration of cultures; and above all 
the issue of freedom of informa- 
tion, which so separates the west- 
ern lands from Russia. 
Lest Unesco be too easily charg- 
pd with temerity in tackling prob- 
lems of this size, it should per- 
haps be pointed out that it was the 
prominence of these factors of in- 
ternational relations which created 
this specialized agency, not the 
agency which originated the prob- 
lems. The range and power of the 
, hew inventions which have made 
the problems so real are little ap- 
preciated; indeed some of the new 
devices may as yet be merely in 
the stage of Hargreaves spinning- 
jenny of 1770. Voice broadcasting 
by radio, which can penetrate every 
  
| corner of the world, is only one of 
them. To this familiar develop- 
ment must be added such devices 
as wireless transmission of fac- 
simile pages, in color if desired, and 
|Jnultiple address” newscasting, 
which permils wireless transmission 
of words by dot and dash at the 
rate of 800 a minute (as compared 
with 40 to 60 by cable). The im- 
plications of such a technique are 
staggering. In due course, perhaps 
under some system of charges ac- 
cording to ability to pay, as now 
governs the rates of American press 
associations, newspapers anywhere 
in the world should be able to ob- 
tain hundreds of thousands of 
words of foreign news daily—a flow 
of information indeed! The reader 
of any newspaper in the world, or 
the editor (if he could not print it 
all) would have at his disposal the 
equivalent, say, of the foreign news 
service of 'Bhe New York Times; 
or perhaps of Pravda, or perhaps 
of the Chicago Tribune. And 
then there ate the developments of 
the process of offset printing 
(Lthrough the aid of pholography) 
by which the type pages of a maga- 
zine—perhaps thousands of pounds 
of metal—are in effect transformed 
to a thin packet of paperd, to be 
carried {in a plane and put on 
presses halfway around the globe. 
A periodical can now bé printed 
simultaneously in all the clties of 
the world. What will such develop-   ments do to national boundaries? 
the plans of the new agency, it is 
  
Are the soverelgn states the Lud- 
dites which. will. attempt to break 
the machines? 
The Proposals 
How deeply American commer- 
cial and political interests are in- 
volved need not be underscored. It 
was at the behest of Americans that 
the London Conference of 1945 
adopted the resolution instructing 
the Preparatory Commission to give 
special attention to Unesco's york 
in the field of mass commu- 
nications. But it is equally ap- 
parent that this technological 
revolution already touches the in- 
terests of every nation in the world. 
The report of the Program Com- 
mittee, adopted at Paris, proposes. 
1} The eventual establishment of a 
world-wide network for radio 
broadcasting and reception, and 
an immediate study of the question 
with a view to submitting a prac- 
ticable plan to the next General 
Conference: 2) a- survey of the 
press, the film and the whole range 
of telecommunications and postal 
services, to eliminate inadequacies 
and encourage needed expansion, 
3) the establishment of an inter- 
national radio forum and a world 
university of the air, .by which 
(within the framework of existing 
facilities) subjects of international 
interest can be discussed, and 4) 
“what might be called negative or 
curative proposals for the removal 
of barriers obstructing the flow of 
communication.” The report of 
the Sub-Committee had recom- 
mended, in regard to this “curative” 
aspect of the program, that the 
agency deal with copyright restric- 
tions, with the cost of cable and 
wireless communication, and “with 
all restrictions on the flow of in- 
formation and ideas across inter- 
national boundaries, and with the 
suppression and distortion of in- 
formation and ideas by any in- 
fluence.” , 
In a final comment on the pro- 
gram, the chairman of the Program 
Committee emphasized the two 
strands of thought which, as we 
have seen, interweave everywhere 
in the constitution and the pro- 
gram of the agency. Without the 
collaboration of the member na- 
tions, Unesco can do nothing, he 
concluded; yet at the same time, he 
pointed out, these are “proposals 
advanced for action by the peoples 
of the world.” . 
U.S.S.R. Opposed 
The Russian comment came 
quickly, Vladislav Ribnikar, a Jugo- 
slav observer, addressed the General 
Conference at the first session to 
explain why his government had 
not ratified the constitution of 
Unesco; and it was unmistakable 
that his remarks were to be taken 
as the view of the U.S.S.R. on the 
program and possibilities of the 
new agency. In short, he served 
notice that the U.S.S.R. is im- 
placably opposed to the mass-com- 
munications activities of Unesco. 
This clarifies the situation. There 
is no reason to suppose that Soviet 
Russia does not mean what she 
says. Nor has she raised an issue 
which will disappear merely if it is 
not discussed. The initial response 
to such a difference of opinion can 
only be an effort of re-examina- 
tion by member nations of Unesco 
and their peoples—above all bv 
Americans, who are the prime 
movers in the proposals to which 
Russia objects—of the course of 
action which has been taken. There 
are no limits to the field of such 
an inquiry. Bui are there, perhaps, 
several fixed points which may 
help orient . the thinking which 
must be done? 
First it seems relevant to under- 
score the fact that the success of 
Unesco, or its failure in any pro- 
ject which raises important issues, 
can greatly—perhaps even deci- 
sively—aflect the whole United 
Nations Organization. Unesco is 
lied to the Economic and Social 
Council by the same type of loose 
agreement which binds the other 
specialized agencies. Subsidiary 
agreements will make special ar- 
rangements in regard Lo the budget 
and the mass media. Though 
neither has been announced, it is 
expecled thal the Secretary-General 
will be given the right to advise 
Unesco about its budget, but that 
the agency will itself determine its 
budget. Unesco wlll probably be 
free to follow its own line in regard 
lo mass communications also, 
{though it Is clearly realized that 
these actlvilies interlock with those 
of other agencles—with the Com- 
mittee on Human Rights, for exam- 
ple, in regard to questions of civil 
liberties. A Radlo Committee has 
been set up on which each of these 
specialized agencles is represented.   
A second point of reference is 
that, Russia seems willing to parti- 
cipate in certain activities—those 
presumably of the “clearing hquge” 
kind—and that it 1s to the py, 1 
tage of everyone that sl 
do so. The nec~srilv-yf making 
such projects ¢7. * .. und practical 
1s obvious—as 1s the possibility of 
over-cxtension of efforts. 
An Unavoidable Function 
The third fixed point is that, in 
Soviet eyes, the future of Unesco 
depends on what is done in the 
tield of mass communications. It 
is helpful to be lLold this so plainly. 
Should the “western” answer, then, 
ke to drop those activities, to put 
them in an organization by them- 
selves, or to go ahead with them 
--and if the latter, then on what 
terms? 
To drop the mass cqQmmunica- 
tions activities would be for Unesco, 
and for the United Nations, 
turn their backs on one of the 
greatest, . potentially most useful 
and most dangerous centers of 
force in the modern world. It would 
mean the renunciation of a world 
mission for the agency and its pa- 
rent body. Since the forces of the 
mass media are so unmistakably 
both international and superna- 
tional in character, an attempt to 
harness and use them is an un- 
avoidable function of a world 
agency which pretends to concern 
itself with the forces which make 
for war and peace, 
There has, however, been some 
evidence of a temptation among 
different groups of specialists to 
play with the thought of putting 
these mass-media activities in a 
separate organization. The Com- 
mittee of Consultants to the De- 
partment of Stdte, in its report of 
September, 1946, insisted that, il 
the mass-media work were rele- 
gated to an inferior position, it 
should be withdrawn from Unesco 
and a new body which was ex- 
clusively concerned with it should 
be ‘set up. The committee could 
hardly have considered the im- 
plications of its suggestion. No- 
thing could so easily put this whole 
question of breaking down of bar- 
riers to the use of the mass media 
into terms of the United States 
versus the world, as would such a 
course. It is the United States 
which is asking new arrangements, 
new privileges, new fields of acti- 
vity for its mass communication 
industries, all around the globe. A 
world agency mainly representing 
the objectives of one nation would 
be unfortunate indeed. 
Highbrow vs. Lowbrow 
As an example of the contrary 
tendency, we may note a protest 
by Kenneth Lindsay, in the Lon- 
don Spectator; that “matters of 
technique such as the film, the 
radio and the press have been 
elevated into positions of undue 
importance at the expense of 
education and teaching,” and that 
this has spoiled the purily of the 
original concept, But, fortunately, 
a avision of Unesco Into two 
separate agencies is not seriously 
being considered. The amalgama- 
tion of the work of the two groups 
of specialists is essential if the work 
of either is to be effective, as the 
experience of the International 
Institute makes plain. Here, 
deed, Americans can make a valu- 
able contribution, for what comes 
to the surface in all of this is the 
old question of highbrow and low- 
brow, perennially familiar to Amer 
icans. One of the great pieces of 
news in the world is that, for the 
first time in history, there exists 
a large nation with a mass culture 
—the United States of America, 
That mass culture is the reverse 
of the medal of mass production. 
It is our special achievement— 
source of our greatest pride, and 
some of our worst headaches. Is 
it not the theme around which all 
the major questions of education 
and of culture have revolved in the 
United States in this century? 
Precisely what it means for the 
United States, and for the worlds 
will doubtless be disclosed in an- 
other hundred years. But one 
thing the American cxpericnce to 
date makes quite clear: the mass 
producers of culture and their 
critics need one another. 
And here lles one more [fixed 
point of reference. It is Lhe inter~ 
action between the mass culture of 
the United States, and the cultures 
of other member states, which will 
at once begin to give Unesco its 
shape and size. Will there be an 
planned and uncritical outpour- 
ing of American entertainment, 
American Ideas, American news, 
the distinguishing characteristic of 
which is simply the size of the 
ould | 
to. 
in- 
  
Lr et mine ll 
csi Slit AY) PNA : i 
a. ¥ 
Ch ¥ 
Ay 
Fy 
strehin? This is what more than on: 
country (quite apart from the grou. 
of Slav nations) genuinely fears. 
To phrase the question of th: 
US8R. and Unesco merely in 
terms of whether and when Russia 
will join is to miss what would 
seem to be the most important point. 
of all. The fact is that a worla™. 
| platform has been set up, and th: 
corollary fact is that Russia is on 
this platform now, atfldressing the 
world. Whether or not she is for- 
mally a member state of the 
agency, she will certainly continue . 
to do so. And with great shrewd-. 
ness in perceiving openings, she will 
deliver her own message. She will 
say many intelligent things, as Mr. 
Ribnikar's speech at Paris shows. 
The message will likewise be ruth- 
lessly propagandist. Mr. Ribnikar's 
demand, for example, that Unesco 
take active measures to suppress 
“any attempt to provoke suspicion 
and hatred between the peoples,” 
coming as it did after a demand 
for strict observance of the rules of 
the constitution, and after an at- 
tack on the centralization of 
Unesco’s activities which 
might give the agency power, mads 
little sense. But it was skillful 
propaganda, enabling the speaker 
to take the offensive, and to at- 
tach the epithet Fascist to ‘the free 
flow of Ideas” —a nimble feat 
indeed. How effectively so negative 
a propaganda will appeal to men's 
imaginations in the longer run Is 
another matter, 
Whose Blueprint? 
Russia does not doubt that a 
world community is desirable and 
necessary, but she has her own 
blueprint of the nature of that com- 
munity. That, and not the shade 
of meaning of such words as “im- 
pose,” or of ‘matters essentially 
within ‘a nation’s jurisdiction” and 
so forth, is the substance of the 
issue between Russia and the non- 
Communist world, here as else- 
where, Nothing is gained by pre- 
tending that this is not the case. 
We may remind ourselves again 
that there are many “clearing 
house” activities in which the 
U.S.S.R. can participate to her 
own and Unesco's advantage; but 
it may properly be emphasized also 
that the agency's larger aim of 
bringing peoples more closely in 
touch with peoples is repugnant 
to the Soviet Union, and that she 
will oppose* it, outside Unesco or 
inside, as she thinks best. Unesco 
can make it easier for the USSR. 
to leok with favor upon many of 
its projects just by making them 
realistic, efficient and effective. 
But there is no use spinning a 
bridge of words. 
Will the gap between the two 
worlds be widened, then, if the new 
agency, after careful examination 
of the mass-communication pro- 
jects, goes ahead with them? 
First let us note again that this 
may not be quite the question. If 
the United States pursues its own 
special interests, enthusiasms and 
objectives uncritically, a gap can 
open in a different place, that is 
to say, between the United States 
and other nations of the non-Com- 
munist world, The drive behind 
such prodigious organizations as 
the United States press and moving 
picture industries c¢an never prod- 
uce a tidy product. were they to 
aim merely at that. half their best 
virtues would disappear. But there 
is. little virtue in the automatic 
application of any principle, least 
of all of such a mighty one as the 
principle of free speech. 
Coming Shape of Things 
If, however, there is give and 
take between the mass culture of 
the United States, and the cultures 
of other lands, a greal community 
may slowly appear. All the mecha- 
nisms of Unesco—conferences, com- 
millees, administrative boards — 
which throw Americans, Europeans, 
Middle and Far Easterners and 
Africans, mass-media specialists 
and educators together in pian- 
ning and executing the various 
projects of the agency will speed 
the growth of the community, And 
the projects themselves will bring 
peoples closer to peoples. Of course 
it is possible that the very process 
will widen the present gap between 
the Soviet and western worlds, The 
only guaranty that the_ gap will 
not widen Is for all the world to 
become Communist. 
Thus, Unesco will work amld 
danger. But it may also work in 
confidence that it is on the road 
tha} leads to the coming political 
shape of things. It 18 not chance 
that brings so plain a challenge to 
this agency of the United Nations. 
Imprimerie du New York Herald Tribune 
21 Rue de Berri, Paria Co 
alone