# [073993](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf) 5

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED 
  
———— 
    
  
UNESCO 
  
EIEN 
NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
    EY Yeu eo 
  
 
‘Volume II.—No 5 Price: 10 Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 25 Francs JUNE 1949. 
   
\Copyright PICTURE POST. Kieboe Photo) 
$ 385.000. 000 Proposed 
By UN for Technical Development Plan 
SUM SUGGESTED FOR 2 YEARS IS FIRST INTER- 
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR UNDER-DEVELOPED 
AREAS. UNESCO SHARE ESTIMATED AT $16,855,500 
plan to use more than $85,000,000 
\ in two years for technical assis- 
AN tance to under-developed countries 
has been outlined in a report 
issued by the United Nations at Lake 
Success on June 2. 
The plan is the United Nations’ re- 
sponse to President Truman's call for a 
“bold new programme’ to make the 
benefits of scientific advances and indus- 
trial progress available for the improve- 
ment and growth of under-developed 
areas. 
The 328-page report, issued by Secretary- 
General Trygve Lie, is.the co-operative 
product of the Secretariats of the United 
Nations and eight Specialized Agencies, 
and is now being submitted by the 
Secretary-General to the Economic and 
Social Council and by the heads of the 
Specialized Agencies to their respective 
governing bodies. 
[4s this issue of the Unesco Courler 
goes to press, the Executive Board of’ 
Unesco is in full session in Paris to 
cons der the technical aid programme and 
the proposals for Unesco’s participation 
during the coming years.] aE 
The estimated cost of the technical E 
assistance described in the orogramme is 
$35,862,576 for the first year and 
$50,079.807 for the second gear. These 
figures are in addition to what govern- 
ments of recipient countries are expected 
to pay as their part of the cost of the 
technical assistance that they receive. 
Unesco's share in the programme has 
been estimated at $6,150,000 for the first 
year and $10,705,500 for the second year. 
The proposed cost of the first two year 
programme submitted by the United 
Nations and the Specialized Agencies may 
be summarized as follows: 
Ce wie 0.00 «First Year Second 
Et Year 
$ $ 
United Nations ......... 4,855,500 7,643,500 
Joint UN-Specialized ) 
Agencies projects ... 
International Labour 
Organization ......... 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization ......... 
Unesco  .................. 
International Civil 
Aviation Org. ...... 
World Health Organi- 
zation ............o.e.e . 
1,084,500 1,601,500 
4,678,400 6,793,500 
9,425,456 11,345,383 
6,150,000 10,705,500 
516,200 1,007,400 
9,152,520 10,983,024 
Total ......... 35,862,576 50,079,807 
In addition, the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development, the 
International Monetary Fund, and the 
International Refugee Organization will 
co-operate in the programme, but do not 
envisage asking for special funds. 
Local Participation 
HE purpose of the programme, the 
1 U.N. report states, is to assist 
under-developed countries to achieve 
for themselves the material and social 
benefits of sound, balanced economic 
development. Realization of this pro- 
gramme will require full use of the 
scientific and technical advances which 
have already so changed the economics 
of wore highly developed areas. The 
report warns, however, that patterns of 
economic development which fit the 
economic and social structure of the 
technically more advanced countries 
cannot be applied without modification 
to those which have remained under- 
developed. 
Furthermore, In every country develop- 
ment must be brought about mainly 
through the efforts of the local popula- 
tion, with the help of domestic resources, 
and by means of appropriate changes in 
economic and social structure. If economic 
development is to achieve its purpose of 
increasing the security and welfare of 
the great mass of mankind, its benefits 
must be widely distributed. 
The report notes that the rate of 
economic development must be fast 
enough not only to keep up with popula- 
tion growth, but to exceed it by a 
substantial margin. The amount of 
scientific and technical knowledge avail- 
able for this .task is constantly increas- 
ing. The problem immediately at hand is 
to organize this knowledge and direct it 
into the channels where it can produce 
the speediest and most constructive 
results. 
The report goes on to say that while, 
in the past, private initiative and capital 
have in most countries been the principal 
agents for economic development, today 
an increased responsibility rests on gov- 
ernments of countries seeking rapid de- 
velopment. For each country the first 
step in economic development must be a 
realistic appraisal of its special condition 
and needs. 
Nature of the Programme 
HE report states that the increased 
role of government initiative and 
direction in economic development 
suggests that the provisions of large- 
scale technical help will usually involve 
     
some sort of inter-governmental arrange 
ments. These arrangements will be either 
on a bilateral basis or through interna- 
tional organizations. : 
The report adds that a sound interna 
tional programeme must make use of the 
experience of many nations with different 
social patterns and cultural traditions 
and at different stages of development. 
It lists a certain number of basic requisites 
for success of the technical assistance 
programme as follows: } 
SUPPLEMENT k 
pages 5to 8 | 
-

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER June 1949 
 
      
  
  
a 
a 
) ARE . 
i ES 
Rl EE * Bw 
2 Sn - Po 
BAT EEAE ME TRE ARIES RATER Seas 
REALE EL AL] np rean LE WAT AER gna 
oa -— ti. it b———— 
'$ 85,000,000 
  
-— a 
a A — - - go 
aide Eel . *  -— 
re y ~ . » = — - yo Sralieidue ews ~ - = 
nd sion - ol a 
PROPOSED 
For Technical Development 
(Continued from Page 1) 
& 1. A practical approach—development 
in each country must grow out of that 
country’s particular needs, desires, and 
potentialities, 
& 2. Personnecl—an adequate supply of 
qualified experts. 
& 3. Supplies and equipment—adequate 
amounts of both. 
© 4. Continuity—expanded technical as- 
sistance programmes are essentially long- 
term undertakings, and need concerted 
efforts for many years. 
& 5. A favourable environment—under- 
developed countries must be willing them- 
selves to take vigorous action to establish 
the internal conditions upon which sound 
development depends. The report insists 
on this responsibility of recipient coun- 
tries, and adds that obsolete systems of 
land tenure as well as traditional methods 
of agriculture may have to be modified. 
The report recalls that in a resolution 
adopted at its Third Session, the General 
Assembly of the United Nations laid 
down that technical assistance furnished 
shall not be a means of foreign eco- 
nomic and political interference in the 
internal affairs of the country concerned 
and shall not be accompanied by any 
consideration of a political nature. 
Fields of Work 
palanced programme of economic 
development, according to the 
report, can best be achieved on 
the basis of a comprehensive develop- 
ment plan, but in many countries eco- 
nomic development may, at the outset, 
have to be limited to a few activities. 
  
(UN -2 Pi 
Help for war-devastated and under- 
developed areas. Here, locomotives are 
shipped to the Far East under a U.N, 
scheme, 
All under-developed countries wish to 
expand and diversify their industrial 
activities. The adoption of more up-to- 
date industrial methods will increase the 
output of goods and promote higher 
standards of living. Improved agriculture 
is essential to produce increased quan- 
tities of food, raw materials for industry 
and products for export. Transport and 
communications must be bettered to 
promote the mobility of labour and the 
availability of goods, Basic education and 
technical training must be coupled with 
the development of labour practices suit- 
able for a more complex economy. And 
the maintenance of adequate health con- 
ditions is essential to progress in any 
sound economic development scheme. In 
all these fields technical assistance is an 
essential forerunner to economic develop- 
ment, 
Forms of Technical Aid 
HE report describes the wide variety 
of forms technical assistance for 
economic development may take, 
such as: technical advisory services; 
practical demonstrations of modern 
techniques; provision of improved oppor- 
tunities for training within the under- 
developed countries or abroad; dissemina- 
tion of information. 
The report recommends that the ad- 
ministrative committee on co-ordination— 
composed of the U.N. Secretary-General 
and the Executive Heads of the Specializ- 
ed Agencies—establish a central -clearance 
point called the Technical Assistance 
Committee (TAC), to be made up of a 
representative of each of the organiza- 
tions. Organizations would submit their 
part of the total programme to their 
own governing bodies in the usual way, 
for appropriation of funds. Governments 
seeking advice or technical assistance 
could approach either individual organiza- 
tions, or the Secretary of the TAC, who 
would turn over the request to the ap- 
propriate organization. 
In connection with the financing of the 
expanded co-operative programme, the 
Secretary-General and the pxecutive 
   
 
rural institution and management, eco- 
nomic and statistical services. 
An example of the many projects en- 
visaged by FAO is a campaign to eradi- 
cate rinderpest in five to ten years 
through the use of vaccines. Rinderpest 
is a major livestock disease in Africa, 
Asia and the Far East. It destroys an- 
nually at least 2 million head of cattle, 
U.N. E. S.C. O. 
INCE. it is recognized that increased 
economic development lends momen- 
tum to increased educational opportunity, 
Unesco proposes to give technical assis- 
tance in the fields which its experience 
has already shown under-developed coun- 
 
  
Air Force for Health. In its anti- 
malaria drive, WHO uses planes for 
spraying unhealthy swamps to rid 
them of disease-carrying mosquitoes. 
  
A Co-operative Project 
  
Heads of all the interested Specialized 
Agencies agreed that each Specialized 
Agency, which considered it necessary, 
would establish a special budget for tech- 
nical aid for economic development and 
would invite its member governments to 
make contributions to this budget over 
and above their contributions to its nor- 
mal budget. 
HE second part of the 328-page re- 
w port describes in detail the kinds 
of technical assistance which the 
United Nations and Specialized Agencies 
can make available. From these descrip- 
tions a vivid idea can be had of the 
almost unlimited range of benefits which 
can accrue to the world from a well- 
co-ordinated programme of technical as- 
sistance, given the.steady and enlightened 
co-operation of the advanced countries, 
the recipient countries and, the interna- 
tional agencies in a sustained effort over 
a long period of time. 
~ 0 T 
United Nations 
THE U.N, proposes to focus its pro- 
gramme on fields of activity which 
are not, or not yet, assigned to any 
Specialized Agency. These include activ- 
ities related to manufacturing and ex- 
tractive industries, control and utilization 
of water resources, inland road, rail and 
water transport, as well as certain sectors 
of the social field such as housing and 
community planning. 
An illustration of the type of activity 
envisaged is provided by industrial 
research in tropical and semi-tropical 
countries where there appears to be 
enormous scope for experimentation in 
the use of new raw materials existing in 
these areas for making textile products, 
ete. 
I. L. 0. to © fem 07 
HE kinds of aid which the Interna- 
tional Labour Organization proposes 
to provide cover the relation of economic 
development policies to labour income 
and employment, including specifically 
such problems as training, migration, 
industrial safety, social security and 
labour inspection, and labour and social 
problems of the indigenous populations 
of Latin-America, 
F. A. O. | CT 
THE Food and Agriculture Organiza- 
tion proposes to provide aid in the 
fields of agriculture, forestrv and forest 
products, nutrition and food management, 
. plaaning and organizing of 
tries are likely to require. These fields 
are: education (elementary, adult and 
technical); production and use of mate- 
rials for education, including mass com- 
munication materials; the technical needs 
of the press, radio and film; training of 
teachers and other specialized personnel; 
scientific 
research and training laboratories; and 
protection of national cultures. 
Among the many projects being con- 
sidered by Unesco is one which recom- 
mends the establishment of scientific 
laboratories to conduct technical research 
on available natural resources, as well 
as to use such laboratories as training 
centres to educate local personnel in 
modern scientific methods. 
I. C. A. 0. ae if : #3 
HE International Civil Aviation 
Organization would provide help in 
carrying out surveys to determine a 
country’s air transport needs, to aid in 
the design, construction and installation 
of aeradromes and air navigation facil- 
¥ 
    
- 
(F.A.0.) 
Aided by the Food and Agriculture Organization, Chinese technicians are producing 
the new rinderpest vaccine at a laboratory near Nanking. 
 
  
jties, and |help devise 
standards. 
W. H. O. 
THE world Health Organization has 
drawn up a programme of work 
relating to health demonstration areas, 
malaria, maternal and child health, en- 
vironmental sanitation, mental health, 
venereal diseases, tuberculosis, public 
health administration, nutrition, cholera 
and other diseases, technical training of 
medical personnel, research on anti- 
biotics, medical literature, and teaching 
equipment, Cu 
HE great task of raising the standard 
of living of the under-developed 
countries of the world is a responsi- 
bility to which the United Nations and 
the Specialized Agencies have already 
applied themselves within the limitations 
of the resources so far placed at their 
disposal for the purpose. What has been 
achieved so far has been useful, but falls 
far short of the need. 
On March 4 of this year, the Ecoxomic 
and Social Council, on the initiative of 
the United States delegate and in pur- 
suance of the Fourth Point of President 
Truman's inaugural address, adopted a 
resolution requesting the  Secretary- 
General of U.N. to prepare “a comprehen- 
sive plan for an expanded co-operative 
programme of technical assistance for eco- 
nomic development through the United 
Nations and its Specialized Agencies, 
paying due attention to questions of 
social nature which directly condition 
economic development”, and to set forth 
“methods of financing stch a programme 
including special budgets”, as well as 
“ways of co-ordinating the planning and 
execution of the programme”. 
In response to this resolution, Mr. 
Trygve Lie at once entered into direct 
consultations with the Executive Heads 
and Deputy Heads nf the 1L.O, FAO, 
Unesco, 1.C.AO., WHO. IR.O, the 
International Bank, and the Monetary 
Fund. 
The report issued as a result of these 
discussions stresses that progress in eco- 
nomic development must be measured in 
decades rather than in years, and that 
the technical assistance projects described 
in the programme are merely a pattera 
for future action. The programme does 
not claim to provide an overnight solution 
for the economic problems of under- 
developed countries, but is intended to 
help those countries to help themselves 
in developing their resources and their 
productive capacity. Its success, the 
report adds, in the long run will depend 
in large measure upon the support given 
to it by the under-developed countries 
themselves. Throughout the process, the 
domestic contribution by countries receiv- 
ing technical assistance will have to be 
much larger than any external aid they 
may be given, and it will be expected 
that these countries will create the con- 
ditions under which the technical assis- 
tance given can be made effective. 
operational 
Hy, 
a get EE 
o
l

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER June 1949 


### 73994: Experts review UNESCO Programme in Germany, suggest expansion

Experts Review Unesco Programme 
In Germany ; Suggest Expansion 
"POLISH REPRESENTATIVE EXPRESSES RESERVATIONS 
of cultural contacts 
  
in the Rose Palace in Paris to discuss the political future of 
AST month, while the Big Four Foreign Ministers were meeting 
3 Germany, another meeting was taking place only a few streets 
away on the educational, cultural and scientific future of Germany, 
This second meeting brought together for the first time members 
of a committee of experts on Germaay called by Dr. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, Director-General of Unesco, to review the work already done 
by Unesco in Germany and to submit their recommendations con- 
cerning Unesco’s future activities in Germany. 
The committee formulated a series of recommendations which Dr. 
Torres Bodet is submitting in a report to the Unesco Executive Board 
for consideration at its meeting this month. 
Among these recommendations 
for future Unesco action in Ger- 
many the committee called for fel- 
lowship opportunities for Germans 
to study abroad. the extension of 
Unesco’s Book Coupon Scheme to 
Germany, participation of Gec- 
man scholars and teachers in 
text-book revision programmes, 
and German individuals and ins- 
titutions to participate in Unesco’s 
work in Germany. 
Before drawing up its suggest- 
ions the committee reviewed 
Unesco’s past work in Germany 
following the decision of Unesco’s 
Beirut Conference to extend part 
of its programme to Germany. In 
order to execute this work, a 
Unesco office has been established 
in Stuttgart under the direction 
of Dr. JW.R. Thompson, Unesco’s 
Specialist on German questions. 
Two other Unesco Offices are now 
being set up in western Germany 
to ensure adequate execution of 
Unesco’s programme. 
Their main functions are to 
maintain a link between Unesco 
and appropriate individuals and 
institutions in Germany and to 
act as Unesco information centres 
in the Westeen Zone. 
7% Unesco’s role as 
a liaison agency, '{ 
supplying both its 
Member States and 
Germany with in- 
formation on the 
present possibilities 
of a two-way flow 
and exchanges, was 
emphasized by Dr. | 
Torres Bodet, when 
he addressed the 
committee at Unes- 
co House on May 27. 
“By arousing Ger- 
man interest in 
the United Nations 
and its Specializ- 
ed Agencies inside 
Germany”, said 
Dr. Torres Bodet, 
“Unesco can ma- 
terially contribute 
to the guidance of 
those minds in Ger- 
  
many where the weekly radio 
programme, “Unesco World Re- 
view” has been sent to all radio 
stations. 
In his report to the Executive 
Board on Unesco’s present work, 
Dr. Torres Bodet states that four 
Unesco publications, translated 
into German, “which appeared 
particularly suitable for wider 
distribution in Germany” will 
shortly be ready for distribution. 
These are : “The Constitution of 
Unesco,” “Unesco, What it is..."”, 
“Message to Youth,” and “Work 
Camps for Peace.” At the same 
time Unesco has extended into 
Germany its activities concerning 
teaching about the United 
Nations. 
Unesco’s world-wide studies and 
plans for improvement of text- 
books and teaching materials are 
now being expanded to include 
Germany, where new text-books 
are progressively being published. 
An important effect of this work 
has been the dissipation of a wide- 
spread misapprehension among 
the Germans that the text-book 
revision programme was aimed 
exclusively at Germany. The 
: 
« "oun 
  
Drawing by Gustave Friese. Reprinted 
from German publication “Horizont” 
realization that Unesco’s plan is 
intended to assist all countries to 
improve their text-books has help- 
ed considerably in the work. 
Another Unesco activity has 
been the introduction of the in- 
ternational survey of the op- 
portunities that exist for the ex- 
change of persons. Copies of the 
Unesco publication “Study Abroad” 
which lists international fellow- 
ships, scholarships and educa- 
tional exchange have already been 
sent to higher education institu- 
tions in Germany. 
Germany is also included in the 
“Way of Life” series and the study 
of tensions which Unesco is car- 
rying out in a number of 
countries. These studies are in- 
tended to throw light on such 
problems as the influences which 
“au TUAnie sn 
INTER Seal i LE 
ANG INT aman 
»- 
% Susie 
all de ut 
 
Germany's hope for the future depends largely on its younger generation. 
Above German youngsters meet those of other nations at the 2nd International 
Youth Congress held in Munich, last year. 
.many who are seek- 
may, 
international understanding, or 
conversely, foster aggressive na- 
tionalism. 
German specialists are now 
being invited to attend con- 
ferences called by Unesco. Several 
Gerinan school principals came 
to Paris in April to attend a meet- 
ing of the heads of international 
schools and German experts on 
adult education will be present at 
the International Conference on 
Adult Education which opens in 
Denmark this month, 
These are some of the activities 
which have been carried out by 
Unesco in 1949. 
While recognizing the Im- 
portance and value of this work, 
the committee felt that the Ger- 
mans themselves should be en- 
couraged to write and publish 
articles in Germany on questions 
concerning Unesco’s aims ‘and 
work. 
In addition to recommending 
the introduction of Unesco’s Book 
Coupon Scheme into Germany, it 
considered that the book exchange 
programme should be broadened 
to enable German institutions to 
receive free publications. 
An important development in 
the increasing of book exchanges 
between Germany and othec 
countries took place on May 1 
last, when. as reported in the May 
issue of the Courier, the first 
book exchange centre for western 
an the one hand, favour 
 
Unesco Helps Restore 
Ex-German Libraries 
ORMER German libraries in 
Italy which were damaged 
during the war and later closed 
down, are now being restored for 
the benefit of students and 
scholars, thanks toa recent grant 
of 5.000 dollars provided by 
Unesco. 
This grant will be used by the 
International Union of Institutes 
of Archaeology, History and His- 
tory of Art, to bring the four 
libraries — the Biblioteca Hert- 
ziana, the ex-German Archaeolo- 
gical Insitute Library and the 
the former Prussian Historical 
Institute, all in Rome and the ex- 
German Art-Historical Institute 
Library in Florence — into full 
use again. 
Today, Unesco has given a total 
of 13,000 dollars to help these in- 
stitutions * which will eventually 
constitute a valuable aid for 
studies of Mediterranean history, 
art and archaeology.   
from zero. 
Young Germans helping to 
rebuild the shattered ruins of 
a town in Western Germany. 
Reconstruction 
Germany was opened at Bad 
Godesberg. 
Another of the committee's re- 
commendations was that the 
details of the Goethe anniversary 
celebrations planned in many 
parts of the world this year, be 
made widely known in Germany, 
in order to demonstrate the im- 
portance the entire world attaches 
to the principles associated with 
Goethe's name. 
Financial support tor Unesco's 
activities in Germany from Ger- 
man sources was also urged by 
the committe in view of the fact 
that financial assistance for 
Unesco projects in its Member 
States comes chiefly from sources 
within those countries. 
During the general discussion of 
the report and recommendations 
of the Committee some reserva- 
tions were expressed by M. Victor 
Mencel, the Polish representative. 
He stated that he endorsed those 
recommendations which had been 
conceived and which would be 
applied in accordance with certain 
principles. 
Among these principles were 
the democratic unity of Germany 
and unity and agreement among 
the four occupying powers as a 
condition essential to peace in 
Germany and peace of Europe ; 
and priority, in Unesco’s work for 
countries ravaged by Nazi aggres- 
sion was a matter which, in the 
case of cultural work in Germany, 
required financing by the Ger- 
mans thenselves. 
The final decision concerning 
Unesco’s future activities in Ger- 
many will lie with Unesco’s 
General Conference, acting on 
the proposals of the Executive 
Board. 
Another meeting of the German 
Experts Committee is scheduled 
to be held in Paris just prior to 
the opening of Unesco's General 
Conference in September. 
ing a future, other than in the ag- 
gressive nationalism which has 
twice 'ad their country to disaster. 
“By keeping Germany informed 
of existing facilities for the ex- 
change of men, ideas and intel- 
lectual works across the frontiers,” 
Dr. Torres Bedet added, “Unesco 
will help to bring Germany out 
of the isolation into which she 
plunged herself. By its presence 
there it will strengthen those 
elements inside Germany who are 
fighting for the principals laid 
down in our Constitution.” 
Dr. Torres Bodet emphasized 
that TUnesco’s programme for 
Germany had not been conceived 
as a substitution for the efforts 
being made by the occupying 
powers, or those efforts of certain 
of Germany's neighbour states to 
re-establish relations with German 
intellectual circles, 
He expresced the hope that the 
efforts begun by Unesco in 1947; 
to establish relations with the, 
Soviet Zone authorities would 
enable Unesco to extend its con- 
tacts to the whole of Germany. 
As the first step in its new 
programme. Unesco undertook the 
wide distribution of its publica- 
tions and documents in order io 
make its aims and achievements: 
known to German individuals,’ 
cultural groups, libraries, universi- | 
  
  
ties, newspapers, educational and 
cultural journals. Already a! 
selection of reading material has: 
been sent to some forty-six Ger-. 
man libraries where it is available: 
to the general public. The Unesco 
Courier, for example, is being: 
widely circulated in western Ger-| 
MAJOR campaign to re- 
\ \ duce economic obstacles 
AN to the free flow of in- 
formation is now being under- 
taken by Unesco. The campaign 
is directed against quotas, Cus- 
toms duties, currency controls 
and other restrictions which 
to-day impede the passage across 
frontiers of educational, scienti- 
fic and cultural materials. 
Unesco’s objective is to enable 
the reader in Rome {o purchase 
a book from New York, the mu- 
seum in Mexico City to obtain a 
painting from Paris, the schools, 
libraries and scientific laberato- 
ries of every country to secure 
the equipment they need from 
abroad, despite the difficult post- 
war economic conditions which 
hamper international trade. 
This attempt to promote intern- 
ational trade in the materials of 
education, science and cultuce 
embraces many different points 
in the Organization’s current pro- 
gramme, Greater exchange of 
these materials through the 
channels of trade can assist less 
developed countries to fill their 
needs. It can, for example, ease 
some of the critical shortages of 
mass communications equipment 
in certain countries, as revealed in 
the 1947-1949 Technical Needs 
Surveys undertaken by Unesco. It 
can also help schools to rebuild 
and restock, and war-devastated 
libraries to replenish their shelves. 
Most of all, it fosters mutual un- 
derstanding by giving people in 
each country greater access to the 
Julian BEHRSTOCK 
Acting Head, Free Flow Division, Unesco - 
ideas and attainments of other 
countries. - 
In carrying out this pro- 
gramme, Unesco since the be- 
ginning of the year has dis- 
patched to its Member States 
two draft international agree- 
ments and a series of ten sugges- 
tions for remedial action. It has 
placed a far-reaching proposal 
before an international tcade 
conference and worked out 
plans for continuing activity in 
conjunction with the competent 
economic organizations of the 
United Nations. Unesco’s Book 
Coupon Scheme, extended and 
given additional funds, is being 
adapted to cover the purchase 
of educational films and scienti- 
fic equipment, as well as books. 
Following is a summary of the 
action Unesco is taking in the 
economic field. 
Annecy Trade Conference 
a 34-nation international 
trade conference, in progress 
at Annecy, France, Unesco has 
submitted a proposal that Cus- 
toms duties should be reduced or 
eliminated on educational, scien- 
tific and cultural materials. A list 
of materials, ranging from equip- 
ment for schools to works of art 
and laboratory apparatus, has 
been placed before the conference. 
After a lively debate, the con- 
ference voted to accept the Unesco 
proposal for the agenda and, 
subsequently, to set up a seven- 
nation committee “to examine, in 
consultation with the representa- 
tives of Unesco. the most practical 
means of studying and focrmulat- 
ing solutions of the questions 
raised.” Under the chairmanship 
of Belgium, the Committee is 
composed of representatives of 
France, the United States, United 
Kingdom, Brazil, Chile and Co- 
lombia. 
This group will report the re- 
sults of its investigations and 
make recommendations to the 
34-nation Tariff Negotiations 
Committee at Annecy. A favour- 


### 73995: Major campaign to cut frontier barriers to education exchange

Major Campaign to Cut Frontier 
Barriers to Education Exchange 
able report can result in specific 
tariff reductions making it easier 
for people in many countries to 
obtain the materials they need 
“from abroad. 
Economic Commission 
for Europe 
ARALLEL with the effort to 
reduce Customs duties, and 
with the same objective, Unesco 
- is seeking to promote internation. 
al trade pacts. Agreement has 
been reached with the Secretariat 
of the Economic Commission for 
Europe to work jointly for the 
inclusion of educational, scientific 
and cultural materials in trade 
agreements concluded under the 
auspices of the ECE. 
At the same time, the 14 Euro- 
pean Member States of Unesco 
have been urged to come to ECE 
meetings prepared to negotiate 
bilateral or multilateral trade 
agreements on specific items of 
scientific and mass communica- 
tions equipment. The proposal was 
accompanied by a detailed list of 
such equipment, based on the 
production capacities and require- 
ments of the countries concerned. 
(Continued on Page 9)

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER June 1949 
 


### 73996: Preservation of nature

SERVATION OF NATURE 
oo NE Be RA Re 
  
many of the world’s valuable re- 
serves on which man depends for 
his sustenances, Mines have been 
flooded, farms ruined, and forests burnt 
down. But this destruction which the war 
has brought in its train has merely added 
to the destruction which man, in peace time 
was already perpetrating. Even without 
the war, the problem would have arisen 
—in hardly less acute forn—of how te 
fill the gap, which 
is growing every 
day, between the 
ever increasing pop- 
ulation of the 
world and its de- 
clinin g resources, 
The problem, there- 
fore, of the protec- 
tion, conservation 
and utilization of 
nature is one with 
many facets, and 
one which interna- 
tional organiza- 
tions, as well as 
humble individuals 
like shepherds and 
IF IVE years of war have destroyed 
  
ploughmen, must 
face. A 
There 1s the problem of protecting 
tropical soils which are being plundered 
by over-exploitation. There is the task 
of convincing the inhabitants of the 
Mediterranean area that every year their 
goats destroy entire forests. There is the 
question of discovering fresh sources of 
energy, or of utilizing those that nature 
has already given us, such as solar energy 
or the tides. There is the necessity of 
protecting species that are threatened with 
extinction. Whatever the particular prob- 
lem involved by the protection of nature 
may be—and such problems are legion— 
it is of equal concern to manufacturers 
and peasants, to scientists and artists, 
Two Conferences 
Considerable importance, therefore, will 
be attached to the conference which 1s 
to begin on August 17 at Lake Success 
under the auspices of the United Nations, 
and at which these problems will be con- 
sidered. 
‘On August 22 another conference, this 
time called by the International Union 
for the Protection of Nature and sponsor- 
ed by Unesco, will also open at Lake 
Success. The International Union 
was created under Unesco’'s aus- 
pices at Fontainebleau, near Paris, 
last October. 
The protection of nature is of 
real concern to naturalists who 
wish to preserve intact certain 
areas known as “natural reserves” 
or “national parks” where they 
can study certain animal and 
vegetable species in their surround- 
ings and thus prevent their destruc- 
tion. 
It will be seen that the two Con- 
ferences of the I.U.P.N. and the 
United Nations are concerned with 
the same subject—Nature. But the 
question is not viewed from exactly 
the same aspect. The United Na- 
tions Conference will examine the 
problems of conservation as applied 
to natural resources while the 
Unesco-1.U.P.N. Conference will be 
concerned more particularly with 
questions relating to the protec- 
tion of plant and animal species 
and soil conservation. But because 
of their interrelationship, it was 
felt that they should be held 
simultaneously, and in the same 
place. 
One of the different ways of 
avoiding the reduction of natural 
resources is to teach the nations 
PE 
   
Jasper Nati$ha Park in the Canadian 
Rockies, is one of the great wild life sanc- 
tuaries of North America. Above, black bear 
cub peers into auto for food while two friends 
stand watch. . 
sg Le - ne - CR 
Hu ee RP. 
ST re 
- TA. 
CAN THE WORLD SAVE ITS DECLINING NATURAL 
RESOURCES FROM DESTRUCTION ? 
SPECIES BE SAVED FROM PEARING ANIMAL 
CAN DISAP- 
EXTINCTION ? 
not to squander them. One of the 
meetings of the United Nations Con- 
ference will therefore be devoted to 
studying the role of education in pro- 
tection and conservation. As Unesco is 
the United Nations Specialized Agency 
for education, the United Nations has 
invited it to prepare 
this meeting. The 
Education and Natu- 
ral Sciences De- 
partments jointly 
requested a number 
of experts to pre- 
pare reports on par- 
ticular facets of the 
problem, while a sur- 
vey was carried out 
by the Departments 
on the methods of 
teaching conservation 
to school children, 
adults and the scien- 
tific world. At the 
same time the Unes- 
co Fundamental Edu- 
cation Clearing 
House decided to 
devote an issue of its 
periodical “Abstracts 
and Bibliography” to 
a study of the best 
educational works on 
conservation. 
A few specific 
examples, perhaps, 
will help to highlight 
the importance of the 
two Conferences. 
As a result of heavy losses suffered In 
the war of 1914-1918, the herds of Euro- 
pean bison were reduced to a few head 
only. The complete disappearance of the 
species was avoided just in time by the 
creation of the International Society for 
the Protection of European Bison. The 
Society did a great deal of work and by 
1938 the number of the pure species still 
remaining was estimated at ninety-six. 
le “> - ~ » p 
wl aa a ER 
(Canadian Nat. ®lm Bd.) 
By Allain GILLE, Agricultural Engineer ) } | 
In spite of losses during the second World 
War, there were still ninety-three left 
in 1947 (1). 
Before the arrival of Europeans in 
America there aere about fifty-million 
bison roaming the plains. By 1905 the 
almost incredible news mwas received 
that only five- 
hundred were left 
in the whole of the 
United States. The 
disappearance of the 
species was once 
again avoided, this 
time by the creation 
of National Parks. 
This measure of pro- 
tection has proved 
effective and to-day 
the herds preserved 
in these parks have 
risen to about six- 
thousand head (2). 
These examples 
of destruction are 
not confined to 
animal and vegeta- 
ble species. Other 
natural products of 
vital importance te 
man have been 
gravely affected. Soil, 
the basic factor in 
agriculture, is dis- 
appearing through 
erosion, which works 
like a cancer on soil 
that is not properly 
cared for. 
To speak only of wind erosion, 
130,000,000 hectares of land in the 
United States have been affected by dust 
storms which sweep away the top soil 
year after year. One of the great hurri- 
canes of 1934 carried off 500,000,000 tons 
of loose top soil in the states of Nebraska 
and Dakota. The soil had been eroded, 
torn up and carried away to a depth of. 
twelve, twenty and twenty-eight inches, 
    
- N * » . 
lis YE WIG 
actually leaving bare rock in its place (3). 
The first question that faces us today 
is shether the earth can continue te feed 
us. Many peoples, now that the worst 
wounds inflicted by the war have been 
healed, have admittedly recaptured, more 
or less the pre-war rhythm of life, In 
the whole of Western Europe for example 
—excepting Spain—the food problem is 
by no means as acute as if was. But this 
tenuous prosperity is a fragile plant, 
constantly exposed to the menace of bitter 
winds. Throughout the whole of Asia 
there are still famines that every year 
claim millions of dead. The fact is that 
even if there were an equal distribution 
of food resources throughout the world, 
no one could eat quite as much as he 
wished. We do not, of course, want to 
achieve equality in misery, On the con- 
trary, we want to increase food resources, 
to make full use of those that nature 
has given us, and to protect their main- 
springs. For in certain respects, men are 
no longer satisfied with the income they 
receive from nature. They consume the 
capital, by destroying it. Or again, they 
are even unaware of the existence of 
some of that income, and do not know 
how to use it. 
Suggestions and Proposals 
Four-hundred and fifty scientists have 
sent to the United Nations Conference 
for the Conservation and Utilization of 
Resources (U.N.S.C.CU.R.) all kinds of 
suggestions and proposals designed to 
apply recent discoveries to the exploitation 
of these resources. 
Thus a Canadian sc’entist, Mr. Hans 
Lundberg, has furnished a report on the 
possiblity of conducting mining prospert- 
ing by electronic means, from aircraft. 
Such a process would result in far more 
extensive and complete prospecting, and 
would eliminate, especially in the case of 
inhabited areas, all the present difficulties 
faced by prospect~ 
ors. Major Lither- 
land Teed, an Eng- 
lishman, has re- 
ported on the latest 
refinements in the 
technique of ex- 
tracting magne- 
sium from sea 
water. On another 
altogether different 
subject, an agricul- 
tural expert from the Belgian Congo 
has described the system used by 
the Bantus for conserving tropical 
forests—a primitive yet particularly 
ingenious system, which he suggests 
should be studied by- forestry ex- 
perts in all tropical areas. 
The gravest dangers to mankind 
arise not so much from the prob- 
lems with which it grapples as from 
those of which we are unaware. A 
conference like that of U.N.S.C.C. 
U.R. has many benefits to confer 
and much information to impart. 
It will only succeed fully, however, 
when its work produces its effect 
not only on scientists and tech- 
nicians, but on a wider public. 
Unesco's function is indeed to bring 
all men, whose daily occupation 
puts them in contact with nature, 
to a full realization of their posi- 
tion in regard to if, and thus to 
make them use it more wisely. 
  
(1) J. Zabinski. “Le Bison d'BEu- 
rope”, Pro Natura, 1948 (1): pp. 
30-32. 
(2) PF. Osborn. “Our Plundered 
Planet”, Little, Brown & Company, 
Boston, 1948, p. 64. : 
(3) R. Furen. “L’Erosion du Sol”, 
Payot, Paris, 1947, p. 150.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
SUPPLEMENT 
     
ee 
  
N ESCO,   
 
COURIER 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume II.—No 5. 
JUNE 1949, 
    
   
  
   
   
A
 


### 74002: The Rebirth of a valley: how the peasants of Marbial helped make the Haiti Pilot Project a success

How the Peasants of M arbial “i 
Helped Make the Haiti p tir 
~ Pilot Proj S ~ riot I'rojecl a Success. 
HIS is a story of an obscure, mountain-bound region in the 
mM Caribbean Island of Haiti called the Marbial Valley. 
In this forgotten, isolated corner of the New World, lying 
north of the little village of Jacmel on the southern shore of 
the island, there live some 30,000 peasants of African origin. Afflicted 
by tropical rainstorms and ruinous droughts, stricken with disease 
and impoverished by land erosion, they tried to scrape together some 
semblance of living — or quietly starved. Not famine —— which was 100 
common-place — but “extraordinary famine” were the words used by 
the people of the valley to mark the periods of large-scale starvation, 
The children were pathetically stunted and diseased. 
Then, in this region of misery, something happened which gave 
the people a new hope in life. A new spirit began to blow through the 
Valley when a Unesco team arrived to set up a fundamental education 
project to help them overcome their illiteracy, raise their living 
standards and agricultural productivity and improve their health. 
This story is filled with ups and downs, with moments of deep 
dejection and despondency, periods when almost everyone believed 
that the project would have to be given up as a failure. 
Now, after two years of continuous struggle, the picture has 
changed. The Marbial project which might have been called “The 
Death of a Haitian Valley”, has lived and grown. 
The heroes in this story are certainly the peasants of Marbial 
. themselves, who in the darkest days of the project, demonstrated with 
huge picket signs reading “Kebe I'Inesko fo” — which in Creole means 
“Support Unesco hard.” Another hero & undoubtedly the social 
anthropologist on Unesco’s staff in Haiti, Dr. Alfred Métraux, who 
though striken by fever and with slender funds at his disposal, refused 
to admit defeat and rallied the Marbial peasants to his side. 
The Marbial experiment began as a lone Unesco-Haiti venture just 
over two years ago. Today it is a joint international undertaking, with 
the World Health Organization, the Viking Fund, the Rockefeller 
Foundation and other organizations taking part. 
The Unesco Courier presents the story of a Haitian Valley, 
The 
Re-birth 
0 
A Valley 
  
The turning point in the Haitian Pilot Project: the [ 
peasants of Marbial (upper left) mobilize to prove BB 
that the experiment can work. Their picket sign 
reads: “The Fond-Melon Co-Operative; Support 
Unesco Hard!" Above, an aged peasant of Marbial 
(This photo and all those oa pages 6 7 § were taken by 
Raymond Kilebos Reproduced by kind permission of 
PICTURE POST.) 
“ , 
»

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

‘Kébé I'lnesko Fo!” BB 
HEN you leave the airfield at Port au Prince 
WwW you step into a world that is African. The 
open shops in the market place might be any 
typical African town. 
  
  
The peasants driving their donkeys into market 
seem to be almost pure African. The Ministers of the 
government and the President himself are proud to 
be descendants of Africans who were brought to Haiti 
as slaves by the Spaniards and who later fell under 
French rule, then defied Napoleon and, in 1804, proclaimed the free 
Republic of Haiti. 
The spirit of freedom is still proudly maintained in Haiti, one of the 
three independent countries of the world entirely governed by black 
people. The Haitians look back with pride at their national heroes, Tous- 
saint Ouverture and Dessaline. 
In Port au Prince, one is conscious of a strongly French culture. French 
is the official language of the country and the people speak it with a 
pleasant musical accent. But once over 
the high mountains which encompass 
Port au Prince one is in a different land. 
The language of the country peasants is 
- Creole. 
In Post au Prince there are attractive 
houses on the side of the hills, fine hotels, 
swimming baths, a large Catholic cathe- 
dral and a Presidential palace, all looking 
out over a brilliant blue inlet of the 
Caribbean. 
Beyond it on all sides are fine ranges: 
of mountains. After tropical rains they 
are brilliant green with new vegetation. 
In the dry season, brown is the predomi- 
nant colour, reminiscent of the semi- 
desert lands of North Africa. 
- When one gets out of Port au Prince 
. into the mountains one enters a different 
Haiti. Here the peasants live scattered 
over the steep mountain sides in their 
humble little shacks, each ¢ne on his own 
small patch of cultivation. 


### 74002: The Rebirth of a valley: how the peasants of Marbial helped make the Haiti Pilot Project a success

### 74003: The Story of the Haiti 'Pilot Project'

THE PROBLEMS OF HAITI 
Haiti : over-population, tropical 
disease, deforestation, acute soil 
erosion, and illiteracy. 
Haiti is the smallest of the Latin-Ame- 
rican Republics, with an area of some 
ten-thousand square miles, but it has the 
highest density of population, calculated 
at more than three hundred and seventy- 
six per square mile. 
A high ‘proportion of the inhabitants is 
afflicted by a variety of tropical diseases. 
Malaria, tropical ulcers, intestinal worms, 
and the contagious skin disease known 
&s yaws, are common afflictions. 
ERE too ar: the real problems of 
THE 
STORY   
   
  
Conference, meeting in Mexico City 
approved the “Haitian Pilot Project” but 
voted to seek the co-operation of the Uni 
ted Nations and other Specialized Agen 
cies in sending experts in fields outsidi 
Unesco’s competence to work in the fiel 
with the director of the project. Unesc 
agreed to provide a director and pa) 
twenty percent of its estimated cost d 
sixty-six thousand dollars for the fir 
year. The Haitian Government promi 
another twenty percent and negotiationj 
were begun to obtain the remainder of 
the necessary funds from other organi 
zations. 
THE PROJECT TAKES 
SHAPE 
HE Head of Unesco’s Fundamenta 
Ww Education Division had visite 
Haiti to discuss the project witl 
  OF THE HAITI CS PILOT 
The pressure Ot increasing population 
forced the peasant to chop down. the 
tropical forest on almost every avaible 
patch of land in order to grow food. But 
even this was not enough to feed his 
family. The Haitian farmer courageously 
and grimly undertook the cultivation of 
slopes so steep that a goat could hardly 
climb them. Using the machete and pri- 
mitive hoe he scratched the surface of his 
fields, often situated on slopes at a sixty 
degree angle, where to keep himself from 
falling he was forced to attach himself 
with a rope! His efforts, however, were 
often condemned to failure. With the first 
tropical ‘rains, the loose top soil was - 
washed down into the valley and out to 
sea. 
Haiti, which was once considered the 
  
SANE STAR A     
  
 
    
a
y
e
 
I
N
I
Y
I
I
N
I
W
E
S
 
  
 
      FR — — er ——— 
[RE Ee AONLAE LS —r 
lz nd n 
. ; T » 3 A a . 1 
Led Wire. HE wis : A forme ad are > teh oh’ d i 
- » 3 
u 
. 
! . 
A 
S— - 
- > ~~ a a ’ 
, - FN hh - -— Se > 
- - a. 
wr Eo ~ SN 
- —_— - 
EAL JET » w J 
To Sao . Sai a 
“- . -~ - Pa » - . 
Se Ae LEY 
- - 4 - 4’ 2 
Noes = aR A ] 
- a 
Se 
L 
  
Columbus dropped anchor off the Island of Haiti, which he called Hispaniola, on 
December 6, 1492. Top map shows point where he landed, with southern “tongue” 
where Valley of Marbial is located. north of tiny Port of Jacmel. Bottom map: 
sketched on the spot by Haitian technician, shows Marbial Valley and existing and 
projected water wells. Unesco Centre is located in middle of Valley. 
UME 
“TS PROJECT °F 
  
richest of the French . Colonies, faced 
acute and increasing poverty, reflected in 
the misery and starvation of the peasants. 
In addition, over the whole Republic 
the rate of illiteracy was over eighty per- 
cent, In the present areas it was normally 
well over ninety percent. This meant not 
only the inability to read and write but 
ignorance of basic scientific principles 
of agriculture anc of the conservation of 
resources, and above all, ignorance of ele- 
mentary hygiene. 
ORIGIN OF THE PILOT 
HZSE were the problems which led 
jl Dumarsais Estimé. Haiti's vigorous 
and popular president, to turn to 
Unesco and propose that a “Pilot Pro- 
ject” in fundamental education be star- 
ted in his country. : 
The site chosen by the Haitian Govern- 
ment for the new ‘Pilot Project” was the 
rural section of Marbial, in the valley of 
the Gosseline River in the south of Haiti, 
The Gosseline, which rises in the high 
mountains of Gros Morne and flows for 
some twenty miles through the rugged 
foothills of Marbial, is a mountain torrent 
which shrinks to a chain of muddy pools 
during the dry season. The population of 
the valley has been estimated at about 
thirty thousand peasants, living scattered 
over the steep mountain slopes in isolated 
shacks. Hovewer, this is only a rough 
estimate because no census has ever been 
taken and no statistics exist. There are 
no villages in the Marbial Valley and its 
only town is the little port of Jacmel, 
where the Gosseline runs out into the sea. 
lot Project” with enthusiasm. But 
this initial enthusiasm was soon 
destined to frustration. 
- First there was a period of misun- 
derstanding, due to long-distance corres- 
pondence—some of which never arrived. 
Then, inaccurate articles appeared in 
American and Haitian newspapers, sta- 
ting that Unesco was putting two-hundred 
thousand dollars into a project of funda- 
mental education for the Marbial Valley. 
This was more than the total budget 
avaible to Unesco for its fundamental 
education. programme for all its forty 
Member States. 
Late in 1947, three members of Unesco’s 
staff visited Haiti and made a brief sur- 
vey of the Marbial Valley. What they 
found in the valley shocked them deeply. 
Unesco had been prepared for “tough 
sledding” in meeting the region’s educa- 
tional problems, but Marbial was obviously 
a “problem area” of the worst kind. 
The over-population, the tropical di- 
seases, the deforestation and erosion 
were so serious that it was patently evi- 
dent that any project to improve condi- 
tions in the valley implied something 
more than education as such. Fighting 
tropical diseases and reinstating a decli- 
ning agriculture were problems in which 
the World Health Organization and the 
Food and Agriculture Organization were 
competent rather than Unesco. 
In November 1947, Unesco’s General -- - 
FRUSTRATION ~~ -": 
AND DESPAIR + 
RN 1 NESCO accepted the Haitian “Pi 
representatives of the government. Bac) 
at headquarters in Paris, the Secretarial 
set to work drafting a programme o 
action for the project, based on these dis 
cussions. This included plans for primary 
schooling for children and general adull 
education for men and women to combal 
ignorance and illiteracy; language tea 
ching ; health education and medica 
services ; agricultural and veterinan 
education ; community cultural activitie 
based on a rudimentaey library, museum 
and arts centre; and the establishmen 
of small industries and rural crafts ai 
well as the organization of co-operatives 
This programme would be integrated 
into an over-all community education 
scheme with Unesco working with the 
Haitian Government and education au- 
thorities. Unesco saw its task as a double 
challenge : raising the social and econo- 
mic level of the community through edu- 
cation and at the same time the training 
of Haitian teachers and workers so that 
the project might become self-supporting 
as rapidly as possible. It was obvious, 
however, that this goal would noi be 
reached in less than five years. 
BASIC SURVEY 
HE first principle underlined in 
] Unesco’s plan was that any project 
for education and material im- 
provement must be based on a thorough 
knowledge of the physical environment 
and the people for whom it was destined. 
Unesco's initial task, theeefore, was ta 
undertake a “Basic Survey” to provide 
data on which the educational programme 
could be realistically based, and a measur 
ing line against which progress could be 
assessed in a few year’s time. 
  
Teaching the people of Marbial to be selfs 
sisal and palm fibres for mats. Young mah 
se eonnection with tbe

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=7) 2

### 74002: The Rebirth of a valley: how the peasants of Marbial helped make the Haiti Pilot Project a success

### 74003: The Story of the Haiti 'Pilot Project'

  
To head the Survey Team in Haiti, 
Unesco called on Dr. Alfred Métraux, an 
American anthropelogist of Swiss origin, 
who left the United Nations’ Department 
of Social Affairs to join Unesco. 
In April 1948, Dr. Métraux arrived in 
Port au Prince, formed his team of field 
workers and set to work in Marbial 
Valley. 
Another eminent anthropologist, Dr, 
Melville Herskovits had written a well- 
known book entitled “Life in a Haitian 
Valley.” When Dr. Méiraux had been in 
. the valley a short time he reported back 
- to Unesco that his survey might have to 
.... be called “The Death of a Haitian 
oo Valley.” 
"The team was next to despair at the 
formidable problems that faced it. Access 
into the valley was cut off for many days 
by tropical storms Only a rough track 
ran up the stony bed of the river and it 
was often impassible even by jeep. There 
f
e
 
Learning of this possibility of abandon- 
jng the project, Dr. Métraux, who had 
doggedly carried on his work .in spite 
of his illness, dispatched a letter to 
Unesco in which he wrote: “We cannot 
pull out from Haiti... we cannot abandon 
these people. If we do. we shall break 
their spirit completely... Whatever has been 
done in the field of education will collapse. 
This will be a complete disaster... The 
Unesco Pilot Project is an experience 
which is worth all our energy”. 
PEASANTS SPRING TO 
. ACTION > 
T was at this point that peasants of 
Marbial sprang into action and 
practically changed the face of the 
valley, 
  
They too heard 
the rumours that 
  
OJLECT” 
Unesco might 
abandon them, 
They called emer- 
gency meetings of 
their local co-ope- 
rativa associations. 
These co-operat-     
~~” was no drinking water, no houses for the 
staff except a few broken-down, leaky 
peasants shacks, with no sanitation what- 
ever. And one by one, the members of the 
team, including Dr. Métraux fell victim 
to malaria. 
It was obvious that these physical 
handicaps would have to be overcome 
before any programme of education could 
be started. It began to look as though 
the Pilot Project might die even before 
it could be brought effectively to life. 
In July of the same year, Unesco asked 
Dr. Frederick Rex, an American funda- 
mental education specialist on Unesco’s 
staff, to go to Haiti. His report confirmed 
the pessimistic view already expressed by 
Dr. Métraux. 
Writing to the Unesco Courier, Dr. Rex 
said: “What I saw and heard made me 
feel that the undertaking was impossible. 
The ravages of floods, erosion. imprudent 
and excessive cultivation had left but little 
earth for the poor peasants of the Mar- 
bial Valley to provide their daily bread. 
“The rains had failed and some families 
had begun to eat the seed corn that 
was all they had to provide the next 
vear’s crops. A few wild mangoes were 
often the only food a family could offer 
in exchange for a cup of millet or corn. 
Seven out of ten people had malaria. 
The swollen stomachs and the spindly 
legs of the children spoke of hookwworm 
and malnutrition. Yaws, with its horrible 
disfiguring effects was apparently com- 
mon”. 
It looked as though the project in 
Marbial Valley might have to be abandon- 
ed, or a new site chosen, since it was 
no part of Unesco’s work to carry out a 
major relief Job. i 
-supperting. Yeung girl (left) learning to weave 
n right) is being paid for work he Las done im 
® Co-operative project. 
ives, known in the 
local Creole as 
“Koumbites”, serve for mutual help in 
. tasks beyond the capacity of one man 
and his family. Despite the fact that 
they were starving, they rallied to Dr. 
Métraux and Dr. Rex and went to work. 
They built the first all-year road to the 
town of Jacmel. They sank a well forty feet 
from the river bed to get pure drinking 
water. They brought in a well-digger from 
Port au Prince to dig more wells. The 
Marbial market which had been halfway 
in the river bed was recontructed on 
higher ground with dry gravelled lanes 
and little stalls, The donkeys, horses and 
animals for sale or slaughter were confin- 
ed in a corral along the river front. A 
small open-air slaughter house was 
constructed of concrete. The co-operatives 
painted a big sign in Creole over the 
market gate: “Sanitary Market of Mar- 
bial constructed by UNESCO”, 
The peasants, with the aid of a Health 
Service technician, drained the swamps, 
tracked down breeding grounds of malarial 
mosquitoes and sprayed them with D.D.T.A 
small dispensary was opened with a doctor 
and a local medical assistant for the 
free treatment of disease and the distri- 
bution of medicines. The dispensary serv- 
ed the peasants and their livestock alike. 
Twenty-eight young women learned to 
weave native cotton on a hand-loom. On 
their small hand-made looms they learned 
to weave sisal and palm fibers for mats 
used for ladies’ sandals. 
An oven was built for the construction 
of cups. saucers, plates and bowls. 
For thé school children an emergency 
feeding programme was begun which gave 
a substantial midday meal to four-hun- 
dred children weekly. 
A community centre was established, A 
small vegetable “nursery” was started to 
- encourage the production of food stuffs 
and the improvement of local varieties 
-of corn, egg-plant and beans. 
In September 1948 ten education centres 
"were teaching old and young in the 
Valley to read and write in Creole. Some 
of the newly literate even began to study 
French. Soon a local newspaper appeared, 
- handwritten and illustrated with simple 
crayon drawings, through the initiative 
“of a few members of the Co-operatives 
and was distributed through the Unesco 
office staff. Now, the newspaper is actually 
being printed. It carries all the local 
news of the Valey—births, deaths. mar- 
riages, letters of complaint to the editor, 
and a section on agriculture and health 
week, There are still not enough copies 
to go around so the school boys and girls 
“read it aloud their eager parents. 
A FAMOUS SITE 
Métraux was able to write to Unesco: 
“Marbial has become a famous site. 
More and more people come to visit it. 
Last month, the director of rural educa- 
tion sent to Marbial twenty-olie school 
teachers to get some elementary training 
in anthropology and field methods... Our 
modest hut has been transformed into a 
| Y the month of October 1948. Dr. 
fairly roomy structure. The clinic has 
been more than successful and is already 
too small for the hundreds of patients 
who fiock to it... 
“However, it is in the schools where 
ehanges are the most striking. Noi only 
“Reading from left to right (1). Creole 
peasants post up first “Rout Ounesko- 
Marbial” sign on newly made road (2). 
A typical peasant home in the Marbial 
Valley (3). Peasants on their way to 
market with (middle distances) the 
woman on her way to market.   
  
Gosseline River and (beyond), terraced hillside (4). Work going ahead on the 
Uneseo Community Centre; large concrete circle is for the foundation of the 
eemmunity hall (5). M. Bonhomme, Haitian Government representative (scated) 
and (on his left), Mr. Berrouet, an agronomist, discussing agricultural problems 
with Marbial peasants (6). Dr. Metraux, American anthropologist, talks to a peasant 
  
has attendance doubled, but the behaviour 
of the children is different...” 
On October 30,1948, Dr. Rex wrote to 
Unesco: ‘“‘The tide of fortune of the 
Unesco Pilot Project... seems to have turn- 
ed for the better. Before the end of the 
vear, conditions and facilities will be right 
for the establishment of specific educa- 
tional activities which may be of great 
interest to other fundamental education 
schemes facing similar adverse conditions 
at the outset... confidence has been estab- 
lished among the peasants of the Marbial 
Valley that their miserable prospects of 
last summer can be changed by joint and 
co-operative efforts...” 
U.N. MISSION ARRIVES 
HAT the Haiti Pilot Project might 
become more than just a Unesco- 
Marbial Valley experiment became 
evident as early in July of last year 
when President Estimé appealed to the 
United Nations’ Department of Economic 
Affairs to carry out a full survey of the 
economic, agricultural, health and edu- 
cational conditions and needs of the 
entire Republic. When the United Nations 
accepted this proposal, Unesco appointed 
Dr. Rex as its representative on the 
Mission. 
Last October, under the leadership of 
the Swedish sociologist, Dr. Ansgar Ro- 
senborn, and assisted by experts from 
 
FAO, WHO and the Monetary Fund, the 
United Nations Mission of Technical 
Assistance to Haiti, began a full-scale 
survey of the island. At the request of 
Unesco it undertook a special study of 
the Marbial Valley. 
In its report, the Mission pointed out 
that although the difficulties of the 
Marbial Valley had not been under estimat- 
ed, the efforts of the local peasants had 
been so remarkable that the project 
- should certainly be carried through. The 
Mission even went further and recom- 
mended that the Marbial project should 
be fitted into a wider health and agri- 
cultural improvement scheme for the 
whole watershed of the Gosseline River, 
(of which the Marbial area represents 
only the middle part), They proposed 
that the health scheme should be based 
on the small local hospital at Jacmel, 
with a Yural clinic at the Unesco Centre 
in Marbial and that the training of 
health and agricultural community 
workers should be carried out as part 
of the fundamental education programme 
in Marbial, 
ENTHUSIASM HIGH 
ODAY throughout the Marbial Valley 
[| an extensive fundamental education 
programme is under way. 
Continued on Page 8) 
Poverty and disease in the Marbial Valley. The Unesco Project spells new hope for 
shis family which lives close to the Unesco Centre. 

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

-- UNESCO COURIER June 1949 
 


### 74002: The Rebirth of a valley: how the peasants of Marbial helped make the Haiti Pilot Project a success

  
The Story 
Of the Haiti 
<Pilot Pro ject’ 
Today, too, the eagerness of the Haitian 
peasants to provide their children with 
an education is such, that they have 
actually had to be restrainedi Only last 
month, Dr. Métraux reported that a young 
Haitian architect, named Mangonés, was 
designing a set of new school buildings 
in the Haitian tradition. Unesco flew a 
number of designs on microfilm to 
Mangonés, showing tropical schools in 
Brazil, Mexico and Africa. But the 
enthusiasm to start building immediately 
was so great among the Marbial people 
that it was only with difficulty that the 
laying of the foundations could be post- 
poned until the final plans had been 
accepted! 
In addition to this building already 
undertaken, plans are being made for 
constructing another rural schood and a 
training centre for fundamental education 
workers. The original school is now 
equipped with klackboards, and locally 
made benches and tables. Practical cour- 
ses are being given in hygiene, agriculture 
and stock-raising, basket-making, weaving 
and carpentry. 
Now that they are getting better food 
every day, the change in the children 
js striking. The gloom and sadness are 
gone and have been replaced by laughter 
and eargerness to play. Their games 
are a mixture of 
children’s ‘“rondes” 
from France and 
traditional African 
games, 
For the parents, 
adult education 
centres have been 
set up in the Valley. 
Often these centres 
have been tiny huts 
made of no more 
than banana leaves. 
But it was from 
these humble buts 
that seventy peas- 
ants have proudly 
emerged to accept 
their new literacy 
diplomas for their . 
studies in Haitian Ma r bial children 
Creole. learning to read. 
‘OUNESCO’ 
OR ‘INESKO’? 
N its report to President Estimé, the 
| | United Nations Mission had recom- 
mended that the Haitian Gov- 
ernment launch an all-out literacy 
campaign with the teaching of Creole 
and French, and prepare a series of 
elementary text-books and readers. 
But preparing books and readers in 
Haitian Creole poses a knotty problem. 
The fact is that Creole, which is a 
mixture of ancient French ard West 
African tribal languages has been written 
in at least four different ways with 
different alphabets. The orthography and 
grammar have never been satisfactorily 
established. This explains why one finds 
signs and posters, written in Creole, 
which spell Unesco in different ways. 
“Ounesco”. “Unesco”, and even “Inesko” 
are thus commonly seen. 
With the aid of the Rockefeller Foun- 
  
dation, Unesco obtained the services of- 
Dr. Robert Hall, Professor of! Romance 
Languages at Cornell University, and a 
Creole linguist. Dr. Hall has just complet- 
ed an intensive study in Haiti of the 
Creole grammar and orthography. The 
report on his findings reached Unesco 
in Paris early in June. He is now at 
work on a standard alphabet and 
grammatical system which will be used 
by a newly-formed team in Haiti to 
prepare basic school books, primers and 
reading material in the local Creole. 
EDUCATION 
For HEALTH 
   
The typical young Haitian girl (above left) presents a vivid contrast to woman 
of Marbial (above, centre) whose face is disfigured by the affects of yaws, a 
disease rampant in the Valley. The parents of the twin babies (above right) 
were paying the local witch doctor to save the life of one of the babies thought 
to be growing at the expense of ihe other whe was dying. 
HEN fundamental education first 
came into being as a part of the 
programme of Unesco, it was 
agreed that provision should be made 
in Pilot Projects for library and museum 
services. Haiti, with its vivid traditions 
of folk art and visual and aural expres- 
sion, was particularly well suited to an 
experiment of this kind, 
Museums and libraries have recently 
developed techniques of direct approach 
to ear and eye which are entirely suitable 
for fundamental education, using models 
and charts to. convey essential ideas to 
a largely illiterate community, Use can 
also be made of films of static film- 
strips, of sound recordings, music, story- 
telling, drama groups and specially 
prepared exhibitions. 
This is an educational technique which 
has been successfully developed by popular 
museums and libraries in more privileged 
countries but has seldom been applied 
to illiterate peoples Here, the Haiti Pilot 
Project has pioneering work to do. 
Last year, Unesco approached the 
Rockefeller Foundation for a grant-in-aid 
of seventy-five hundred dollars to enable 
Mademoiselle Yvonne Oddon, an anthro- 
pologist and librarian of the Musée de 
I’'Homme in Paris, to study the cultural 
missions and popular museums and libra- 
ries in Mexico and the United States 
where these techniques were being applied. 
Miss Oddon collected information and 
sample materials which would help the 
field workers in the Haiti Project to apply 
these new museum and library techniques. 
She studied methods of preparing film- 
strips and educational! films, educational 
posters, mobile exhibits and trail-side 
museums and libraries. Mlle Oddon felt 
that no material could be- translated or 
copied in Haiti without first being 
thoroughly adapted to the local Haitian 
requirements, tested in Haitian schools 
and adult centres, before being adopted 
for general use. : 
Her idea was to equip the Marbial 
Community Centre for 
demonstrations and to 
have these examined 
and criticized by Hai- 
tian educators and 
artists, 
With the help of a 
young Haitian named 
Ramponneau (who will 
later aid in illustrating 
Creole text-books) she 
went to work on the 
project following her 
arrival in Haiti last 
March. Using a work- 
shop lent t~ Unesco by In the 
the Art Centre at 
Port au Prince, she Valley 
prepared an exhibit 0 
including an artistic 
The desire for 
chart of Creole phone- . . ] 
tics, hand-made slides CSoucation 18 the 
on mosquitoes and Marbial ha ey : 
malaria. a three di- such ‘ that . the { 
mensional exhibit on o a ha d to ac 
food. and a diorama on restra ined : 
soil protection. Even the older 
The exhibit was an generation is en-§ 
immediate success in  thusiastic for the § 
Port au Prince where new educational § 
such panels and light- 
ing effects were almost 
unknown. Mlle Oddon 
has now taken the 
exhibit to the Unesco 
Community Centre in 
ed. 
The 
Progress 
is ; 
be 38 
opportunities offer- 
children, : 
formerly apathetic 
because of chronic 
Marbial, where she will establish a visual 
education museum as part of the funda- 
mental education activities in the Pilot 
Project, Examples of the exhibits will be 
sent to Rio de Janeiro for the Latin- 
American Seminar on Literacy Teaching 
which will be held from July 27 to 
September 6, and some may also be 
available in Paris for Unesco’s General 
Conference in September. 
AGRICULTURAL 
DEVELOPMENTS 
] HERE is a joint American and 
Haitian Food Production Organiza- 
tion in Haiti known as SCIPA 
(Service coopératif inter-américain de 
production agricole) which is assuming 
an important role in the agricultural 
development of the Republic. This organ- 
ization is supported financially by the 
Institute of Inter-American Affairs in 
Washington and the Haitian Government 
in Port au Prince. 
Pending a decision on the recommenda- 
tion made by the United Nations Techni- 
cal Mission for an agricultural development 
plan embracing the entire Gosseline 
watershed, SCIPA is carrying on agri- 
cultural work in the Marbial Valley. 
Their technicians have helped to get this 
year’s planting under way. Luckily, the 
rains began to fall during the middle of 
March. and the peasants are confident 
of a fine harvest of beans. corn and 
egg-plant. 
Already, new seeds have been distribut- 
ed in the Valley and the farmers were 
so over-joyed to receive them that they 
agreed to give two days’ free w3rk to 
Unesco as a sign of their gratitude. 
SCIPA has attached a Haitian agri- 
cultural expert to the project and a de- 
monstration plot and seed nursery have 
also been set up in the Valley. 
The plan is not to be a large-scale, 
agricultural-engineering scheme, but an 
 
 malnutrition, have shown a striking 
change now that they are eating wholesome food. 
effort to help the peasants to raise their 
own economic level by their own efforts 
and with their own resources. 
WHO JOINS IN 
NESCO’'S sister Agency, the World 
|B Health Organization, has now 
agreed to co-operate with the Haiti 
Pilot Project and will send in a doctor 
and a public health nurse to run the 
public health programme for the Valley. 
In a letter to Dr. Torres Bodet, Director- 
General of Unesco, dated June 1, the 
irector-Geeneral of WHO, Dr. Brock Chis- 
holm, writes: “..concerning WHO parti- 
cipation in this Project, we are now in 
process of recruiting the medical officer... 
A tropical nurse to help in the training 
of Haitian women in domestic and 
midwifery practices is also in process of 
recruitement... Budget allotments have 
been made for drugs, medical equipment... 
“We are glad to have this opportunity 
to share in such a valuable joint Project.” 
WHO will use the Unesco educational 
centre for training medical assistants and 
for getting the principles of hygiene 
across to the inhabitants. The aim is to 
turn the entire Gosseline Valley into a 
“demonstration area” in tropical hygiene 
and health education and training. The 
educational and training aspects are to 
be handled by Unesco while preventive 
medicine and tropical hygiene will come 
under WHO. 
An encouraging example of the Haitians’ 
vfaith in a demonstration cause and remedy 
was their reaction to a Walt Disney film 
on hookworm. After seeing the film and 
realizing why they were suffering from 
hookworm they immediately agreed to 
suggestions to build latrines. Now fifty 
latrine pits have been sunk and are 
regularly supervised by the Koumbite Co- 
operative, 
But the greatest public health problem 
of the Valley is yaws. If it could be arrang- 
ed to pump one “shot” of penicillin, which 
to-day costs twenty-two cents a dose, into 
every local inhabitant of Marbial, all 
cases of this hideous disease, and of 
other afflictions such as tropical ulcers, 
could be wiped out practically over night. 
  
Mille Oddon, the French museum and 
library specialist talking with four 
workers of the Community Centre. 
If Unesco and WHO could train the 
Haitians to use hypodermics and get the 
local people to take the injections, the 
results would be spectacular and might 
give health education quite a boost in 
Haiti. 
R. Alfred Métraux, who has directed 
the Haitian Pilot Project up until 
last month, is about to return to 
Europe. He leaves the Marbial experiment 
to a new Director of Fundamental Edu- 
cation, M. Albert Fernandez Ballesteros, 
who has just arrived in Haiti, Widely 
experienced in modern educational me- 
thods, an architect, designer and painter, 
M. Ballesteros has lived and worked for 
many years in Africa, Mexico, Columbia 
and Jamaica, where he was able to observe 
at first hand the difficult life of the 
peasants. Ia his native Spain, he has 
known long years of experience in organiz= 
ing and running co-operative movements. 
In a letter dated May 27, and written 
to Mr. John Bowers, who has directed 
Unesco’s Fundamental Education Division 
since its creation, and who steadfastly and 
courageously maintained his faith in the 
Pilot Project, Dr. Métraux writes: 
“..My sojourn in Haiti is coming to an 
end. I shall leave Haiti with regret but... 
with a good director on the job and 
with the support of the Director-General 
of Unesco, the Haitian project will not 
have to remain the burden anc the worry 
it has been for more than two years. The 
baby will soon walk and will no longer 
need a solicitous nursemaid.” 
This, then is the story of the re-birth 
of a Haitian Valley. Yes, the baby will 
soon walk. The Project is scheduled to 
last for five years, At the end of the 
first, it looked impossible. Now, by the 
end of the second year, its achievements 
and future possibilities have been drama- 
tically recognized. The success is a tribute 
to the peasants of the Valley of Marbial. 
The project survived because they had 
faith in it, because they were not afraid 
to prove that faith in their work despite 
the scepticism, anguish and set-backs 
that might have halted them. A Haitian 
Creole proverb says, “Bié si sué pa duré” 
or “What one gets without pain doesn’t 
last”. 
In proving their faith, the people of 
the Marbial Valley have proved the basic 
principle of fundamental education—that 
progress must be made not FOR the 
people, but BY the people themselves.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=9) 3

### 74002: The Rebirth of a valley: how the peasants of Marbial helped make the Haiti Pilot Project a success

June 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
  
  
DS So So So So 
  


### 74006: UNESCO review

  
UNESCO 
    
     
 
News of World Interest 
LATEST 
SCHOOL 
AlD : 
TELEVISION 
Television is now being used for 
the teaching of surgery. Recently 
an entire operation at a hospital 
in London was watched by a 
crowded room of students in ano- 
ther part of the building by means 
of television. 
The use of colour television will 
also be demonstrated this month 
at Atlantic City, in the United 
States, where 12,000 delegates to 
the annual meeting of the Ame- 
rican Medical Association will 
watch operations being per- 
formed in a local hospital in 
another part of town. 
  
POETS 
RECORD 
OWN WORKS 
ETRY lovers can now obtain 
recordings of some of their 
favourite poems read by the 
authors themselves, thanks to the 
initiative of the Library of Con- 
gress in Washington, which has 
issued a series of five albums of 
records entitled “Twentieth Cen- 
tury English Language Poets.” 
In the first series, now on sale 
to the public, T.S. Eliot, for exam- 
ple, reads, “The Waste Land.” 
Other well-known contemporary 
poets who have been recorded in- 
clude W.H. Auden, Louise Bogan, 
E.E. Cummings, Richard Eberhart, 
Robinson Jeffers, Allen Tate and 
Wiliiam Carlos William. 
The Library of. Congress, which 
has equipped a recording labora- 
tory capable of producing normal 
commercial type records, is issuing 
a second series of five poetry re- 
cord albums this year. 
A similar plan is also in oper- 
ation in Brazil where a series of 
Jow priced records of the best Bra- 
zilian poets has just been put on 
the market. The first album con- 
 
- Film Festival 
in Washington 
Films from several countries 
were shown in Washington on 
May 28 during the second Interna- 
tional Film Festival sponsored by 
the Washington World Affairs 
Centre. They included two Indian 
films, “Dances of India” and 
“Tree of Wealth,” a documentary 
based on the many uses of the 
coconut tree ; “School in Cologne,” 
a British film on new educational 
methods in Germany; and 
“Songs of Friendship,” a U.S. film 
about sorgs of different nations. 
Book Coupons Now 
Obtainable Through 
Science Co-op Offices 
A number of Unesco Book 
Coupons are now on sale 
through Unesco field science 
co-operation offices. Institu- 
tions and individuals in the 
respective regions interested 
in obtaining coupons should 
apply to the following ad- 
dresses: 
Latin-America : Dr. A. Esta- 
blier, Avenida Agraciada 
1875, Montevideo, Uruguay; 
Middle East: Dr. L. Thuriaux, 
33, Sh. el Qasr el Ali, Cairo, 
Egypt; 
South Asia (including Asia): 
Dr. A. Wolsky, ¢/0 Delhi 
University, New Delhi, India; 
East Asia: Mr. Jan Smid, 
United Nations Building, 166, 
Whanpoo Road, Shanghai, 
China, 
plays reflecting the 
      
tains poems by the writer, Manuel 
Bandeira, and several other cel- 
ebrated poetshave been recorded 
in subsequent albums. 
Some of these poets have be- 
come distant and legendary fig- 
ures to the people who live in 
the jungles and mountains of 
Brazil's outlying areas. The re- 
cordings will bring close to them 
the works and personalities of 
their national writers. 
‘WORLD 
PEACE’ 
PLAYS 
URGED BY UNESCO 
  
MORE than two-thousand pro- 
fessional, school and com- 
munity theatre groups in the 
United States have been urged by 
the U.S. National Commission for 
Unesco to present a series of 
dramatic performances to help 
promote world peace, human 
rights and international ‘under- 
standing. 
Miss Rosamond Gilder, Chair- 
man of the National Commis- 
sion’s Panel on Dramatic Art, 
and Representative of the Amer- 
ican National Theatre and Aca- 
demy, who made the appeal, em- 
phasized that “the whole point 
and emphasis should be toward 
expressing the basic Unesco idea 
in terms of the locality in which 
the performance takes place.” 
International understanding 
could be enhanced, she said, by 
life and 
customs of other nations, music 
and dance festivals dedicated to 
a Fem Ech 
- ad N y ATi 
AN 
    
         
~~ Re y-, “> MY > 
A Letter from Nagoya 
To the Editor, 
This iv to acknowledge the re- 
ceipt Jf three different issues of 
‘Courier’, which you were good 
enough to send us. I had some of 
them filed in the library of the 
Nagoya Association for Coopera- 
tion with Unesco and the rest 
distributed among carefully se- 
lected members of the Association, 
with the request that they be 
passed on to others when they are 
finished with. 
The publication is deeply appre- 
ciated by every member who had 
opportunity of reading it. It 
seemed to have impressed them 
with wide tie with which all mem- 
bers of the Unesco Association are 
bound. 
May T avail myself of this 
opportunity in informing you 
some cof our recent activities of 
the Nagoya Association ? 
For four days beginning on 
March 27, this year, the Nagoya 
Association were the host to 
thirty-five representatives of the 
Unesco associations established in 
upper secondary schools through- 
out Japan. Thirty more delegates 
attended this conference from 
nearby prefectures. The gathering 
had two objectives : study of the 
United Nations and the Unesco 
and the discussion of the future 
activities of the Unesco associa- 
tions. 
On April 10, lectures and film 
shown in commemoration of the 
first anniversary of the Nagoya 
Association for Cooperation with 
the arts of other countries, or 
original scripts built around the 
basic tenents of human freedom 
as set forth in the U.N. Declara- 
tion of Haman Rights. 
ne. CANADA £     
 
HELPS | ( 
CREATIVE ARTISTS 
Creative artists in Austria, 
France, Western Germany, Ifaly 
and Ethiopia are to receive badly 
needed equipment through a 
grant of 46,000 dollars from the 
Canadian Council for Reconstruc- 
tion through Unesco. 
The money has been made 
available for a creative arts pro- 
ject from the 1,055,000 dollars 
which the Council has raised to 
help war-devastated countries. It 
will be used to buy equipment re- 
quired by painters, sculptors, 
writers, architects and handeraft 
workers. 
Austria is to receive 10,000 dol- 
lars, France 12,000, Western Ger- 
many 12,000, Italy 10,000 and 
Ethiopia 2,000, Ethiopia's grant 
will be administered by its Depart- 
ment of Education and used for 
re-establishing folk arts. 
Burma To Join Unesco 
The Union of Burma has 
decided to become a member of 
Unesco and has instructed its 
ambassador in London to s'gn the 
Constitution of Unesco and to de- 
posit the instrument of acceptance 
with the British Government. 
Switzerland, which becanfe the 
46th Member State, on January 
28 thid; year, was the last country 
to join Unesco.     
-— —— a ——— — 
4 UNESCO 
fl JAPAN 
—
—
—
—
—
—
 
  
{2873308 5 
E
E
E
 
E
Y
 
] 
     
      
W
M
A
R
B
T
A
R
A
N
 
S
a
n
t
 
A
A
R
 
A
R
A
B
 
A
v
a
n
 
» - gant won   
cultures. 
Unesco’s ultimate aim 
at its summer session. 
Sa
n 
an
 
ah
 
oh
 
oh
 
oh
 
a
 
S
e
 
S
R
i
n
a
i
 
i
E
 
S
S
 
o
h
 
S
S
 
a 
i 
bot DEE 
EE a 
<REPORT TO U. N.| 
¢ YD EPORT to the United Nations”, a comprehensive account 
of Unesco’s activities and devzlopment during 1948 together 
with details of the Organization’s programme of work for 1949, 
as approved by the General Conference last December, has just 
been published for submission to ths United Nations. 
In an introduction to the Report, Dr. Torres Bodet, points out 
that it lays stress on Unesco’s work for the re-establishment of 
international contacts in the fields of education, science and 
N conclusion, he writes, “This is what I personally regard as 
: through education, 
culture to bring about true fellowship between all peoples of the 
world and between all men in each country. 
“Unesco is thus faced with two equally important obligations : 
to make each culture understand that it enriches 
borrowing from others and repaying them with interest from its 
own finest and rarest creations; 
between intellectuals and the masses so that a bond of brother- 
hood may draw them together for the kenefit for all.” 
The Report and its 15 annexes cover every aspect of the 
Organization’s work during the past year, financial and adminis- 
trative facts, information about Unesco’s relations with other 
organizations and details of its 1949 programme. The 1786 page 
report, which constitutes a valuable reference book, will be 
examined by the United Nations Economic and Social Council 
     
4 
science and 
itself by. 
and to bridges the wide gulf 
e
t
 
o
e
e
e
e
e
a
m
e
n
s
 
A
 
e
l
 


### 73995: Major campaign to cut frontier barriers to education exchange

Campaign to Cut Barriers 
To Education Exchange 
{Continued from page 3) 
Under study in Unesco House is 
a plan to create an inter-Secreta- 
rial committee, commosed of rep- 
resentatives of the Interim Com- 
mission of the International Trade 
Organization and the Economic 
Commission for Europe, which 
would join with Unesco in a 
planning body to co-ordinate and 
broaden current activities to re- 
duce economic obstacles to the 
free flow of information. 
International Agreements 
N indication of the importance 
attached by Unesco to this 
economic field is the fact that 
the first two international agree- 
ments to be initiated by the Or- 
ganization fall within this realm. 
The first is an Agreement to 
Facilitate the International Cir- 
culation of Visual and Auditory 
Materials of an Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Charac- 
ter. It would free films and si- 
milar materials, for educational 
ARZ3) 
      
BAL EALE “re 
AR tea tsar avavn 
S LR 
Cha de PTL An   
© 0 0 0° 
EE 
in 
2%) 2B
Row 
x J rN 
ghee: 
Cc & 2 
Risin 
EE na 
Ht 
Sa EF 
bs Rn ~-1e32 
- g A 
1 "an 
mH, 5 
! x« $3 
Japan, which is not a Member of Unesco has formed seventy 
associations for co-operation with Unesco and 22 Unesco Students 
Clubs. Above we reproduce poster to publicize Unesco used at Nagoya 
Unesco Festival, in Japan, last month when elephants (above 
left) were mobilized to help. 
Unesco was held in conjunction 
with the inaugural meeting of the 
Nagoya Chapter of the United 
Nations Association in Japan. 
Another commemorative event 
was a big-scale Unesco festival 
taken place at the municipal zoo- 
logical garden in the hilly 
outskirts of the city. Features 
were exhibits of publications and 
posters, folk dances of all nations, 
sketch contest of school children, 
children's talent contest, a con- 
cert at which a ‘Song for Unesco’, 
composed by the Nagoya Associa- 
tion, was for the first time made 
public. 
Elephants’ tricks, duck race and 
many other attractions were 
enjoyed by visitors, which aver- 
aged 15,000 a day. Altogether 
12.000 students of both sexes took 
turns to act as box office attend- 
ants, ushers, stall attendants, 
promptiers and monitors. 
Although financially the festi- 
val was rot much of a success, the 
cost proving more than we had 
calculated, we were satisfied that 
it had tremendous effect of pub- 
licity for the Unesco movement... 
The Nagoya Association put out 
the first issue of its organ, 
“Unesco and You” on April 28. 
Dr Mitsum Tsurumi 
Vice President 
Nagoya Association 
for Cooperatimsn with Unesco. 
May 16, 1949.   
purposes, from quotas, Customs 
and import licensing systems, 
The Dominican Republic has 
just reportetd its intention to 
sign the Agreement, which comes 
into force upon ratification by 
ten countries. 
A similar Agreement to Facilie 
tate the International Circulation 
of Publications was dispatched re- 
cently to Unesco’s Member States. 
It would enable people in each 
contracting country to purchase 
books, newspapers and periodicals 
from abroad under a more liberal 
system of Customs, quotas and fo- 
reign- exchange controls. 
After discussion of this Agree- 
‘ment at the Fourth Session of the 
General Conference, in Paris in 
September, it is expected that a 
final text will be established for 
circulation to Member States for 
signature, 
Extension of Book 
Coupon Scheme 
VWHILE these and other propo- 
sals move forward through 
the machinery of international 
action, Unesco is going ahead with 
its own unique Book Coupon 
Scheme. This scheme, which en- 
ables “soft currency” countries to 
purchase books from “hard cur- 
rency”’ countries by means of 
coupons redeemed through a 
- Unesco revolving fund, is rounding 
out a successful trial period. 
An additional $ 250,000 has now 
been appropriated for the contin- 
ued operation of the scheme. 
Producers of scientific equipement 
and educational films are being 
sounded out in a number of coun- 
tries as a first step in extending 
the scheme to materials other 
than books. 
Recommendations 
to Member States 
N a Memorandum to Member 
States early this year, the Di- 
rector-General stated the case for 
reducing economic barriers to the 
international movement of infor- 
mation materials and put forward 
ten suggestions, Among these were 
that Member States should sim- 
plify and centralize their own 
import regulations ; release larger 
amounts of foreign exchange for 
educational purchase; and ins- 
truct their representatives at in- 
ternational! trade conferences to 
urge specially favourable treat- 
ment for educational, scientifie 
and cultural materials. 
“Relaxation of controls for 
these materials” the Director-Ge- 
neral commented, ‘involves a re- 
latively small imposition on the 
national economy, by comparison 
with benefits to be derived in 
terms of popular enlightenment 
and scientific advancement.” 
Julian BEHRSTOCK.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10 UNESCO COURIER June 1949 
  
    
he was carrying all his worldly treasures --a cat and a parrot cage 
containing two small birds and a white mouse. 
  
“(Photo Ina Bandy) 
Two of the “Vercheny” boys, 
Dédé (right) aged 11, and 
Michel, aged 12. When Déde 
arrived at the children’s 
association reception centre 


### 74007: A French foreign legionnaire and Paris 'dead-end' kids

  
THE CHILDREN’S VILLAGE WITH... ~~ 
A French Foreign Legionnaire 
And Paris ‘Dead-End’ Kids 
of the Drome, in the moun- 
tainous Vercors country of 
southeast France, where the 
maquis had their strongholds 
during the Occupation, you will 
come across a little hamlet call- 
ed Vercheny. 
I you travel up the valley 
  
About a mile away, up on the 
vine-covered hillside are the 
ruins of another village, Verche- 
ny-le-Vieux, abandoned a genera- 
‘tion ago. The roofs have fallen 
in, grass grows thickly round the 
crumbling walls and the village 
streets are only recognizable as 
weedy tracks. Within the former 
dwellings themselves, trees have 
actually taken root and pushed 
theic trunks and branches up- 
wards through the ceilings and 
the roofs. 
A few months ago, “Old” Ver- 
cheny was a deserted ‘“Ghost- 
town”, but today, to the noise 
of hammering and sawing and 
the sound of young voices raised 
in song, it is coming back to life. 
Led by a 21-year-old ex-Foreign 
Legionnaire, a group of Paris 
youths are working there on what 
might be termed “Operation New- 
life”. Out of its ruins they are 
creating a new community to give 
the chance of a new existence to 
some of the neglected “dead-end” 
children of Paris. 
When the work is completed, 
the piles of rubble and jagged 
walls will have been replaced by 
new houses, workshops, a school 
and a sports ground. forming a 
children’s community centre 
which will provide home life and 
educational and apprenticeship 
opportunities for children who 
were heading for the juvenile 
court and the reform school. 
. The project- began three years 
ago as an idea in the mind of 
Robert Ardouvin, a young French 
ex-Legionnaire who is directing 
the work at Vercheny. At fhat 
time he was eighteen, practically 
penniless and earning his living by 
teaching school and selling news- 
papers in the Montmartre quarter. 
  
———— 
Upper row: Place Pigalle in Paris (left) where the Young Legionnaire, Robert Ardouvin 
At his pitch in the Place Pi- 
galle he watched life go on around 
him and saw children who, in 
order to eat, stole or trafficked on 
the black market, others whose 
home lives were non-existent and 
the homeless ones who, after the 
last underground train had pass- 
ed. lay down to sleep on the steps 
of the stations at Anvers, Pigalle 
and Barbés 
He had read that there were 
300,000 French children living in 
 
It was a hard life and the pay 
didn’t compare with what they 
could have made by petty black 
market activities. Some did in 
fact give up, but the ones he 
finally brought back to Paris 
were physically and morally better 
©. than when they 
had left. 
Then for a time 
his efforts seem- 
ed to lead mno- 
where. But one 
day, Madame 
Jean Chauvel, 
wife of the then 
rench Assistant 
Secretary of State 
for Foreign Af- 
fairs, heard what 
Robert was trying 
to do. Soon after- 
wards, an associa- 
tion, which they 
decided to call 
“Friends of the 
Children of Pa- 
ris”, was formed 
by Madame Chau- 
vel and other pro- 
minent Parisians. 
Robert was no 
jo!
 
  
   
fa 
“J a 
44- 
Robert Ardouvin, 
drawn by one of 
his companions, 
M. Haffner, 
  (Seine). 
You can help the children of Vercheny and Montreuil whe 
need financial aid, construction ,materials of all 
furniture, bedding, shoes and clothing. Gifts of money should 
be sent to “Amis des Enfants de Paris”: Banque Flury-Hérard, 
372 Rue Saint-Honoré, Paris-ler, and gifts in kind to the same 
Association at 150, Avenue dua Président-Wilson, 
kings, 
Montreuil   
conditions of “moral danger”, 
60.000 of them in Paris alone and 
he also knew that most of the 
efforts made by the authorities 
were aimed at “re-educating” 
those who had already committed 
offences 
So, alone, he made up his mind 
to help those children who had 
not yet appeared before a judge. 
He would need, he decided, a 
team of helpers, preferably young 
men who had learned from exper- 
ience the meaning of “conditions 
of moral danger”. He also vis- 
ualized a home in Paris where 
the children would spend a short 
period for rehabilitation and ob- 
servation and a centre, somewhere 
in the provinces, far from the 
temptations of Paris, where the 
children would live under home- 
like conditions, be educated and 
eventually learn a trade of their 
own choosing. 
He decided to look for his “dis- 
ciples” among the people he was 
trying to help. Soon, {fifteen 
youths had agreed to help him. 
To put them to a physical test 
and get them out of Pacis, he 
took them to work in a lumber 
camp in the Landes pine forests 
of southwestern France. = ~~ 
longer fighting a lone battle, 
Madame Georges Vanier, wife 
of the Canadian Ambassador in 
Paris, became Honorary President 
of the Association and thanks to 
her efforts a generous donation 
was received from the “France- 
Canada Committee”, this was 
followed by other gifts. 
Finally, in May 1947, a house 
in the Paris suburb of Montreuil 
was obtained from a youth hostel 
association. It had heen empty for 
nearly forty years and was in 
ruins. 
The Ministry of Reconstruction 
estimated that 1,200,000 francs 
would be needed to put it in or- 
der, but six months later, Robert 
and his team of helpers had made 
it habitable at a cost of 75,000 
francs, plus a good deal of sweat 
and aching muscles. 
It wag a great day for him when 
the first fifteen children arrived 
from Paris at the “White House”, 
as it was called because of its 
clean, newly limed walls, They 
were not coming to live in “ideal” 
conditions, but it was at least 
a great improvement on what they 
had left behind : 
They had to be taught many 
simple things—that meals are 
eaten off plates and around a 
tables, that they must wash them- 
selves and brush their teeth daily, 
that they must go to school regu- 
larly and do their homework—all 
of which they soon accepted as 
part of their new life. But, above 
all, they were happy and began 
to understand what a “home” 
really meant. . 
Watching the members of his 
“family” learning to live together, 
Robert was happy, but he still 
didn’t know how and where he 
could set up the country centre 
for them, so that the Montreuil 
home could be free to receive 
fifteen newcomers. 
Last June the unexpected hap- 
pened. Madame Daumas, a pro- 
perty owner in the Drome Valley 
in southeast France, offered the 
Association a house and about 
sixty-seven acres of land near the 
village of Vercheny (Madame 
Birthday in 
Hungary 
The Hungarian Children’s 
Republic near Budapest will 
next month celebrate its first 
anniversary. Serving as a 
summer home for thousands 
of children on holiday, the 
Republic is run entirely by the 
children themselves.     
] 
, recruited his first Group of “Dead End” kids to form his Children’s V 
boy, shown at right, walked all night to reach the new Centre at Montreuil 
group of children at the house they helped reconstruct at Montreuil, near Paris. 
Daunas is now a member of the 
Association’s Executive com 
mittee). 
Robert went straight down there 
and, finding the ruined village, 
decided to rebuild it. Instead of 
grass-grown ruins, he already saw 
the neat little houses where “fami. 
lies” of twelve boys and their 
“parents” would live, the school, 
the sports ground, and the work- 
shops and model farm, where the 
boys would begin training for a 
trade after leaving school. 
Two months later, helped by 
seven other youths, he began to 
clear the site for the first house. 
He also began digging into the 
hillside to catch a spring which 
would provide the centre with 
water and also help to improve the 
supply for Vercheny village. 
The villagers have been glad to 
help the boys, giving them fruits, 
vegetables and cheese. Two farm- 
ers have promised to plough up 
the land for them. 
A few months ago, the rest of 
the twenty youngsters from Mon- 
treuil went down to join them 
and a new group of youngsters has 
taken their place. Now that the 
fine weather has come. the work 
is being pressed ahead with the 
assistance of the International 
Voluntary Service for Peace which 
has sent down teams of work 
camp volunteers to give a hand. 
Three houses have already been 
fully restored— the first units in 
what will eventually be a com- 
munity of two-hundred young 
people, 
So, the third part of Robert's 
dream is coming true. But he 
is looking much further ahead. 
While he works at Vercheny, he 
is thinking up new projects—an 
industrial training centre near a 
large town and more reception. 
centres, at Marseilles and Lyons. 
He's young enough, he feels, to 
be able to make long-term plans. 
  
  
    
  
  
      
illage. The 
Bottom row: Two of Robert's helpers (left) supervising home lessons. The youth studying alone (centre) has now found a position in a Parisien bank. Right: Happy 
(Photos by Mme Ina Bandy)

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

June 1949 UNESCO COURIER 11 


### 74009: The Librarians join hands: a new venture in world publications exchanges

ox 
A New 
Venture 
In World 
Publication 
Exchanges 
N December 1 last year, a 
serious fire destroyed the 
libraries of the Univer- 
sity of Chile Medical School, 
burning about half the 15,000 
volumes in the main library and 
most of those in the eight 
departmental ones. 
Among the books lost in the 
fice were many medical period- 
icals published in European and 
other countries whose replace- 
ment, especially those now out of 
‘print. 
Now, however, thanks to an 
“SOS” published by Unesco in 
its “Bulletin for Libraries”, there 
is a good chance that libraries in 
many parts of the world will be 
able to supply Chile Universitv 
with many of the missing vo- 
lumes. oC 
This example of directing help 
where it is most needed is a good 
illustration of an important as- 
pect of Unesco’s work and demons- 
trates the useful role which the 
“Bulletin for Libraries” has fill 
ed since it was first published 
Just over two years ago. 
~ Existing Resources 
The story of the Libraries Bul 
letin began even before the offi- 
cial birth of Unesco itself. In 
1846, the Preparatory Commis- 
sion of Unesco set up a prepara 
tory Libraries Section which start- 
ed an extensive survey of world 
library needs and resources. 
To those carrying out the in- 
quiry it soon became obvious that 
not withstanding the losses caus- 
ed by the war, many library 
      
       
    
3
)
 
J 
i
 
41
1 
2!
 
» 
—
—
 
—
 
rn
g 
ia
 
—
 
y
o
»
 
L
L
 
hd 4 
needs 
through existing 
in other countries. The 
problem, it seemed, was 
mainly one of informing 
needy libraries where to look 
for donors and of indicating 
to libraries with surplus ma- 
terials’ the places where 
their help would do the 
good. 
The purpose of the publi- 
cation, it was decided, would 
be to publicize the needs, 
offers and exchange invita- 
tions of libraries, to give 
information on important 
bibliographical and reference 
works as well as library news of 
international interest. 
Since the first issue appeared 
in April 1947 the “Bulletin” has 
been published regularly .each 
month in a bilingual edition 
(English-French) and has grown 
in size from twenty-four to forty 
pages. During the same time its 
circulation has increased from 
4500 to 7,500 copies, which are 
sent out free of charge to all 
parts of the world. To-day, the 
“Bulletin” has established itself as 
an integral part of international 
library communications. 
Why -has it proved such a suc- 
cessful experiment? The principal 
could be satisfied 
resources 
The Librarians 
I 
examples of   
reason is that it ig filling an im- 
portant need by acting as a co- 
ordinating agency to assist libra- 
ries reconstruction and to faci- 
litate international library ex- 
changes. 
Proof of the “Bulletin’s” success 
has been seen in the hundreds of 
letters received by Unesco from 
libraries in all parts of the world, 
expressing appreciation for the 
help it provides. To cite but one 
example, recognition of these ser- 
vices was given recently by the 
“Schrifttum der Bodenkultur”, 
organ of the “Hochschule fur Bo- 
denkultur” in Vienna. “The 
Unesco Bulletin for Libraries”, 
said this journal, “one of the few 


### 74010: UNESCO book shelf

UNESCO BOOK SHELF 
@@ 
B’nai B'rith. 
“Unesco in Focus’’ describes the history 
and evaluates the prospects of 
,success of the UN education- 
al organization dedicated to 
‘constructing the defenses of 
peace in the minds of men’. 
In a foreword to the pamphlet, 
Milton Eisenhower, Chairman 
of the U.S. National Commis- 
sion for Unesco, terms it a 
major contribution to the lite- 
rature about Unesco. 
“If our world is not to be 
the tomb of an atom-wrecked 
civilization’’, declares Mr. Hen- 
derson, ¢‘‘a fair share of us 
on the globe must achieve 
that mutual understanding and 
respect by which an interna- 
tional society transcending all 
national or group differences 
can become a reality. Unesco 
is the best answer man has 
yet devised to this life-and- 
death problem’’. 
‘‘Unesco cannot function in a vacuum’’, says 
Mr. Henderson, ‘‘but can achieve its goals only 
if people the world over cultivate the art of 
Yuman relationships and develop attitudes that 
will hurdle the barriers of class, religion, race 
and nationalism?’’. 
NESCO in Focus’ 
Henderson, lecturer at the Uni- 
versity of London, is a recent 
pamphlet in the Freedom Pamphlets Series 
published by the Anti-Defamation League of 
by James L. 
Mr. 
lagged ; 
bata at   
¢‘Unesco’’, 
Dear Sirs, 
& 1 enclose 
Town   
SUBSCRIPTION FORM 
(Cut out this subscription form and send it today to the agent 
in your country listed in adjoining: column.) 
Kindly enter my name as a subscriber to the “Unesco Courier”. 
I wish the subscription to date from: 
#& The last issue published @ from Volume IL No I (Feb. 1049), 
NTL as 
@ Please send me a bill for amount due, 
ELAR RL EERE EE EEE EE LE A a 
eA EASES HIER SR SARE SHE aR0 o COMBEEY oocvicricirnnsisararssssssssnene 
I wish to receive the @ English @ French ¢ Spanish edition 
of the “Unesce Courier”, Please encircle desired service, 
to cover annual subscription, 
    
With a view toward attaining these goals, 
Henderson points out, 
barked upon a bold global program, which calls 
among other things for: educational recons- 
truction in war-devasted nations ; advancement 
cf education in areas where it has hitherto 
promotion 
Unesco has em- 
of cultural exchange 
in the arts and sciences ; 
furtherance of free and uni- 
versal communication of ideas 
and the study of individual and 
group tensions. 
Discussing the basic elements 
of international amity, Mr. 
Henderson says the founda- 
tions must be laid early—in 
the school and family—and 
developed through adult life 
by various projects which will 
evoke a sympathetic attitude 
toward co-operation among 
peoples of the world. Mr. Hen- 
derson cites some specific 
examples : pen friendships 
among children of different 
nations ; student exchanges; 
and international relations 
clubs to help dissolve the bar- 
riers to international under- 
standing. 
says Mr. Henderson, ‘‘is the or- 
ganized symbol through which we can combat 
prejudice and ignorance. It needs and deserves 
tbe support of the citizenry of the world’. 
¢‘Unesco in Focus’ is available at twenty- 
five cents a copy from the Anti-Defamation 
League of B’nai B’rith, 212 
Fifth Avenue, New York, 
New York. . 
Recent Publications 
STUDY ABROAD. International 
Handbook, Fellowships, Scho- 
larships Educational Exchange. 
Supplement to Volume I, 1948, 
Fr. Frs 120 or $ 0.40 or 2s. 
INTERNATIONAL YEARBOOK 
OF EDUCATION 1948. Edited 
by the International Bureau of 
Education in cooperation with 
Unesco. Fr. Frs 700 or $ 3.00 or 
13s6. 
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION 
ON TECHNICAL NEEDS in 
Press, Film, Radio, 1948. 308 pp. 
Fr. Frs 350 or $ 1.20 or 6s. 
THE BOOK OF NEEDS in Edu- 
cation, Science and Culture of 
War-Devastated Countries. 
Vol. II, 1949. 140 pp. 
Fr. Prs 300 or $ 1.30 or 6$6. 
  
successful and 
really practic- 
al internation- 
al co-opera- 
tion, is Unes- 
co's endeavour 
to encourage 
libraries of the 
various coun- 
tries of the 
world to im- 
prove and en- 
large their re- 
lations. It de- 
serves the at- 
tention of 
every bibliophile”. 
The latest issue of the ‘‘Bulle- 
tin” contains a good cross-section 
of the type of information wel 
comed by libraries in all parts of 
the world. It is divided into five 
chapters: “News and Informa- 
tion”, “Fublications Wanted”, “Ex- 
change”, and “Free Distribution”. 
Many poignant stories lie be- 
hind the information published 
under the heading of “Publica- 
tions Wanted”. Laghouat, a Sa- 
hara desert town in Southern 
Algeria, for instance, has no 
educational facilities other than 
primary schools and the local 
press. “It is essential” says the 
Bulletin, “to establish a library 
and enlarge the vision of this 
Muslim population which lives 
i 
as if lost in the sands of the 
Sahara desert”. To start a li- 
brary, Laghouat’s governing 
authorities are therefore appeal- 
ing for gifts of books (in the 
French language) from well- 
stocked libraries in other parts 
of the world. 
Books for Czechoslovakia 
The devastation of war is re- 
flected in an appeal from the 
University of Thessalonki at Salo- 
nika in Greece, for gifts of books. 
Founded in 1926, it had built up 
an efficient library before the 
war, but during the German occu- 
pation many of its volumes were 
lost or pilfered. Now the univer- 
sity is too poor to make good 
its losses or buy new books. 
Post-war economic difficulties 
which prevent the free interna- 
tional movement of cultural ma- 
terials such as books are illus- 
trated in a message from the 
Medical Faculty Library of 
Palacky University in Czechos- 
lovakia. The library is experienc- 
ing insurmountable currency 
difficulties in its efforts to 
complete a series of medical and 
scientific periodicals interrupted 
during the war years. 
Fortunately for libraries such as 
these there are more favoured ones 
Join Hands 
which are willing to make free 
gifts of their surplus publications. 
Even libraries in such war-devas-* 
tated countries as Austria, France, 
China and Italy do what they can 
to help those who have suffered 
greater losses than themselves. 
Through its Clearing House for 
Libraries, Unesco has been offer- 
ing for free distribution thou- 
sands of books and periodicals 
and each month the “Bulletin” 
lists many of these offers. 
In the March issue for instance, 
the offers included books on reli- 
gion, fiction, various periodicals, 
and a large selection of reprints 
from medical periodicals. More of 
these medical reprints were of= 
fered in the April “Bulletin”. 
Sophocles and Zenophon 
The offers published in the 
May issue cover Greek and Latin 
text-books which can be obtained 
free of charge on application to 
Unesco’s Clearing House for Li- 
praries. These text-books include 
works by Homer, Plato, Sophocles 
and Zenophon in the Greek Sec- 
tion and Latin text-books rang=- 
ing from elementary grammars to 
H. Hardinge’s book, “Julius Cae-. 
sar, Soldier, Statesman, Emperor.” 
The May issue also lists ex- 
change offers from thirteen coun- 
tries, A French oceanographic 
station in Indo-China, for 
example, offers to exchange tech- 
nical memoranda publications, 
but stipulates that it must receive 
“really valuable ientific ma- 
nuals” in return, as its archives 
have been seriously depleted dur- 
ing fighting in the area. 
Some of the requests and offers 
would certainly mean little to the 
average reader but they are of 
vital importance to libraries and 
librarians in many parts of the 
world, who are trying {to overcome 
the effects of the cultural “black- 
out” of the war years. And what 
is still more important they are 
a sign that libraries are living 
again, nourished by the renewed 
flow of information, restored cone 
tacts and mutual assistance. 
Later this year Unesco's Libra- 
ries Division will publish a hand- 
book in international publication 
exchanges, the first of its kind 
ever to appear. Listing exchange 
offers ny subject field, the hand- 
book will serve as a useful ref- 
erence work for use by libraries 
in their search for books. 
It is -this world-wide network 
of library communications which 
Unesco is working to maintain 
and develop, and in its fight one 
of the most vital weapons is the 
“Bulletin for Libraries.” 
 
Are You A «Courier’ 
SUBSCRIBER ? 
The Unesco Courier is an international periodical 
devoted to the work of Unesco and to aclivities and 
developments throughout the world in education, science 
and culture. 
Until now some of our readers have been receiving free 
copies of our periodical. In order to permit us to supply 
the many thousands of new readers in almost every coun- 
try in the world, we are undertaking a special drive for 
subscribers. 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 
U.S, or 5/- or 250 French Francs (300 French Francs 
outside of France). 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! Tell your friends about the Unesco 
Courier and get them to subscribe too. 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to 
Unesco House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16, France. 
N. B. — The photo-offset American edition is available only 
through our agent, Columbia University Press. 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsina 500. Buenos-Aires. 
Australia: RB. A. Goddard Ltd. 255a, George St, Sydney, 
Belgium. — Librairie 
Bruxelles IV. 
encyclopedique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, 
Caaada : the Ryerson Press. 299 Queen St. West, Toroato. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga. R. de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana, 
Denmark : Einar Murksgaard, 6 NoOrregade. Copenhagen. 
Great Britain: HM Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service) . P.O Box 569, Lond>n, SE. (Post 
orders). — Manchester 2: 39-41 King Street — Edinburgh 2: 13a 
Castle Street — Cardiff: 1 St Andrew's Crescent. — Bristol 1: 
Tower Lane — Belfast: 80 Chichester Street 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris. Se, 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale. Athens. 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery OCo., Scindia House, New Delhi, 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle. Av, des Prancals, Beirut, 
Low Countries: N.V. Martinus 
J Lange Vonrhout. The Hague 
Portugal : Unido Portuguesa de Imprensa, Caixa Postal 615, Lisboa 
Sweden: Ab. O. BE Pritzes. Fredsgatan i, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Payot. Lausanne, 
Uruguay. — Libreria 
Montevideo. 
US.A. — International Documents Service, 
Press. 2960 Broadway, New York 27, N.Y. 
Nijhott, Afd., Fondsaministratie 
Internacional SR.L, Calle Uruguay 133}, 
Columbia University 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073993engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 UNESCO COURIER 
  
 
  


### 74011: World 'Cité des arts' to be created in heart of Paris

‘WORLD ‘CITE DES ARTS’ 
TO BE CREATED = 
In Heart of Paris   
N the seventeenth 
century, the part of 
the churches of 
Saint Gervais and 
Saint Paul was a 
quarter containing 
many fine build- 
ings. Situated on 
the right bank of 
the Seine, close to the Islands of La Cité 
and Saint Louis where Paris was founded, 
it was also the scene of many important 
historical events. 
But, time and history have changed its 
aspect. During the eighteenth and nine- 
feenth centuries many of the stately 
buildings were transformed into apart- 
ment houses and, under a slum clearance 
plan put into operation during the Second 
World War, dozens of houses were torn 
down. 
- Before the war ended, however, archi- 
tects had begun to draw up plans for the 
preservation and re-adaptation of the 
remaining buildings for modern needs and 
the construction of 
new olies so as to 
house some 5.000 peo- 
ple—about 
many as had previou- 
sly lived there. 
. Until recently, 
however, only a small 
part of these plans 
had been carried out 
because funds were 
lacking. 
- Now, thanks to an 
idea put forward by 
a Finnish painter, 
M. Eero de Snellman 
- it is hoped to begin 
work shortly on the 
restoration of the 
central] sector of the 
area to its former 
architectural beauty. 
M. de Snellman’s 
idea was for the 
creation, partly out 
of existing buildings, 
of an international 
“City of the Arts” to 
which painters, sculp- | 
tors, musicians, en- 
gravers and other 
artists would come 
from all parts of the 
world to work and § 
study in a unique 
setting. 
Paris already has 
its international Cité 
Universitaire which 
cbmprises nineteen 
national students houses. The statutes 
of the new centre will be similar to those 
of the University City except that it will 
welcome both mature artists and art 
students. 
The scheme is being directed by a com- 
mittee set up in France under the patro- 
nage of the Academy of Fine Arts and 
the City of Paris. Similar committees have 
been formed in other parts of the world, 
principally in Scandinavian countries, 
with the aim of raising capital for the 
project which, it is estimated, will cost 
about one-thousand million francs. 
This sum is to be split into two-hundred 
shares of five million francs each, rep- 
resenting the cost of building and fur- 
nishing a studio or workshop with its 
own flat and will allow for each con- 
tributing country to share in the cost of 
restoring a former mansion for use as a 
“City Hall”. 
In this way, a country subscribing 
twenty-million francs will be allocated 
— — 
  
  
I —— 
NOX 16 sl SALTER CaNTRA 
half as ) FENSE Wak § 
al
 
2 
a
a
a
 
B
S
 
 The Facade of the Hotel d’Aumont, future headquarters of the Cite, as it will appear whea reconstructed 
Paris lying between 
rich and prosperous 
four studios together with flats to which 
it may send its artists. 
The Cité des Arts will, therefore, go a 
long way towards solving the problem 
facing many artists from abroad who at 
present have great difficulty in finding 
accommodations in Paris, owing to the 
serious housing shortage. 
M. Michel Roux-Spitz, a leading Paris 
architect who has drawn up the plans for 
the Centre, estimates that beiween two- 
hundred and two-hundred and twenty 
studios and workshops, each having its 
own apartment of from two to tive rooms, 
can be provided. The larger apartments 
will be for those “students” who decide to 
bring their families with them and will 
be furnished and decorated in a simple 
but attractive way. 
The architectural design of the Cité 
will harmonize ° with its seventeenth 
century surroundings and the construc- 
tion will embody as much as possible the 
traces of the past—foundations of former 
buildings and the mouldings and figures 
that have been salvaged from them. 
As part of the original reconstruction 
     
 
The reconstruction plan of the area outlined in the map above. 
The Cité des Arts will cover the largest of the four blocks with 
(top, right) the Hotel d’Aumont and its gardens. 
and common rooms (bottom) lock out over the Seine. 
Artists’ flats 
scheme two entire houses of the 
Louis XVI period and a third from an 
earlier period were taken down stone by 
stone, numbered and piled for future use. 
These three houses will be rebuilt exactly 
as they stood two-hundred years ago and 
will become the studios and homes of the 
artists. 
There will, however, be no attempt at 
standardization. In following the form of 
the original buildings, the architects have 
been able to plan varying types of studios. 
Generally speaking, sculptors will have 
their workshops on the ground floors of 
buildings so that blocks of stone and other 
heavy working materials can be delivered 
to them easily. 
Painters, as far as possible, will be 
given studios facing the north, on the 
first and second floors. Other studios and 
workshops are planned [or engravers and 
architects. 
On some of the ground floors it is in- 
  
 
A 17th century map of Paris showing (bottom) the church of St. Gervais, the River 
Seine and (top right) the Isle of St. Louis. Qutlined in black is the central sector 
of the ar=a the Paris City Council plans to reconstruct. The Cité des Arts will occupy 
the upper right hand block, 
tended to install book, art and antique 
shops to serve the needs of the Cité. 
The administrative headquarters of the - 
Centre will be housed in the historic 
Hotel dA’Aumont, built for the Duke d’Au- 
mont by the famous seventeenth century 
architects, Le Vau and Francois Mansart, 
At the time of the French Revolution 
the house was bought by a contractor 
who later sold many of its furnishings, 
the paintings on the ceilings and even the 
staircases. Finally, it became part of a 
pharmaceutical factory, but in 1936 it 
was bought by the City of Paris au- 
thorities who wished to preserve and 
restore it. B 
Work has already begun on its restora- 
tion and a giant wooden “umbrella” has 
been built to protect it from further 
damage by the weather, 
In its completed form the new “City 
Hall” will comprise an exhibition hall for 
paintings, engravings and other art works, 
an art library, administrative offices and 
accommodations for the Director of the 
Centre. 
The huee cellars with their vaulted 
ceilings which were formerly the kitchens, 
will become a lounge and concert room. 
The whole will constitute a sort of In- 
ternational Cultural Centre where artists 
from many countries will be able to hold 
exhibitions of their work and compare 
ideas and techniques. 
Eventually it is hoped to extend the 
Hotel d’Aumont by adding a new wing on 
the west side. This did not previously 
exist but the architects believe that it 
formed part of the plans of the original 
builders, and was never completed be- 
cause of insufficient money. 
Originally the hotel had its own gar- 
dens, but these have long since disap- 
‘peared. It is intended to lay out new ones 
following the lines of the former ones and . 
to plant trees along each side. 
On the south side of the Cité, bordering 
“the Seine, an entirely new building will 
be constructed with a series of archways . 
allowing an unrestricted view over the 
river towards the Isle of Saint Louis and 
at the same time enabling the passer-by 
to see the gardens of the Cité and the 
facade of the restored Hotel d’Aumont.. 
This building will contain a restaurant, 
lounges, lecture rooms and a number of. 
guest rooms, the whole fronted on the : 
riverside by a long terrace. : 
The final form of the Cité will be that: 
of a hollow square with gardens, squares 
and trees in the centre and the studios 
and apartments round three sides. Most 
of the fourth side will be open to view 
from the street, but enclosed by railings. , 
Completely self-contained, the Cité will 
have a single entrance on the north side 
and will be far enough away from the 
main streams of traffic to ensure the 
calm and quiet required for creative work. 
The construction of the Cité has been 
. embodied in the general plan for rehabi-. 
litating this part of Paris, and has, there- 
fore, the support of the Paris City 
Council. Recently the Council approved 
the granting of a ninety-nine year lease 
on the ground for the project, and the 
French State Council is drawing up and 
approving the statutes. 
Promises of financial support have 
been obtained from several countries and 
it is expected that work on the world’s 
first international City of Arts will soon 
be under way. 


### 74012: UNESCO prepares Chopin 'memorial'

  
UNESCO PREPARES 
CHOPIN ‘MEMORIAL’ 
  
   
  
to write. 
HE great Polish composer, Frederic Chopin, used - to hold 
Parisian audiences spellbound when he played his compositions 
at the Salle du Conservatoire, 
Next September, on the occasion of the centenary of his 
death, art audience in the same hall will hear the performance 
of a “musical memorial” for Chopin which Unesco has initiated. 
So far, seven leading composers have agreed to collaborate in 
the preparation of the “memorial” which will take the form of 
a collection of short works which Unesco has asked the composers 
The composers are free to choose the form and type of work, but the duration of 
performance of each composition must not exceed fifteen minutes and the number of 
performers, either instrumental or vocal, which it will require must not be more than five. 
The “homage to Chopin” compositions will be performed publicly by leading artists 
for the first time at the Paris concert next September and it is also hoped to broad- 
cast them. 
The composers who have so far agreed to collaborate in the preparation of the trib= } 
ute are: Heitor Villa-Lobos, Brazil; Florent Schmitt, France; Francisco Malipiero, 
Italy; Jacques Ibert, France; Howard Hanson, 
 
  
the United States and Carlos Chavez, Mexico. 
The centenary will also be marked by the 
granting of two fellowships in compositions » ' ; 
for Polish students to enable them to come # ¥ 
to Paris and study at the Conservatoire. ——— 
The money for these fellowships has been 
provided through Unesco by the Inter- 
national Music Fund set up by the American 
Section of the International 
Contemporary Music (ISCM) to aid compo- ’ 
sers and composers’ societies in Europe. i 
  
Society of 
-—— 
Editorial Offices 
Editor : S.M. KOFFLER. 
Director : 
: Unesco, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (18e) 
Asst. Editor 
C. a PRATO. 
: R. S. FENTON 
gE All Reproductions Authorized |   IMPRIMERIE by NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE", 
Unesco Publication 343 
21, Rue de Berri, Paris (99%;