# [186699](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
fii i 
United Nations Educational, . 
Scientfic and Cultural Organization d 
     
  
2009 * number 4 * ISSN 1993-8616 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Contents 
2009 - N° 4   
 
 
SCHOOL FOR THE FUTURE 
Education for sustainable development... Launched in 2005, 
the concept is still in its early stages, but it is making progress. What it 
means is education designed to build our capacities for facing today’s 
major challenges - preserving the environment, respecting 
biodiversity, safeguarding human rights - and focused on the future. 
EDITORIAL P3   
© 
Ta
ng
 
Mi
ng
   
SCHOOL FOR SUSTAINABILITY 
Still a fledgling concept, Education for 
Sustainable Development is nonetheless 
making headway in Jordan. Raising aware- 
ness among young people about the importance of good water 
management is a crucial issue for Queen Rania Al-Abdullah of 
Jordan, UNESCO goodwill ambassador and chair of the Arab 
Sustainability Leadership Group. P4 
  
Gai fl. SAVING STARFISH 
- : ¥ A dozen facilitators, a pile of copies of an 
al educational newspaper, a bus. ..sometimes 
it doesn't take much to make thousands of 
schoolchildren more aware of sustainable development. In Kenya, 
the organizers of the “Chanuka Express” programme are inspiring 
underprivileged young people to become agents for change. Their 
motto: “Our life, our world". P6 
   
     
    
’ 
    
   
   
gas FOCUS 
=<" “And Then They Came For Me”: 
fu 
and editor of the Sunday Leader. P13 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4   
WATER SCHOOLS 
SHED LIGHT 
ON YANGTZE POLLUTION 
| The Yangtze river system produces 
40 percent of China's grain, a third of 
its cotton, 48 percent of its freshwater fish and 40 percent of the 
country's total industrial output. It is also, alas, a depository for 
60 percent of the country’s pollution. A plan to save the river was 
launched by schoolchildren in Sichuan province and has taken 
on national scope. P8 
INSIDE THE GREEN TENTS 
Despite Bolivia's extraordinary biodiver- 
sity, it has one of the highest rates of 
deforestation in the world. Meanwhile, 
massive migration towards the fertile lowlands is hampering 
sustainable development. Conservation International is using 
games to raise public awareness. P10 
ALPHABET 
OF DEVELOPMENT 
| Literacy is at the heart of our societies, 
says Princess Laurentien of the Neth- 
erlands, who was named UNESCO's 
Special Envoy on Literacy for Development last March. For more 
than 20 years, she has been fighting illiteracy in her homeland 
where the problem has been neglected. P12 
“gi Last words of Prize laureate Lasantha Wickrematunge 
™ The 2009 UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize is being awarded to the late Sri Lankan journalist

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Tr
op
ic
o  
The puzzle shows the harmful effects of pollution. 
“Green Tents” project, Bolivia. 
ust over two decades ago, the 
World Commission on Environment 
and Development made an appeal 
for a “development that meets the 
needs of the present without com- 
promising the ability of future genera- 
tions to meet their own needs! In a 
nutshell, this captures the essence of 
sustainability — a long-term vision that 
speaks to our sense of responsibility 
for the present and future. 
This vision underpins the eight Mil- 
lennium Development Goals en- 
dorsed by the majority of the world's 
countries in 2000. They aim to allevi- 
ate extreme poverty and hunger, im- 
prove child and maternal health, com- 
bat HIV and AIDS, achieve universal 
primary education, and promote gen- 
der equality and environmental sus- 
tainability. Education is imperative for 
reaching these goals, a conviction 
that underlies the UN Decade of Ed- 
ucation for Sustainable Development 
(DESD) launched in 2005. 
ESD sets new directions for learn- 
ing. First, it requires an interdisci- 
plinary approach that integrates the 
social, environmental, economic and 
cultural dimensions of development 
and generates awareness of our in- 
terdependence - with others, with the 
world around us, and with nature. It 
enables us to address such issues as 
environmental protection, biodiversity 
and human rights. Second, ESD im- 
parts skills such as critical thinking, 
decision-making and problem-solv- 
ing. In this regard, teachers have an 
influential role to play in encouraging 
more dialogue, team work and initia- 
tive. Third and most fundamentally, 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
© 
Da
ni
el
 
M
a
s
 


### 186711: Editorial: towards building more just and sustainable societies

  
TOWARDS BUILDING MORE JUST 
AND SUSTAINABLE SOCIETIES. 
What is Education for Sustainable Development? 
It is education that banks on the future. It is designed to enable us 
to face the major challenges of today: preserving the environment, 
respecting biodiversity, protecting human rights. 
ESD promotes values such as peace, 
equality and respect for others and 
for the wider natural and social envi- 
ronment. ESD is about empowering 
learners with the knowledge, skills 
and values to become real agents of 
change. 
Rethinking 
education’s goals 
The recent UNESCO World Con- 
ference on Education for Sustainable 
Development held in Bonn, Germany 
(31 March to 2 April) showed that 
many countries have designed inno- 
vative ESD policy frameworks. The 
Decade has encouraged countries 
to rethink the purposes of education, 
curriculum content and pedagogical 
practice in ways that are complemen- 
tary to the drive to achieve Education 
for All. 
The DESD is generating a myriad of 
initiatives and projects that are put- 
ting ESD into practice in schools and 
extra-curricular settings. But prog- 
ress remains uneven and much more 
needs to be done to increase pub- 
lic awareness about ESD. Now we 
  
Education for sustainable development 
highlights the social, environmental, 
economic and cultural aspects 
of development. 
3 
have to work together to ensure that 
ESD becomes a guiding principle for 
improving the relevance and qual- 
ity of education, through appropri- 
ate engagement with policy-makers, 
teacher training institutions, universi- 
ties and other key partners. Finally, 
we must take every opportunity to 
stress the centrality of education for 
sustainable development. 
A response 
to the global crisis 
The financial and economic crisis 
makes this injunction more timely 
than ever. We will not succeed In 
reducing poverty and building more 
inclusive, peaceful and sustainable 
societies without empowering in- 
dividuals at all ages with the 
knowledge, skills and values 
to make responsible and in- 
formed choices. Quality educa- 
tion that promotes awareness, 
openness, solidarity and respon- 
sibility must be part of any re- 
sponse to today's global crisis. 
As this issue of the UNESCO Cou- 
rier illustrates, much can be done 
when students, teachers, schools 
and communities mobilize to address 
social and environmental challenges. 
But leaders and policy-makers must 
create the conditions for education 
at all levels to be geared towards 
building more just and sustainable 
societies. 
Nicholas Burnett, 
Assistant Director-General for Education, 
UNESCO

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
Still a fledgling concept, Education for Sustainable Development Cfo] [5343 CY [= 
ELE LEETEVAD RI CEL METS D EVEL CHEER (o] RT [of olTel o  [YET ToT TT R {1 [N14 o Jo] go] [o=Re) fs [oo] 
ELC RENE ENE ACER (TCE RE TER (o) GO NTT WE TE WARN [TIE] Wel [eT (eT) 
(SoCo Me Toles (TIT 4 iL ERLE To [o) JET [e Mo ET lo ML WAVE Lo RITES ETH ETT NA KEE Te ETE TT eX €1 (611 8   


### 186713: School for sustainability

SCHOOL 
FOR 
SUSTAINABILITY 
Questions submitted by Cathy Nolan (UNESCO) 
What are the implications 
of ESD for the Arab region? 
ESD is an imperative in Jordan, 
and across the whole Arab world, 
because although sustainability is 
more than a concept, it's not yet 
a culture. Raising awareness in 
schools, universities, the public 
sector, and private companies is 
crucial if we are to make the most 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
u
s
t
a
f
a
 
R.
 
M
o
h
a
m
m
e
d
 
Da
ra
s ¥ 5 
   
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
of our precious resources, and pro- 
vide opportunities for our youthful 
population. 
The Arab world faces serious de- 
velopment challenges: 5.7 million 
of our children are not enrolled in 
school, almost three and a half mil- 
lion of them are girls; 8.9 million of 
our young people are illiterate; and 
only one in four young people has 
ord 
“I'm proud that we've achieved gender parity at all levels of education in 
Jordan," says Queen Rania 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
4 
Queen Rania Al-Abdullah of Jordan, 
during a visit to UNESCO in Paris. 
a job. We must put young people 
at the top of our local, regional, and 
global agendas. 
60% of our region is under the 
age of 30, that's 70 million young 
people in the Arab world. They 
need our help in order to become 
all they can be. And that means that 
we need to create jobs, urgently. 
We need to be graduating young 
people with the skills and the tools 
they need to participate competi 
tively in the global and regional job 
market. ESD is a key foundation 
block for us. 
| am pleased that there have been 
some significant strides in this field. 
Last year, a group of dynamic busi- 
ness leaders established the Arab 
Sustainability Leadership Group, 
which | am proud to chair. Not only 
are members publishing sustain- 
ability reports and engaging civil 
society and business leaders, they 
are practicing their businesses in 
ways that support economic vitality, 
ecological integrity, and social eqg- 
uity. And that's a smart start; they 
are great role models, but there's 
still a long way for us to go. 
(see)

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 186713: School for sustainability

SCHOOL FOR SUSTAINABILITY 
  
(eee) 
What aspects of Education 
for Sustainable Development 
are particularly important 
to you and your country? 
We recognize that all aspects of 
ESD are important for Jordan to 
prosper now and in the future. But 
given our water scarcity issues, wa- 
ter education and management are 
very important to us, as well as car- 
ing for, and making the most of, all 
our natural resources — our beautiful 
nature reserves, for example. 
Additionally, ESD is important for us 
from a gender perspective. I'm proud 
that we've achieved gender parity at 
all levels of education in Jordan; in 
fact we have more girls at university 
than boys. But that doesn't translate 
into workforce figures yet. Traditional 
mindsets still result in girls getting 
married and having children early, not 
joining the labour market — although, 
I'm pleased to say that this is chang- 
ing. ESD is important to teach chil- 
dren and parents how girls can play 
a crucial and productive role in Jor- 
dan’s development. 
E s 
5 
© 
c 
Oo 
c 
Q 
£ 
w 
© 
[22] 
Q 2 
Q 
< 
o 
Can you mention 
some specific projects? 
To be honest, it's still a fledg- 
ling concept, but we're working 
very hard to increase awareness 
and visibility of ESD. For example, 
Jordan established a national ESD 
working group with members from 
government, universities, NGOs, 
and the private sector to promote 
ESD across all sectors; and ESD 
has been included in legislation to 
protect the environment. 
The Royal Society for the Con- 
servation of Nature (RSCN), with 
the Ministry of Education, has 
been integrating environmental 
concerns into the Jordanian cur- 
ricula to ensure that environmen- 
tal awareness is developed at 
an early stage. The RSCN orga- 
nizes nature teams at schools, has 
founded over 1000 conservation 
clubs at local schools, and has 
prepared ESD manuals. 
Several NGOs are active in pro- 
viding non formal education and 
informal education opportunities 
for youth and women all over the 
country. These initiatives are con- 
ducted in places, and at times, 
to suit the rhythm of women who 
have to balance caring for their 
families with learning new skills. 
We are also one of four coun- 
tries in the Arab region (the others 
being Lebanon, Oman and Tu- 
nisia) with clear public budgets 
for ESD - proof of our commit- 
ment to creating lasting change. 
Not many people know this, but 
Jordan is blessed with stunning 
nature reserves. They have en- 
abled us to develop several award- 
winning sustainable tourism and 
eco-tourism projects, which help 
us both protect and promote the 
things that are most precious to 
us. Together with the Royal So- 
ciety for the Conservation of Na- 
ture, and several other NGOs, 
we're working hard to strike a ba- 
lance between developing these 
areas, and encouraging people to 
visit, which generates income for 
local communities. 
EE _—"m—m—m— 
- - 
Nature reserve in Dana, Jordan. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  
‘A dozen facilitators, a pile of copies of an educational newspaper and a bus... 
sometimes it doesn’t take much to make thousands of schoolchildren more aware 


### 186714: Saving starfish

   
    
SAVING 
STARFISH 
n older man was walking along 
the beach and came upon a sandy 
stretch where thousands of starfish 
had washed ashore. 
Just ahead, he spotted a teenager 
picking up starfish one at a time and 
tossing them back into the ocean. 
“Oh! You're being silly!" he ex- 
claimed. “You can't possibly save 
all of these starfish. There are too 
many!” 
Smiling the teenager replied, “I know. 
But | can save this one, and she 
tossed another into the ocean, “and 
this one’ toss, “and this one, and..." 
Each and every one of our acts is 
critical. 
© 
Ja
ca
ra
nd
a 
De
si
gn
s 
Lt
d 
The “safety” group with leader Dagmawit. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
J
i
a
 
© 
Ja
ca
ra
nd
a 
De
si
gn
s 
Lt
d 
F
T
N
 
T
E
 
OQ
 
| 
This is the message the Kenyan 
programme Chanuka Express has 
been spreading among young peo- 
ple—both in and out of school — for 
the last several years. Always do the 
“right thing” because we can make 
a difference! And young people 
CAN ... and ARE doing just that. 
In Kiswahili Chanuka means to 
“Get with it or ‘bloom’ by using 
knowledge! A partnership between 
UNESCO Jacaranda Designs— 
with help from the private sector 
including Tetra Pak and Shell-the 
programme has a budget of US$ 
160,000 (10% of which is provid- 
ed by the UNESCO office in Nai- 
 
rowd runs to meet the Chanuka Express. 
robi). Several Jacaranda Designs 
staff members and a dozen student 
volunteers run the mobile outreach 
training initiative out of a bus —the 
Chanuka Express. The slogan is 
Maisha Yetu, Dunia Yetu (Our Life, 
Our World) and the theme is “Learn- 
ing for Sustainable Living" 
Reaching teenagers in low-income 
primary schools and communities, 
the programme focuses on smaller 
groups of peer-selected Chanuka 
Club leaders who identify their own 
priority issues of personal safety, 
health, hygiene, water and sanita- 
tion, and environmental degrada- 
tion. Club membership totals about 
5000. 
Like the young woman with the 
starfish, their level of determina- 
tion is making an impact not only 
on them but on their communities, 
schools and families too. Sustain- 
able development in our country 
is depending on them: on young 
people equipped with productive 
knowledge, practical skills and a 
positive character choosing to be 
‘agents of change! 
A day in the life 
of Chanuka 
In the morning, Chanuka facilita- 
tors climb aboard the Chanuka Ex- 
press bound for the day's venue. 
With them is a raft of teaching tools, 
(eee)

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  
     
Lt
d 
q
n
s
 
© 
J
a
c
a
r
a
n
d
a
 
De
si
 
What to do about climate change? 
(oe) 
props, and art supplies. Among 
these tools are copies of the Young 
African Express, a monthly edu- 
cational newspaper published by 
Jacaranda Designs, aligned to the 
Kenyan curriculum and filled with 
illustrated articles, cartoons, facts 
and games focusing on essential 
life skills. 
On arrival, they meet up with a pre- 
selected group of teenagers. Teach- 
ers and other members of the com- 
munity are there too. After a short 
highly participatory puppet show or 
community theatre introduction, the 
youth form four Chanuka teams— 
Peace and Safety, Health, Water 
and Sanitation, and the Environ- 
ment. In small groups, the young 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
people engage in games, demon- 
strations, discovery sessions, role- 
plays and discussions to identify 
key local challenges and solutions. 
These young leaders form the back- 
bone of the Chanuka Clubs set up 
in every school involved (60 out 
of 5000 secondary schools in the 
country and 150 out of 20,000 pri- 
mary schools). The day ends with 
presentations of the identified key 
issues and the action plans made 
by each group. 
The Chanuka Express visits each 
site 2-3 times a year. Between vis- 
its, the young people and teachers 
are not idle. They form Chanuka 
Clubs with Health, Water and Sani- 


### 186714: Saving starfish

tation, Safety and Peace, and En- 
SAVING STARFISH 
  
vironment teams. The teams recruit 
others in their schools, passing on 
the messages they created and 
mobilizing others to join in taking 
action on important issues. They 
record their plans, obstacles and 
successes in supplied notebooks, 
which are used by the Chanuka fa- 
cilitators on return visits. 
A 25-cent revolution 
The results are impressive. Cha- 
nuka Club members at Evangel Pri- 
mary School in Baba Dogo, Nairobi 
realised there was a high rate of 
absenteeism at their school, which 
was affecting the pupils’ perfor- 
mance. 
The club members investigated 
and found out that pupils were 
missing school due to stomach 
ache. They connected the stomach 
aches to worms caused by unhy- 
gienic habits including eating with 
unwashed hands and drinking un- 
safe water. 
The club's solution was to start 
a de-worming campaign in the 
school by distributing information 
then holding discussions with their 
schoolmates to motivate action. To 
feel better, they needed to get rid 
of the worms by taking de-worming 
tablets. To buy these, they came 
up with a plan—they asked every 
member of their school community 
to donate Ksh 20 (25 cents US) to 
the project. 
Their parents were so impressed by 
the idea that they contributed more 
money, and the club was soon able 
to buy de-worming tablets for the 
entire school community—children, 
teenagers and the adult teachers! 
Step by step, through such activi- 
ties, education for sustainable de- 
velopment becomes a reality. 
Yvonne Otieno 
and Susan Scull-Carvalho, 
Jacaranda Designs

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

third of its cotton, 48 percent of its freshwater fish and 40 percent of the country’s total 
industrial output. lt is also, alas, a depository for 60 percent of the country’s pollution. 
DE 
he ) CU CROC ESE CLE ol (ol [TEER RT GET Ee MOG TH ERE [CT 
EUR CELVER GCN OE RETR ET To [Te Wo) Rog [eTel [ody TI [e [1 MT ST Tog TET Wed (Tg [=] 
£ 
s 
8 
© 
ENG EEREL CHR Lil EL le] ETE { ee] o 12) 
  
Primary school students conduct a survey among villagers in Piankou Town, 
Beichuan County, Sichuan Province. 


### 186715: Water schools shed light on Yangtze pollution

WATER SCHOOLS SHED LIGHT 
ON YANGTZE POLLUTION 
oul-smelling “rubbish mountains” 
consisting of piles of polystyrene, 
cardboard cups, food scraps, plas- 
tic bags, medical needles and other 
debris pollute the Baicao River, 
which provides drinking water to 
the 6,600 inhabitants of Piankou 
Town, Beichuan County, in south- 
west China's Sichuan Province. 
In the 1980s, this tributary of the 
Yangtze, China's biggest river, was 
“so clear that you could see to the 
bottom", recalls Zeng Wenjun, a 
town resident in his forties. “The 
Qingbo (Clean Water) Fish exclu- 
sive to the river was unmatchable 
in taste, but it is now regrettably 
extinct” 
The run-off from private gold mines 
and sandstone collectors adds to 
the filth. The mushrooming small 
and medium-sized hydropower sta- 
tions also pose an ecological risk to 
the livelihoods of the people living 
nearby. 
The 1,000-plus towns along the 
upper reaches of the Yangtze pump 
the numerous tributaries with waste, 
causing a huge environmental prob- 
lem at the Three Gorges Dam, says 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
Fu Zhiping, a professor of ecology 
at Mianyang Normal University, Si- 
chuan. 
The Yangtze river system produc- 
es 40 percent of the nation’s grain, 
a third of its cotton, 48 percent of 
its freshwater fish and 40 percent 
of the total industrial output. How- 
ever, it is also a depository for 60 
percent of the country’s pollution, 
making it the single largest source 
of pollution in the Pacific Ocean, 
© 
Ta
ng
 
Mi
ng
 
according to the Shangri-la Insti- 
tute for Sustainable Communities 
(SISC), a Chinese non-governmen- 
tal organization. 
Fifty thousand 
schoolchildren 
to the Yangtze’s rescue 
In the spring of 2008, both profes- 
sor Fu Zhiping and Sun Yao, prima- 
ry school student in Piankou, took 
part in the Water School for a Liv- 
(o0°) 
  
Primary school students conduct a survey among villagers 
in Piankou Town, Beichuan County, Sichuan Province. 
8

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

DE I I DE 


### 186715: Water schools shed light on Yangtze pollution

 VIATERSCHOOLS SHED LIGHT ON YANGTZE POLLUTION 
  
(o00) 
ing Yangtze under the International 
Water School Program sponsored 
by Austria's Swarovski company, a 
program that also includes the Nile 
in Egypt and India’s Ganges. 
The Chinese program, supervised 
by the SISC, with the Ministry of 
Education and UNESCO as its 
partners, has involved more than 
50,000 students from 27 middle 
and primary schools in Sichuan and 
the adjacent provinces of Qinghai 
and Yunnan, as well as Shanghai, 
where the Yangtze meets the East 
China Sea. 
Under the guidance of teacher 
Tang Ming, Sun and his classmates 
at Piankou Central Primary School 
began to monitor water quality by 
using graduated cylinders and test 
papers, which they had never used 
before. 
P
©
 
Ja
ne
 
Pe
nn
el
l 
The preliminary test result con- 
firmed Sun's concerns: the PH in- 
dex stands at 5.8 at the lower reach- 
es of Baicao River, with the turbidity 
reaching Grade IV, showing that 
the water has already been pol- 
luted to an alarming extent. 
Based on further investigations 
in and around Piankou Town, 
Sun and his classmates wrote 
a letter proposing that munici- 
pal authorities re-arrange the 
15 dustbins along the two major 
streets “in a more scientific way” 
and establish a rubbish disposal 
system. 
To their great surprise, the town 
government approved their pro- 
posal, and a sewage treatment 
plant based on the scientific prin- 
ciples of a biological wetland is also 
under discussion. 
   
China has its share of polluting factories, such as this one on the Yangtze. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
The students went on to dissemi 
nate questionnaires to the commu- 
nities of Piankou, and 89 percent 
of the respondents believed it was 
necessary to treat the river pollution. 
“The project provides a platform for 
effective environmental protection 
around the branches of Yangtze, 
and it is a model for shifting away 
from the exam-focused educational 
system,’ says Fu, who has 14 years’ 
experience in the field of environ- 
mental education. 
Tibetan lamas 
joining in 
The water schools on the Yangtze 
have gone beyond the boundaries 
of campuses to complement local 
social, economic and cultural condi 
tions. 
For instance, the lamas of Dong- 
zhulin Temple, in Deqing Tibetan Au- 
tonomous Prefecture in Yunnan, are 
invited to contribute to water protec- 
tion through their religious teachings 
that link nature and man. 
“We encourage the process of 
learning by doing, so that a change in 
mindsets and behavior will impact the 
policy-making of government, which 
promotes wider public participation 
in long-term environmental protec- 
tion,” says Dorjie, SISC program co- 
ordinator. 
In 2009, the project will expand to 
China's capital Beijing, a city notori- 
ous for its scarcity of water. Besides 
the Education for Sustainable Devel- 
opment on the Tibet Plateau project 
surrounding the Yalu Tsangpo River, 
the SISC is also aiming to carry out a 
similar environmental education proj- 
ect along China's second longest 
river, the Yellow River, says Dorjie. 
Gong Yidong, 
journalist, China Features

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

~~ Despite Bolivia’s extraordinary biodiversity, it has one of the highest rate: 
f deforestation in the world. Meanwhile, massive migration towards the fertile lowlands 
hampering {TI CTE] of (SR [ST (oT of yy 1, MOG T ELTA TEN (Te ML CY GE ToL ETRE TE [ Be ET 
to raise public awareness. 
“Don’t shoot !", says the puppet. 
nside a green marquee, eight year- 
old Juan throws a dice in a game 
of snakes and ladders painted on 
a wooden board. He throws a four. 
He moves his counter forward and 
“lands on a square marked “defor- 
estation”. He is penalized and told 
to “go back three squares”. On 
his next turn he lands on a square 
showing a river basin. He is asked 
what can be done to preserve a 
water source. “Plant more trees!” 
he replies. He is rewarded, and can 
move forward five squares. 
We are in the Amazonian village 
of Rurrenabaque, inside a military 
enclosure, not far from the Ma- 
didi conservation area. A crowd of 
children, most of them between 6 
and 11 years old, jostles around 
the puppet shows, memory games 
and puzzles. The adults are more 
interested in the poster exhibits. 
That evening, there will be the first 
performance of a play written and 
performed by a group of young ac- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 


### 186717: Inside the green tents

INSIDE 
tors, inspired by suggestions made 
by the “Green Tent” teachers, trav- 
elling throughout this tropical area 
of Bolivia. All the activities have a 
common theme - pollution and pro- 
tection of the environment. 
The green canvasawning stretched 
over four plastic poles looks like a 
giant beer tent at a summer festival. 
Or a travelling circus, with fun activi- 
ties based on environmental issues, 
rather than performing animals. 
Home-made games 
The travelling show uses interac- 
tive teaching methods designed for 
learning about sustainable devel- 
opment, in an attempt to make up 
for the absence of environmental 
issues in the Bolivian school cur- 
riculum. The approach works well 
in this country, steeped in oral cul- 
ture. Since the project first started 
in 2000, the twenty Green Tents 
have toured some 100 indigenous 
communities. They travel from vil- 
10 
 
THE GREEN TENTS 
lage to village, at the request of lo- 
cal people, staying for four to five 
days at a time. 
Set up and administered by the 
international environmental organi- 
zation Conservation International, 
together with the Bolivian con- 
servation association Tropico, the 
Green Tents project is run by a 
group of about fifteen agronomists, 
biologists, foresters, teachers and 
communicators, most of them vol- 
unteers. The project's US$ 30,000 
annual budget comes from the Unit- 
ed States Agency for International 
Development (USAID) and the Bo- 
livian National Service for Protected 
Parks (SERNAP). 
Eduardo Forno, Director of Con- 
servation International's Bolivia of- 
fice and initiator of the Green Tents, 
is keen to point out that “the teach- 
ing materials are not dreamed up 
in offices in faraway cities, but by 
pupils, teachers and foresters from 
the region. They are the ones who 
(00°)

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
(00°) 


### 186717: Inside the green tents

decide which myths, stories and 
pictures they will use. Descriptions 
of the games are then sent into 
town, where they are manufactured 
by carpenters and artists, and dis- 
patched to the schools. Specialists 
are on hand to make sure the con- 
tent is accurate’ 
Green tents 
for a green country 
The Madidi Park conservation area 
lies in a corridor linking the Cordil- 
lera de Vilcabamba mountain range 
in Peru to the Amboré National Park, 
near Santa Cruz (Bolivia). This corri- 
dor is thought to harbour the richest 
biodiversity in South America. But 
thousands of people are coming 
to live here, fleeing the fragmenta- 
tion and arid conditions of the high 
plateaux of the Andes and looking 
for other ways to survive. This con- 
tinual influx is causing considerable 
environmental damage - every year, 
some 300,000 hectares of forest 
are destroyed in Bolivia, according 
to the Environment Ministry. 
“Bolivia is landlocked, so the econ- 
omy is turned towards the tropical 
interior, rather than the coast,’ ex- 
plains Eduardo Forno. “This is the 
major conservation challenge here. 
The people of the fertile lowlands 
know and respect the extraordinary 
biodiversity of their region, which is 
not necessarily the case for those 
from the high plateaux. This is why 
we are mainly targeting this group, 
as well as young people. There is 
a preconception that the new gen- 
eration must be impregnated with 
the indigenous culture, as if it were 
passed down through their genes. 
But we tend to forget that the trans- 
mission of culture can be affected 
by market forces and modern liv- 
ing.” 
The intense internal migration and 
Bolivia's opening to international 
markets for timber, soya and the 
mining industry are changing and 
increasing the risks to the environ- 
ment. “People can see that there 
are fewer and fewer fish, but don't 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
©
 
Tr
op
ic
o 
  
 
A green tent in the Rurrenabaque military enclosure, near Madidi park. 
perceive mining as a threat to the 
environment,” says Eduardo Forno. 
“But we know that any form of pol- 
lution higher up the valley is even- 
tually going to spread downwards 
and that mercury pollution sooner 
or later kills off the fish. The Green 
Tents project is raising issues like 
this and encouraging people to 
think about the environment, be- 
yond the immediate situation’ 
According to Eduardo Forno, en- 
vironmental education is one of the 
few means to maintain the services 
provided by healthy ecosystems. “It 
is fundamental for the preservation 
of nature and to keep Bolivia green,’ 
he says. 
Activities inside the Rurrenabaque 
Green Tent show clearly that edu- 
cation for sustainable development 
can be fun, no matter how serious 
the challenges for the future of hu- 
manity. 
Niels Boel, 
danish journalist 
   
Group of children writing a play with an environmental theme. 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### 186718: Alphabet of development

ALPHABET 
OF DEVELOPMENT 
© 
Se
ba
st
ia
an
 
te
r 
Bu
rg
 
Literacy is at the heart of our ods 
i i lands, CEVA (CER ETT CY Re CR 51) [Eg 
who was named UNESCO’s Special Envoy on Literacy 
{oT QO SEAT HIRES RV ET Co ME So Tl [eT CR ET PUREE 
JIC EER EU RT LL BRT CIET TAT HG CT vonsiand 
OCT CRO TEN o (ded (1) I EER o TET Wy [=Ye | [Tor £20 
  
 
Excerpts from an interview given 
to Edulnfo (UNESCO Education Sector) 
et me first say that | am delighted to 
start working with UNESCO more 
formally in my new role. | intend to 
work closely with all experts, adding 
value where | can to the framework 
of action provided by the United Na- 
tions Literacy Decade (UNLD, 2003- 
2012). This framework proposes 
a new vision of literacy, by situating 
Literacy for All at the heart of Educa- 
tion for All and by promoting it as a 
key for development and essential for 
the health and well-being of people 
everywhere. | will advocate these im- 
portant messages, with the aim of 
helping to make a difference and cre- 
ate new dynamics. 
Literacy is about people, and thus 
literacy lies at the heart of society. | 
want to appeal to everyone to join 
forces for the benefit of develop- 
ment of both people and societies. 
To tackle this complex issue structur- 
ally, we will also have to think outside 
of the box at times when it comes to 
solutions and involving stakeholders, 
from governments to business, from 
municipalities to educational experts 
and Iliterates themselves. It's only 
by joining forces that we can make a 
real impact. It will therefore come as 
no surprise that | will focus on reach- 
ing out to those not yet fully aware or 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
© 
G
P
D
 
  
  
  
Princess Laurentien of the Netherlands, 
UNESCO Special Envoy on Literacy for Development. 
committed, rather than on preaching 
to the converted. 
Literacy is a vital means of human 
development. It is an enabling skill 
for further learning opportunities 
in the framework of lifelong learn- 
ing. It leads to empowerment, so- 
cial inclusion, health and better life 
chances. Everyone deserves to 
have those chances. So we need 
to urgently mobilise our entire so- 
cieties to tackle illiteracy structu- 
rally, also by linking prevention and 
reduction. | would like to convince 
the key actors of the enormous 
potential of literacy and also show 
them the actual costs of illiteracy 
for our societies. And all this against 
the backdrop that we have no time to 
waste. 
Princess Laurentien in the field. 
“We work on the principle of a snow- 
ball effect to reach out and involve busi- 
ness, social and government partners 
who can make a key contribution to this 
area, she has said. The foundation en- 
courages a diverse range of formal and 
non-formal educational initiatives, and 
forms partnerships with all kinds of or- 
ganizations in society, from trade unions   
THE LITERACY MARKET 
Honorary president of the Dutch 
Association of Public Libraries, 
Princess Laurentien also lends her 
support to the Dutch Language Society 
and the Listening and Braille Library of 
the Netherlands. In 2004, she founded 
the Reading & Writing Foundation 
(Stichting Lezen & Schrijven) to raise 
awareness and develop pilot projects 
to get more actors involved in the fight 
against illiteracy. 
to prisons to child healthcare centres: 
“We choose promising and innovative 
projects tackling low literacy aimed at 
young people and adults, but also mobi- 
lizing the business community, parents 
and educational organizations. We have 
built our approach around the literacy 
‘marketplace’ creating and matching 
supply and demand?   
12

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

    
    
  
  
  


### 186719: And then they came for me: last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate Lasantha Wickrematunge

“And Then They Came For Me”: 
Last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate 
Lasantha Wickrematunge 
    
  
    aR} ™ 
wy §  
  
Sri Lankan journalist Lasantha Wickrematunge won 
the UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize 2009 posthumously. 
No other profession calls on its practi- 
tioners to lay down their lives for their art 
save the armed forces and, in Sri Lanka, 
journalism. In the course of the past 
few years, the independent media have 
increasingly come under attack. Elec- 
tronic and print-media institutions have 
been burnt, bombed, sealed and co- 
erced. Countless journalists have been 
harassed, threatened and killed. It has 
been my honour to belong to all those 
categories and now especially the last. 
| have been in the business of journal- 
ism a good long time. Indeed, 2009 
will be The Sunday Leader's 15th year. 
Many things have changed in Sri Lanka 
during that time, and it does not need 
me to tell you that the greater part of 
that change has been for the worse. We 
find ourselves in the midst of a civil war 
ruthlessly prosecuted by protagonists 
whose bloodlust knows no bounds. Ter- 
Le Courrier de TUNESCO 2009 N°4 
ror, whether perpetrated by terrorists or 
the state, has become the order of the 
day. Indeed, murder has become the 
primary tool whereby the state seeks to 
control the organs of liberty. Today it is 
the journalists, tomorrow it will be the 
judges. For neither group have the risks 
ever been higher or the stakes lower. 
Why then do we do it? | often wonder 
that. After all, | too am a husband, and 
the father of three wonderful children. | 
too have responsibilities and obligations 
that transcend my profession, be it the 
law or journalism. Is it worth the risk? 
Many people tell me it is not. Friends tell 
me to revert to the bar, and goodness 
knows it offers a better and safer liveli- 
hood. Others, including political lead- 
ers on both sides, have at various times 
sought to induce me to take to politics, 
going so far as to offer me ministries of 
my choice. Diplomats, recognising the 
13 
The 2009 UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize 
is being awarded to the late Sri Lankan 
journalist and editor of the Sunday Leader, 
Lasantha Wickrematunge, who was assassinated 
on 8 January this year. The article reproduced 
here expresses Mr Wickrematunge’s 
commitment and fierce independence. 
Written for posthumous publication, this piece, 
first published in the Sunday Leader three days 
after his death, shows that Mr Wickrematunge 
was fully aware of the dangers facing him. 
It bears testimony to great courage, recognized 
by the jury of 14 professional journalists 
from all over the world that selected 
Lasantha Wickrematunge for the Prize. 
risk journalists face in Sri Lanka, have of- 
fered me safe passage and the right of 
residence in their countries. Whatever 
else | may have been stuck for, | have 
not been stuck for choice. 
But there is a calling that is yet above 
high office, fame, lucre and security. It is 
the call of conscience. 
The Sunday Leader has been a contro- 
versial newspaper because we say it like 
we see it: whether it be a spade, a thief 
or a murderer, we call it by that name. 
We do not hide behind euphemism. The 
investigative articles we print are sup- 
ported by documentary evidence thanks 
to the public-spiritedness of citizens 
who at great risk to themselves pass 
on this material to us. We have exposed 
scandal after scandal, and never once 
in these 15 years has anyone proved us 
wrong or successfully prosecuted us. 
The free media serve as a mirror in 
(o0°)

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 186719: And then they came for me: last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate Lasantha Wickrematunge

“And Then They Came For Me”: 
Last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate 
  
Lasantha Wickrematunge 
(00°) 
which the public can see itself sans 
mascara and styling gel. From us you 
learn the state of your nation, and es- 
pecially its management by the people 
you elected to give your children a bet- 
ter future. Sometimes the image you see 
in that mirror is not a pleasant one. But 
while you may grumble in the privacy of 
your armchair, the journalists who hold 
the mirror up to you do so publicly and 
at great risk to themselves. That is our 
calling, and we do not shirk it. 
Every newspaper has its angle, and we 
do not hide the fact that we have ours. 
ly accountable to the people and never 
abuse their trust. Secular because in a 
multi-ethnic and multi-cultural society 
such as ours, secularism offers the only 
common ground by which we might all 
be united. Liberal because we recog- 
nise that all human beings are created 
different, and we need to accept oth- 
ers for what they are and not what we 
would like them to be. And democratic... 
well, if you need me to explain why that 
is important, you'd best stop buying this 
paper. 
The Sunday Leader has never sought 
safety by unquestioningly articulating the 
THE SUNDAY 
  
Lasantha Wickrematunge launched the Sunday Leader with his 
brother in 1994. He used it to support the ca 
the war between the Sri Lankan army and the 
© 
Re
ut
er
s 
vi
a 
G
u
a
r
d
i
a
n
 
- 
  
m n he led against 
Tam hele 
He was “a man who was clearly conscious of the dangers 
he faced but nevertheless chose to speak out, 
even beyond his grave,’ said Joe Thloloe, President of the j jury 
of the 2009 UN 
Our commitment is to see Sri Lanka as 
a transparent, secular, liberal democ- 
racy. Think about those words, for they 
each has profound meaning. Transpar- 
ent because government must be open- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
SCO World Press Freedom Prize. 
majority view. Let's face it, that is the way 
to sell newspapers. On the contrary, as 
our opinion pieces over the years amply 
demonstrate, we often voice ideas that 
many people find distasteful. For ex- 
14   
ample, we have consistently espoused 
the view that while separatist terrorism 
must be eradicated, it is more important 
to address the root causes of terrorism, 
and urged government to view Sri Lan- 
ka's ethnic strife in the context of history 
and not through the telescope of terror- 
ism. We have also agitated against state 
terrorism in the so-called war against 
terror, and made no secret of our horror 
that Sri Lanka is the only country in the 
world routinely to bomb its own citizens. 
For these views we have been labelled 
traitors, and if this be treachery, we wear 
that label proudly. 
Many people suspect that The Sunday 
Leader has a political agenda: it does 
not. If we appear more critical of the gov- 
ernment than of the opposition it is only 
because we believe that - pray excuse 
cricketing argot - there is no point in 
bowling to the fielding side. Remember 
that for the few years of our existence in 
which the UNP was in office, we proved 
to be the biggest thorn in its flesh, ex- 
posing excess and corruption wherever 
it occurred. Indeed, the steady stream 
of embarrassing exposes we published 
may well have served to precipitate the 
downfall of that government. 
Neither should our distaste for the war 
be interpreted to mean that we support 
the Tigers. The LTTE are among the most 
ruthless and bloodthirsty organisations 
ever to have infested the planet. There 
is no gainsaying that it must be eradicat- 
ed. But to do so by violating the rights 
of Tamil citizens, bombing and shooting 
them mercilessly, is not only wrong but 
shames the Sinhalese, whose claim to 
be custodians of the dhamma is forever 
called into question by this savagery, 
much of which is unknown to the public 
because of censorship. 
What is more, a military occupation of 
the country’s north and east will require 
the Tamil people of those regions to live 
eternally as second-class citizens, de- 
prived of all self respect. Do not imagine 
that you can placate them by showering 
“development” and “reconstruction” on 
them in the post-war era. The wounds of 
war will scar them forever, and you will 
also have an even more bitter and hate- 
(00°)

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 186719: And then they came for me: last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate Lasantha Wickrematunge

“And Then They Game For Me”: 
Last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate 
Lasantha Wickrematunge 
(see) 
ful Diaspora to contend with. A problem 
amenable to a political solution will thus 
become a festering wound that will yield 
strife for all eternity. If | seem angry and 
frustrated, it is only because most of my 
countrymen - and all of the government 
- cannot see this writing so plainly on 
the wall. 
It is well known that | was on two oc- 
casions brutally assaulted, while on 
another my house was sprayed with 
machine-gun fire. Despite the govern- 
ment's sanctimonious assurances, 
there was never a serious police inquiry 
into the perpetrators of these attacks, 
and the attackers were never appre- 
hended. In all these cases, | have rea- 
son to believe the attacks were inspired 
by the government. When finally | am 
killed, it will be the government that kills 
me. 
The irony in this is that, unknown 
to most of the public, Mahinda and 
| have been friends for more than a 
quarter century. Indeed, | suspect that 
| am one of the few people remaining 
who routinely addresses him by his 
first name and uses the familiar Sin- 
hala address oya when talking to him. 
Although | do not attend the meet- 
ings he periodically holds for news- 
paper editors, hardly a month passes 
when we do not meet, privately or 
with a few close friends present, late 
at night at President's House. There 
we swap yarns, discuss politics and 
joke about the good old days. A few 
remarks to him would therefore be in 
order here. 
Mahinda, when you finally fought 
your way to the SLFP presidential 
nomination in 2005, nowhere were 
you welcomed more warmly than in 
this column. Indeed, we broke with 
a decade of tradition by referring to 
you throughout by your first name. 
So well known were your commit- 
ments to human rights and liberal 
values that we ushered you in like a 
breath of fresh air. Then, through an 
act of folly, you got yourself involved 
in the Helping Hambantota scandal. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
It was after a lot of soul-searching 
that we broke the story, at the same 
time urging you to return the money. 
By the time you did so several weeks 
later, a great blow had been struck to 
your reputation. It is one you are still 
trying to live down. 
You have told me yourself that you 
were not greedy for the presidency. 
© 
Ar
am
 
Gr
ig
or
ya
n 
  
  
know who will be behind my death, 
but dare not call his name. Not just 
my life, but yours too, depends on it. 
Sadly, for all the dreams you had for 
our country in your younger days, in 
just three years you have reduced it 
to rubble. In the name of patriotism 
you have trampled on human rights, 
nurtured unbridled corruption and 
  
“The irony in this is that, unknown to most of the public, 
Mahinda and | have been friends for more than a quarter 
century”, wrote Lasantha Wickrematunge. 
You did not have to hanker after it: 
it fell into your lap. You have told me 
that your sons are your greatest joy, 
and that you love spending time with 
them, leaving your brothers to oper- 
ate the machinery of state. Now, it 
Is clear to all who will see that that 
machinery has operated so well that 
my sons and daughter do not them- 
selves have a father. 
In the wake of my death | know you 
will make all the usual sanctimonious 
noises and call upon the police to 
hold a swift and thorough inquiry. But 
like all the inquiries you have ordered 
in the past, nothing will come of this 
one, too. For truth be told, we both 
15 
squandered public money like no 
other President before you. Indeed, 
your conduct has been like a small 
child suddenly let loose in a toyshop. 
That analogy is perhaps inapt because 
no child could have caused so much 
blood to be spilled on this land as you 
have, or trampled on the rights of its 
citizens as you do. Although you are 
now so drunk with power that you can- 
not see it, you will come to regret your 
sons having so rich an inheritance of 
blood. It can only bring tragedy. As for 
me, it is with a clear conscience that 
| go to meet my Maker. | wish, when 
your time finally comes, you could do 
the same. | wish. (ove)

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### 186719: And then they came for me: last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate Lasantha Wickrematunge

“And Then They Game For Me”: 
Last words of UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize laureate 
Lasantha Wickrematunge 
    
   
© 
Al
l 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
(00°) 
As for me, | have the satisfaction of 
knowing that | walked tall and bowed 
to no man. And | have not travelled 
this journey alone. Fellow journal 
ists in other branches of the media 
walked with me: most of them are 
now dead, imprisoned without trial or 
exiled in far-off lands. Others walk in 
the shadow of death that your Presi- 
dency has cast on the freedoms for 
which you once fought so hard. You 
will never be allowed to forget that my 
death took place under your watch. 
As anguished as | know you will 
be, | also know that you will have no 
choice but to protect my killers: you 
will see to it that the guilty one is never 
convicted. You have no choice. | feel 
sorry for you, and Shiranthi will have 
a long time to spend on her knees 
when next she goes for Confes- 
sion for it is not just her owns 
sins which she must confess, but 
those of her extended family that 
keeps you in office. 
As for the readers of The Sunday 
Leader, what can | say but Thank You 
for supporting our mission. We have 
espoused unpopular causes, stood 
up for those too feeble to stand up 
for themselves, locked horns with 
the high and mighty so swollen with 
power that they have forgotten their 
roots, exposed corruption and the 
waste of your hard-earned tax ru- 
pees, and made sure that whatever 
the propaganda of the day, you were 
allowed to hear a contrary view. For 
this | - and my family - have now paid 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
Lasantha with his parents and brother Lal. 
the price that | have long known | will 
one day have to pay. | am - and have 
always been - ready for that. | have 
done nothing to prevent this out- 
come: no security, no precautions. | 
want my murderer to know that | am 
not a coward like he is, hiding be- 
hind human shields while condemn- 
ing thousands of innocents to death. 
What am | among so many? It has 
long been written that my life would 
be taken, and by whom. All that re- 
mains to be written is when. 
That The Sunday Leader will contin- 
ue fighting the good fight, too, is writ- 
ten. For | did not fight this fight alone. 
Many more of us have to be - and will 
be - killed before The Leader is laid to 
rest. | hope my assassination will be 
seen not as a defeat of freedom but 
an inspiration for those who survive 
to step up their efforts. Indeed, 
| hope that it will help galvanise 
forces that will usher in a new era 
of human liberty in our beloved 
motherland. | also hope it will 
open the eyes of your President 
to the fact that however many are 
slaughtered in the name of patrio- 
tism, the human spirit will endure and 
flourish. Not all the Rajapakses com- 
bined can kill that. 
People often ask me why | take such 
risks and tell me it is a matter of time 
before | am bumped off. Of course | 
know that: it is inevitable. But if we 
do not speak out now, there will be 
no one left to speak for those who 
cannot, whether they be ethnic mi- 
16 
  
norities, the disadvantaged or the 
persecuted. An example that has 
inspired me throughout my career in 
journalism has been that of the Ger- 
man theologian, Martin Niemoller. In 
his youth he was an anti-Semite and 
an admirer of Hitler. As Nazism took 
hold in Germany, however, he saw 
Nazism for what it was: it was not just 
the Jews Hitler sought to extirpate, it 
was just about anyone with an alter- 
nate point of view. Niemoller spoke 
out, and for his trouble was incar- 
cerated in the Sachsenhausen and 
Dachau concentration camps from 
1937 to 1945, and very nearly exe- 
cuted. While incarcerated, Niemoller 
wrote a poem that, from the first time 
| read it in my teenage years, stuck 
hauntingly in my mind: 
First they came for the Jews 
and | did not speak out because 
| was not a Jew. 
Then they came for the Commu- 
nists and I did not speak out 
because | was not a Communist. 
Then they came for the trade 
unionists and I did not speak out 
because | was not a trade unionist. 
Then they came for me and there 
was no one left to speak out for me. 
If you remember nothing else, re- 
member this: The Leader is there 
for you, be you Sinhalese, Tamil, 
Muslim, low-caste, homosexual, 
dissident or disabled. lis staff will 
fight on, unbowed and unafraid, 
with the courage to which you have 
become accustomed. Do not take 
that commitment for granted. Let 
there be no doubt that whatever 
sacrifices we journalists make, they 
are not made for our own glory or 
enrichment: they are made for you. 
Whether you deserve their sacrifice 
is another matter. As for me, God 
knows | tried. 
Lasantha Wickrematunge

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/186699eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

NN 
        
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour l'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHu3aums 
O6bepnHeHHbIX Hauuii no 
BOMNpOCcaM 06pas3nBaHus, 
HayKu 1 KyNbTypbl 
ki, a od 
ReEHE, 
CEI SEA EN 
  
  
  
          
  
 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°4 
   
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
http://www.unesco.org/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
Director 
Saturnino Munoz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Jasmina Sopova - j.sopova@unesco.org 
Editorial assistance 
Katerina Markelova - k.markelova@unesco.org 
Editors 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org 
assisted by Zaina Dufour - z.dufour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org 
English 
Cathy Nolan - c.nolan@unesco.org 
Russian 
Victoria Kalinin - v.kalinin@unesco.org 
Spanish 
Francisco Vicente-Sandoval - liglesias@unesco.org 
Photo and web layout 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web Platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
s.roberts@unesco.org 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be 
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” 
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without 
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations 
of the countries and territories concerned. 
17