# [074968](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf) 12

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
[Erication No. L > 
i ro . ATE) 
  
JroLuMmeE HE— Net PRICE : 10 Cents (U. S.), 6 Pence (U. K.), or 20 Francs (FRANCE). Ist FEBRUARY 1950 
EE FTP g— Eg ET ET TE WR TTR Teg LI TE ST X A PEE TREE ER ET Tn 
™\ 
      JUST FOR 
MOMENT... 
er us lake a momenl—bul no longer— 
to pily frightened men. Then let us. plan 
and work to dispel their fear and bring 
them into our purposeful society of the 
makers of things and the, architects of hu- 
man peace and progress. This is what we 
must do, to save them and to save ourselves 
from the consequences of their fear and 
folly. We must Jearn to recognize and 
know them. = : 
They can be recognized to-day by their words. 
To-day, as before, they attack the very heart of 
education and of science, by saying that every- 
thing is already known. Among the things they 
“know” so well are these: ST , 
Hunger and despair are and must be the com- 
. mon lot of most of the earth's people (just as 
their forebears said, before the days of deep 
freezers, curing of meat and hybrid corn). War 
is an incurable trait of human nature (just as 
it was once human nature for some to be slaves 
and others to be masters). .Science is evil (as 
labour-saving machinery was once considered 
evily. Universal education Is wrong because. 
educated men will no longer “know their place” 
(as the Renaissance proved). 
Yet. in defiance of all the things that once 
were “known”, the cxperimenis have been made. 
with fire, water, wood, iron and the “indestruc- 
tible” atom itself—and we have the trains, ships, 
printing presses and medicinal isotopes to 
prove it. The challenges have been made and the 
victories have been counted in every fleld of hu- 
man endeavour—because courage. itself is a 
common element in human naturs. 
* 
N_this page is illustrated one of the most 
dramatic demonstrations of human determi- 
nation—for there is one place which is the 
most natural home for fear. That place is the 
world. of perpetual darkness and solitude, inha- 
bitated by the blind. If this is not terrifying, 
and if his does not justify fatalism and sur- 
render—what is there for man to fear ? 
Once, unbroken loneliness, ignorance and de- 
pendence were the commen lot of those who 
could not see. Now, the bravest among them 
have defeated darkness, Working in full part- 
nership wilh their sighted colleagues, in UNESCO 
meeling rooms, and in thousands of places 
throughout the world, they are helping all handi- 
capped men. women and children to take the 
place so lang reserved for them jn our society. 
* 
NESCO knows many of the-ecourageous men 
and women, in the broad fields of education. 
science and culture, and has helped’ bring 
them logether in thousands of meetings, to plan 
and earry forward eo-operative work—of the kind 
exemplified on this page. - 
To study progress reports on such work, and 
to make plans for the future, UNESCO will open 
its Fifth General Conference at Florence, aly, 
on the 22nd of May. Before then, UNESCO will 
have sponsored. meetings on such projecls as 
hese: : . 
To speed the reconstruelien of schools: lo en- 
courage the inlernalional dissemination of music: 
lo provide for the increased inlerchange among 
naltons of workers, teachers and studenls; to 
help solve the educational problems of physically 
handicapped children: to open a fundamental 
education cenire in Mexico to serve the whole 
of Lalin America: to inerease the infernalional: 
availabillly of educational, seienlific and euilural 
materials: to help doctors, chemists and engineers 
to learn quickly of the work rof their colleagues 
in olher countries... "and to accomplish other 
work that there is no space to list. 
These -are- among the indispensable elements 
for the practical attainment of a hetter world. 
f 
a 
| 
;
 
A
 
F
L
E
E
T
 
C
r
i
e
d
 
O
S
 
a 
r
i
d
d
.
 
a
n
d
 
    
i 
BR t
e
 
’ 
ra
 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 


### 74969: Thanks to some unusual child guidance methods... bad children in London find it's more fun to be good

Thanks to 
some unusual 
Child 
Guidance 
Methods... 
  
BAD CHILDREN 
IN LONDON 
FIND 
MORE FUN 
TO BE GOOD 
IT'S 
delinquents—the young people who break the laws of their country, 
Eo year, millions of dollars are spent on the treatment of juvenile 
city or community, again and again. Many people are aware of such 
causes of delinquency as poverty, broken homes, unstable parents, war 
conditions and other social evils. Yet, few know exactly what can be 
done to prevent the crimes committed daily by boys and girls under twenty- 
one. The article below tells the story of one unusual experiment which 
is going on in Great Britain to help wayward youth. -. _.. ... 
f you were walking along a quiet 
street in the West End of London, 
you might be startled to hear the 
husky shouts of youth at play, the 
splinter of glass and the thud of a 
football. You might be even more sur- 
prised tc learn that the sounds of 
rough and tumble were coming from 
a one-time convent, a building with 
austere stone walls and a conservative 
design. But, if you took one more step 
and went inside the door, you would 
understand at once why those youthful 
sounds were coming from the building. 
It is the Institute for the Scientific 
Treatment of Juvenile Delinquency. 
The methods which this Institute uses 
to treat wayward youth make it out- 
standing in the British Isles, and per- 
haps unique in the world. 
Hundreds of children are selected 
from the court rooms of London each 
year to attend the Institute. There is 
nothing frightening abou; their wel- 
  
cation, science and culture. 
subscribers, 
French Francs. 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! 
get them to subscribe too. 
Toronto. 
Chile : 
Service) : 
Hungary : “lbusz” Akademia-u. 10, B 
India : 
B rr ol FT EI Tingle EE > i 
" . E 
y . 
1 - oi 
: , i 
a. " 
} ’ 
1 of - kB 
od ll OE isi are A TE a ES 
The UNESCO COURIER is an international periodical devoted to the work 
of UNESCO and to activities and developments throughout. the world in edu- 
_ Until now some of our readers have been receiving free copies of our 
periodical, In order to permit us to supply the many thousands of new readers 
in almost every country in the world we are undertaking a special drive for 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 US., or 5/- or 200 
Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France, 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana S. A. Alsina 500 Buenos-Aires. 
Australia : H. A. Goddard Ltd., 255a, George St., Sydney. 
Belgium : Librairie encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua Mexico $8-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio-de-Janeiro. 
Canada : Mr Victor .P. Seary, Manager, The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, 
Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Mr Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 9a, 1791, Bogotd. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, Sr. D. René de Smedt, O'Reilly, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Stalinova, 46, Praha XII. 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 6, Norregade, Copenhagen. 
France : Unesco Sales Service, 19, av. Kiéber, Paris (16¢). Tél. Kléber 52.00. 
Great Britain : I{.M. Stationery Office : London : York House, Kingsway (Retail Counter 
P.O. Box 569, London S.E.I. (Post orders). - Manchester 2 : 39-41 King 
Street. - Edinburgh 2 : 13a Castle Street. - Cardiff : 1 St Andrew's Crescent. - 
Bristol 1 : Tower Lane. - Belfast : 80 Chichester Street. : 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens. 
udapest V. 
Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Italy : Messagerie Italiane, Via Lomazzo, 52, Milano. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Universelle, Avenue des Frangais, Beirut. 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, Mexico 
come, when they come to spend one or 
two afterncons a week there. Though 
they are not aware of it when they 
enter, a team of experts begins work- 
ing in their behalf. Health reports, 
intelligence, school and home reports 
are thoroughly prepared. 
‘When these check-ups are completed, 
the children come to play—in the two 
basement playrooms of the Institute, 
under the watchful eye of a man and 
woman. These are highly trained 
play teachers, who recreate, in a sense, 
the symbols of a father and mother in 
the family circle. They give the 
children complete care and coopera- 
tion, but they never tell them directly 
what to do. 
‘What goes on in these playrooms 
may seem strange at first. But, when 
one stops to consider that about 
seventy per cent of these difficult and 
unhappy children are treated success- 
fully at the Institute, it seems worth- 
 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Afd. Fondsadministratie, Lange Voorhout 9, The 
ague. : 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 7, Oslo. 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Pert, S.A. Girén de la Unién, Lima. 
Portugal : Unico Portuguesa de Imprensa, 198 Rue de S. Bento, 3° Esq. Lisbon. 
Sweden : C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
United States of America : International Documents Service, Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York 27, N.Y. 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacién Cientifica para la América Latina, Unesco. Bulevar 
Artigas 1320-24. Montevideo.   
 
Publishers and booksellers 
in eleven countries are 
now sticking this “hurry 
it up” label, printed in 
English and French, on 
parcels of books bought 
with Unesco Book Cou- 
pons. The primary pur- 
pose of the label is to 
draw the attention of cus- 
  toms officials to the con- 
tents of the package so as 
to save time and trouble 
both for them and the 
buyer. It is also one small 
move in the general aim 
of Unesco to secure freer 
movement for books and 
scientific and educational 
material. Unesco is alse 
making arrangements to 
extend the use of the Book 
Coupons system to the 
purchase of scientific films. 
and apparatus, for whose 
despatch a similar label 
to the one above may be 
introduced.      
while to examine the methods care- 
fully. 
From Destruction 
to Creation 
irst, the children, especially those 
who are aggressive, forceful, and 
somewhat backward in school, are 
put in what is known to the staff as 
the “Dirty Room.” Here, every child 
begins by being allowed to do exactly 
as he likes—except that he may not 
hurt anyone else. He is encouraged to 
make a mess, to produce those fami- 
liar noises which often echo in the 
streets. Pots of paint are placed on 
the floor, just waiting to be daubed on 
the walls and flung at the ceiling. 
Earth, sand and water lie ready to be 
made into pies and plastered anywhere. 
Newspapers are there to be lighted and 
allowed to flame. 
The children, unlike normal boys 
and girls, become very aggressive in 
isolation, and usually run wild in this 
Dirty Room. All the pent-up violence 
and tension is flung out at the walls 
and ceiling. When they have worked 
off the hidden anger which has dis- 
turbed their behaviour and made them 
unhappy, they become less tense, grow 
more creative than destructive, and 
feel more confident with their teach- 
ers. 
Then, as most patients finally do, 
they move from the Dirty Room to the 
Clean and Quiet Room. Here, there 
are constructive games, paints and 
clay, tables and chairs, cards, and 
even boxing gloves for organized 
fights. 
« Drawing out » 
Nightmares and Fears 
Tr pictures painted by the children 
are very important. When the 
youngsters are encouraged, they 
draw their nightmares and the things 
that frighten them. And after they 
have drawn and discussed them, they 
gradually lose their fears. At first, 
the pictures are vague, impersonal and 
confused. But after more effort and a 
chat with the play teacher, they begin 
to draw with real design and purpose. 
Later, when these children can play 
games, accept rules and defeat, and 
take their turn in an organized 
fashion, they have made considerable 
progress. 
‘When they have reached such a 
stage, they are nearly ready to be 
released from treatment at the Insti- 
tute. Elizabeth Draper, General Se- 
cretary of the Institute, says that they 
are now prepared to make a realistic 
adjustment to their homes and back- 
grounds. For the Institute always 
treats the children while they are stiil 
llving at home—so that they may 
make a healthy arrangement for living 
within their immediate situation. } 
Today, this Institute for the Scienti- 
fic Treatment of Juvenile Delinquency 
is more than seventeen years old. Its 
clinic for the cure of young people who 
have got into trouble with the law has 
been taken over by the British Minis- 
try of Health, while its research work 
has had the support of the United 
Nations Appeal for Children. Its me- 
thods may seem unusual at first, but 
they have had results, which may in- 
fluence the treatment of what has been 
called wayward youth all over the 
world. 
RECLAIMING AFRIGA 
to feed its people 
A projected survey of lhe Bang- 
weulu swamps in Northern Rho- 
desia promises to open up an 
important new chapter in the dramatic 
story of the struggle to turn the im- 
mense food-producing potentialities of 
Africa to practical use. 
Unlike many parts of the continent, 
“a large section of the central African 
plateau has an excess of water. It 
collects in great swamps, the most 
impressive of which is in Northern Rho- 
desia, where there are about 
20,000 square miles of seasonally 
flooded. land, of which at least one- 
third is perpetual swamp. 
Swamps have an important place in 
nature, for they prevent the too rapid 
run-off of rain in the short wet season. 
But the evaporation is very great and 
this moisture does not return as rain. 
The Bangweulu swamps are ordinarily 
about 3,000 square miles in area, and 
5.000 square miles in the flood season. 
Around their edge is a fringe of ferlile 
grassland up lo five miles wide, which 
is flooded every year for several 
months. i 
Another fertile area of about 
200.000 acres inside the swamp has to 
be abandoned periodically by its 
thousands of inhabitants. The plan is 
lo control the cyelical floods and also 
to use surplus water to enlarge the 
fertile area. - 
Several months of preliminary work 
will be needed before this end can pos- 
sibly be achieved, but all indications 
are favourable. 
  
        
  
Part of a chart, typical 
in this case among the people of Indonesia. 
MUSIK 
Soetedjo Saifoel Bahri 
| "Beladjarlah membalja I" 
» 8S 8 Aa %5.. 0 5 
PTomiige: 
A Soe pa ja pandas 
0 6 - 
EEE 
dan te- hh - bi, 
a... OO 6 & 
239 4.2. 0 «oa 2 8 a.72 
  
ha roes be- la cor Bor wom goeh hai L 
3.00 5 354 5.1.02 398 #.2.042 =» 
_- 
      bh cinder Toe adm 
oO +375 6. % 
Dii-ka-lau ra-dyn  le-kas 
of those used as visual aid teaching material in literacy campaigns, 
TEKST: LER £3 wel 
Singing the praises of literacy. 
The title of this song, taken from 
an Indonesian pamphlet used in 
literacy teaching is “Learn to Read” 
—. and the words of the song repro- 
— duced above go: “lf you want to 
become famous you must work hard 
and carefully at your studies. If 
you study hard you will soon be- 
come clever.” 
  
tural manual 
from France, 
“MLIMO WA STRIP PAMOJA NA MPANDO WA MAJANI". This 
African text and the illustration (above) are taken from an agricul- 
Africans and their Land’, used as a follow-up reader 
which gives a practical value to literacy. 
(above) which means ‘strip cropping and the grass ley’ are taken 
from a chapter which aims to show African farmers how to improve 
grazing for their cattle and the fertility of their soil. 
part of a collection received by Unesco’s Education Clearing House 
Great Britain and Holland, 
Ce Department is using in an Exhibition illustrating the use of text books 
TT for adults in Africa. Indonesia and Indo 
Co LA Exhibition which opened in Paris on February 1, and which will later 
be sent to Brussels, Amsterdam and London, is io encourage text 
book production for use in adult literacy teaching. 
The photo and the text 
This book is 
which the Education 
China. The purpose of the  

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=3) 3

### IGNORE

  
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 74970: Report on the desert: Ritchie Calder begins special UNESCO project

Report on the desert : RITCHIE CALDER BEGINS 
SPECIAL UNESCO PROJECT 
new kind of desert war is on. It is not a battle of men against men, of weapons against 
It is a fight against the sands of the arid zones of the world weapons. 
To tell the peoples of all nations about the progress of this vital battle, Unesco has 
developed a unique educational and information project in co-operation with the U.K. National 
Commission, the London “News Chronicle” and Ritchie Calder, science editor of that paper. 
Mr. Calder left Paris last month on a seven weeks trip to gather material for a report on 
the desert. 
He will tell the story of the struggle which many old civilizations have lost, now being waged 
by scientists and other experts in remote stations. 
is desert land, covering parts of Asia, Africa, North and South America and Australia 
These vast expanses of land can play a vital part in solving the world’s food problems. Each 
day new soil is being lost by erosion and by tbe march of the deserts encroaching on fertile 
land. 
What can be done now to reclaim there areas? 
the world. As the Scientific body of the United Nations. Unesco has already begun to tackle 
it and is collecting information on reclamation research going on in the science outposts 
Mr. Calder will visit a number of these outposts and te of the desert. 
modern “legionnaires of science” who live and work in them. Tul 
On January 190 he left Paris for North Africa following an interview with M. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, D.rector-General of Unesco. “The problem of developing for human use the vast desert 
surfaces of our planet is one to which Unesco attaches special importance”, M. Torres Bodet 
“Your articles, by awakening the public imagination to the challenge 
and possibility of the desert will render a valuable international service. They should prove 
particularly useful in making the experience of scientists and engineers in the regions you visit 
told Ritchie Calder. 
known to readers in other countries where similar conditions exist.” 
World-Wide 
“Running Commentary” 
ITCHIE CALDER'S journey is 
taking him over 5,000 miles 
through North Africa and the 
Middle last, from Carthage to 
Babylon, and the high deserts of 
Persia. His first objective was a 
Saharan outpost south of Algiers, on 
he I ontiers of Morocco. Then he 
p.ai:ned to visit Carthage and to travel 
eas.ward through the wartime battle- 
fieids of Tripoliiania, Cyrenaica and 
the Weslern Desert of Egypt. 
Eastwards from there he will go to 
the Sinai desert to study research 
prcjects. The great areas of the 
Euphrates and ligris where irrigation 
projects have been recommended as 
part of the UN Technical Aid to 
Underdeve.oped-Areas is next on the 
trip. In Persia, he will survey the 
territory, where it is planned to use 
£200,000,000 to plough back the wealth 
coming from under the earth, before 
his trip finally ends in Israel. 
These areas are only part of the 
Arid Zones which extend over the 
world. But, they form the grea! 
classical desert in which ancient 
civilizations have been buried. By 
finding out what is happening in these 
desert stations and by publicising 
examples of useful experiments, this 
research tour will be a guide to action 
and study for future projects in other 
parts of the world. 
As part of the extensive press and 
radio coverage, Ritchie Calder will 
write a “running commentary” to be 
pub.ished in the *News Chronicle” and 
in a series of newspapers throughout 
the world. The British mass circula- 
“tion publication, “Picture Post™, 1s co- 
vperating by sending a photographer 
on the trip. Through the B.B.C, 
Ritchie Calder’s voice will be heard 
telling of his experiences. 
Schools to Follow 
Desert Journey 
HE educational aspects of this 
survey have already aroused great 
interest in Britain. In this 
connecticn the U.K. National Commis- 
sion for Unesco is promoting an 
educational project in schools and 
adult education organizations. 
Plans include a series of articles on 
the essential facts of the trip to be 
published in educational journals, a 
special wall map produced by the 
“News Chrenicle” fer use in schools, 
showing the routes with pictures of 
.the principal places to be visited, 
supplemented by an illustrated pam- 
phlet and periodical reports of the 
desert survey. 
The conclusions drawn from the in- 
vestigations will appear in special 
articles in a British weekly “New 
Statesman and Nation”. Finally, as a 
permanent record, a presentation of 
all this material will be published as 
a Lext-book supplemented by visual 
aids. 
Ritchie Calder has had discussions 
with some of the experts who met at 
Unesco Housc recently to consider 
plans for an Institute of the Arid 
Zones. These experts proposed that an 
International Council for Research in 
the Arid Zones be created to co-relate 
informafion on projects being carried 
out in the desert areas of the world. 
to promcete cther types of investigation, 
where they are lacking, and to encou- 
rage fundamental research in academic 
and other institutions. 
The report on the desert made by 
this well-known British science writer, 
will help us to see this urgent problem 
in its perspective, and to reinforce the 
action that the nations must take for 
its eventual solution. 
More than a quarter of the earth’s surface 
'I'his is the problem facing the nations of 
11 the story of the 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
rears 
  
   
   
Derna 
rer rbead ‘ 
1 Alymer YW 
HT i Cau 
| WESTERN SENT 
$00 111000 
   
  
  
A 
Thats saat 
— 
 
 
     
This is the route Ritchie Calder will follow on his 5.000-mile tour of the deserts. 


### 74242: Mexican education centre will serve a continent

MEXICAN EDUCATION CENTRE 
WILL SERVE A CONTINENT ue tirst teacher raining centre 
for fundamental education to 
be establishied under Unesco’s 
programme for combatting illite- 
racy, will be opened during {950 
with aid from Unesco and the 
Organization of American States 
(0.A.8.) near Mexico City. It will 
provide a paltern for other such 
centres, notably in the Middle East, 
to serve regional needs for {raining 
teachers to work with illiterates. 
The Mexican project will be initial- 
ed jointly by the Mexican Ministry 
of Kducalion, officials of the O.A.S. 
and John B. Bowers of the Funda- 
mental Education staff of Unesco. 
Mr. Bowers is now on his way to 
Mexico City. 
While the «Training and Pro- 
duction Centre » near Mexico Cily 
will provide basic teaching for 
Mexican children and adults, its 
primary purpose is to train inslruc- 


### 74243: Dr Mendez-Pereira to direct first UNESCO regional office

Dr MENDEZ-PEREIRA 
TO DIRECT FIRST 
UNESCO REGIONAL OFFICE 
gr. OcTAV1IO 
MENDEZ-PE- 
REIRA, Rec- 
tor and founder 
of the University 
of Panama, has 
been appointed 
Director of the 
Unesco Regional 
office which is to 
be inaugurated 
" 
   \ 
= == at Havana, 
Dr Mendez-Pereira Cuba, this 
month. 
The main task of this first Unesco 
Regional Office will be to make 
Unesco better known throughout the 
Western Hemisphere, to increase 
contacts between Unesco’s Member 
States and the National Commissions 
in the region and to enlist their full 
support in carrying out Unesco’s pro. 
gramme. A plan, outlining the ini- 
tial activities of the Office, is at 
present being worked out by the 
Secretariat. 
The Office is being set up in 
agreement with and through the 
assistance of the Cuban Government 
which has placed a building facing 
the Plazza del Mayo at its disposal 
and has agreed to provide postal 
franchise and diplomatic privileges. 
The Organization of American States 
(OAS) will also co-operate with the 
new Office. 
Senor Mendez-Pereira has held the 
post of Minister of Education in 
several Panamanian Cabinets and has 
been Ambassador to the United 
States, Cuba and Chile and Minister 
to France and the United Kingdom. 
He has also represented his country 
at United Nations and other interna- 
tional conferences, and has written 
several works on education and in- 
ternational relations. 
In his new post he will be assisted 
by Professor René Halconruy, a 
Belgian expert in fundamental edu- 
cation, who has spent many years in 
Latin-America as professor at the 
University of Sucre, in Bolivia and 
director of the School of Languages 
at the same university. Professor 
Halconruy has written several books 
and made a number of surveys on 
educational problems. 
andl an 
tors from all over Latin-America in 
how to teach by the best modern 
methods. 
Mr. Bowers will advise the Mexi- 
can Ministry of Education in the se- 
lection of a Director for lhe centre, 
assistant, both of whom 
will be members of the Unesco sec- 
retariat for at least the first year 
of operations. The educational and 
training programme of the centre 
will be reviewed during Mr. Bowers’ 
stay in Mexico City. It is planned 
that the trainee instructors will have 
an eight-month course; . initially 
there will be forty students. 
Plans for the training and pro- 
duction centre formulated al 
Inesco’s Fourth General Confe- 
rence in Paris last September spe- 
cified that such an institution 
should serve «a region wiih 
common problems and, as far as 
possible, a common language ». It 
was further suggesied that some 
regional organization be asked to 
share responsibility. In the pre- 
sent instance, both these require- 
ments are met, as the centre will 
serve all of Latlin-America, and an 
0.A.S. donation of 100.000 dollars 
has facilitated development of the 
plan. 
Materials for anti-illiteraey eam- 
paigns will be produced in the cen- 
tre. including texts, wall charts, 
cartoons and diagrams, as well as 
film strips and scripts for cinemas 
and radio use. Materials thus pro- 
duced will be lested in actual field 
work. . : > 
It is proposed to draw 10 trainees 
from Mexico, and the remaining 30 
from olher Latin-American slates,

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=4) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 


### 74244: Testimony of the twentieth century pioneers

TE STI MON 
of the 
TWENTIETH 
CENTURY 
PIONEERS 
Ux WHO, FAO, UNESCO, UNICEF 
. what can these tidy blocks of 
letters contribute to the happiness of 
ordinary men and women, who want 
to spend their lives at peace with one 
another, in useful, purposeful work? 
A book can only help to answer this, 
for the real answer is being given by 
action, humble or noble, ten or a 
hundred thousand times a day. But 
a book can inspire new efforts, by 
recording present - gains. Such a 
book .is PEACE ON EARTH, a 251 
page volume, published by Hermitage 
House, New York. 
The names of the writers form a 
miniature world WHO'S WHO for 
they are names of the men who lead 
the international teams of workers 
charged with responsibilities for 
keeping the peace, helping distressed 
children, and improving the health 
and educational 
whole world. 
Trygve Lie (Norwegian), 
neral of United Nations, contributes an 
analysis of the UN Charter — “The docu- 
ment ’, he says, * that resulted from 
the work of those who wrote the Charter 
was not the lowest common denominator 
“wut the highest common denominator of 
agreement attainable either then or 
now. . 
* 
Brock Chisholm (Canadian), World 
Health Organization, describes the new 
kind of human society in which survival 
will be based on co-operation instead of 
competition. ¢ It calls ’*, he says, * for 
people with real maturity, Two basic 
qualities of a mature person are 
adaptability and compromise, and both 
of these qualities are required of those 
engaged in the building of peace . 
* 
Eleanor Roosevelt, the world® leading 
woman internationalist says of the Decla- 
ration of Human Rights: “I am even 
more hopeful that if we begin to try and 
live up to the Declaration we will remove 
one of the great causes of war ", 
* 
Lord John Boyd Orr (English) gives 
briefly the objectives of the Food and 
Agricultural Organization: * to provide 
the machinery for the nations to 
co-operate in putting an end to hunger 
and malnutrition in the world, to raise 
the standard of tiving of rural workers, 
and to develop the resources of farms, 
forests and seas - to enrich the world 
with their products . 
* . 
Jaime Torres Bodet (Mexican) — Direc- 
tor-General of Unesco — instances the 
help Unesco devends on, when he says one 
lesson is already clear. “ We know that 
success will depend on the friendly co- 
operation of a multitude of institutions 
and that there are no monopolies in the 
field in which Unesco works. Our duty 
does not lie in a lordly dispensing of 
alms, but in organizing mutual help.” 
* 
Other outstanding contributions des- 
cribe the work and purpose of the 
Economic and Social Council, the Inter- 
national Trusteeship System, the Inter- 
national Children’s Emergency Fund, and 
the General Assembly of the United 
Nations. 
The introduction is written by Robert . 
E. Sherwood, who defines the book as 
an * assertion of tremendous progress 
and of faith that such progress can never 
be lost 
  * 
CATALOGUE OF 
BACH 
RECORDINGS 
TO MARK 1950 
BI-CENTENARY 
USICIANS and music-lovers through- 
M out the world are celebrating this 
year the 
  
memory of Johann- 
Sebastian Bach. 4 number of countries 
are organizing special ceremonies to 
mark the second centenary of the great 
composer’s death on July 28th 1750. 
Among the many projects being 
arranged by UNESCO in this connection, 
the publication of a catalogue of all 
Bach’s works and of all Bach record- 
ings made during the last fifty years, 
will be of special interest to musicolo- 
gists and music-lovers everywhere. 
This work is the second rolume in. 
the series “Unesco Archives of Recorded 
Music” whose first volume was devoted 
to the works of Frederic Chopin. The 
Buch catalogue wil also include an 
introduction, annotations and inset 
illustrations. oo 
standards of the 
Secretary-Ge- 
a
 
S
L
 
a
y
 
-
 
TY TT TEE TY SR 


### 74246: UNESCO-IBE: a partnership working to improve world education

SCO-IBE: A PARTNERSHIP WORKIN 
  
TO IMPROVE WORLD EDUCATION 
Ls STEER TRg ee 
in Unesco House last month 
sel in motion plans which 
will have profound and lasting 
effects upon almost every child 
who will be attending school, in 
most countries of the world, in 
1951 and thereafter. The event 
was the seventh meeting of the 
Joint Committee of Unesco and the 
international Bureau of Education. 
Together, the conferees planned 
a major part of the Agenda for the 
Thirteenth Session of the Inter- 
national Conference on Public 
Education to be held in Geneva 
from the 6th to the 14th July this 
year. Sn EE Na REL 
al VERA 4 ESE) gn N 
A MEETING of six men and women 
ae a Ss LA EE PEs «aE nls | Ne 
To record the educational develop- 
ments of 1949-1950 in about 50 nations 
which submit reports to the LB.E., so 
that the best and most cffective of them 
may be distributed and studied by 
teachers throughout the world, will ve 
the first point on the Conference 
Agenda. These reports will be contain- 
ed in the International Yearbook of 
Education, published regularly for the 
past fifteen years. 
The Conference will deal with the 
best means for introducing children to 
the rich and engrossing world of 
mathematics; how to increase their 
grasp of a study which can do so much 
to make them more effective men and 
women, to discharge a greater part of 
the work-load which awaits lheir ge- 
neration with greater ease. 
- Some of 
  
Unesco’s 
RECENT PUBLICATIONS 
 
  
  
  
        
TA 
hold 
: 
i ] 
02 —2 fg A med) 
| | » | 25 
- x’ | 4 
pri pK | | wots | | 
i 3 : : ; : 
: 2.4 30 | 28 | 
| po i hot | | | | 
com ai Nall sn a YE ay ra 
Ipes Iga  iges ET) 947 NS ply Vaan 
PUBIATIONS NUNKR OF pee NN 
PUT ON BME AnwoaLY prRIONCALL gi 
 
  
  
  
  
    
  
“ BEST SELLERS ~ 
Volume 1I, 
ONE OF THE 
“ STUDY ABROAD © 
949. 
International handbook, Fellow- 
ships, scholarships, educational 
exchange. This volume, which lists 
spportunities available for 1949-50, 
reports almost 22,000 awards donated 
by 49 countries, 23 Non- Self-Governing 
and Trust Territories, the United 
Nations and Specialized Agencies and 
international non-governmental orga- 
nizations, with full particulars of 
conditions of each award and instruc- 
tions to prospective applicants, 
$1.25 s.6/. 
RECORDS OF THE GENERAL 
CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS EDUCATIONAL SCIEN- 
TIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANI- 
ZATION. 
Fourth Session, Paris 1949, Reso- 
lutions. 
Handbook of the resolutions adop- 
ted by the representatives of Member 
States of Unesco, during the fourth 
session of the General Conference 
held in Paris from September 19th to 
October 5th 1949. 
Edition in Spanish. 
$0.75 s.4/6. 
  
HANDBOOK OF NATIONAL COM- 
MISSIONS. 
Contains the list of National 
Commissions as of May Ist, 1949, 
their addresses, constitutions, officers, 
members, committee, structure and a 
brief statement of significant acti- 
vities. (under print). 
$1.00 s.6/. 
S EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIAN- 
HIP 
librarians and the 
library 
Training of 
creation and operation of 
schools. 
Edition in Spanish. 
$0.45 5.2/6. 
FUNDAMENTAL EDUCATION. 
A description and programme. A 
brief outline of the elements which 
go to make a programme of funda- 
mental education within a country or 
a district; the latter part describes 
what Unesco is doing in this field. 
$0,25 s. 1/6. 
HOMELESS CHILDREN. 
This publication describes the 
a 
psychological problems of homeless 
children in the post-war period and 
gives an account of the most 
interesting experimental rehabilita- 
tion work carried out in Children’s 
Communities. (Being Printed) 
$0.50 s.3/. 
Cn FE 
CHILDREN OF EUROPE. 
A booklet written in the name of 
the children of Europe, victims of 
war. Its message, eloquently illus- 
trated with photographs from all 
parts of Europe, is addressed to 
“ grown-ups ' of today. : 
$0.25 s.1/6. 
Edition in Spanish. 
  
er nnd Ce i cll. 
As a result of the meeling of lhe 
Joint Committee, the Conference will 
take up the question of teaching 
handicrafts in secondary schools. and 
thus will help extend the satisfactions of 
creative work to countless children. 
immediately and in the far furure — 
carrying forward discoveries of great 
educators in the past about the true 
relation of hand and brain. 
Preparing A““Teachers”’ Charter | 
0 help broaden the outlook and 
improve the value of teachers to 
their pupils, the Conference will 
take up a question of increasing the 
- international exchange of teachers — a 
question which has been tlie subject of 
special studies by Unesco. On all these 
points, the Conference will make recom- 
mendations directly to Ministries of 
Education, urging the adoption of prac- 
tical measures to implement the prin- 
ciples involved. 
During 1950, the LB. E. is expected to 
continue work already under way, in- 
volving standards of training and of pay 
for school-teachers. Specifically, the 
Organisation will finish its enquiry into 
the remuneration of primary teachers, 
and will begin its study of the training 
of secondary teachers. .An enquiry into 
the training of primary school-teachers 
has already been completed. Results of 
these studies will constitute elements in 
a Teachers’ Charter, eveniually to be 
published by the LB.E. 
Other matters will include research in 
the fields of psychology and of comput. 
sory school attendance. : 
Passing On The ¢ Know-How *’ 
T HE -vear 1950 marks the 25th anni- 
versary of the IB.E. During its 
quarter century, the Organization 
has issued more than one hundred 
works dealing with educational develop- 
ments in some fifty countries, seeking in 
each field to keep all countries abreast 
of the latest advance. Its publications 
have dealt with such matters as school 
buildings, rural education, teaching of 
living and classical languages, school 
inspection, geography teaching, organi- 
zation of school libraries, physical 
education, hygiene, and many others. 
Unesco and the I.B.E. have worked in 
the closest consultation since an agrec- 
ment between the two organizations was 
initialled in Paris on 12th November 
1946, even before the first session of the 
Unesco General Conference. The Di- 
rector of the LB.E., Prof. Jean Piaget, 
accepted the temporary charge of 
Unesco’'s Department of Education to fill 
the vacancy left by the recent departure 
of Dr. Clarence Beeby. - 
ha 


### 74247: Human rights message will be spread by travelling exhibition

HUMAN RIGHTS MESSAGE 
WILL BE SPREAD BY 
TRAVELLING EXHIBITION 
REPLICA of the Unesco Exhibition on Human Rights, held in the Musce 
Galliéra in Paris last Autumn is to begin a tour of the French provinces 
this month. The tour, made possible through the co-operation of the French 
National Commission for Unesco, which is paying all expenses, will cover the 
principal French cities and towns, beginning with Toulouse, where the exhibi- 
tion will be cpened in the newly-built Musée Pedagogique. It will then go to 
Bordeaux and Limoges, and its arrival in the latter city will coincide with the 
creation there of a Unesco Youth Club. 
Unesco's Paris Exhibition, illustrat- 
ing the United Nations Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and 
showing how the Rights it proclaims 
have been fought for throughout the 
centuries, was visited by over 16,000 
persons, including six thousand school 
children. Hundreds of others wrote, 
asking for photographs and documents. 
Original historical Human Rights 
Documsznts, loaned to this exhibition, 
including the French Declaration of 
“the Rights of Man, the Constitution of 
1791, and the 1849 Constitution of the 
Roman Republic have been photo- 
graphed. and will form part of the 
exhibition touring France. 
An offer by Unesco to provide 
facilities for other countries to 
organize similar exhibitions has al- 
ready been accepted by a number of 
governments, 
A collection of sketches and photo- 
graphic reproductions of different 
parts of the Paris Exhibition will 
constitute a working basis for 
architects and decorators in these 
countries. Where two dimensional 
exhibitions are being planned, albums 
of photos and texts taken from the 
original displays will be available, and 
for teachers in small country centres 
there will be bound books made up of 
non-detachable photos and texts. 
Altogether, 658 photos and 50 sketches 
have been prepared to help carry the 
Human Rights message in visual form 
to the peoples of many countries.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 74971: UNESCO seminar offers new hope for Asia's millions

UNESCO SEMINAR OFFERS NEW | 
HOPE FOR ASIA'S MILLIONS 
“NAl TALIM”, 
  
TIMES ABOUT ALL ASPECTS OF EDUCATION. 
THE EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY OF A CO- 
OPERATIVE SELF-SUFFICIENT COMMUNITY AT SEVAGRAM, GAN- 
DHI SAID: “EDUCATION COVERS THE ENTIRE FIELD OF LIFE... 
THIS PRIMARY EDUCATION WOULD 
TARY PRINCIPLES OF SANITATION, HYGIENE, NUTRITION. THERE 
IS NOTHING IN LIFE, HOWEVER SMALL, WHICH IS NOT THE 
CONCERN OF EDUCATION". 
AHATMA GANDHI, GREAT SON OF THE HOST COUNTRY 
M TO THE UNESCO SEMINAR AT MYSORE SPOKE MANY 
IN DEFINING 
INCLUDE THE ELEMEN- 
* 
his country to ‘welcome the world to its breast.” During 
the heat and passions of World War II, his calm voice 
assured mankind that the future would see a great ‘coming 
together of nations”, and the growth of creative understanding 
ameng them. 
Responding to the invitation, and inspired by the same confi- 
dence, the Unesco Seminar cn Rural Adult Education for Com- 
munity Action was held in Tagore's country during November 
and the early part of December. 
At this “coming tcgether of nations” (1) at Brindavan Gar- 
dens, Mysore, nearly 70 educationists pooled their ideas, know- 
ledge and experience during 4 1/2 weeks and produced recom- 
mendations for an action programme which Unesco will coor- 
dinate and send out to all its Member States. 
In this space it is possible only to provide a brief outline of the 
enormously detailed elements of oy EE I 
the programme; and merely to 
suggest the far reaching effect 
which this programme can bring 
about. The four main divisions 
of the Seminar’s report are 
“Literacy”, “Health and Home 
Life’’, “Economic Aspects” and 
“Social Life and Citizenship”. 
These words imply vast and in- 
calculable changes In the lives 
of nearly half the inhabitants of 
the earth — and a consequent 
elevation in the standards of life 
for all men and women. 
Here, in brief, are some of the 
main conclusions of the four 
working groups into which the 
Seminar was divided : 
| RE renowned poet, Radindranath Tagore, once called on 
Practical Approach 
to Literaey 
ITERACY teaching is an 
I . acquired skill and needs 
teachers specially trained 
for the job. ‘Quick and easy’ Tiger's Pond: An Indian village of. 
The first task, after agreement 
on teaching methods, is to train 
instructors. This is urgent in 
Asian countries where the adult 
population is still largely iilite- 
rate. 
A midwife for every 5000 people; 
a health centre composed of a 
public health nurse, one or two 
midwives, a sanitary Inspector 
and a social worker for every 
10,000; a health unit composed 
of several centres and a dispen- 
sary under a medical officer for 
every 30,000. These are the mini- 
mum requirements for an ade- 
quate health service according to 
the study group on this basic 
problem of HEALTH AND HOME 
however small Every village, 
  
- 
hs sie TAN 
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
i/7     
  
“1 AM NOT TOO OLD TO LEARN” 
Devaji. who gained the highest mark in a Social Education test. 
councils and local boards dealing 
with the development of rural 
adult education and the formu- 
lating of policies affecting the 
home-life of a nation. The at- 
tention of governments which 
feel hesitant to initiate rural 
adult education programmes on 
a mass-scale owing to lack of 
workers, should be drawn to the 
vast untapped resources that can 
be found among university stu- 
dents and patriotic and socially 
minded adults. 
« Precious Fruit 
‘of the Earth » 
HE group specializing in the 
ECONOMIC ASPECTS of 
rural adult education stres- 
sed the fact that the low stan- 
dard of living in Asia is largely 
due to under-employment of tbe 
agricultural population. 
techniques still used in many 
countries have proved faulty and 
should not be employed, whatever 
superficially impressive results 
they may claim. 
The methods, although adapted 
to local conditions, should always 
be built on modern scientific 
principles. The most important of 
these is to teach reading through 
perception of ‘whole thought 
units, and not syllable-by-syllable 
or word-by-word. It is impera- 
tive that the contents of the 
teaching material should be use- 
ful and meaningful to pupils; the 
ordinary juvenile . are 
nonsensical to adults and tend 
to limit reading speed and make 
learning to read appear useless. 
These are some of the conclu- 
sions arrived at by the working 
group dealing with LITERACY. 
(1) 33 delegates from 18 coun- 
tries (all Asian except 3), 25 ob- 
servers from Indian States and 
Provinces, UN, WHO and FAO, 3 
Unesco experts, 4 group chairmen 
and administrative personnel from 
600 people whose roads are like 
rubbish heaps. In Mysore State 
alone there are 16,000 villages, some 
‘of the same standard as this, some. 
slightly more prosperous. Such 
sights impressed on all the educa- 
tionists at the Seminar a sense of 
urgency and impatience to put their 
action programme into effect. 
This group also emphasized the 
need for follow-up work in lite- 
racy teaching, the most important 
aspect of which is preparation 
and distribution of specially 
designed reading material. The 
readers’ interest must be caught 
and held by dealing with subjects 
of immediate concern to them, 
of practical importance to their 
daily lives. 
Distribution of the literature 
can be accomplished by setting 
up rural libraries founded on 
modern principles. Energy and 
ingenuity must be employed to 
get the right kind of reading into 
the hands of the people, so that 
it is not left on shelves in some 
 
    
  
   
    
   
    
The setting up of health 
units was recommended 
by the group dealing with 
Health and Home Life at 
the Mysore Seminar. Thou- 
sands of rural communities 
still lack minimum .requi- 
rements. Others on «a 
“self-help »” basis have 
provided basic necessities. 
At right: New Guinea 
native doctor-boys are 
applying a dressing. Mi- 
nor surgical jobs and 
dressings are carried 
out by the doctor-boys 
unaided. 
  
store-room ‘which bears the 
misnomer of library. 
the central Indian + Ministry of 
Education. 
  
Literacy is not the same as education, but rather a means of opening up 
the fields of education and of culture. In Asia, in much the same way 
as it was conserved throughout the centuries in Europe, a rich cultural 
heritage has been handed down by artists, philosophers, scholars and 
by men of religion. such as the Burmese Shan monk. shown in this photo. 
One of the aims of the work done at Mysore is to open up this heritage 
to the mass of the people. 
 
and poor, must have a local 
health service with its own ad- 
ministration and its own budget. 
This group formulated its re- 
commendations after a detalled 
study of home and health condi- 
tions in Asian rural communities. 
The problem of disease-breeding 
dirt was the dominating one in 
all the areas surveyed. Lack of 
cleanliness in cooking, sleeping 
and living quarters; lack of per- 
sonal cleanliness; absence of suf- 
ficient latrines and adequate 
drainage are all aspects of the 
same problem. 
Woman's Role in. 
Fight For Health 
alleviated through educa- 
and the prevalence 
tuberculosis and 
thus be 
A LI. these deficiencies can be 
tion; 
of malaria, 
other diseases «can 
reduced. 
The need for preventive medi- 
cine — at least as important as 
curative medicine — was stressed. 
Here, the rural community worker 
can play an important part, 
even if not specially trained in 
medicine. A minimum knowledge 
of individual and public health 
is part of the necessary equipment 
of each village worker. The 
position of the woman in the 
family must be improved and 
her work appreciated; she must 
be made the centre of all efforts 
for educating the family to 
healthier ways of living. 
Unesco was asked to make its 
member states aware of the im- 
portance of giving women more 
adequate representation on inter- 
national seminars, national 
 
It considered the following as 
appropriate means of creating 
fuller employment: ¢ A com- 
prehensive survey by experts: of 
the rural communities’ primary 
needs; establishment of rural or - 
cottage industries to meet these - 
needs in order of priority. In. 
industries, - the choice of such 
self-sufficiency of the village 
should first be aimed at — in 
general, no attempt should be 
made to compete with large-scale 
urban industries using mass- 
production methods’”’, To fur- 
ther achieve self-sufficiency, sub- 
sidiary occupations should be 
found, especially those that 
provide work during periods of 
seasonal unemployment. Train- 
ing «centres are required to 
teach the skills necessary for 
economic productions of good 
quality — these should also be 
community centres which can 
also serve as rural! marketing 
agencies. Co-operative organiza- 
tion is necessary for almost all 
cottage and rural industries, from 
financing to production and 
marketing. 
Unesco has been asked to 
collect and distribute to its 
member states all available infor- 
mation on cottage industries. 
«The teacher should not be 
like the merchant seeking goodly 
pearls, but like the husbandman 
who 'waiteth for the precious 
fruit of the earth and hath long 
patience of it”. This is one of 
the basic principles which the 
group considered should govern 
the approach to the economic 
uplift of rural communities. 
Begin where the people are and 
with what they have; teaching 
should reach down to the level 
of the poorest; no deserving 
person should be deprived of 
educational benefits by reason of 
poverty. 
‘Detailed reports of village comn- 
munity life in fifteen, mainly 
Asian, countries served as the 
background to the work of the 
group which dealf with SOCIAL 
LIFE AND CITIZENSHIP. They 
revealed certain [trends common 
to almost all rural communities, 
the most important of which is 
the isolation of the village. The 
village as a world of its own is 
undoubtedly a danger to the 
development of modern Asian 
countries. 
This study-group drew up 4a 
seven-point curriculum for citi- 
zenship training with these 
headings: Personal dignity and 
worth; respect and consideration 
for all human beings irrespective 
of social and economic status 
and political and religious affilia- 
tions; kinship with the commu- 
nity and cooperation in commu- 
nity activities; interdependence 
of the social, economic and cultu- 
ral life of the country as a whole; 
concept of one-world and its 
implications in terms of world 
citizenship; cultural and national 
heritage and unity in diversity; 
political rights and duties. 
It was stressed that a curricu- 
lum does not consist only of 
informational items to be taught, 
but also activities and experien- 
ces which give life and reality 
to them, Citizenship itself is a 
dynamic concept which expresses 
itself in activities. The group 
has therefore indicated suitable 
activities and experiences toge- 
ther with the information to be 
imparted. 
No Blind Belief 
in Modern Methods 
UCH time was spent on the 
study of media and me- 
thods in citizenship train- 
ing as outlined in the curriculum. 
Among the old traditional media 
considered were: festivals, fairs, 
pilgrimages to temples and tombs, 
ashrams, folklore folk dances and 
dramas, sport. These media of 
proved worth should not be dis- 
carded in a blind belief in the 
superiority of the modern mecha- 
nistic media such as press, radio 
and film. The new media can 
play a vital part in rural commu- 
nity education, but they must be 
handled with care, knowledge 
and skill. : 
Other recommendations were: 
In areas where the population 
is not yet enfranchised, local 
self-governing institutions should 
be introduced; every country 
should encourage the establish- 
ment of special agencies for the 
training of personnel and for 
production of literature and other 
aids for civic and social training 
in rural areas; Unesco should 
undertake the production of adult 
education literature and visual 
alds especially suited for Asian 
conditions; it should draw up 
specimen programmes for the co- 
ordinated and intensive use of 
mass media in the presentation 
of themes pertaining to adult 
and fundamental education; 
follow-up seminars on a regional 
and national 
organized. 
basis should be 
 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

- UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 
 
of History Textbooks.” 
nations and peoples.    
all but sacrilegious to think of “rewriting’’—yet it is just that task of rewriting 
history which is one of the main concerns of responsible educators in all countries. 
The job of correcting textbooks, and improving teaching methods; of deciding 
that this or that event is of greater or less importance, is truly an unending one. At this 
mid-point of the 20th century, more attention is being paid than ever before to the 
urgency of that task—whose importance is suggested by other stories on these pages. More 
recently recognized, but equally vital, is the proper teaching of geography, to make young 
people aware of the day-to-day interdependence of peoples. 
Accordingly, UNESCO has convoked two seminars, dealing with closely related aspects 
of the same job, to be held at the same time, in Brussels, Belgium, and at McGill University, 
Montreal, Canada. At Brussels, from July 12 to August 23, more than one hundred 
experts from many countries will discuss “The Improvement of Textbooks, Particularly 
Ji is often regarded as a fixed collection of standard facts, which it would be 
The principal aims of this group will be to increase the emphasis on the teaching of 
world history as the basis for national histories; to focus more attention on the construc- 
tive work of mankind, particularly through the great family of international organizations; 
to eliminate or at least reduce “jingoism’ and depr/catory statements about “foreign” 
Similar broad purposes will guide the experts meeting at Montreal on “The Teaching 
of Geography as a Means of Developing International Understanding.”   


### 74972: If you have three hand grenades...

“If you have three 
hand grenades..’ 
to read between 1933 and 1937. 
learned from his first school books 
that other boys had been born to 
be his slaves; that the lands of other 
men had been stolen from his fatherland; 
that the rightful victory of his country 
had somehow been “stolen” 10 or 14 
years before he was born. 
He was taught to burn the books that 
could have helped to save him and all 
mankind from what was to follow. 
In 1949, that boy and his surviving 
classmates were asked a series of questions 
by interviewers for the French Institute 
of Public Opinion. Here are some of the 
answers : 
A majority of German university 
students, aged 18 to 22, said Hitlerism 
still expresses the spirit of their nation 
and that it will return to power ; that 
there were -objective” causes for Nazi 
A boy in Germany, who first learned 
  
Robert Ley. the Nazi leader, once said: We 
begin with the child when it reaches the age 
of three. As soon as it begins to think, « 
little flag is placed in its hand.” After the war, 
the healing of wounded minds was an impera- 
tive task. In the French Zone of Germany. 
production of revised text-books had reached 
4.000.000 volumes by 1947. Shown above 
is a demonstration class in the Teachers 
College at Stuttgart, in the U.S. Zone where 
teachers study modern methods and receive 
guidance from specialists. 
race prejudices; thay the Allied powers 
had no right to try men as war criminals, 
and that they have no right to enforce 
de-Nazification of the country. 
From the first day of their schooling, 
the minds of these young men and thuir 
contemporaries in Italy and Japan had 
been flogged by slogans: 
“BELIEVE, OBEY AND FIGHT. 
WAR IS LIFE!.. THE STATE IS THE 
ONLY REAL BEING... THE LEADER IS 
ALWAYS RIGHT!. A BOOK AND A 
MUSKET !.. WAR IS THE FATHER OF 
CREATION AND THE MOTHER OF 
CULTURE.” 
Even their elementary arithmetic books 
had problems like this : “If one of our 
bombers... If one of our soldiers... If you 
have three hand grenades...” 
Finding the Happy Medium 
NE must not infer from this that 
only the former Axis powers have 
been guilty of bias in their textbooks. 
In the school histories of nearly every 
_ ceuntry, “we” have fought purely to 
" defend justice and civilization, and 
“they” have had only sordid motives. 
“We” have generally won — or lost — 
against “overwhelming odds”. 
The history of cooperative efforts to 
remove bias from schoolbooks records 
victories of a better kind. It was natural 
enough that soldiers returning to their 
countries after World War I should have 
been revolted by schoolbooks which 
glorified war, and that they led in efforts 
for reform. It was natural, too, for 
Anatole France to oversimplify the pro- 
blem, in addressing a Congress of French 
Elementary School Teachers at Tours in 
1919: 
“BURN THE BOOKS WHICH TEACH 
HATRED! BURN THEM ALL!” 
Gradually the negative approach gave 
way to positive action, as teachers 
within their own countries worked to im- 
prove teaching materials. Increasingly 
they arrived at certain common conclu- 
sions : 
In history books it was important tur 
writers to eliminate flat falsifications ot 
fact, but also to become aware of and 
eliminate their own unconscious bias and 
prejudice. War as a topic was greatly 
over-emphasized — taking up more than 
30 per cent of most textbooks — but it 
was realized that an arbitrary “de- 
emphasis” could distort truth as badly as 
the prevailing jingoism. 
It was agreed that new and revised 
textbooks should contain more informa- 
tion about the building of cities, the de- 
velopment of inventions, the expansion of 
industry, the spreading of railroads and 
the peaceful trading between nations. It 
was felt to be very important to devote 
more attention to the history of inter- 
rational peace organizations. 
Mutual Fairness 
In School Books 
UT how, for example, could even the 
most conscientious historian elimi. 
nate his own “unconscious bias” ? 
The answer was found in making their 
studies international. 
 
Children throughout Europe, with intimate memories of war, are likely to produce 
the ugly shapes of bombs instead of flowers, when asked to draw a garden ; to depict 
a demon torturing mankind, when asked to illustrate “life to-day”’ The examples above 
ing for mutual fairness in school books. 
The first such treaty was signed by the 
Argentine and Brazil in 1933. 
The most comprehensive job of all was 
accomplished by the Norden Societies of 
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and 
Sweden, from 1919 onwards. Working in 
close consultation, the Societies studied 
compared and revised all the history 
books used in their schools — to provide 
factual and non-provocative material 
about these countries and the past rela- 
tions between them. All proposed new 
history texts are now submitted to all 
the Norden Societies. 
On the initiative of Germain teachers, 
  
How German seven-yeur-olds were taught arithmetic in 1936. After being shown the number of 
aeroplanes in a flight. @ squadron and a wing, the children were asked : "How many planes in - 
$ squadrons ? in 2, 4, 6. squadrons ? Three wings make a group. How many planes in a group ? ” 
Considerable perspective was gained on 
the War of 1812 when the Canada-United 
States Committee on Education made a 
jeint study of U.S. textbooks which 
described it as a fight fcr “freedom of 
the seas” and of Canadian books which 
spoke of it as “a stab in the back... dell- 
vered when Britain was fighting for the 
freedom of the world”. 
Similar groups worked in the same way 
to improve understanding among a 
number of Latin American countries. 
Where governmental authority over the 
school system permitted, formal treaties 
were agreed to between countries provid- 
THIS IS WHAT 
“EDUCATION “ HAS BEEN 
From the SONGBOOK of a German 
Day Nursery, 1933: 
« We believe our leader, 
We live for our leader 
And die for our leader 
Until we are heroes. » 
From “WE LEARN TO READ”, 
a first grade primer, 1933: 
« When the Fuehrer commands, we 
soldiers go to war. Our Fuehrer does 
not want to make war at all, but the 
enemy forces him to do so. There is 
no staying at home for a true soldier. 
| want to gc as well. »     
French and German histcrians met in 
Paris in 1935 and reached agreement on 
39 disputed points about Franco-German 
relations from 1789 through the signing 
of the Locarno Pact in 1925. Where 
complete agreement was impossible, they 
took note of each other's reservations. 
An extensive programme for encourag- 
ing revision of books in the two countries 
was agreed to, but the German Govern- 
ment withdrew support for the project 
and the findings were disavowed. 
Many studies were stimulated by the 
International Institute on Intellectual 
Cooperation, whose work for textbook 
revision was jointly supported by the 
French Government and the League of 
Nations. The signing of international 
treaties was encouraged, but it was found 
that the educational systems of the larger 
countries were too decentralized to be 
bound by such treaties. In other words 
— international understanding by pupils 
had to be reached through international 
understanding among the teachers, his- 
torians and writers. 
The Real Fruits . 
Of Civilization 
URES has taken on a leading role 
in the fight for better understanding 
through better textbooks. In 1946. 
the Preparatory Commission of Unesco 
published “LOCKING AT THE WORLD 
THROUGH TEXTBOOKS”. Since then, 
Unesco has done many things, among 
them the following : 
1. It has distributed to all Member States 
copies of “A MODEL PLAN FOR THE 
ANALYSIS AND IMPROVEMENT OF 
TEXTBOOKS AS AIDS TO INTERNA- 
TIONAL UNDERSTANDING”. This 
work, prepared by Dr. I. James Quillen, 
of Stanford University provides a large 
number of practical proposals for the 
“TESTING” of books and encouraging 
higher standards of writing and s€lec- 
tion. 
2. Unesco has encouraged special studies 
by Member States of the treatment in 
their own textbooks of agencies of 
international cooperation, from the 
founding of the League of Nations to 
the present. ; 
3. The Organization has given specific 
assistance to nations, groups and indi- 
viduals working on projects for text- 
book improvement. In this connection, 
Unesco has recently published “A 
HANDBOOK FOR THE IMPROVE- 
MENT OF TEXTBOOKS AND TEACE- 
ING MATERIALS”, 
As such work progresses, fewer and 
fewer young people will be trained to 
believe they were born to avenge ima- 
ginary “historic wrongs” and that flame- 
throwers and dive bombers are the finest 
fruits of civilization. 
More and more of them will understand 
that the reality of history lies in such 
dramatic fights as that of the Food and 
Agriculture Organization against starva- 
tion ; of the World Health Organization 
against plagues; of the United Nations, 
Unesco, the International Civil Aviation 
Organization, International Postal Union 
— and a score of others — for a better 
world. 
To-day, millions of boys and girls are 
learning to read and the race is on — 
to give them books which will encourage 
them to build and not to destroy. 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

  E— 
are the work of German children, and vividly illustrate the seed for mental reconstruc- 
tion. 
most imperative. 
HE Ti gr ’ 
FACTS 
Of the many aspects of re-education. the revision of textbooks is one of the 
To this work. needed in all countries, Unesco is giving practical aid. 


### 74973: Facts replace fancy Japanese schoolbooks

REPLACE FANCY 
"IN JAPANESE SCHOOLBOOKS 
i provided the much needed opportu- 
: nity to implant in Japanese children 
I! h 
To end of the war in the Far East 
a truer appreciation of the indivi- 
dual as a human being and to give them 
a mcre realistic picture of their own 
country in relation to other nations. 
“The first essential task was to reform 
the teaching of history, for this subject 
had been much disterted in the books in 
use at that time. These books had been 
issued in 1943 and were written from a 
militaristic viewpoint. 
Japan's new textbcoks are no longer 
illustrated with Samurais on horseback 
and gods descending from the heavens. 
Instead, they show works of art, popular 
scenes, or schelars and scientists at 
work. 
‘In one, for instance, is the story of 
Fenellosa, the foreign art critic, whe, 
tewards the end of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, fought against the destruction by 
the Japanese themselves cf relics of 
Japan's artistic past. 
The new texts stress the importance of 
mecdern rather than ancient times. The 
crigin cof the Japanese race is no longer 
explained by legends of ancient mytho- 
logy, but in the light of the scientific 
findings of anthropologists and archae- 
ologists. 
Instead cof learning the episodes of the 
clan warfare of feudal times, children are 
taught the history of their country’s 
civil administration, that cf navigation 
and of the development of popular insti- 
tuticns. Instead of speaking abecut the 
aggressive policy of European nations, the 
new history bcoks explain the decline of 
the Samurais, the democratic evolution 
of the Meiji era, and the cultural evolu- 
ticn of modern Japan. 
The cld textbooks go nc further than 
the celebration of the 2,600th anniver- 
sary of the empire (1940 in the Christian 
calendar): the new cnes include the 
attack upon Pear] Harbour and stress the 
importance ef the Emperor’s radio speech 
in which he announced Japan’s uncondi- 
ticnal surrender. 
The history becok ends with these 
words “The advent of the military 
clique brought misery to Japan and 
dragged the nation to war”. 
Written in a Spoken Language 
~N this way, the interest of Japanese 
I children is being turned from martial 
matters to scientific and cultural 
subjects. By studying ancient tombs and 
fossils, they learn how their ccuntry 
originated and developed. 
Studying the history of their people 
within the general pattern of world his- 
tory widens the cultural horizon of these 
children, so that they gradually become 
aware of Japan's place in the world as 
a whole. 
They are beginning too to use their 
powers of discrimination, to establish 
parallels between the culture of ancient 
Japan and that of Persia and Arabia. 
They are taught to develop their indi- 
viduality and critical sense by answering 
sets of questions at the end of each 
chapter of their history books. 
Ancther important reform is that these 
textbooks are now written in the 
“spoken” language. This language, 
simpler than the classical vocabulary 
which includes Chinese and compound 
Sinc-Japanese words, is more easily 
understood by children. So 
Historians With Fresh Vision 
Te new textbooks, therefore, teach the 
children to see history in a new light: 
when speaking of the sixteenth cen- 
tury, for example, they no longer refer 
cnly to the subject of feudal unification ; 
they also tell of the first contacts with 
the cutside world through Christianity 
and cf trade with Helland and Portugal. 
Finally the old chronology based upon 
the reigns of the different emperors has 
been abolished. Each emperor was given 
a pcsthumous name and the dates were 
established in relation to each reign. 
Teday, Japanese textbooks use the 
Christian calendar s2 as to enable 
parallels to be drawn with the history 
of other nations. 
In this way, historic and intellectual 
iscldaticn is being abolished. 
Efferts are being made to introduce for 
scheol study the works of Japanese 
scholars which would have a far greater 
value than those hitherto employed. One 
of the most suitable of these books is 
“The Yamato Era”, which was inspired 
by H. G. Wells’ “Outline of World 
History”. 
This work deals with the creation of the 
world and with Japanese anthropology 
and archaeology, starting with the story 
cf the Ainus, a white race which origi- 
nally occupied the country. 
Japan’s increasingly broad-minded and 
sccially conscicus h'sterians are daily 
expanding their cwn vision of the world, 
as they gain access to new sources for 
research and study. The children of 
Japan, and cof a'l lands, are deriving 
benefit from this improved vision. 
~encies in 
or separate. 


### 74974: UNESCO seminars: a new approach to world history

ANEW 
APPROACH 
T0 WORLD 
HISTORY 
NE of the aims of {ruly inlernational 
thinkers is thal history should be 
       
written and faught as a global 
subject. The story of man's strug- 
gle up lo his present stage of culiure 
stlould be told in context of the whole 
study of human history. 
This is not a new idea. Suggestions 
for revising history texibooks were agreed 
upon shorfly after the First World War 
when experts cited the faet that a third 
of most history hooks was devoted to the 
study of wars. Scliemes for such revision 
have been under way for many Years, and 
have been carried out with good results 
between Scandinavian couniries, Canada 
and the United States, between several 
Latin-American nations, and on a limited 
scale, between some European countries, 
It should be noted that these agreements 
for the revision of history teaching took 
place before World War II. 
We can still say truthfully that history- 
teaching is improving. Bul it is a slow 
process to reduce ultra-nationalistic tend- 
both writing and teaching 
history. A child can be taught to regard 
history as an account of the evolution of 
customs and {raditions. Ile can learn 
something of peaceful developments 
without losing sight of the destruction 
caused by wars. 
There are many distinguished inlerna- 
tional authorities on education who believe 
the basic principles for teaching history 
should be changed. Some of these people 
met recently at Unesco Ilouse, in Paris, to 
consider draft outlines of a handbook for 
history teaching which may bring aboul 
this change. The history instruction 
handbook will be printed first, next Sum- 
mer, after if is analyzed by a seminar on 
textbook improvement ai Brussels. 
Since The Time Of 
Thucydides 
Tx drafl outline for this work was pre- 
pared for the Unesco meeting by 
Mme. M. T. Maurette, of the Inter- 
national School of Geneva, setting forth 
some ideas on the teaching of history 
which might help harassed teachers to 
present a balanced interpretation of 
human events. She agrees with Paul 
Valéry, who felt thal history-teaching 
which encourages mistrust of all “foreign- 
ers” is so bad from the world harmony 
viewpoint that it might be better if history 
were not taught at all 
“Since {he time of Thucydides the 
writing of history has been a continual 
striving toward the truth”, her outline 
states. “But whercas he {ried to esta- 
blish it for his small world of Grecce, we 
must now try to establish it for the whole 
world.” 
Mme. Maurette would like lo slow up 
the process of history inslruetion for the 
voung. and limit a child's study lo “pre- 
paralory” work before thw age of [2 
Initially. a student would concenlratle 
upon the history and international deve- 
lopment of foods, clothes. habitation. 
transportation, and the 
among children of all the world. Concen- 
tration upon these “cenires of interest” 
replaces the old system of administering 
large and rather indigestible doses of 
dates and trends. Then pre-history would 
follow, including comparative study of 
living primitive peoples. teaching the child 
how our species came lo its present state 
of culture. In early adolescence (he 
pupil should begin lo study his national 
history. and world history, either combined 
~- Am “Eye-Opener, 
For Children 
N each ease. Mme. Maurelle emphasized, 
instruction should adhere firmly to a 
policy of showing “the increasing in- 
ter-dependence of the peoples of the world 
in cultural, technical, economic and poli- 
lical fields”, and of making children 
aware of “prejudices. intolerance, and 
national selfishness. and of the necessity 
te overcome them”. Specific lteacher- 
methods were included for the classroom 
on cach of her points. 
Under this system the feaching of 
hislory would be carefully graded {o match 
the progressive development of the pupils’ 
capacity for undersianding. 
Adopting the general oullines of these 
suggestions, the experts at Unesco House. 
who had come from six different coun- 
fries, added the following suggestion in 
the further hope of safeguarding the 
history student of the future:   
modes of play | 
Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 
SEMINARS 
A special section shondd be included, 
called Aims and Purposes to stress “cultu- 
ral interpenetration, the imporlance of «a 
balanced presentation of the contributions 
of different parts of the world, an under- 
standing of foreign relations, the impor- 
tance of the teacher's altitude... 
And finally an emphasis on “the absence 
in the classroom of uny lendency to ridi- 
cde other groups”. 
“tIn short, let's have a teaching of history 
that is adapted to the mental and psyeho- 
logical development of the child and 
which at the same time helps lo open his 
eves fo the world. 
A HANDBOOK 
FOR THE 
IMPROVEMENT OF 
TEXTBOOKS 
AND 
TEACHING 
MATERIALS 
« AS AIDS TO INTERNATIONAL UNDERSTANDING 
provided its Member States with a 
basic guide for their textbook impro- 
vement activities. 
I N producing this Handbook, Unesco has 
First major publication of TUnesco's 
Textbook Improvement Project, it follows 
a previous booklet, Looking at the World 
Through Textbeoks (“Les Livres de Classa 
et la Découverte du Monde”) published 
in 
The first part of the Handbook tells the 
story of efforts to improve textbooks, 
beginning after the first World War when 
the movement “took on the spirit of a 
crusade, with teachers organizations and 
peace societies in the vanguard. 
During this period, the League of 
Nations had its International Institute of 
Intellectual Co-operation working on the 
problem, and in Scandinavia, the Norden 
Association developed its unofficial system 
of criticizing history textbook manuscripts. 
And there were deczens of other private 
groups working to make textbooks into 
instruments of peace. 
Part Two of the book outlines Unesco’s - 
programme for textbook improvement, 
and gives a Medel Plan which suggests 
techniques of analysis : It also includes a 
specific proposal ‘0 Member States that 
they begin by increasing their textbook 
coverage of the United Nations and other 
international agencies which have existed 
since 1918. 
A set of recommendations, varied 
enough to suit the conditions found in 
all Unecco’s Member States are contained 
in Part Three, as well as a bibliography 
of books and articles in eight languages 
which provides ample material on the 
background of the textbook revision move- 
ment. Finally, two appendices reproduce 
the texts of “textbook” treaties between 
different countries and the League of Na- 
tions’ famous Casares Resolution of 1526 
together with its later amendments. 
The major part of the publication was 
prepared by Dr. I. James Quillen, Profes- 
sor of Fducation at Stanford University 
(U.S.A), during his year’s _service in 
Unesco’s Department of Education, 
editorial assistance being given by 
Mr. George H. Kelly, formerly of the 
Department of Political Science at Stan- 
ford University, who prepared the chapter - 
on textbook treaties. 
This Unesco Handbook, whose present 
Englih language edition will be followad 
in March by one in French, will serve as 
a “bible” for Member States and edu- 
cators who are active in textbook impro- 
vement. :

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 
ADULT EDUCATION. Apr. 10, July 
1, 6, 7, Sept. 23, Nov. 5, 19. 
— Elsinore, Int'l Conf. Apr. 
July 1, 6, 7, Nov. 5. 
— See : Seminars : Delhi, My- 
sore. Petropolis. 
AFGHANISTAN. Feb. 11, Dec. 9. 
AGREEMENT to facilitate the int’} 
circul. of visual and audi- 
tory equipment. March C, 
June 9, Sept. 19, 27, Oct. 
12. 
— Intl circul. of publications, 
June 9, Sept. 19 
— See : GATT. 
AGRICULTURE. Apr. 1, 5, & June 
8. 
— Farming. new methods, Apr. 
5, 
— See : FAO, Haiti, Mysore. 
AMERICA. Art in Central. Sept. 32. 
AMERICAN Stares, Organisation of. 
(OAS), Jan 3 
AMERICANISTS. New 
gress. Nov. 22. 
ANTHROPOLOGISTS, int'l organiz. 
of. March 2, Sept. 2, 28, 
Nov. 14. 
ARABIC Classics. March C. 
ARCHIVES int'les (’hist. des scieq- 
ces. Apr. 11. 
-- See : Photographic. 
"ARID ZONES, Inst. int’l of. Febr. 
2, Nov. 5, Jan. 9 
ART CRITICS. Aug. 12. 
ART (S) and Letters. March C, 
Sept. 15, 30, Nov. 3 
— Cité des. June 12. 
— ‘Council, a Colonial. Sept. 21. 
— Art films. Jan. 6, 7. 
— In Central America. Sept. 32. 
— In Education. Dec. 11. 
_— ~ nll Review of. Nov. 16. 
— Malina’s pastel. Emotlonalism 
in Science, Aug. 
—- Revival in India, May 8. 
~— See : Filin. Folk-lore. Irec- 
dom of the Artist. Monn- 
ments. Music. Photogri- 
phic Archives. Visual Arts. 
ASSISTANCE to under-developed 
areas. See : Technical. 
AUSTRALIA. offers to aid wur- 
wrecked museums ; March 
. — Nolan, Sidney. 
AUSTRIA. Feb. 1. 
AVICENNA. Sept. 6, 
BACH, J. 8. Jan. 3. 
BAEZ, Martinez. Nov. 20. 
BALZAC. Jan. 3. 
BEEBY, C. E., Honorary Counsel- 
lor. Jan. 3, Feb. I1, 
Sept. 22, Nov. 9. 
BELGIUM, Int'l Theaire 
Feb. 4. 
York. Con- 
Jan. ti. 
Jan. 3. 
Inst. 
— Children’s Villages. Feb. 9. 
BIBLIOGRAPHICUS, Index. Nov. 
16. 
BIDAULT, Georges. I'eb. 4. 
BLIND Persons. Braille. Nov. 3, 6. 
BOHR, Niels. March 1, jul 7. 
BOOK (8S) Cheap. Aug. 
— Book Coupon Sc jeme, Mareh 
3, C, June 3, 9, Aug. 7, 
sept. 19, Nov. 2, ‘8 
— Extension to films and io 
scientif. equipment. Nov. 
5, 8. 
— Obtainable through Science 
Co-op. OMf.. June 9. 
— Exchange Centres. March 3. 
— See: Children. Textbooks. 
BOOK of Needs. Volume 1L 
March 6. 
BOYD-ORR, Lord. 
BRAILLE. Nov. 5. 
Aug. 5 
BRAZIL. Records of the best 
Brazilian poets. June 9. 
— See : Quitandinha, Inter- 
American Seminar. 
BUDDHA. May 1. 
BUDGET. Feb. 2, 9, Apr. 1, 4, 
July 2, Aug. 10, Sept. 13, 
15, Nov. <3. 
— Devaluation measures. Nov. 
— for 1950. Sept. 13, 15, Nov. 
3, July 2. 
BURMA. Member State. June 9 
— Reconstruction. Feb. 9. 
Vie . 
CALDER, Ritchie. Aug. 6. 
CANADA. Book Coupon Scheme 
and Exch. Centres. Mareh 
3. : 
— Canadian Council for Re- 
construction througaia 
Unesco. Feb. 9, June 9. 
"National Film Board. Oct. 12 
Nov. 10 
CARE. Co-operative for American 
Remittances 10 Europe. 
Apr. 2. 
CARNEIRV, Prof. Paulo de Bei- 
redo. Aug. 2. 
CASSOU, Jean, March 2. 
CATALOGUE of colour reproduc- 
tions (1860 10 1949). 
March 2, Aug. 12, Nov. 16. 
- — See : Exhibition. Recorded 
Music. 
CHANDRASEKHAH, S. 
Apr. 9, May 9. 
Feb. 10, 
CHILDREN, Feb. I, 3, 6, 7, 8, 
12. March’ B, Sept. 
Nov. 9, Jan. 9. See : China’ 
. Europe. Greece. Middie 
~ East. Spanish. 
— Broadeasting Stories Tor. 
Jan. 3. 
— Comic Strips. Feb. 12, Api. 
4, Aug. 8 
— Homeless. Feb. 1, 3, 6, 7, 
Nov. 23. 
— 1FCC. Int’! Fed. of Children’s 
Communities. Feb. 9. 
Intl Montessori congress. 
Nov. 17. 
— Little teacher System in 
China. March 8 
— Magic Carpet for. Dec. 10. 
— Photo Story, Children of 
Europe. Feb. 1, 5, 6, 7, 
Dec. 10. 
-— Problem of Child Vagrant. 
Charleroi Conf. Nov. 23. 
— Science Books for. Jan. 8. 
— Children’s Villages. Feb. 9, 
10, May 4, June, Jo, July 3 
Aug. 9, Sept. 2 
— See : tetert 20 
UNAC. UNICEF. 
CHILE. Helping University, 
§2. 
" Schools. 
Feb. 
CHINA, Educational Missions in. 
Feb. 11, Nov. 5. 
— Engineering education- 
al equipment. Dec. 5. 
— «Little teacner’ against Tlli- 
.teracy. March 8. 
—- McLaren in. Oct. 12. 
— Reconstruction Fund, Int'l 
Nov. 4, 15. 
CHOPIN, Frederic. Scholarships. 
Recordings and Concert. 
A Tribute to. Feb. 4, June 
12, Sept. 31, Nov. 16. 
CIER, Council f. int'l Educ. Re- 
constr. In U. S. Feb. 9. 
CITE DES ARTS, Paris. June 12. 
CIVILIZATION, Foundations of. 
Apr. 
-— See : Americanists. Central 
America. Folk Arts. Philo- 
sophy. Translations, Index 
translationum. 
CI.ASSICAL studies, 
Sept. 5. 
CLASSICS. Translations of. Maren 
C, Dec. 4, Jan. 10.° } 
National Com- 
and Unesco. 
CLEVELAND. See : 
missions. U. 
CLUBS. Young  fentisia’ Aug. 4, 
Nov. 15. 
COLOMBIA. Assoc. Project In 
Viani. March 5, Sept. 22. 
COLOUR Reproductions of Pain- 
ting. See Catalogue. 
Exhibition. Travel 
hng Print. Masacclo, 
Album. 
COMIC STRIPS. Feb. 12, Apr. 4. 
Aug. 8. 
COMMUNICATIONS. Sept, 15, Nov 
: Exchange of Persous. 
Mass Communications. 
COMPETITIONS. In schools. Essay 
and Poster. March 2, 
Sept. 23, Jan. 1. 5. 
COMPTON, Dr. A. March. 7. 
CONFERENCE, General. Paris. 
Sent. 13, Oct. 1, 3, Nov. 
3. 
— See. 
4, 
— Balinée ‘sheet of a, Nov. 1, 
— Florence 1950. Nov. 2, 4, 5. 
— Int'l Student Group. Nov. 20. 
— Organization of Work. Sept, 
13. 
CONFUCIUS. 2.500th Anniversary. 
Jan. 3. 
CONSTITUTION, Unesco’s. Oct. 1) 
CONVENTIONS. Int’l. See : Agree- 
ment. Copyright. 
COPYRIGHT. March C, Aug. 4, 
Nov. 5. 
COUNCIL of Europe. Jan. 3. 
CROCE, Benedetto. Aug. 11. 
CULTURAL Activities. Aug. 9, 
15, Nov. 3, 16. 
CULTURE and Technology. March 
1, A, Apr. 1. 
— Czech Plan. Aug. 9. 
— of various countries 
their relationship 
others. Nov. 5. 
— Protection of Local. July 11. 
— See : Adult Education, Elsi- 
nore Conf. Cultural Acti- 
vities. Duties of the state. 
Newsprint. 
Sept. 
and 
with 
CURRENCIES. June 9, Sept. 8. 
See : GATT. 
CUSTOMS. Reducing Economic 
Obstacles. June 3, Sept. 7, 
19, Nov. 3, 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. Book Coupon 
Scheme. March 3. 
— Czech Five-Year Plan. Aug. 
DAVIS, Watson. March. 4, Aug. 5. 
DELHI. Seminar. May 3, Nov. 16. 
DEMOCRACY. What is it. May if, 
Aug. 8. 
— See : ‘Terminology, Scienti- 
fic. 
DEMOGRAPHY. See : Food and 
People. 
DENMARK. Folk High School Mo- 
vement. July 6. 
DESERT. See : Arid Zones. 
DESMOND R. W. Feb. 2. 
DIRECTOR- JENERAL Feb. 2, 3, 
10, Sept. 16, 
— Ann. Rep. on the Activities 
of Unesco. 1948, Feb. 2; 
1949, Sept. 16, 17. 
DRZEWIESKI, B. Nov. 11. 
DUTIES OF THE STATE. July |, 
Sept. 1, 13, Oct. 4, Nov. 6, 
ECONOMIC Commissions. Europe, 
Asia, Jar East. June 3, 
Sept. 7 
ECONOMISTS int'l organiz. of. 
Sept. 28 
CUMULATIVE INDEX TO 
Ll ON x - ul 
1, July 10, 
Aug. 10, Sept. 3. 
— Unesco Report to United 
Nations. Aug. 10, Sept. 3. 
— See : Technical Aid Plan. 
ECUADOR. Earthquake, Nov. 4, t1. 
— Human Rights Day. Feb. 3. 
EDUCATION. Budget and Pro- 
gramme. Sept. 15, 22, Nov. 
3, 9. 
— Cut Frontier Barriers to 
Exchange. June 3. 
— Denmark. Folk High School. 
July 6. 
ECOSUC. March B, Apr. 
— France, ann. Seminar. Se- 
vres. Dec. 8. 
— India. May 6, 7. 
— Intl Conf. on Public Edii- 
cation, Geneva. May 2, 
Aug. 2. 
— Int'l Educational Fund. Apr. 
—_ Missions, Educational. Feb. 
1, Nov. it, March B, Apr. 
H. ~ 
—— Training of Teachers. Feb. 
July 10. 
K. Ann. Conf. of the “Nat. 
~ Union of Teachers. May I. 
— See : Adult. Elementary. Hu- 
man rights. IBE. Radio. 
Reconstruction. Seminars. 
Technical. Television. 
Book Coupon Scheme. 
Sept. 19. } 
EINSTEIN, Albert. March 1, 7. 
EISENHOWER, Milton S. Apr. 2. 
ELEMENTARY Education. July 10. 
Nov. 5. 
ELTON, A. Aug. 7. 
EMERGENCY Action. 
Nov. 3, 4, ii. 
EPIDEMICS. Bulletin, Feb. 12. 
EQUIPMENT. See : Mass Commu- 
nications ‘and Education 
Materials. 
EUROPE, heen of. Feb. 1, 5, 
, 9, 12, June 10. 
— See : Economic Commis- 
sions. Council of. } 
EXCHANDE of Persons. March C 
Aug. 4, Sept. ho 15, 26, 
7, Nov. 3, 5, 10. 
— Between the United States 
and other Countries. 
Roads to Peace. Sept. 26. 
— Young Scientists Clubs. Aug. 
— U. 
EGYPT. 
Sept. 24, 
— See : Study Abroad. Inter- 
national Handbook of Fel- 
lowships. 
EXCHANGE OF EXHIBITIONS and 
Collections. Nov. 5 
EXCHANGE OF PUBLICATIONS. 
June 11, Sept. 14. 
EXECUTIVE BOARD. Feb. 3, July 
2, Sept. 14, Nov. 4, Jan. :. 
EXHIBITIONS. Colour reproduc- 
tions. Travelling. Aug. 12. 
— Catalogue of Travelling 
Exhibition. Aug, 12 
— Human Rights, usee Gal- 
liera. Sept. 9, Oct. 5, 6, 7. 
— Levant Fair. Nov. 10. 
-— Munch, Edvard. Aug. 12. 
Municipal Museum of Ams- 
terdam. Dec. 2. 
-— Sidney Nolan. Jan. 11. 
— See 
: tions and Collections. 
FAO. Feb. 10, Apr.-2, 9, June 2, 
Aug. 6, Sept. 
— Hot 1 Springs, Foundation of. 
Aug. 6. 
FASCISM and National-Socialism. 
studies of their philoso- 
phic bases. Nov. 
FAWTIER, Robert. Mar. 2. 
FELLOWSHIPS. See : Study 
Abroad. 
FIELD Science Co-op. Off. See : 
Science. : 
FILM (S), technical needs of. 
March C, Nov. 5, 11. 
—_— Association, wr "Scientific. 
Jan. 7. 
— Canadian National Fil 
Board. Nov. 10. 
— Educational. Apr. 4, Aug. 7, 
Jan. 6, 7. a. 
re Extension of Book Coupon 
Scheme to. Nov. 5, 
— Festival, washington. "June 
— Fundamental Education in 
China. Oct. 12. 
— Indian. May 8. 
— Popular scientific. 
7, Jan 
— Projectors, Tow priced. Nov, 
Aug. 6 
5. 
FISHERIES, Sept. 2. 
FLORENCE, -Seat of Unesco Confe- 
rence 1950. Nov. 24. 
FOLK ART and traditions. Nov. 23, 
Dec. 3, Jan. 5. 
FOLK LORE, a Tale from American 
Indian. Jan. 5. 
FOOD and People. Feb. 10, March 
, Apr. 4, 5, 6, 7,8, 9, 
a) y 12, Aug. 6, 
Sent. 3, 7. 11, 28, Nov. 15, 
— Articles and pamphlets. 
. Sept. 11. : 
— Famine threatens man. Sept. 
i. 
— Food Production since War 
Apr. 6. 
— How the soil vanishes. July 
— Latin America. Nov. 15. 
— Mal-Nourishéd "Population. 
Aug. 
— Netherlands. Nov. 15. 
The Story of Antonio 
Arango. July 12. 
RS ad J = SRS 
HANDLER, 
) Apr 
Exchange of Exhibi- - 
N.B. — Numbers in Index refer to pages. — 
3 i —— — rT a = 
2d i Bes id de ha LR ee WEBS ee 
— The Way Out. Apr. 7. ICAO: Int'l" Civil Aviation. org. 
— United Kingdom. Nov. 15. June 2. 
— VUnited Nations, Technical 1COM. intl Council of Museums. 
Aid Plan, Priority for : Sept. 
food. Sept. 3. 
-— See : Fisheries. 
FRANCE, Book Coupon Scheme. 
March 3. 
-— Human Rights Day. Feb. 3. 
— Intl Theatre Institute. Feb. 
-— Int'l University of the Air. 
Feb. . 
— Sevres. ann. Seminar of Di- 
rectors of Secondary Edu- 
cation. Dec. 8. 
-— See : Children’s Villages. 
FREE Circulation of Publications. 
June 9, Sept. 19. See : 
Agreement. 
FREEDOM of the Artist. Sept 3i. 
FREE FLOW, of Cultural Equip- 
ment. Sept. 8. : 
Agreement. 
— Flow of Information. March 
C, Sept. 7, 8, 19 
— Movement J Persons. Sept. 
18. See : Study Abroad. 
FRISCH, Hartvig. July 6. 
FUNDAMENTAL Education. aren 
5, 8, June 5, 6, 7, 8, July 
10, Nov. 5, 9, 19 Dee. 1, 
6, 7. Jan. 3. ro Soe 
GANDHI, Mahatma. May 5, Oct. 7. 
GATT. General Agreement on Ta- 
riffs and Trade, Annecy. 
June 3, Sept. 19. 
GEODESY and Geophysics, Un. of. 
Jan. 9. 
GEOGRAPHY and int’]l understand- 
ing. May 2, Sept. 22, Nov. 
5, Dec. 10. 
GERMANY. May 3, June 3, Sept. 9, 
14, Nov. 18. 
— Book Exchange Centre. May 
-— Ex German Libraries in 
: Italy. June 3 
GOETHE. Aug. 1, 11. 
GRANTS - IN - AID to scientific 
unions. Sept. 10, Nov. 5. 
GREECE. Refugees. Feb. 1, July fi, 
Oct. 11, Nov. 13. 
HADAMARD, Jacques. 
HAITI, Pilot Project. 
7, 8, Nov. 5. 
Joseph. 
| 
March. 7. 
June 5, 6, 
March. 6, 
HEALTH, Epidemics Bulletin. Feb. 
12, Apr. 1. 
— Mental. March 6. 
— Rajkumari Amrit Kaur. In- 
dia’s Minister of. Sept. 21. 
-— See : Medical, WHO. 
HENDERSON, James L. June 11. 
HISTORY, “ Most of the World ". 
Natural and political. Sept. 
-— of Mankind. Scientific and 
cultural. Nov. 16. 
— Textbooks, Improvement of, 
See : Seminars 1950. 
— See : ‘Archives. Monuments. 
Science. 
HOEG, Carsten. Sept. 5. 
HUMAN Factors, 
lity. July 6, 7. 
HUMANISM. See : Classical Stu- 
dies. 
HUMANISTIC Studies. See : Phi- 
losophy and. 
HUMAN RIGHTS. Feb. 3, 8, March 
C, D, Apr. it, Sept. 9, 
Oct. t, 5, 6, 7, Nov. 13, 
21, Jan. 4, 11. 
— Articles of the Universal 
Declaration. Oct. 6, 7, 
(Loose Page). 
— Day. 10th December, Feb. 3, 
Jan. 4. 
— Essays. Apr. 11, 
— In Switzerland. 10th Decem- 
ber, Jan. ii. 
— Lake Success, Photographic 
Display. Nov. 13. 
— Musce Galliera, Paris. Sept. 
9, Oct. 5, 6, 7, Nov. 21. 
— Solemn Consecration in 
Sorbonne. March D. 
— Story of. Feb. 3. 
— Symposium on. Oet. 1. 
— Teacher's Handbook. Feb. 3, 
the 
HUNGARY. Book Coupon Scheme. 
March 3. 
-—- Children’s 
ties. Feb. 1, 9, June 10. 
HUXLEY, Aldous. Apr. 6, 7, 8. 
HUXLEY, Julian, Former Unesco 
Director- General. . Feb. 2, 
3, Sept. 21. 
HUYSMANS, Camille. March. 2. 
HYGIENE. Apr. i. 
HYLEAN Amazon. Febr. 2, March 
B. 
IBE. See ntl Bureau of Edu- 
.. cation. 
and responsibi- 
Communi- 
IFCC. Int’l Fed. of Children’ s Com- 
munities. Feb. 
ILLITERACY. March 8, Aor. L 19 
May 3, July 11, Sept. 5, 23 
25. Oct. 2, Nov. 1, 9, *bec 
— See : 
tion. 
ILO. Int’l Labour Organiz. June 2. 
Impetus. Reconstr. and Rehabili- 
tation Magazine. Oct. 11. 
See : Bibliographicus. 
Translationum. 
INDIA, Anniversary of Mahatma 
Gandhi’s Death. Feb. 12, 
May 5, Oct. 
— BOOK Coupon F— May 
Fundamental Educa- 
INDEX. 
— Indian Literature. May. 7. 
— In the World today. May 5. 
— Minister of Health. Sept. 21. 
-— Newsprint. May 12. 
— Population problems. 
. Apr. 8, May 9. 
— Radio Stations. March 4. 
— Science Clubs. Dec. 5. 
INDUSTRTAL Development. Pro- 
blems raised by. July 10. 
INFORMATION. See : Communici- 
tions. Press and. United 
Nations. Methods. 
INTERCHANGE. See : Exchange of 
persons. 
mi’l Bureau of Education. Feb. 2, 
May 2, July 1, Nov. 5.. 
Feb. 
Int’l Organizations. See : Non 
Governmental. 
INT'L SCHOOLS, A chain of. May 
Int’l Sciences Bulletin. Nov. 14. 
Int’l Studies Conference, Sept. 28. 
Int’l Telegraph and Telephone, 
T.T. Conf., Paris. July 4. 
int’l Understanding. Feb 2, March 
$s May 4, July 8 , Sept. 
— Elsinore : Basic Principles, 
) July 8 
— Geography. See : Seminars 
1950. 
— See : Duties of the State. 
International Schools. 
IRO. Feb. tI. 
ISRAEL. Member State. Oct. 3. 
ISTANBUL. Branch Off. of the: 
age East Sc. Co-op. OIT. 
ec 
Y. Children of Europe. Feb. 
1, 9, Aug. 1, 9, Nov. 17. 
— Monuments, Restoration of. 
Nov. 17, Dec. 12. 
ITAL 
JAMAICA. Work Camp. Sept. 24. - 
JAPAN. June 9, Sept. 9, 14, Nov. 
— Nagoya Association for Co- 
operation with Unesco, 
June 9. 
— The Univ. Decl. of Human 
rights. Sept. 9. 
JOURNALISTS. Need for Profes- 
sional Training. Feb. 2. 
— Press and the aanguage of 
seienee. Ang. 
KABIR, Humayun. May 6, Jan. fo. 
KOO, Portia. March 8. 
 KRONBORG, Castle. Great Knights’ 
Hall. July 6, 7. 
LABORATORIES, Research 
Training. July 10. 
LABOUR. See : ILO. 
LANGUAGE. Poetry Records. Alb- 
um. Library of Congress. 
June 8. 
— See : Terminology. 
TATIN AMERICA. Associated Pro- 
ject in Viani. Sept. 22. 
. — Book Coupon Scheme. March 
3. 
and 
— Congress of Universities. 
Guatemala. Jan. 
.— Decade, Royaumont. Jan. il. 
— Literature. March C. 
— Non-Governmental Organiz. 
Conf., Panama. Nov. 22. 
— Radio programmes of Scien- 
ce Off. ‘of Unesco. May 10. 
— Regional Off., Havana. Nov. 
— Seminar. See : Quitandinku. 
— Struggle against Illiteracy. 
March 5, Julv 11. See 
Quitandinha. Feb. 2. 
_LAVES, W.H.C. Feb. 2 
LEBANON. July 3, Jan. 3. 
LEVEILLE, André. Nov. 15. 
LIBRARIES. March C, June 8, 11, 
Sept. 19, 31, Dec. 10.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

UNESGO GOURIER 
Letters apply to March Courier Supplement 
- oi aa CSU a 
Libraries Bulletin. March (, 
-— Manifesto. a Unesco Poster. 
B Sept. 31, Dec. 10. 
— Reconstruction and gevelns- 
ment of. Sept. 
C— Seminar, Delhi. Nov. 16, 
f.INCOLN. Oct. 7. fem 
June 
Mc PHEE, Lori. Nov, 2. oo 
MARBIAL Valey. Haiti. March BR. 
} June 5, 6, 7, 8. 
MASACCIO. Colour Reproductions, 
Portfolio. Apr. 12. 
MASS COMMUNICATIONS. March 
C, July 4, to, Sept. 7, 15, 
Nov. 3. 
. «— communications and educi- 
tion materials, July 10, 
Nov. 3, 8, Jan. 3. 
© .— world-wide services 10 ihe 
press, Unesco Features. 
See : Press Service. 
MASSON, Paul-Marie. Feb. 4. 
MAUD. Sir John. Nov. 20, Jan, 3. 
MEDICAL science congress, perma- 
nent councit {or ne coor- 
dination of, March 6, Apr. 
11, Sept. 11. 
-- See : Science. 
MEMBER STATES. See Burma, 
Israel, Pakistan, Switzer- 
land. 
MENTAL Health. March 6. 
METRAUX, Alfred. Dec. 3. 
MEXICAN Fundamental Education 
Centre. Jan. 3. 
MIDDLE EAST. Feb. 1i, March 2. 
July 3, Nov. 4, 13. 
MONTESQUIEU. Oct. 7. 
MONTESSORI, Maria. Nov. 17, 
Jan. 4. 
MONUMENTS, Historic and artis- 
tic sites and. March C, 
Sept. 30, Nov. 5, 17, Dec. 
12. 
— Protection in cases of armed 
conflict, Nov. 5. 
MUNCH, Edvard. Aug. 12. 
MUSEUM. int'l rev. of museums 
lechnigues. March C, 6, 
Sept. 
MUSEUMS, Brooklyn. Dec. 5; Haiti, 
June 8; ICOM, March GC; 
New York, March 2, Nov. 
16. 
~— Aid to 
March 6. 
— And the popularization of 
2 science. Nov. 15. 
~— Increasingly important fac- 
tor in education. Sept. 30. 
MUSIC. March C. 
— Aid to composers and com- 
war - wrecked. 
posers’ societies in Eu- 
rope. Feb. 4. 
-— Catalogue, Chopin Records. 
Feb. 4. 
— Int’l Council of. Feb. 4. 
— Fund, Int’l. Feb. 4. 
MYRNA LOY, Hollywood. Aug. 3, 
Sept. 8. 
MYSORE. Nov. 
- 
19, Dec. 1, 6, 7. 
   
NABUCO, Joaquim. Oct. 7. 
NAGOYA Associations. see : Japan. 
NANNETTI, Guillermo. July 12. 
NATIONAL COMMISSIONS, Infor- 
mal Meeting of represen- 
tatives. Nov. 2. 
— List of. Sept. 12. 
-— Vital Role. May 2, Sept. 12. 
— Belgium. March A. 
— Denmark. July 6. 
— France. Feb. 3. ERATE 
— Greece. Nov. 2. TEL 
— India. May 5. 
— Italy. Jan. 3. 
— Luxembourg, Grand Duchy 
of. Sept. 12, Jan. 11. 
— Netherlands. Dec. 2. 
— Switzerland. Jan. 11. 
— Turkey. Nov. 2. 
— Union of South Africa. Nov. 
  
15. 
—- United Kingdom. May 2. 
— United States of America, 
Cleveland Conf. Feb. 10, 
March 6, Apr. 1, June 9, 
Aug. 3, Sept. 12. 
NATURAL RESOURCES, Preserva- 
tion of. Apr 5, June 4, Ju- 
lv 12, Aug. 4, Sept. 9, 22. 
— Associated Project in Viani. 
Sept. 22. ’ 
— See : UNSCCUR 
NATURE, Preservation of. March 
B, June 4, Aug. 4, Sept. 4, 
10, Nov. £, 5. 
— Int'l Technical Conf. on the 
Protection of, Sept. 
— Union for the Croreation of. 
Nov. 5 
NEEDS. see : Book of. Technical. 
NEHRU, Pandit. May 5. 
. NUTRITION. 
i i i tO. str ld 
NETHERILANDS, Book Coupon 
Scheme. Sept. 19, Dec. 2. 
- — Director-General’s visit. Dec. 
NEWSPRINT. March C, 
12, Nov. 5. 
~~ Conf. on world pulp pro 
- : ems, Montreal ay 10, 
NEW WORLD. see : Competition, 
Essay and poster. 
NOLAN, Sidney. Jan. 11. 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL Organiza- 
tions. Nov. 2, Jan. 3. 
-— See : Latin America. 
See : Food and Peo- 
May 10, 
ple. 
   
ORSERVATORY at Lembang. Nov. 
5. 
— Harvard. Aug. 6. 
-— Mount Palomar. Sept. 10. 
  
— Washington, U §. Naval 
Dec. 5. 
OFFICIAL BULLETIN, Unesco. 
March 6. 
ORLEANS. Town affiliation. Wi- 
chita. May 
OROZCO, Jose Clemente, Jan, 12, 
Dali . 
PAINTERS, see Exhibitions. 
Colour Reproductions. 
BOTTICELLI, Fra Angelico. Yanv 6. 
MASACCIO. Apr. 12. 
MICHELANGELO. Janv. 6. 
OROZCO, Janv. 12. 
REMBRANDT, RUBENS 
GOGH. Janv. 6. 
PAKISTAN. Member State. Oct. 3. 
— Population Problems, Apr. 
, May 9. 
PALESTINE. July 3, Nov. 13. 
PANAMERICAN Union. Book Coti- 
pon Scheme. March 3. 
PANE. R. Nov. 17, Dec. 12. 
PANKHURST, Emmeline. Oct. 7. 
PEACE. 
— Techniques of. Dec. 8. 
PELSENEER, Jean. Apr. 11. 
PEOPLE and Liberty. Soul of the. 
Aug. 2 
, VAN 
g. 2. 
— See: Food and people. Po- 
pulation. 
PERIODICALS. Important, 
print. May 12. 
out-of- 
PERSONS, see: Free Movement 
of. Exchange of. Study 
Abroad. 
PESTALOZZI. Feb. 0, Oct. 7. 
PHILIPPINES. Feb. 11, Dec. 5. 
PHILOSOPHY and Humanistic Stu- 
dies. Feb. 10, March 2, C, 
Sept. 15, Nov. 
— Int'l Council iM "March 2. 
PHOTOGRAPHIC ARCHIVE. of 
works of cultural cha- 
racter. Nov. 5. 
PHOTO STORY. the Children of 
Europe. Feb. 1, 6, 
PIAGET, Jean. Nov. 9. 
PIGALLE-VERCHENY. June {0. 
PILE. W. D. Feb. 9. 
POLAND. Children of Europe. Feb. 
1, 9. 
ee mel Theatre Institute. 
— Tar letter. Feb. 12. 
POPULATION. More People, Less 
Food. Apr. 6 
— Most of the world. Natural 
and political history. 
Sept. 2 
— Problems, Int'l Union for 
the Scientific Study of. 
Apr. 9, May 9, Sept. 28. 
— World and Food. Feb. 10. 
— See. Food and people. 
POSTAL Union, Universal. Sept. 8. 
POSTERS. Unesco. Apr. 3. 
— See: Competitions. Libraries. 
PRESS and Information. Int’l Ins- 
titute of. Feb. 2, Sept. 8, 
Nov. 35. 
— Review, Times. Feb. 2. 
— Technical needs of. Feb. 2, 
March C, Nov. 5, 11. 
— Unesco Features. World- 
wide, Press Service. July 
4, Aug. 7, Sept. 18, Nov. 
15. 
PRIZE. Unesco. (Music). Feb. 4. 
—- Science writing awards. 
U.S.A., Dec. 5 
— See: Competitions. Unesco. 
" PROGRAMME of Unesco. Feb. 2, 3, 
July 1, 2, Aug. 10. Sept. 13. 
— Code of eighteen directives, 
basic , Principles. Feb. 3 
July 2, Aug. 10 
PSYCHOLOGY. Sept. 28, Oct. 2. 
PUBLIC awareness and under- 
standing of United Na- 
tions. July ft. 
-— Opinion. Human Rights and. 
Sept. 9. 
— Support of Unesco. 
Lad 
Apr. 3 
- VOLUME I 
FEBRUARY 1949 
TO JANUARY 1950 
Quitandinba. See: SEMINARS, 
id . 
Le 
RACIAL Prejudice and Democratic 
World. Nov. 14, Jan. 10. 
RADIO. Children’s Stories for 
Peace. Jan. 5. 
~— In India. March 4. 
-— Int'l high frequency broad- 
casting Conf., Mexico. 
March 4 
.— Post-war Children’s Story. 
Dec. 10. 
-— Programmes of the Unesco 
Field Science Off., Monte 
video. May 10. . 
— School Broadcasting. July 4 
-— Sets, low priced. Nov. 5. 
— Technical needs of. March C, 
Nov. 5, 11. 
— Unesco. Latin America. May 
10, Aug. 
~- Unesco. Science service. 
March 4, Aug. 5, 6, Nov, 
15, Dec. 5, Jan. 8. 
--- Unesco World Review. Feb. 
12, Sept. 8. 
— World Caravan. May 10. 
-- World University of 
air. Feb. 12, March 3. 
RAMOS, Arthur. Sept. 28, Dec. if. 
READING and writing lesson Tech- 
niques. May 2. 
RECONSTRUCTION. Educational. 
Feb. 9, March 3, B, July 2 
Sept. 15, 24, Nov. 3, 11. 
— Impetus. Oct. 11. 
— Int'l Fund. Unesco. Feb. 9. 
— See: TICER. 
RECORDS. Chopin Catalogue. Feb. 
the 
pune 12, Sept. 31, Nov. 
16. 
—— English Language Poets. 
Libr. of Congress. Five 
albums of. June 9. 
-— World Catalogue of. Feb. 4. 
REFUGEES. Feb. 11, March 2, 
July 1, 3, Sept. 24, 25, 
Oct. 11, Nov. 4, 12, 13. 
— See: IRO. 
REGIONAL Office, Havana. July 2, 
Nov. 5. 
— See : Field Science Co-0p. 
Off. 
RENNES University. Apr. If, 
Dec. 5. 
RESOURCES. See: Natural. 
ROMAINS, Jules. Aug. 11, 
ROOSEVELT, Mrs. Eleanor. Apr. 2. 
ROYAUMONT. Jan. {1. 
RURAL Centres. See: Mysore. 
RUSSELL, -Sir John. Apr. 7. 
SANCHEZ, Ramon Diaz. Nov. 20. 
SARRAILH, Jean. Nov. 20. 
SCHOLARSHIPS. See: 
Abroad.” 
Study 
SCHOOLS. Feb. 1, 6, 7, 8, March B, 
Apr. 10, May 4, June 8, 
July 3, 
. Broadcasting. July 4. 
— International schools. a 
“chain” of. May 4. 
-— Refugees. Feb. 11, March 2, 
july L 3, Sept. 24, 25, Oct. 
Nov. 4, 12, 13. 
— Te Feb. 1, 8, July 10. 
— See: Haiti. Science Teachers: 
Textbook, improvement of. 
Thailand. 
SCHUMAN, Robert. Feb. 3. 
SCIENCE(S), Human and social 
relations. See: Philosophy 
and humanistic studies. 
— Medical. March B, 6, Apr: 
11, Sept. 11. 
— Natural. Sept. 15, Nov. 5, 
— Political. March C, Sept. 
Nov. 14 
— Social. March C, Sept. 15, 28, 
Nov. 3, 5, 14. See: Inti 
Social Sciences Bulltn. Ra- 
cial Prejudice. Way of 
e. 
SCIENCE(S) and Humanism. For- 
ces to serve Mankind. Nov, 
5. 
— And primary school children. 
Natural. May 2. 
— And Young People. Aug. 5. 
— Available copies of Reports 
on Popularization of. Aug. 
Young scientists. 
Aug. 5, Dec. 5. 
— Field Co- -operation Offices. 
Unesco. March B, 3, Apr. 1, 
Sept. 11, Nov. 5, 15, Dec. 5. 
— In general education, March 
— Int'l Union for the History 
of. Apr. 11. 
— Popularization of. Aug. 5, 
Nov. 15, Dec. 5, Jan. 8. 
-— Teachers in Devastated 
Countries. Suggestions 
for. Apr. 11 
— Unesco Science Service. 
March 4, Aug. 5, Nov. 15, 
Dec. 5, Jan. 8. 
SCIENTIFIC abstracts. July 9, 
Sept. 10 
— Equipment, Extension of 
Book Coupon Scheme to. 
Nov. 5, 8. 
— Information. July 10. 
— Research. Grants-in-aid to. 
Sept. 10, Nov. 5 
B EE . 
“TEACHERS. 
Museum. 
Int’l Council for the Exploi- 
tation of . Sept. 
SEMINARS. World community 
educators. Dec. 11. 
~-—- Delhi. May 3, Nov. 16. 
~-— Mysore. Nov. 19, Dec. 1, 6, 7 
-— Quitandinha, May 3, July 11, 
Sept. 5, Oct. 2. 
— For 1950: May 2, Sept. 22, 
Nov. 5, 9, Dec. 1, 10, 11. 
SEN, S.N. May. 7. 
SEVRES. Annl. Seminar of French 
directors of secondary 
education. Dec. 8. 
SEYMOUR, D. Feb. 1, 6, 7. 
— See: Film. 
SEA. 
SHAPLEY, Harlow. Aug. 6. 
SHORT-WAVE Frequencies, Fu- 
ture of. March 4. 
‘Improve- SIAM, School = Svstem 
ment. Apr. 10. 
SITES, historical. See: Monuments. 
SOCIOLOGY, int'l organiz. of. 
Sept. 28. 
SOIL ER 0s Apr. 5, June 4, 
July 12. 
SOLANO, Armando. Nov. 20. 
SPANISH Children. Feb. 9. 
SPENDER, Stephen. Aug. i. 
SPRAGUE Smith, Carleton. Feb. 4. 
STATE. See: Duties of the. 
STUDENT(S) Evening Discussions. 
March 4. 
— See Conference, General. 
STUDY ABROAD, Handbook of 
Fellowships. Volume IL 
Sept. 27, Nov. 10. 
— Fellowships. Sept. 14, 26, 27, 
Nov. 5, 10. 
—.. Fellows Report Progress. 
Sept. 
SUMMER Camp ‘Moulin Vieux for 
war orphans. May 4. 
SWITZERLAND, Book Coupon 
Scheme. March 3. 
— Children’s Villages. Feb. 9. 
— Human Rights Day. Jan. (1. 
— Member State. Feb. 12. 
— Radio, Epidemics Bulletin. 
Feb. 12. 
-~ Special Framing of teachers. 
Feb. 1. 
SYRIA. July 3 
TAC, Technical Assistance Commit- 
tee. June 1, 2. 
TAGORE, Rabindranath. May 7. 
TALICE, Rodolfo. Aug. 5. 
See: Education. 
Schools. Science. 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE to un- 
der-developed countries. 
June 1, 2, July 10, 11, 
Sept. 2, 3, 4 . 
TECHNICAL Education. July 10. 
TECHNICAL NEEDS of Mass Com- 
munications. press, fllm, 
radio. Feb. 2, March C, 
Julv 10, Sept. 7, 15, Nov. 
3, 5, 11 
TECHNOLOGY and Culture. 
March 1, A, Apr. i. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS Union, 
Int'l, Mexico Conf. March 
4, Sept. 8. 
TELEVISION in the U.S.A. 
March 4. 
— Science through. Aug. 8. 
TENSIONS, affecting int’l under- 
standing. Feb. 2, March 6, 
Sept. 28, Nov. 14. 
TERMINOLOGY, Democracy and 
scientific. Aug. 6, 8, Nov. 
15. 
— Vocabulary and understand- 
ing. Aug. 6. 
TEXTBOOKS, Improvement of. 
March B, May 2, Sept. 22, 
23, Nov. 5, 9, Dec. 10, 11. 
— See: Seminars 1950. 
THAILAND, School System Impro- 
vement. Apr. 10. 
THEATRE Institute, Int'l (ITI). 
Feb. 4, 12, March C, May 
2, Aug. 3. 
— Architecture of the New. 
Aug. 
— Bulletin. Feb. 4. 
— Themes of Peace and Rights. 
June 9, Aug. 3 
TICER. Dec. 8. 
TOMLINSON, George. May 3. 
TORCHOK. See: Children’s 
lag 
Vil- 
TORRES BODET, J. Child's Edu- . 
cation begins twenty 
vears before he is born. 
Jan. 9. 
— Adult Education and the 
Future of our Civilization. 
July 6, 7. 
-— An act of self-examination. 
Oct. 9, 
— Faith in Unesco. Sept. 16, 17. 
— Half the world’s population 
is illiterate. Sept. 29. 
— Int'l Conference on Public 
Education. Aug. 2. 
—— Mission of Unesco. March A. 
— National Commissions’ vital 
role. Sept. 12. 
-— Report to United Nations. 
Aug. 10. 
— &i vis pacem, para conscien- 
tias. Dec. 2. 
-- Solemn consecration of the 
Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. March D. 
-— Teachers hold key to Unesco 
Aims. May 3, 4. 
— Techniques of Peace. Dec. 8. 
— The Plan for Under-Deve- 
oped Areas. Apr. 1, Sept. 
— Unesco A Personal Faith. 
Jan. t. 
-— Whv we fight. Nov. 12, i3. 
~~ Will to Peace. Jan. 1. 
"TOWN 
Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 
AFFILIATION idea, Wichi- 
ta-Orleans. May 4. 
TRADE Conference, Int'l June 3, 
Sept. 19. Cs 
TRANSJORDANIA. July 3. 
TRANSLATIONS, a charter 
translators. Jan. 10. 
-— of Classics. Mareh C, Dec. 4 
Jan. 10. 
— Index Translationum. Dec. 
TROGEN, Children’s Communities. . 
Feb. a. 
for 
UNAC. Feb. vy 
UNESCAN, a new word. Apr. 2. 
UNESCO Constitution. Oct. 10. 
—- Essay and Poster Competi- 
tion in schools, four post- 
ers, Jan. 1, 5. 
-— Essay contest in Philippines. 
Dec. 
-—— House. Apr. 4, July 2, Or. 
— In Focus. June {t. 
—~— Liaison with Member Stites. 
Nov. 3, 5, Sept. 15. 
— Priority system and code of 
18 directives. Feb. 3. July 
2, Aug. 10. 
— Problems of. Feb. 2. 
— Radio news about, Arst 
broadcast. Feb. 12. 
—— Regional Office, Havana. July 
2, Nov. 35. 
~—- Report to United Nations. 
June 9, Aug. 10. 
— Unesco Thinkers, Pawtucket, 
Group of Students. Dec. 10. 
— World Review. Feb. 12, 
Sept. 18. 
— See: Exhibitions, Press ser- 
vice L'nesco Fealures. 
UNICEF. Feb. 9. 
UNIFORMITY, cultural. 
Sept. 
UNITED KINGDOM, Book Coupon 
Scheme. March 3 
— Bringing 
Apr. 4, 
Moliere to 
mines. Feb. 12. 
— British Film Institute. Aug. 
the 
—_— Intl Theatre Institute. Feb. 
— Margate, National Union of 
Teachers, Ann. Cont. 
May 3. 
UNITED NATIONS, Associations, 
World Fed. of. Nov. 20. 
— Information problems. July 
— Programme of technical as- 
sistance. June t, 2. See: 
Technical Assistance. 
— Teaching about. Nov. 9. 
-— U.N. Day, 24 October. Nov. 
5, Dec. 5 
-— Unesco Report to. June 9, 
Aug. 10 
UNITED STATES, Book ‘Coupon 
Scheme and Exchange 
Centres. March 3. 
~~ Cleveland Conference. See: 
National Commissions. 
— Int’l Theatre Institute. Feb. 
4, June 9. 
-— Music Fund, int’l. Feb. 4. 
— Poetry Record Albums, 
June 9. 
— President Truman. Apr. 1. 
— Roads to peace. Sept. 26. 
— Science writing awards. 
Dec. 5. 
Television. March 4. } 
World Peace Plavs urged by 
Unesco. June 9. 
I 
UNIVERSITY, Int'l Bureau. Sept. 
, Nov. 9. 
—— of the Air, World. Feb. 12, 
: March 4. 
— Utrecht Conf., Changing role 
of. March 6. 
— Chile, Int’l Helping hand to. 
Feb. 192. 
— Latin American congress, 
Guatemala. Nov. 22. 
— Rennes. Apr. {i, Dec. 5. 
UNRRA in China. Dec. 5. 
UNSCCUR, United Nations Conf. f. 
the Conservation and Uti- 
lization of Resources. 
June 4. See: Nature, 
VERCHENY. June 10. 
VERNIERS, L. Nov. 20. 
VIANI, Colombia. March- 5, Sept. 
922, 
VINCENT, Paul. Apr. 6. 
VISUAL AND AUDITORY materials. 
March C, June 9, Sept. 19, 
27, Oct. 12. 
—- See: Agreement. Methods. 
Technical Needs. : 
_ VISUAL ARTS. March © 
See: Terminology. 
WAY of life. March. 6. 
WESTON, R. Mc V. Aug. 8 
WHEELER, Monroe. March. 2. 
WHO, World Health Organiz. Feb. 
12, March 6, Apr. 11, June 
2, 3, 6, 7 i, 8, Sept. 1H. 
WICHITA-Orleans. May 4. 
WILLIAMS-ELLIS, Amabel. Jan. §. 
WOMEN’s Access to Education. 
Jan. 9. 
WORK CAMPS, Int'l Volunteers. 
Feb. 9, March 5, Sept. 18, 
24, 25. 
_~— Unesco Handbook, Work 
Camps for peace. Sept. 25. 
National Park. 
Vocabulary. 
   
ZOOLOGICAL org. 
June 4. 
ZUCKERMAN, J. March. 3.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=10) 3

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 10 
    
It is to the skill of structural and electrical engineers that we owe the construction and 
smooth running of hydro-electrical projects such as the one at Genissiat, France 
(shown above) whose success is equally important to the worker and the housewife. 
Work on the Genissiat Dam — the largest in Western Europe to-day — began in 
1936 but was interrupted by the war. Completed and put into operation in 1948. this 
dam is over 300 feet high, nearly 200 yards wide and has a base thickness of nearly 
300 feet. Genissiat, which dams the River Rhone, is designed to produce an annual 
output of 2,000 million kilowatts. Another giant hydro-electric installation, Boulder Dam, 
in the United States, has an annual production of 5.000 million kilowatt hours. One of 
the most striking examples of how this vital source of energy, “white coal”, as 
the French call it, can be used, is the work done in the Tennessee Valley, United 
States. Twenty dams, built over a period of ten years. transformed this once “dying 
valley” 
OR lack of a dictionary, a water 
power project may be delayed, or 
the design of a machine to in- 
crease production of tractors, or shoes 
or telephones may be held up. 
The reason is that the majority of 
the documents on engineering are 
published in very few languages. For 
historical reasons, engineering has 
been a specialization of a very few 
countries in the main, and it is esti- 
mated that 80 per cent of all the pa- 
pers engineers should read are pub- 
lished in French, English or Ger- 
man. Thus it is necessary to have 
accurate engineering dictionaries to 
SCIE 
ne setting up of Popular Science 
Institutes where the “man in the 
street” could see how science can 
and does change his way of life is one 
of the suggestions made in the latesl 
report published by ihe Division for 
Science and ils DPopularizalion, of 
Uneseo’s” Nalural Seienees Department. 
The Reporl,. “The Theory and 
Practice of Popular Seience™ ‘has heen 
wrilten by Dr David S. Evans, a young 
scientist of Welsh birih. now working 
“al the Radeliffe Observatory, Pretoria, 
Union of South "rica. 
Surveying the field of popularization 
of science and assessing the problem as 
a whole in relation. to modern times, 
Dr. Evans, who was formerly advisory 
edilor of the British science magazine 
“Discovery”. emphasises lhe urgency 
of making science understandable to 
the layman. He discusses ihe siralegy 
and tactics of popularizing science in 
the press. magazines and books, through 
the spoken word and-in seientific films. 
Popular Science 
Institutes Urged 
E believes that “the newspapers and 
H the scientists need to co-operate 
ever more closely so that the for- 
mer can acquire a better appreciation 
of the handling and presentation of 
seientifie subjeels, and the latter should 
so ofganize lhemselves, that this need 
is met”. 
He advocates the setting-up of Insli- 
lates of Popular Science. which he sug- 
gests could probably be made a finan- 
cial success. Each of these should 
into a rich and prosperous countryside. (Photo : United Press.) 
facilitate translation and permit 
practical use of this material. 
This technical civilization of ours 
presents some special difficulties be- 
cause it is easy to misunderstand 
terms that are used in different 
countries. Even among the world’s 
leading engineers, misunderstanding 
may arise because they use the same 
technical expression Jor different 
ideas. Therefore, to assist the free 
flow of engineering information, some 
method must be devised to ensure that 
what is meant is clearly and exactly 
understood, and has the same meaning 
to all engineers. 
NCE 
include film projeclion rooms, a plane- 
larium, laboratories and .a small te- 
lescope, demonstrations, lectures and a 
library and museum. “The new em- 
phasis”, he says, “should, if possible, 
be on direct manual experience rather 
than on visual instruetion. Tt is elearly 
a large programme. bul Hs political 
“implications alone, in a country based 
-on {echnical advances, would: make the: 
project worth while” 
Te advocates also the introduction 
 
“inte 
This is the fundamental problem 
discussed recently at Unesco House 
in Paris by a study group of en- 
gineers. The immediate need is not 
to increase the number of documents 
available to engineers, but to help them 
track down quickly the necessary 
material to solve some new problem, 
or to study some specific construction, 
among the mass of documents con- 
stantly being reproduced in a vast 
number of journals and stored away 
in an equally vast number of libraries. 
When the documents are found, they 
must be put at the disposal of the 
engineer and he must be able to read 
them.. Unesco can take most effective 
action in helping to provide the necess- 
ary tools for the understanding of 
these documents. 
Urgent Need For 
New Dictionaries 
EFGRE the war, technical diction- 
aries in six languages were avail- 
able. But these are now difficult to 
find, and would, in any case, need 
drastic revision because of the great 
progress made in scientific engineer- 
ing. A number of international asso- 
ciations are tackling the problem. The 
Permanent International Association 
of Navigation Congresses, for example, 
has published five volumes of a series 
of fifteen which, when complete, will 
include all the terms needed by engi- 
neers in this field. The International 
Commission on Large Dam Construc- 
tion has also completed preparations 
for a dictionary. Similar projects are 
being considered for bridge and struc- 
tural engineering, electrical engineer- 
ing, soil mechanics and topography. 
These projects are, however, making 
slow progress. The publication of 
a dictionary is rarely a profitable 
commercial venture, and the lack of 
general directives is also a serious 
handicap. It is, of course, inevitable 
that dictionaries of terms used in the 
different branches = of engineering 
should overlap. and it is therefore es- 


### 74254: Science is everyone's business

EVERYONE'S 
BUSINESS 
universities, where important 
fundamenial scientific advances - are 
made, of Public Relations Officers who 
can aet as skilled interpreters of new 
developments. These P.R.O.s would 
help to “smooth out the irritating 
misconceptions.of new advances which 
are the bane of the scientists responsi- 
ble for them". Co 
Copies of this Report, and a list of 
other Reporls, may be obtained on 
application {0 Unesco. 
  
NATURE AND TECHNOLOGY. — Here is a striking model of the human ear. displayed 
at an exhibition in Switzerland. The caption reads: 
received by the ear and reproduced by the mouth. In Technology. the human voice 
is received and reproduced by a dictating and recording machine". 
“In Nature, the human voice is 
The latter is an 
example of modern precision engineering. The exhibit indicates the type of visual 
approach that could be made in an Institute for the Pepularization of Science. 


### 74253: Helping world's engineers to speak the same language

eh WORLD'S ENGINEERS 
~ TO-SREAK THE SAME LANGUAGE 
sential that the same terms appearing 
in different dictionaries should have 
the same translation. It is suggested 
that there should be not only a trans- 
lation but also a drawing, where pos- 
sible, so that no doubt will exist as 
to what exactly is meant. 
The engineering experts therefore 
recommended that Unesco consider 
this task as a number one priority, 
and proposed that a “dictionaries 
committee” should be set up. These 
recommendations are now being acted 
on through the work of the Natural 
Sciences Department of Unesco. 
 * 


### 74255: Has the twentieth century room for Malthus?

HAS THE TWENTIETH 
CENTURY ROOM FOR 
MALTHUS ? 
  
Professor André Mayer. 
N analysis of the relations be- 
tween food, people and social 
progress is made by Profes- 
sor André Mayer, the French nu- 
trition expert, in his new bcoklet, 
“Nutrition, Population and So- 
cial Progress”. 
He writes, “The earth’s size is 
a constant, while its population 
is growing. So the old Malthus- 
ian Law returns to haunt us 
with all the air of biological in- 
evitability which thinkers of the 
last century built up around it, 
and with all their alarming de- 
ductions from it. 
“We can escape from that at- 
mosphere”, says Dr. Mayer. 
“Malthus was born in 1766 and 
the first edition of his Essay 
appeared in 1798. Though the 
problem he raised is still valid, 
ncne of the terms he used, for 
example, “subsistence”, “popu- 
lation”, or even “men”, has 
exactly the same connotation as 
in his age. This I shall endeavour 
tc show while simultaneously I 
try to restate this vital questicn 
in the terms of to-day.” 
The booklet by Dr. Mayer is 
published by Editions Dunod in 
Paris. It is cne of the series of 
the “Food and People” booklets 
published in connection with the 
annual discussion theme of Unes- 
co. Others ncw available in 
French are : “L’A B C de la Con- 
servation du Sol” (Guillermo 
Nannetti): “La Répartition des 
Produits Alimentaires dans le 
Mcnde™” (Stefan Krolikowski); 
“Les Nations Unies s’attaquent 
au Probleme de I’Alimentation” 
(Peter Kihss). Their price is 
35 PFrs. each. 
The latest publication in Great 
Britain by the Bureau cf Current 
Affairs in the “Food and People” 
series is “Are we too many?” by 
iva Myrdal and Paul Vincent.     

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=11) 3

### IGNORE

  
N the year 1749 a certain Mon- 
sieur de la Cuza drew up plans 
and started building a town, 
which was to be called I’'Hopital, 
on the West coast of the island of 
Haiti. Situated in a wide bay, pro- 
tected by two long peninsulas and 
by the Ile de la Gonave, this city later 
became Port-au-Prince, capital of the 
Republic of Haiti. 
Port-au-Prince has had a troubled 
history. It was destroyed by earth- 
Page 11 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 74256: The Slaves who claimed their rights as men

The SLAVES who claimed 
their RIGHTS as MEN 
quakes in 1751 and 1770 and on several 
occasions it has been ravaged by fire. 
It has even changed its name, having 
pean known successively as Port-Henri 
and Port-Republicain. 
To-day, Port-au-Prince is celebrating 
its second centenary two hundred 
years of life; one hundred and forty 
six of hard-won freedom. 
But it is not the descendants of the 
Indians who lived on Haiti when 
Christopher Colombus discovered it on 
December 6, 1492, who will take part 
in these celebrations. They have long 
since disappeared. In 1508, the Span- 
jards and Frenchmen who settled in 
Haiti to grow sugarcane, began import- 
ing large numbers of black slaves and 
even at the start of the 19th century. 
the wealthy land-owners of Haiti 
considered the enlire population as 
their personal property. It is the des- 
PORT-AU-PRINGE 
cendants of these slaves who are to- 
day free men and citizens of the 
Republic of Haiti, : 
During the last one and a half cen- 
turies the people of Haiti have walked 
a hard path from conditions of gene- 
ral slavery to emancipation as a free 
people. And their conception of 
Human Rights has been more than a 
legal or philosophical concept. 
It was for the Rights of Man, of all 
men, whatever their colour or creed 
that Toussaint Louverture fought the 
armies of Napoleon, 
French prison, so that one day, a 
nation of coloured people should live 
in freedom and independence in the 
Caribbean. 
And it is symbolic that a century 
and a half after these battles, it should 
have been Monsieur de Saint Lo, Hai- 
tian Minister in Paris, and head of his 
country’s delegation to the United 
Nations General Assembly, in Paris, 
who presented the report on the draft 
Declaration of Human Rights, which 
was adopted by the Assembly the 
following day. : 
gad Be 
2 
€ 
nN 
  
and died in a 
BER w ig 
   
  
   
  
F 
    
_ 
i ~ DESCARTES. Some 
Unesco’s exhibits on Human Rights which are being presented at the Port-qu-Prince Inter- 
national Exhibition, this year, stress the part played by the coloured deputies from Saint 
Domingo in the proclamation by the French National Convention, on February 5, 1794, of the 
abolition of slavery in all French colonies (see above). One of the most famous of these 
coloured deputies was Jean-Baptiste Belley (1746-1804) whose portrait (reproduced above) 
was painted in 1797 and is now in the Versailles Museum. Another diorama at the exhibition 
shows Monsieur de Saint Lo. the Haitian delegate to the United Nations Third General 
"ANNIVERSARIES 
4 


### 74257: Some anniversaries during February 1950

| during 
FEBRUARY 1950 " 
53 | ~~ ia 
THE GREAT MOGUL, AKBAR 
PLANCK... 
Giordano 
BRUNO.. 
  * 
begins rather like a fairy story. “Once upon a time” opens the door to dreamland, 
The celebration of anniversaries is also 
A hundred years ago... About a thousand years ago... Almost every chapter in history 
or conjures up the vision of a golden age. 
the key to untold treasures; through them man may learn more about himself and 
gain strength for the future. 
We could indeed honour, 
predecessor who has helped shape our lives. 
every day of the year, some illustrious or little-known 
We must however make a selection from 
among this host of philosophers, artisans, poets, scientists and martyrs and from among 
the events without heros, the less renowned discoveries. The choice will be arbiirary, 
and the reader will be able to add many other historic occasions to those noted each 
month in this column. . 
FEBRUARY. “I am master of 
10t such a vast kingdom and hold 
the reins of power in my hands: 
nevertheless, true greatness consists in 
carrying out the Will of God.” These 
words were written four centuries ago by 
the Great Mogul, Akbar, holy king and 
emperor of India. Records indicate that 
in February 1575, he ordered the con- 
struction of a building for the use of diffe- 
rent schools of philosophy and theology. 
He was at that time an orthodox Moslem. 
Three years later he admitted Hindus and 
Christians to his seminary. Akbar che- 
rished a great ideal which he revealed In 
1582 : the creation of a universal religion. 
* 
FEBRUARY will be celebrated 
11th all over the world as the three 
hundredth anniversary of the 
death cf René Descartes. Few other men 
have had more influence oa modern 
science and thought. Anyone re-reading 
his Meditations, his Treaties anc his letters 
cannot help forming a vivid picture of the 
man himseif. As Paul Valéry said : 
«There lies the most striking trait of the 
strong and rounded personality of Des- 
cartes, and this trait distinguishes him 
from the majority of other philosophers : 
In none of their works does character, 
that is the reaction of the whole man, 
show itself more vigorously than in his 
speculations”. 
* 
FEBRUARY. On this day 150 
15th years ago, the Morning Herald 
of London stated “The Attor- 
ney General asked permission to present 
a Bill to the effect that the law 
suspending the Habeas Corpus Act be con- 
tinued for a limited time. Sir Francis 
Burdett rose to his feet: “I fear that by 
suspending the Habeas Corpus Act we 
shall end by suppressing it entirely. If 
this Act, the strongest support of our 
Constitution, is abolished, our liberty goes 
with it. I cannot adequately express 
the anxiety I feel at these repeated sus- 
pensions. Until now, it was regarded 
as the most precious principle of our Con- 
stitution that the poor man's cottage 
should be as inviolable as the prince's 
palace. Protected only by straw from the 
wind and rain, the King himself would 
not have dared lay a finger upon it.” 
Born in 1770, Francis Burdett had tra- 
velled much and had been profoundly in- 
fluenced by the French Revolution. He 
later devoted himself to the suppression 
of laws discriminating against Roman 
Catholics, to defending freedom of expres- 
sion and to electoral reform. As early as 
1818, he proposed universal suffrage. When 
he died in 1844, he had seen all these aims 
achieved. 
* 
FEBRUARY Giordano Bruno 
17+ was burned to death by the 
Inquisition in 1600. Born in 
Naples, he spent most of his life in exile, 
being driven from town to town. - In 
his books and teaching, he attacked wita 
equal vigour Aristotle’s logic or Ptolo- 
mey's astronomical theories, the philoso- 
phy of. the scholars or Christian dogma. 
Deep! fluenced by Raymond Lulle, Pla- 
to, P and above all by Nicolas de Cuse, 
his doctrines are the fruit of an impas- 
sioned learning. They greatly influenced 
other pantheists, and made of Spinoza, 
Schelling and Hegel his spiritual heirs. 
In 1592 the Inquisition in Venice threw 
him into prison, where he stayed for six 
years until his extradition was granted. 
Brought before the Governor of Rome, 
the Cardinals and the advisers of the Holy 
See, he was excommunicated, degraded 
and handed over to the secular authorities, 
but he refused to confess any guilt: “The 
sentence you have just passed,” he said, 
“probably causes you more sorrow than 
me to hear it.” 
he was led to the Campo dei Fiori and 
burned. 
* 
2 2 n FEBRUARY. How is energy dis- 
tributed between the various 
radiations in the light spec- 
trum emitted by a black body? A 
black body being a substance capable of 
absorbing all radiations, except when heat- 
ed.) In 1900 Max Planck, Professor of 
Physics in Beriin, set himself this ditficult 
problem, which engrossed at the time more 
than one scientist in Harvard, Oxford, 
Paris and St. Petersburg. 
Late in February, Planck proposed a 
theory, which has become classic, to 
account for these releases of energy : any 
source of light radiates or absorbs energy 
intermittently in multiples of a basic unit 
called the “quantum”, the amount being 
equal to the frequency of radiations. His 
theory announced a universal proportion, 
since known as Planck's constant. 
The celebrated physicist thus upset 
established theories, introducing discon- 
tinuity into both the theory of waves and 
radiation of light and conceptions of the 
structure of the atom. He prepared the 
way for Einstein, Louis de Broglie and 
Niels Bohr. 
      
Allustrating the 
On 17th February 1600 
Assembly, presenting the draft Declaration of Human Rights. on December 9, 1948. 
It is therefore appropriate that the 
theme of Human Rights should figure 
in the celebration of Port-au-Prince’s 
second centenary this year and to this 
end, Unesco is organizing an exhibition 
for inclusion in the International Exhi- 
bition to be held in the capital of 
Haiti. 
On January 2nd, crates weighing 
over a ton left Unesco House in 
Paris for Haiti. They contained 
wooden and aluminium wall-panels, 
facsimile reproductions and dioramas 
theme of Human 
Rights from their origins to the pre- 
sent day. The exhibition will first be 
shown at Port-au-Prince and later in 
other towns of the Republic. 
Some of the exhibits will be of 
special interest to Haitians. There is 
a scale model of the “Ouragan” (Hur- 
ricane), a slave-ship- built at Nantes 
in 1830; it was originally a schooner 
and later converfed into a 150 ton brig. 
Visitors to the exhibition will also 
see a diorama portraying the session of 
the French National Convention on 
February 4th 1794. 
Another diorama shows the scene in 
the United Nations General Assembly 
when the Haitian delegate, Monsieur de 
Saint Lo, presented the draft Declara- 
tion of Human Rights. 
Speaking for all who have suffered 
oppression and for those who still 
suffer to-day, the Haitian delegate 
opened a new chapter in the history of 
Human Rights, a period which should 
see these rights become established 
facts throughout the world. 


### 74258: A Young republic wants to join UNESCO

A YOUNG REPUBLIC 
WANTS TO JOIN 
became an independent nation, 
- the Republic of the United States 
of Indonesia applied for member- 
ship of Unesco, and on January J, 
Dr. Darmasetiawan, Personal Represen- 
tative of the Indonesian Prime Minis- 
ter, visited M. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
1. AST month, a few days after it 
PANAMA, SWEDEN 
AND GUATEMALA 
"JOIN UNESCO 
HREE countries, Guatemala, 
Panama and Sweden, it was 
. announced last month, have 
joined UNESCO, bringing the 
number of its Member States 
to 54. 
Panama and Guatemala had 
already signed Unesco’s Consti- 
tution at the Organization's 
Constituent Assembly in 1945 and 
became members when they 
recently deposited their instru- 
ments of acceptance with the 
British Foreign Office. 
Sweden joined Unesco on 
January 23rd, when it signed the 
Constitution and deposited its 
instruments of acceptance. 
For several months, a provi- 
sional Swedish Unesco Committee 
has been in existence under the 
chairmanship of Professor Inge- 
mar During, of Gothenburg Uni- 
- versity. Its fifteen members, who 
include Government repres:nta- 
tives as well as members of educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural 
bodies and popular organizations, 
form the nucleus of a permanent 
National Commission, tc be esta- 
plished by the Swedish authorities.     
“>
 
UNESCO 
     
 
tarly last month, Dr. Darmasetiawan, Per 
sonal Representative of the Indonesian Prime 
Minister, seen above, right, with M. Jaime 
Torres Bodet. Director-General cf Unesco, 
presented his country’s application for 
membership of Unesco. 
Director-General of Unesco, to present 
his country's application. 
Following this meeting, Dr. Darma- 
setiawan stated: “The Republic is re- 
questing membership of Unesco, and 
wants it as soon as possible.” 
One of Indonesia's main problems, he 
declared. was the high rate of illiteracy 
among its 75,000,000 people. = Under 
the previous Republic, considerable 
progress was madc against illiteracy, 
but the government wished to incor- 
orate into the campaign the best and 
atest methods so far employed by 
other nations to deal with this problem. 
Membership in Unesco would enable 
Indonesia to request information and 
advice for carrying out a really effec- 
tive drive against illiteracy. 
Dr. Darmasetiawan, who has been 
closely concerned with health problems 
in his country said that the government 
intended to take advantage of modern 
malaria. research, through laboratories 
in Ceylon. Sydney and elsewhere.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074968engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page {2 
 -—_— a at Ce es oie maa | ] 
» 


### 74975: Young Egyptians find new beauty in the ancient clay of the Nile

Young Egyptians 
find new beauty 
IN THE ANCIENT 
CLAY OF THE NILE 
ast month, an exhibition of sculptures, tapestries and drawings by young 
L Egyptians was opened at UNESCO House, Paris, by H.E. Ahmed 
Saroit Bey, the Egyptian Ambassador in Paris and by M. Jaime Torres 
Bodet, Director-General of UNESCO. 
This exhibition, which created something of a sensation amongst the 
critics and the general public, was organized by UNESCO’s Department 
of Cultural Activities, as part of its project for the Arts in General Edu- 
cation. This project is concerned with ways in which the arts are used 
throughout the world as a means to education. 
  
A young Egyptian boy making a tapestry 
on a simple loom set against a wall. He 
first made his own design of “Saint George 
and the Dragon” which is fastened above 
the loom for his guidance. He uses wool 
which he has dyed himself in vegetable dyes. 
and, slipping the fingers of his left hand 
between the long warp threads he passes 
his simple shuttle backwards and forwards 
with his right hand. weaving each small 
part of the design in « different colour. 
arts bath for developing indivi- 
dual cultural appreciation and 
expressicn and promoting inter- 
national understanding, Unesco works, 
to promote wider diffusicn of the arts, 
and to encourage greater apprecia- 
tion of their significance as instru- 
ments of education. It pursues this 
aim particularly thrcugh its project 
for the Arts in General Education. 
Unesco therefore welcomed the 
opportunity of sponsoring an exhibi- 
tion which so admirably demonstrated 
what canbe done, even with the sim- 
plest materials and equipment, to de- 
velop the natural artistic abilities of 
children, provided they are taught and 
encouraged with sympathetic insight 
and understanding. 
These are qualities which particular- 
ly characterise Mr Habib Gorgi. 
chief inspector fer art in the Egyptian 
Ministry of Education. An inspired 
teacher, an artist of considerable abi- 
lity, he has a rare gift of understand- 
ing children on their own terms. He 
has known which children to choose, 
both in and out of Egyptian schools, 
to share with him an adventure of 
discovery in the world of art. 
His name must be added to the many 
who by precept and practice have 
WARE of the great value of the 
Courier 
~ UNESCO 
EDITORIAL OFFICES 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. 18 
  
PETER DU BERG 
RS. FENTO%N 
Ednor 
English Langusge Editor 
All reproduct ons author. red 
: 
rue 
UNESCO Publication 654     
worked to bring about in recent years 
an extraordinary change in the atti- 
tude towards the aims and methods 
of education. 
Habib Georgi, as an educator in a 
responsible position, was well aware 
of these developments. In his official 
capacity he succeeded in introducing 
many changes in the methods of 
training teachers and of teaching the 
arts in Egypt. Aided by his wife, he 
also carried out special experiments 
in metheds of art teaching in his own 
home and in a few small private vil- 
lage schools for small groups. 
« ARCHAEOLOGIST ” 
OF THE MIND 
E has been compared by one 
writer to an archaeologist, but 
an archaeologist cf a very special 
kind, searching not for antiquities in 
  
For the teacher it was fascinating to see an 
8-year old boy make this Head of a Prophet. 
Unlike the older children who model all in 
one, shaping details with a stick or a straw. 
he first made the rough-shaped head. Then 
with concentrated, almost fierce intensity he 
added the eyes, the ears and {finally pushed 
on the nose. And the result is nearly terri- 
fying in its primitive force and power. 
the sands of Egypt, but in the sub- 
conscious minds of his young compa- 
tricts for traces of that great art 
which characterised ancient Egypt. 
Georgi, in accord with Jung’s theory 
of the collective unconscious, believed 
these traces could still be reached 
through his pupils if only he could 
give them the right conditions. 
To decide cn the right conditions 
A scene from village 
tide, A woman ae 
companied by her dog. 
on her way to fetch 
water, passes the oxen 
end the call in the 
field ol comm. Yehia 
abu Serei. who carved 
this when he won 
17 years old. bs « 
quiet boy whe tends 
to keep apart broom 
other. Uving In « 
world of his own. poe 
tic and lyrical. carving 
such panels in limes 
tone. patiently working 
a! them lor months he 
uses oaly his own pen 
knile to make these 
delicate low reliefs. 
 
In her modelling of this figure of Meditation, showing an Egyptian peasant woman in 
contemplative thought. 19-year old Sayeda Missac achieves an extremely moving 
work of art. Texture of clay, quietly flowing lines, justly disposed weight of the body. 
sensitive hands, a whole inner world of the spirit reflected in the gentle face, every- 
thing contributing to a sense of inward depth and withdrawn repose. 
was a difficult problem. Habib Gorgi 
does ‘not accept the modern attitude 
which, as he puts it “permits the child 
to beccme his own master with unres- 
tricted liberty. In practice,this theory 
has to be modified. In art especially, 
the majority of children do not profit 
by this unbridled freedcm. They 
often indulge in a precess of unceasing 
self-repetition”. 
Gorgi realized that the crux of the 
preblem lay in the teacher-child 
relationship. Whilst the teacher 
should neither impose a standard of 
aesthetic values nor kill enthusiasm by 
misguided criticism, it was his respon- 
sibility deliberately to create situations 
in which the child could decide upon 
the appropriate reactions. 
The existing attitudes and conditions 
in the schools scarcely allowed for 
such experiments, and so Gorgi 
worked on his own. 
STORY OF SAYEDA 
AND THE LION 
E went to that part of the popu- 
lation where life had undergone 
no basic change since the time of 
the Pyramids — to the peasant class. 
He tells a delightful story of the day 
he found Sayeda Missac, who lived in 
cne of the poorest districts in Cairo. 
She and her many brothers and sisters 
lived largely by their wits — playing 
and begging. As scon as a school 
was opened in the neighbourhood 
Sayeda enrolled. There one day Gorgi 
found her “struggling to sculpt 
Daniel in the Lion’s Den. She had 
never seen a licn, but she closed her 
eyes and asked for the power to make 
something very ferocious”. What 
she produced was a creature with 
little resemblance to the king .of 
beasts, but easily excelling him in 
ferccity. ER 
Subsequently Sayeda lived ir® .Yabib 
Gorgi’s household for seven years. 
Sometimes she goes back to the excite- 
ment of the crowded streets and to 
a life of idleness, but she always comes 
back in chastened mood and, of her 
cwn accord, works harder than ever. 
She was the first of many children 
who came to stay and work in the 
favourable environment of the Gorgi 
household, in ccmpany with his own 
children. 
REFLECTION OF AN 
ANCIENT TRADITION 
GR working materials, Habib Gor- 
F gi has given the children paper 
and craycns, and there are many 
examples in thc Exhibition of their 
drawings. These, apart from the local 
Egyptian subject matter, have the 
same basic characteristics as those 
which distinguish children’s drawings 
everywhere. But it is interesting to 
find that linear and pictorial expres- 
sicn did not altogether suit the needs 
cf these children. So Habib gave 
them clay and also let them make 
tapestries on primitive looms. 
It is above all clay and sculpturing 
that seem to suit them best, and it is 
through this medium that they find 
true freedom, and at the same time 
most obviously reflect the subconscious 
memery of their cwn Egyptian artistic 
traditions. Similarly, in the low-relief 
carvings in white stone there is the 
strongest echo of the subtlety of the 
finest ancient Egyptian friezes and 
panels. - 
- The teaching technique is something 
difficult to describe in words, for like 
all good educational methods it does 
net consist so much ef a rigid formula 
as of a mutual relationship. It does 
not depend on Habib Gcergi imparting 
his knowledge to the children. He 
says that his function consists mainly 
in creating an atmosphere and a 
situation “which will liberate the 
child of stored images and make him 
richly productive, and at the same 
time protect him frem the influence 
of undesirable elements”. 
In practice he may tell them tradi- 
ticnal fairy tales and mythological 
steries ; he encourages them to draw 
inspiration from the scenes and events 
of their daily lives, but most of all he 
depends upon establishing the right 
relationship between himself and his 
children. He says: “We sit upon the 
ground in our big rocm and we work 
together ; we are all working and 
singing and we are happy.” 