# [059709](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
7
 
RE
T 
on
 
OR
E 
C
R
Y
 
| 
ER 
TI
LE
Y 
if 
     
 
SHEEN A gy EFT 
  
  
May 1967 (20 th year) U.K: :“1/6-st 
> 
g. - Canada : 30 cents - France: 1 F : 
  
- tr 13 Xa A we ai 
— : I Rp ey nT 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

"Y 
Ey 
uA Ww yo 
SIS 
CEN 
  
ah, ani 
d
e
 
vi 
» Mri WF > 
| § 
yF 
X X 
a ® . i ; 
Ee 
| gal 
¥ of 
WK fv 
"Nak ND 
a
 
L
a
l
a
s
 
w
a
y
 
p
l
 
a
a
a
 
A
 
aa
 
h
a
e
 
-.
 
a
f
i
 
S
e
 
oo
 
CA
SO
 
S o
n 
(
a
 
a
 
t
e
 
“ 
oe 
gl
 
n
e
a
 
sod ty tia ROE i ee 
By 
a
.
 
3 
3 
  
TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART 
16 
Wrought by 
master goldsmiths 
A striking decorative 
motif by an artist 
of the Quimbayas, 
Pre-Columbian inhabitants 
of eastern Colombia. 
It comes from a collection 
of 20 prints that demonstrate 
the beauty and variety 
of forms of gold jewels 
and ornaments wrought by 
Colombia's Tolima, 
Calima and Quimbaya artists. 
The original objects 
were selected from among 
the 2,800 items in the Bogota 
Gold Museum (Colombia) 
by the French artist 
Georges Arnulf, who did 
the drawings and reproduced 
them by silk screen printing. 
“20 Pre-Columbian prints’’ 
is published as a large-format 
album by Georges Arnulf, 75, 
rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, 
Paris (Price 135 F). 
Photo © Georges Arnulf

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Thea C « winoow “orion TRE WORLD 
IM_OUricr 
MAY 1967 - 20TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
  
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
US.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7°. 
Annual subscription rates: 15/-stg.;: $3.00 
(Canada); 10 French francs or equivalent; 
2vyears: 27/-stg.; 18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.; 
30 cents; 1 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese and Italian. In the United Kingdom it is distributed 
by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H.W. Wilson Co., New York. 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Research: Olga Rodel 
Layout & Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief 
  
Page 
HISTORY OF MANKIND 
6 THE BIRTH OF WHEAT AND MAIZE FARMING 
By Jacquetta Hawkes 
7 THE EARLY DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS 
By Jacquetta Hawkes 
9 ‘WHEN ORPHEUS STRUCK THE TREMBLING LYRE’ 
By Luigi Pareti 
11 NUMERALS OPEN NEW MATHEMATICAL HORIZONS 
By Philippe Wolff 
12 DID JAPANESE FISHERMEN BRING THE ART 
OF POTTERY MAKING TO ECUADOR 5,000 YEARS AGO? 
By Betty J. Meggers 
14 THE DAWN OF THE GEOGRAPHIC SPIRIT 
By Philippe Wolff 
16 THE SAILING VESSEL COMES INTO ITS OWN 
By Louis Gottschalk 
18 OFFSPRING OF ICARUS 
20 THE SECOND SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION 
By J. Bronowski 
25 THE SINEWS OF INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY 
By Caroline F. Ware, K.M. Panikkar and J. M. Romein 
27 THE ERA OF SYNTHETIC MATERIALS 
By Caroline F. Ware, K.M. Panikkar and J. M. Romein 
28 A RICH MOSAIC OF WORLD HISTORY 
31 THE STUDY OF ANIMAL BEHAVIOUR 
By Jane Oppenheimer 
32 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
33 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
2 TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Wrought by master goldsmiths 
N
e
b
 
- 
18
67
 
MC
 
67
-1
-2
24
 
A 
  
Photo © Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris 
TR BT or ETA i Er WS OR 
  
A 15th-century illustration from “The Book of Ser Marco Polo”, 
an account of the geography, ethnography, politics and science 
of Medieval Asia. Marco Polo wrote it about 1300 on his return 
to Venice after spending 24 years in Asia. In this miniature 
a mariner consults an astrolabe, an early navigational instrument 
which fixed a ship's position by reference to the altitudes of the 
stars, and a ship propelled by sail and oars makes for land.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

HISTORY 
OF 
MANKIND 
[ issue of the Unesco Courier is 
devoted to a pioneering effort to bring an 
international view to the writing of world 
history—the six-tome ‘History of Mankind"’ 
produced under Unesco’s auspices by the 
International Commission for a History of 
the Scientific and Cultural Development of 
Mankind. Presenting extracts from the 
‘History of Mankind’’ as a whole, this number 
is published to coincide with the appearance 
in English of Volume VI of the History (The 
Twentieth Century) and the launching of the 
French language edition—an outstanding pub- 
lishing achievement, containing 7,000 pages, 
855 pages of illustrations plus 108 full colour 
plates. 
As M. René Maheu, Director-General of 
Unesco, has written: “This ‘History of Man- 
kind’... deliberately confines itself to shedding 
light on one of mankind's aspects, its cultural 
and scientific development... It departs from 
the traditional approaches to the study of 
history which, as we know, attach decisive 
importance to the political, economic and even 
military factors.” 
An immense effort of scholarship, compila- 
tion and presentation has been devoted to this 
unparalleled international venture. For the 
first time the reader is shown in truly global 
perspective the developments of science and 
culture from prehistory to the twentieth 
century. None of the volumes trace the natio- 
nal history of any country or people in parti- 
cular. Instead they present the detailed study 
of economic and social events, religious and 
cultural life, the forms of artistic expression 
and the scientific thinking of many peoples 
and cultures (see the Unesco Courier, June 
1963 and May 1965). Other language editions 
have also been published or are in preparation 
(See details page 35). 
    
: 
-~ N 
. wa = See FE 
Photo © Editions Robert Laffont - 
  
  
  
CC RNCInE SEES 
a 
ERE 
NE al 
UE EE 38 ote Cw SEE SR. 
Naples Museum 
  

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  
THE MATHEMATICS LESSON. In the centre of this painting, dating from 1495 and attributed to Jacopo de Barbari, the artist has 
portrayed the Italian scientist, Luca Paciolo. A year earlier, Paciolo published an important work in Venice, summing up the 
mathematical knowledge of his day. No less a master than Leonardo da Vinci illustrated one of Paciolo’s later works.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### 59710: The Birth of wheat and maize farming

  
The birth of wheat 
and maize farming 
by Jacquetta Hawkes 
VW... barley and millet 
in Asia, Africa and Europe, maize in 
the Americas, made the solid founda- 
tion for the agriculture of our Neolithic 
forebears. . . Precise facts about the 
first steps in the cultivation of the 
wild ancestors of the cereals are still 
very few, but their subsequent agricul- 
tural history is sufficiently well estab- 
lished. 
One very significant difference be- 
tween the ancestral wild grasses and 
the man-bred forms is that the former 
shed their seeds as soon as they 
are ripe. When, then, women were 
gathering wild seeds they had to beat 
them into skins or baskets and were 
liable to lose a large part of the yield. 
True reaping could only be invented 
after this natural method of propa- 
  
JACQUETTA HAWKES is the distinguished 
British archaeologist and writer. She is 
the author of Part | (Prehistory) of Volume | 
of the History of Mankind. 
Below, man bearing ears 
of wheat—a farming scene 
from 5,000 years ago recorded 
on a limestone seal 
from Mesopotamia. 
3 
- 
{ 
- 
Fr
an
ce
sc
hi
 
- 
Cc 
o 
& 
@ 
- 
t 
=] 
ve] 
=] 
oc 
w 
c 
o 
- 
© 
w 
Oo ~~ 
[+] 
£ 
Qa. 
gation had been checked by selective 
sowing. . . 
It is likely that there were many 
centuries during which the food 
gatherers of Mesolithic tradition were 
trying out different species, before the 
crops on which so much of the future 
history of mankind were to depend 
became selected, improved and sta- 
bilized. Who at that time could say 
which was certain to be a domestic 
plant, which a “weed”? Even at a 
much later date, rye, which had been 
carried as a weed in soft wheat, mu- 
tated, was cultivated, and soon began 
to be extensively grown in the northern 
latitudes where wheat could not thrive. 
We have absolutely no tangible evi- 
dence for this period of tentative tran- 
sition. But ears of wheat found at 
Jarmo, Mesopotamia in the Old World 
and cobs of maize at Bat Cave, State 
of New Mexico, U.S.A., in the New 
were alike at a primitive and as yet 
unstabilized stage of development. 
It is a rather surprising fact that 
throughout the early centres of culti- 
vation in the Old World wheat and 
barley are almost invariably found to- 
gether ; no Neolithic culture is known 
to have been based on one alone. 
At that stage, however, wheat seems 
usually to have been the more impor- 
tant of the two. . . 
Emmer (Triticum diococcum) has 
been found more abundantly than any 
other wheat on all ancient sites (with 
the exception of some Danubian vil- 
lages) from Egypt to Britain and Scan- 
dinavia. All the great wheat deposits 
to have been preserved in Egypt from 
Neolithic to Roman times are of this 
species. Emmer is remarkably like 
its wild ancestor, now known to be 
Triticum diococcoides, which grows 
wild from Syria and Palestine to Iraq 
and Persia. The discovery that this 
was undoubtedly the ancestral form 
has finally disproved one theory that 
would make Abyssinia the home of 
emmer wheat. 
The wheat found at Jarmo and dating 
from about 5000 B.C. is of very irregular 
type, some ears being coarse and loose 
(closely comparable to Triticum dio- 
coccum) while others are compact and 
already close to the fully cultivated 
form of emmer. As the wild grass is 
at home in relatively high country, it 
is possible that bringing it to lower 
levels for field cultivation helped to 
cause rapid mutation. 
From its homelands in south-west 
Asia this wheat seems to have been 
diffused along two routes, dividing at 
the eastern end of the Mediterranean; 
one took it southward into Egypt, the 
other into Europe, where it was grown 
by the Danubians, the Swiss lake- 
dwellers, the Windmill Hill people of 
Britain and the first farmers of Scan- 
dinavia. Indeed, in the conditions 
offered by the sub-boreal climate it 
was able to do better in these northern 
lands than it would today. . . 
The origins and early history of 
maize have been studied so inten- 
sively of late that opinions have been 
rapidly changing. One basic convic- 
tion which has survived all attempts 
to challenge it is that this most pro- 
ductive cereal originated in the Amer- 
icas and was not known in the .Old 
World in pre-Columbian times. 
¥.. view which has been 
most clearly and consistently develop- 
ed, and which has gained most support 
from recent archaeological and palaeo- 
botanical discoveries is that maize de- 
veloped from a wild ancestor which 
was at once a popcorn (hard-seeded) 
and a pod-corn—in which each kernel 
is enclosed in its own glumes or chaff. 
In the fully evolved maize (Zea 
mays) there are no glumes, the ker- 
nels being attached to a rigid cob and 
enclosed in tight-fitting leaf-sheath or 
shucks. Such a form could never 
survive in nature as (a boon to the 
farmer) the seeds are non-dispersable 
and can only be sown artificially. In 
the primitive pod-corn the seed prob- 
ably grew on slender rachises (in 
place of cobs) which easily broke when 
shaken by wind or by birds, so scatter- 
ing the seed. 
Endorsement of the view that the 
wild ancestor was a maize and not, 
as others have argued, teosinte (Zea 
mexicana) or Tripsacum was provided 
by the discovery two hundred feet be- 
low Mexico City in a geological context 
dating it to at least sixty thousand 
years ago of unmistakable maize pol- 
len grains. That it was also of pod- 
corn type is supported archaeologic- 
ally—both by the finding of ancient 
and primitive cobs and by portrayal in 
prehistoric ceramics. The cobs found 
in the oldest level in Bat Cave, New 
Mexico, and a little uncertainly dated 
by Carbon 14 to about 3600 BC, cer-

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 59710: The Birth of wheat and maize farming

tainly had the glumes and fragile rachis 
of the supposed primitive pod-corn. 
The same is true of the second most 
ancient specimens, the cobs from La 
Perra Cave, Tamaulipas, Mexico, which 
are some one thousand years more 
recent. As for ceramic evidence, vari- 
ous pots from central and South 
America, particularly a funerary urn 
with a maize god from the Mexican Za- 
potec culture, looks very much like a 
pod-corn, 
The Zapotec specimen also tends 
to confirm an interesting result 
obtained by a most ingenious method 
of regressive selective breeding. This 
breeding back towards the primitive 
suggested that in the early form the 
male flower, which in modern maize 
grows separately at the top of the 
stem, was immediately above the fe- 
male flower and therefore the ear. 
The ear held by the Zapotec god is 
crowned with plumes like a helmet. 
Almost certainly they represent the 
plumy male flower. This having been 
observed, re-examination of the Bat 
Cave cobs showed them to be topped 
by stumps which can only be the base 
of the male spike. 
The view that Zea mays is descend- 
ed from a wild maize of pod-corn type, 
is, then, seemingly confirmed from 
many directions. With it is associated 
the further belief that teosinte, so far 
from being the ancestor of maize, was 
in fact the result of a natural hybrid- 
ization between an already cultivated 
maize and Tripsacum. On the other 
hand after this hybridization maize 
seems often to have recrossed with its 
offspring, so that probably nearly all 
the modern variations of corn contain 
an element of teosinte . 
Where and when did the cultivation 
of maize begin? Until recently it was 
assumed that the wild ancestor was a 
native in the South American lowlands 
(where varieties of pod-corn still 
flourish) and that it was first fully cul- 
tivated in the Andes. Bat Cave, how- 
ever, has very much shaken this opi- 
nion: the oldest cobs there, about the 
size of a woman's finger-nail, are un- 
doubtedly very primitive and probably 
near the beginning stages of cultiva- 
tion. If the Carbon 14 date of 3600 BC 
is correct—and it is not unambiguous 
—this is the most ancient corn known. 
The Mexican La Perra cobs are also 
primitive but they differ from those of 
the North American site in several 
botanical features. Although no such 
early specimens have as yet been 
found in the Andean highlands their 
absence cannot be held to dismiss the 
earlier arguments in favour of a South 
American origin. 
— Vol. |, Pt. I, Chap. 10 (Farming) 
   
Ph
ot
o 
© 
S.
 
Ce
le
bo
no
vi
c 
- 
» 
  
p - — 
4s : § Y » — - N 
0” us Ze" 4 8 
From long being dependent on hunting for food, 
the Neolithic peoples gradually began to domesticate animals 
and to raise herds. The wives of the hunters are believed 
to have been responsible for the beginnings of farming. 
Above, hunting scene, detail of an Egyptian relief (4000-3000 B.C.). 


### 59712: The Early domestication of animals

The early domestication 
H ow the first stages of the 
domestication of wild goats, sheep, 
cattle and pigs were achieved is not 
known, and is never likely to be fully 
understood. There are, however, a 
number of theories. The least accep- 
table is that the step was taken direc- 
tly from hunting practices, and in par- 
ticular by the capture and taming of 
animals for use as decoys. It is just 
conceivable that this may have been 
true of reindeer. 
of animals 
Another and contrary view depends 
upon the womenfolk having already 
made enough progress with agricul- 
ture for some extra food to be avail- 
able to tempt hungry animals. Again 
it has been suggested that in the con- 
ditions of post-glacial dessication the 
wild flocks and herds became more 
and more concentrated in the neigh- 
bourhood of water, and more and 
more open to human influence and 
control. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### 59712: The Early domestication of animals

DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS (Continued) 
Man's best friend 
becomes shorter in the muzzle 
The last two explanations are com- 
patible and can well be combined. 
“It happens that just in those regions 
of Hither Asia where ancestors of 
wheat and barley grew spontaneously, 
there lived also wild sheep, goats cattle 
and pigs. Now the hunters whose 
wives were cultivators had something 
to offer some the beasts they had 
hunted—the stubble on grain plots 
and the husks of the grain. As suit- 
able animals became increasingly hem- 
med in to the oases by the desert, 
men might study their habits and, 
instead of killing them offhand, might 
tame them and make them dependent”: 
(V. Gordon Childe, New Light on the 
Most Ancient East). 
One authority has put forward a 
theoretical time-sequence for the do- 
mestication of the different groups. 
First the scavengers, such as the dog, 
second, nomadic animals such as the 
reindeer, goat and sheep; third, beasts 
for which a settled life is essential— 
cattle and pigs; finally, animals that 
can be used for transport including 
the horse, ass and the llama. While 
the dog was certainly domesticated 
in Mesolithic times, and the horse 
not until after the Primary Neolithic 
period, the validity of the distinction 
between the other two classes is very 
dubious. 
However, at the Belt Cave in nor- 
thern Iran domesticated sheep and 
goats were found in the earliest, pre- 
pottery, Neolithic occupation dated by 
Carbon 14 to the first half of the sixth 
millennium, while pigs (the earliest 
known in the world) and cattle did not 
appear until the later Neolithic occu- 
pation dated to the second half of the 
same millennium. 
Ts evidence supports the 
priority of sheep and goats in order of 
domestication Nevertheless it may be 
a purely local state of affairs, and not 
too much weight should be given to it. 
It has already been suggested in dis- 
cussing the origins of the Neolithic 
way of life in general that it is wrong 
to look for a single precisely limited 
centre. Once the idea of taking par- 
tial charge of certain animals had got 
about, trials, some of them successful, 
are likely to have been made in a 
number of regions and by divers 
methods. 
The biological aspects of domestica- 
tion must be briefly considered. The 
beasts composing the early flocks and 
herds in the cradlelands of farming, 
and those later led into Europe, were 
usually much smaller than their wild 
counterparts. The cattle in particular 
(Bos longifrons) were as diminutive 
as the modern Kerry. The usually 
accepted explanation is that wherever 
possible men selected the occasional 
dwarf from among the wild stock, and 
continued to be best able to keep and 
to breed from the smaller, weaker and 
more docile animals. 
It was only much later when domes- 
tication was complete and irreversible 
that their human masters could afford 
to reintroduce a strain from the larger 
wild breeds and to select for size and 
weight. Most bodily changes that 
have taken place in domestic animals 
have been due to selective breeding — 
for example the increased woolliness 
of sheep. On the other hand there 
does seem some tendency at least in 
dogs and pigs to become progres- 
sively shorter in the muzzle, and for 
their coats to lose their natural pro- 
tective shading and assume bright 
colours and piebald markings. 
In spite of a human inclination to 
estimate sheep and goats very diffe- 
rently, it is in fact difficult to distin- 
guish between these two members of 
the sub-family Caprinae by their skel- 
etal remains alone, very slight differ- 
ences in the cannon bones and in the 
bones round the eye being almost the 
only reliable indication. In practice it 
has very often proved impossible to 
determine whether particular Neolithic 
peoples kept goats, sheep, or both 
together. 
All modern domestic sheep appear 
to be descended from three existing 
types of wild Ovis. The most impor- 
tant, because it was probably the spe- 
cies originally domesticated by the 
pioneer herdsmen of south-west Asia, 
is the Urial (Ovis vignei) which has a 
vast Asiatic range from the Elburz 
mountains to Tibet. It has a fawny 
brown coat with a darker band along 
the back; this is hairy on top but con- 
ceals wool below. The ram has large 
horns curving outwards and back- 
wards, the ewe small prick horns like 
a goat. 
If this was the breed first tamed in 
regions south of the Elburz (and rep- 
resented by those very early animals 
found in the Belt Cave), it was cer- 
tainly also the one first to be carried 
westward with the farming economy 
into Europe, for it is represented by 
O. aries palustris, the famous “Tur- 
bary” sheep of the earliest Swiss lake- 
dwellers. It was, indeed, the breed 
raised by most of the early Neolithic 
farmers of Europe. 
Another type of wild sheep with 
domestic offspring is the mouflon 
(Ovis musimon) with a rather more 
westerly range than the Urial; today 
varieties live in southern Europe 
(Sicily, Corsica and Sardinia) where 
they must originally have had a more 
extensive territory. It is also found in 
Cyprus; its area of distribution extends 
eastward from central Anatolia to nor- 
thern Iran. . . 
Ai wild species that has 
contributed to our modern stock is the 
Argali (Ovis ammon) at home in the 
highlands of central Asia. It is very 
large, and bears long horns making a 
forward turning coil. It is possible that 
such a powerful animal would not 
have found favour among the early 
domesticators. Its earliest recorded 
presence seems to be as a cross with 
Urial at Anau at the end of the Neoli- 
thic occupation there. Argali elements 
certainly spread westward and are 
dominant in the Merino breed. A 
beast apparently representing a pure 
Argali variety was found in deposits 
in the English Thames dating from 
Bronze Age times. 
It is still impossible to give any 
coherent account of the domestica- 
tion of what was probably man's first 
milk-giver—the goat. It is likely, 
however, that the bezoar goat of Tur- 
kestan and Afghanistan was the most 
important ancestral species. 
The big horn is the wild sheep na- 
tive to the New World. It was never 
domesticated, sheep not having been 
kept by the pre-Columbian people of 
America. 
All humpless breeds of cattle are 
believed to be descendants of the 
wild Bos Primigenius, or aurochs, that 
was a native of the plains from 
southern Russia to the Altais. The 
bull of this species is huge and carries 
wide, outspreading horns. Yet the 
cow (as is well shown among the Las- 
caux cave-paintings) has a much lighter 
build and more sharply curved little 
horns, and altogether looks less unlike 
the small, short-horned Bos longifrons 
(or Bos brachyceros) that composed 
the herds of most Neolithic farmers 
alike in the primary areas of south- 
west Asia, in Egypt and in Europe. 
— JACQUETTA HAWKES 
Vol. I, Pt. I, Chap. 10 (Farming)

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 59768: When Orpheus struck the trembling lyre'

‘When Orpheus struck the trembling lyre’ 
Kor primitive times man 
felt the need of song to amplify the 
sounds he made under the influence 
 
LUIGI PARETI, the great Italian scholar of 
Greco-Roman history, completed the basic 
manuscript for Volume Il (The Ancient 
World) of the History of Mankind before 
his death in 1962. 
   
of emotion, and to give them emphasis 
and exaltation. He also wanted to 
accentuate the rhythm of other activi- 
ties, such as the march and the dance, 
with sounds produced by clapping the 
hands or by playing instruments of a 
fairly rudimentary nature. 
These instruments were probably 
“invented” independently by various 
     
    
by Luigi Pareti 
peoples. Men were led to create them 
empirically by the noises they obtain- 
ed, sometimes quite casually, through 
percussion, or shaking, or quick rotary 
movement, or rubbing, or plucking at 
resonant and vibrant objects, or blow- 
ing at reeds and similar hollow tubes. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
LS
E 
The harp, 
was made 
and played with 
great skill some 
5,000 years ago, 
when this sculpture 
of a harpist 
from the Cyclades 
(Greece) 
was carved. 
Harps ranged 
from a simple 
bow shape to 
triangular in form. 
In different 
versions they 
had from 4 to 11 
B strings and even 
® as many as 21. 
A
E
E
 
A
 
S
A
 
E
A
R
 
R
a
p
h
o
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
L. 
Fr
ed
er
ic
 
- 
E
s
e

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 59768: When Orpheus struck the trembling lyre'

10 
THE TREMBLING LYRE (Continued) 
Tree bark musicians of yore 
Vibration caused by pressure gave 
rise to hurdy-gurdies, cymbals, casta- 
nets, and the like; percussion on reso- 
nant sticks or hollow tree-trunks or 
tablets or taut membranes led to the 
various kinds of xylophone and to 
drums or timpani; rapid rotation in the 
air made people invent peals of bells, 
sirens, and their variants; the emission 
of sounds by shaking suggested the 
sistrum and the rattle; the simplest 
methods of friction (on notched sticks 
or toothed bows or “clappers”) pro- 
duced instruments consisting of taut, 
sounding strings to which a bow was 
applied; and the plucking of reeds or 
bark or similar substances led to the 
various instruments based on the plec- 
trum (zither, guitar, harp, and so on). 
At the same time wind instruments 
were invented and developed. Some 
required continuous blowing on one 
or more reeds, which could be open 
or closed, and which might or might 
not have holes to be shut down with 
the finger. On others the blowing 
was intermittent, the sound being 
obtained by the vibration either of the 
mouthpiece (as with horns or trumpets) 
or again of some type of reed (as 
with the oboe, the Greek aulos, or 
the like). 
In varying degree we have certain 
types of evidence for music among 
ancient peoples. There are monu- 
ments figuring scenes of singers, dan- 
cers, and players; some ancient 
musical instruments have survived; 
there are allusions in literature; and 
sometimes there are even musical 
scores in the poetic texts as they have 
been transmitted to us. 
India. Nothing is known of early 
Indian music, except in so far as it 
was connected with the Vedic sacrifice. 
The Vedic hymns (sdman from the 
musical point of view) were sung or 
chanted according to fixed rules, which 
formed the object of a special manual, 
the Rgpréatisakhya. The tradition of 
Vedic chanting has lasted down to 
these days, more or less faithfully 
preserved. 
Four song-books (Gana) are employ- 
ed for study or practice. They are 
technical “works of very late age, 
connected “with the Samaveda. They 
give the Vedic texts in their chanted 
form, i.e., with the insertion of addi- 
tional syllables or whole words (sto- 
bha), mostly meaningless and intended 
to make the verses agree rythmically 
with the melody. Musical notation is 
of a primitive kind. On this basis a 
reconstruction of Vedic hymn-singing 
of 3,000 years ago has been attempted; 
but of course this contains an all-too- 
strong element of surmise and hy- 
pothesis. 
Egypt. On monuments showing 
processions, retinues, and armies on 
the march both singers and players 
are represented. Of the latter some 
have vertical flutes with as many as 
eleven stops, and sometimes double 
flutes; others have harps, with up to 
twenty strings; others have lyres, 
drums, or rattles. 
Assyria preserved and improved the 
types of musical activity which had 
been current in the Middle East since 
Sumerian times. Here too monuments 
show scenes of singers and musicians 
taking part in temple rites, funeral 
ceremonies, processions, and military 
operations. 
For the Hebrews we have the evi- 
dence of the Bible showing that 
music was used to accompany songs, 
both individual lyrics and choral 
chants, at consecration ceremonies 
and at public addresses. We also find 
it used in the recital of the sacred 
prose writings, which were intoned 
against the background of melodious 
compositions following prescribed 
rules. The Hebrews therefore used 
both wind instruments such as the 
horn and also strings (the guitar, lyre, 
and harp) to accompany their choral 
songs, for which the Temple employed 
extensive choirs. 
n the Greek world monu- 
ments as early as the Mycenaean age 
attest the presence of singers and the 
use of musical instruments—the sis- 
trum, the zither, and the flute. Zithers, 
which perhaps derived from Egypt or 
Asia Minor, were of various kinds, 
their size, shape, and the number of 
strings (from seven to eleven) depend- 
ing on the nature of the piece to be 
played. 
Among wind instruments the aulos 
or oboe (made of wood, bone, or 
metal) had various ranges of pitch 
(known as parthenoi, paidikoi, teleioi, 
and hyperteleioi); and the double 
flute, played with both hands, had one 
reed for the song and the other for 
its accompaniment (krousis). Some- 
times use was made of the horizontal 
flute. The ancient syrinx, the shep- 
herd's pipe, had between seven and 
nine reeds of the same length but of 
different diameters; but when used for 
artistic music it developed into an 
instrument in which the lengths of reed 
and their diameters were both dif- 
ferent. Trumpets were of various pro- 
portions and had various depths of 
tone. Percussion instruments inclu- 
ded wooden rattles (castanets), cym- 
bals of various sizes, and timpani. 
From Mycenaean times there were 
two distinct types of musical accom- 
paniment for poetry. One became 
especially popular in lonia, and was 
used in the solo recital or declama- 
tion of epic verse. The sound came 
from the lyre (phorminx), which was 
for the most part played by the sing- 
er himself. The other type of accomp- 
animent was used to provide the tune 
  
Lute player floating in mid-air 
is one of the innumerable Buddhist 
apsaras (angels) depicted 
on 8th century frescoes in the cave 
temples of Tun Huang (China). 
She strikes the lute to celebrate 
the Buddha's enlightenment. 
Widely played in Mesopotamia 
and Egypt, 4,000 years ago, 
the lute is believed to have been 
invented in the Caucasus region 
or near the Caspian Sea. 
In its different forms it is still 
widely used in Asia. 
From “Science and Civilization in China” 
by Joseph Needham, Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press, 1965

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### 59768: When Orpheus struck the trembling lyre'

for lyric poetry, both in solo recitals 
and in choral performances. 
The lliad has many references to 
music, for instance to the singing of 
peans (I, 472; XXII, 391). Moreover 
in the Eighteenth Book, describing the 
scenes on the shield made by Hepha- 
estus, the poet tells of the dances, 
songs, and notes from auloi and phor- 
minges which accompanied a wed- 
ding. There are the shepherds play- 
ing the syrinx, the maidens singing 
to the sound of the lute, the harves- 
ters dancing and yelling, and a piazza 
where young men and girls do their 
dance. 
In later times recitation of poetry 
was accompanied less and less by 
music, and eventually without it alto- 
gether. But lyric accompaniments 
grew in importance and became 
increasingly varied. 
In Dorian lands the choral song 
was revived to express lyric senti- 
ments, both for solo voices and for 
choirs. It was performed in dialogue 
by young men and girls, by athletes 
and dancers, and at weddings. . . 
Meanwhile Pythagoras and his pu- 
pils worked at the study of acoustics 
and mathematics in relation to music. 
We need say no more here than that 
they enunciated the relation between 
musical intervals and the length of 
strings. 
Monuments show how the Etruscans 
too were devoted to music and dan- 
cing and how they made use of both 
on public occasions, at games, and 
at funerals. The instruments in most 
common use were the lyre, the flute, 
and the subulus (or double flute), the 
bronze trumpet with curving mouth- 
piece (lituus), and the circular horn. 
We do not know what their musical 
compositions were like, but they 
must have drawn heavily upon Greek 
models. In execution we can see from 
monuments that it was common prac- 
tice to let two players accompany one 
another, one on strings and one on 
the double flute. 
— Vol. Il, Pt. I, Chap. 6 
(Literature and Art) 


### 59769: Numerals open new mathematical horizons

Numerals open new mathematical horizons 
U.. the eleventh century, 
the only methods of calculation known 
in Europe had been the mechanical pro- 
cesses necessitated by the use of Ro- 
man numerals which were so awkward 
to manipulate. These processes in- 
cluded counting on the fingers, a pro- 
cess treated of in many manuals of 
computation; the abacus (a tablet with 
counters strung on or between hori- 
zontal bars), which the exchequer used 
for the financial reckonings of the 
English royal house, was a variant; and 
wooden tallies marked with notches 
of varying depth. 
It was Gerbert who introduced into 
western Christendom the “gubar” nu- 
merals, inscribing the symbols on 
counters, which he then placed on 
the abacus. It is uncertain whether 
he had fully grasped the idea of posi- 
tional value. 
Early in the twelfth century, Abelard 
of Bath translated Al Kharizmi's 
treatise explaining the mechanics of 
the Hindu numerical system. It was 
known thereafter as “algorism,” and 
was to be appreciated at its full value 
by Leonardo Fibonacci (¢. 1170-post 
1240), the son of a Pisan merchant, 
who had been educated by a Muslim 
teacher at Bougie, and had subse- 
quently travelled extensively in Egypt, 
Syria, and Greece. 
His efforts, however, were not suffi- 
cient to bring about a general adoption 
of the system. The abacus was held 
to meet current requirements, and the 
Hindu numerals to lend themselves 
more readily to falsification (hence the 
prohibition of their use in the keeping 
of accounts until the sixteenth cen- 
 
Photo University of Istanbul Library 
This 16th century Persian miniature 
shows Islamic mathematicians 
at work in an observatory. 
tury). Not until a much later date was 
there a general realization of the new 
mathematical horizons which were 
opened up by the use of these 
numerals. 
The techniques of calculation, then 
known as “logistics,” remained rudi- 
mentary. Fibonacci took over from the 
Arabs what still remains our current 
procedure for subtraction. Multipli- 
cation was treated as a series of addi- 
tion operations, with doubling as a 
further separate operation. Division 
procedures were a source of parti- 
cular perplexity: Gerbert sets out no 
fewer than ten of such procedures, 
and has recourse in the main to a 
series of subtractions. Fibonacci, 
however, was able to detail methods 
of extracting square and cube roots. 
Arithmetic consisted in the theory of 
numbers, which had been evolved by 
the Pythagoreans and expounded after 
them by Boéthius and Fibonacci. Fi- 
bonacci appears also in connexion with 
algebra, the name of which is derived 
from a treatise by Al Kharizmi, Al jabr 
w'al Muqébalah, translated by Robert 
of Chester. In his Flos (1225), Fibo- 
nacci generalized the substitution of 
letters for numbers in the solution of 
problems (as, at about the same time, 
did the German Dominican, Jordanus 
Nemorarius), and employed a negative 
quantity in solving financial problems. 
It was due to these same authors 
that some progress was also made in 
three-dimensional geometry. Certain 
rules make their first appearance in the 
work of Fibonacci (although it is not 
certain that he was the first discoverer 
of them), as, for instance, for ascer- 
taining the volume of the frustrum of 
a pyramid. Jordanus Nemorarius stud- 
ied plane projections, which were used 
in connexion with the astrolabe and in 
map-drawing. 
Trigonometry, despite a few trans- 
lations from the Arabic, was scarcely 
taken up. But the concept of infinite 
quantities, rejected by Aristotle but 
recognized by Christianity, set some 
minds on the road to the differential 
and integral calculus. Unfortunately, 
the work accomplished on mathemati- 
cal infinity around 1300 by scholars 
in Paris was to be lost sight of in the 
fifteenth century, until Fermat and 
Cavalieri worked it out afresh. 
— PHILIPPE WOLFF 
Vol. Ili, Pt. IV, Chap. 9 
(Scientific Thought) 
1

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### 59770: Did Japanese fishermen bring the art of pottery making to Ecuador 5,000 years ago?

Did Japanese fishermen 
bring the art of pottery making 
to Ecuador 3,000 years ago? 
12 
by Betty J. Meggers 
U P until relatively recent 
times, it was believed that two hearths 
of New World civilization, Mesoamerica 
and the Central Andes, had achieved 
their developments independently, or 
at best with a minimum of intercom- 
munication. However, better know- 
ledge of the cultural sequences in both 
areas has made it increasingly evident 
not only that a great deal of inter- 
change took place, but that it began 
at a relatively early time. 
During the early Formative period, 
traits of basic significance were passed 
from one region to the other, including 
pottery making and certain species of 
domesticated plants. Beginning shortly 
before the Christian era and continuing 
to the time of the Spanish Conquest, 
evidence of contact is more abundant, 
perhaps the result of planned trading 
expeditions. 
Flat and cylindrical stamps made of 
pottery, small pottery masks, numerous 
details of costume and headdress are 
among elements introduced onto the 
coast of Ecuador from Mexico, while 
the figurine mold, shaft and chamber 
tomb construction, and metallurgy are 
among traits that moved from south 
to north. 
The principal foci of contact appear 
to have been the coasts of Ecuador 
and southern Mexico, and many of the 
exchanged traits were adopted spor- 
adically or not at all outside of these 
regions. Others, however, were widely 
diffused. How significant this inter- 
change was in stimulating the process 
of cultural development in either region 
is a question still unanswered. 
Another long cherished belief that 
has recently been challenged is the 
independence of New World cultural 
development. Until the last decade, 
the majority of archeologists viewed 
New World prehistory as an isolated 
BETTY J. MEGGERS, author of Chapter 1 
(Prehistoric New World Cultural Develop- 
ment), in Part. V of Volume lll (Eastern Pre- 
dominance and the Rise of the West) of the 
History of Mankind, is an American anthro- 
pologist who has carried out special re- 
search in South American archeology. 
 
 
 
        
Until the last few 
years it was 
believed that the 
civilizations of 
pre-Columbian 
America had evolved 
independently from 
cultures in other parts 
of the world. The 
latest archaeological 
findings however point 
to the fact that 
some 5,000 years ago 
fishermen from Japan 
must have crossed 
the Pacific and landed 
at or near Valdivia 
Bay on the coast 
of Ecuador, where 
they initiated the 
local fishermen into 
the art of pottery 
making. The photos, 
left, reveal the 
amazing similarity 
of patterns between 
the Jomon pottery of 
Japan and the Valdivia 
pottery of Ecuador. 
Shown here are only 
five comparative 
illustrations from 
a host of other 
examples equally 
remarkable in their 
similarity and which 
leave little doubt as to 
their Japanese origin. 
Photos ©, taken from 
“Early Formative Period 
of oastal Ecuador” by 
Betty J. Meggers, Clifford 
Evans and Emilio Estrada. 
Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, 1965

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### 59770: Did Japanese fishermen bring the art of pottery making to Ecuador 5,000 years ago?

The coastal civilization of 
fishing people which developed 
in Japan nine thousand years 
ago founded what is now 
called the Jomon Culture. 
Right, a Neolithic earthenware 
Jomon (rope pattern) pitcher 
whose name comes from 
the distinctive patterns made 
on its surface by coiling 
rope on the soft clay. 
Photo Japanese Embassy, Paris 
phenomenon, and resemblances be- 
tween cultural traits or complexes in 
Asia and America were interpreted as 
due to parallelism or convergence. 
As the chronological, geographical 
and contextural circumstances have 
become better known, however, it is 
increasingly evident that this explana- 
tion can no longer be accepted un- 
critically. Nor can we be certain that 
transpacific introductions were insigni- 
ficant in their effect on developing 
New World culture. 
Investigations of the origin of pottery 
making on the coast of Ecuador have 
produced the suggestion of a trans- 
pacific introduction from western Japan 
around 3000 B.C. The appearance of 
a complex of ceremonial traits includ- 
ing head rests, small house models 
with Asiatic architectural treatment, 
and a special type of panpipe, in ap- 
proximately the same area several 
thousand years later seems best 
explained as the result of another 
Asiatic introduction, this time from the 
Malay peninsula. Many components of 
Maya art, architecture, astrology, cal- 
ender, mythology, symbolism and 
ritual have Asian counterparts, and it 
is becoming increasingly improbable 
that independent development can 
have produced them all. 
Although we are far from under- 
standing the nature and extent of 
transpacific contact, it is safe to affirm 
that the rise of civilization on the Old 
and New Worlds was not an inde- 
pendent phenomenon, and that theories 
concerning the inevitability of a cultural 
evolutionary process leading from 
savagery to civilization must take this 
factor into account. 
If the evidence has been correctly 
evaluated, it suggests that the Bering 
Strait was not the only route by which 
new cultural traits were introduced 
into the New World. 
Pottery appears on the coasts of 
Ecuador about 3200 BC. as a major 
component of the Valdivia culture. The 
earliest material is competently made 
and tastefully decorated, although 
thick walled. Vessels are large rounded 
T
R
 
bowls and small jars with slightly 
constricted or insloping upper walls. 
Surface treatment ranges from un- 
polished through incompletely polished 
to lustrous and a high proportion of 
vessels are red slipped on the exterior. 
A variety of decoration was produced 
by simple instruments such as a piece 
of shell, a sharpened stick or a finger 
drawn across or punched into the 
surface. Although Valdivia pottery 
incorporates no complicated vessel 
forms or techniques of decoration, it 
is clearly the product of a long tradi- 
tion of ceramic development. 
While our knowledge of New World 
prehistory is still far from complete, 
the outline now beginning to take 
shape leaves no gap into which such 
an evolution could fit. On the other 
hand, across the Pacific on the island 
of Kyushu, Japan pottery dated around 
3000 B.C. not only closely resembles 
that of the Valdivia culture, but can 
‘be traced back over several thousand 
years to increasingly primitive forms. 
I. makers of Early Middle 
Jomon pottery in Japan lived either 
along the coasts or in the mountain 
valleys. The inhabitants of the coast 
were shellfish gatherers and fishermen, 
like the contemporary coastal inhabi- 
tants of the New World, and their 
general level of social and cultural 
dévelopment was very similar. 
An important difference was that 
pottery making had been acquired by 
about 7000 B.C. From an original 
simple conical-based, vertical-walled 
all-purpose container, decorated with 
incised, rouletted or cord-marked 
designs, there developed a variety of 
more complicated bowl and jar forms 
and more elaborate techniques of 
decoration. This gradual evolution is 
clearly preserved in an archeological 
record composed of hundreds of 
Jomon sites. 
The contrast between this long 
record and a blank in the New World 
prior to the appearance of Valdivia 
| \ AL
 
:
 & 
X 
| 
ai
 
te
 
YJ 
: =
 
- 
pottery, the striking comparability 
between the ceramic complexes on the 
two sides of the Pacific, and the 
coincidence of the initial Valdivia dates 
with the dates for pottery with the 
same characteristics in Japan, lead to 
the conclusion that the two occur- 
rences must be of common origin. 
An introduction via an overland 
route across the Bering Strait is un- 
supported by any evidence. On the 
other hand, the presence of bones 
of deep sea fish in Jomon sites, as 
well as the discovery of several dugout 
canoes of Jomon age, attest to the 
fact that these early fishermen 
ventured far from shore. 
The modern Polynesians possess 
the knowledge required to survive for 
weeks on the open sea, and the Jomon 
fishermen can be credited with similar 
skills and endurance. Such a craft, if 
blown far from land by a storm and 
left to the mercy of winds and currents, 
would have been propelled across the 
northern Pacific and down along the 
coast of the New World. The jutting 
coast of Ecuador marks the end of this 
route ; failing a landing here, a drifting 
craft would be borne again westward 
across the Pacific. 
Such a journey might have required 
close to a year, and all of the original 
occupants may not have survived. 
However, at least one survivor is 
required to account for the elements 
characterizing the original pottery of 
the Valdivia culture. Such a survivor 
would have found the coastal Ecua- 
dorians living very much as his own 
people had on the coast of Japan, with 
the principal exception that containers 
of perishable materials were the only 
type known. 
The newcomer knew how to make 
pottery, and in teaching the Ecua- 
dorians introduced the vessel shapes 
and decorative techniques and motifs 
with which he was familiar, So apt 
were the pupils that they soon equalled 
or even surpassed the products of 
their contemporaries in Japan. 
— Vol. Ill, Pt. V, Chap. 1 
(Prehistoric New World 
Cultural Development) 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 59771: The Dawn of the geographic spirit

14 
The dawn 
of the geog 
spirit 
by Philippe Wolff 
Kisii: of the world 
had shown a marked shrinkage in the 
third and fourth centuries, and Roman 
geographers like Solinus had interlard- 
ed what was left with information that 
was entirely mythical. From the ninth 
century onwards, however, thanks to 
Scandinavian travellers, horizons be- 
gan once more to widen. A Dane, 
named Gardar Svavarsson, made the 
journey round Iceland in about 860; in 
878 or 886 a Norwegian, Ohthere 
(Ottar) rounded the North Cape, and 
reached the mouth of the Dvina. 
Then came the discovery of Green- 
land by the Norwegian, Gunnbjorn, in 
about 900, and its exploration by an- 
other Norwegian, Eric the Red, in about 
980. Eric's son, Leif, attempting to 
establish a direct route from Norway 
to Greenland, was carried towards Vin- 
land, a part of North America (1000). 
PHILIPPE WOLFF, co-editor of Volume Ill 
(Eastern Predominance and the Rise of the 
West) of the History of Mankind, is a French 
historian, philologist and man of letters. 
raphic 
Fact (icebergs and volcanoes) 
and fantasy (menacing sea- 
monsters) are intermingled on 
this 16th century Spanish chart 
of northern waters (from the tip 
of Norway to Iceland and the 
edge of Greenland in this 
detail). In the 9th, 10th and 11th 
centuries, Scandinavian navigators 
discovered a large area of the 
Northern Hemisphere. In the 
11th century a Norwegian mariner 
is believed to have set foot 
briefly in Newfoundland and 
Southern Labrador, travelled up 
the valley of the St. Lawrence, 
and even reached Nova Scotia. 
Photo © Editions Robert Laffont, Paris 
Not long afterwards, Thorfin Karl- 
sefni set up an Icelandic colony there. 
This proved short-lived, but it seems 
fairly certain that he set foot briefly 
in Newfoundland, and southern Labra- 
dor, travelled up the valley of the St. 
Lawrence, and reached even as far as 
Nova Scotia and New England. 
Nor were the Scandinavians mere 
coverers of distances. The Konungs 
Skuggsjé (Mirror of the King), dating 
from about 1250, is the work of an 
anonymous Norwegian who had lived 
in Iceland, and, with its admirable 
descriptions of glaciers and icebergs, 
is the only European work to give 
evidence of a true geographic spirit. 
The other great European contribu- 
tion to the knowledge of the globe is 
represented by the journeys made by 
missionaries and merchants in the 
thirteenth century into Asia, in con- 
nexion with the Mongol conquest. 
From the time of John of Plano Car- 
pini, who reached Karakorum (1245-47), 
to that of Marco Polo, who lived for a 
long time (1271-95), in China, some 
  
GRVNTLANDI} 
PARS - 
a 
   
dozen travellers, most of them Italian, 
left more or less detailed accounts of 
their journeyings. 
The most remarkable, in the preci- 
sion of its observation, is perhaps that 
of the Flemish Franciscan, William of 
Rubruck (1253-55), who among other 
things re-established the fact that the 
Caspian was an inland sea. But when 
Marco Polo returned to Italy, he was 
met with ironic scepticism, and all the 
treasure of his accumulated observa- 
tion remained almost unused. 
Even more disappointing was the 
representation of the world. In the 
few Mappae Mundi, that have come 
down to us (for example, the work 
of the anonymous geographer of 
Ravenna from the eighth century and 
especially the maps, attributed to 
Hereford, from the thirteenth), con- 
siderations of exact representation 
seem to have been subordinated to a 
concern for aesthetic effect, aimed at 
producing an ornamental design, or de- 
ferring to some religious considera- 
tion. For instance, Jerusalem is plac-

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 59771: The Dawn of the geographic spirit

  
  
ed in a central position and Palestine 
is enlarged disproportionately to hold 
all the biblical place names. 
More accurate maps were neverthe- 
less a necessity, and sectional topo- 
graphical maps in due course made 
their appearance. These were intend- 
ed for the elucidation of itineraries, 
as, for example, the four maps of 
Britain produced in the thirteenth cen- 
tury by the English historian, Matthew 
Paris, and the portulan charts, showing 
only seas and coast-lines, which were 
in use among European sailors from 
the twelfth century onwards. 
Geographical questions were also, 
for reasons which were partly theolo- 
gical, subjects of considerable con- 
troversy. That the earth was a sphere 
was throughout maintained, the Church 
expressing no opposition to such a 
view, although there were writers who 
advanced other theories. It is ques- 
tionable, however, whether ths theolo- 
gical affirmation was based on any 
very clear mental picture of its im- 
plications. 
22 
GRVNTLANDIE 
ow a 
HE GALANDIA 
terra mod 
Les 
= ~~ f 
YR1IA ” NOR MC 
ohe R 
  
Considerations of climatic variations 
gave rise to doubts about the in- 
habitability of the sub-tropical areas 
and the southern hemisphere. Grosse- 
teste followed Ptolemy in declaring 
such regions to be uninhabitable; 
Albert the Great, on the other hand, 
maintained that, as none of Nature's 
activity could be in vain, the south 
must have its temperate zone, inhabit- 
ed by men, and that these regions 
were not separated from the known 
world by insuperable obstacles. 
The relative geographical distribu- 
tion of land and sea continued to en- 
gage two schools in controversy. The 
orthodox school seems to have fav- 
oured the “oceanic theory” of Pto- 
lemy, for which there was biblical con- 
firmation (for instance, in Psalm XXIV, 
according to which God established 
the earth on the waters). The other 
school supported the “continental 
theory”, however, affirming the exis- 
tence of three continental land masses 
like Eurasia. This theory could also 
claim biblical substantiation, and more- 
over it received the support of Roger 
Bacon, and was not without its influ- 
ence on Christopher Columbus. 
The tides also received attention, 
since these were seen as an admirable 
example of astral influence: it was 
generally agreed that they were the 
result of the action of the moon. The 
Venerable Bede, having assembled a 
basis of sound information, drew up 
a valuable table of tides and their 
variations in Britain. 
Problems of geology and relief were 
scarcely formulated, save in relation 
to extraordinary phenomena such as 
volcanoes. There was a general reluc- 
tance to be satisfied, however, with 
the explanation of the water supply 
of rivers merely in terms of precipita- 
tions. It was believed that the waters 
contained in the earth, being lighter, 
rose naturally to the surface, and that 
only the action of the stars prevented 
them from covering it entirely. 
— Vol. Ill, Pt. IV, Chap. 9 
(Scientific Thought) 
. RE - 
Huforumpic 
Frou only 17 min 
vik 
13

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### 59772: The Sailing vessel comes into its own

The sailing vessel 
comes into its own 
I the Mediterranean, until 
about 1500 the galley with one bank 
of oars was supreme both as man- 
of-war and as merchant ship. Oars 
were steadily increased in length, even 
to fifty feet. Reaching inboard for 
one third of their length, they were 
LOUIS GOTTSCHALK, the noted American 
historian and scholar, is author-editor of 
Volume IV (The Beginnings of the Modern 
World) of the History of Mankind. 
manipulated by as many as seven 
men each. 
The steering oar early gave way to 
the rudder, and man power was sup- 
plemented by masts and sails. The 
Venetians and the Genoese used huge 
galleys equipped with both oars and 
sails, called galleasses, and slow 
freighters (naves or carracks) of as 
much as six-hundred tons’ burden. In 
1571, at the Battle of Lepanto, the 
Christian armada included six galleas- 
From ancient times a Mediterranean vessel par excellence, the galley, propelled 
mostly be oars but also fitted with sails, remained in use until the end of the 
17th century. Some were of as much as 600 tons burden and had 30 oars 
on each side. Detail of engraving shows galleys from a 16th century fleet. 
  
¥ 
2 
= 
’ Ww: 
o
y
)
 
A
 
FD
, 
  
  
  
by Louis Gottschalk 
ses and over two hundred galleys, to 
say nothing of smaller auxiliary craft. 
Lepanto was the last significant naval 
battle in which the galley was consider- 
ed the decisive vessel, although it con- 
tinued to be used for more than a 
century. 
Meanwhile the sailing vessel had 
come into its own, especially on the 
Atlantic. The stern-post rudder, which 
permitted more rapid steering, had 
probably been known to the Chinese 
Photo © Editions Robert Laffont, Paris 
 
    
  
        
  
  
  
  
  
 
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### 59772: The Sailing vessel comes into its own

In 1681, the Languedoc Canal 
(241 kilometres, 150 miles; 
119 locks) was opened in France, 
connecting the Rhone and the 
Garonne Rivers, An engineering 
marvel of its age, the canal 
circumvented the long and 
hazardous trip via the straits 
of Gibraltar. Right, drawing by 
the 17th-century Italian artist, 
Zonca, shows operation of a lock. 
Photo © Editions Robert Laffont, Paris 
in the eighth century, to the Byzan- 
tines in the twelfth, and in Poland in 
the thirteenth. It was fully developed 
in fourteenth-century Byzantine ves- 
sels. The fleet which the English king 
Henry V assembled for the invasion 
of France in 1413 included cogs, car- 
racks, barges, and balingers, mostly 
of about five-hundred tons’ burden, 
the best known being the blunt, broad, 
slow-going cogs of northwestern 
Europe. 
Meanwhile the Portuguese and the 
Spanish were developing the caravel, 
a small, broad, high-pooped, lateen- 
sailed, vessel for ocean travel. This 
was the type of ship used by Vasco de 
Gama and Columbus. Columbus’ Santa 
Maria was of only a little over two 
hundred tons. By this time rigging 
had improved; three-masted vessels 
with bowsprits were common from the 
fifteenth century on and with two 
masts square-rigged and one lateen 
rigged, navigators could beat “up the 
wind.” 
S... the winds over the 
Atlantic rarely die down completely, 
nations with Atlantic outlets were able 
to abandon the clumsy oar-driven 
galley in favour of more maneuvrable 
sailing vessels. The Great Armada 
(1588), with only four galleasses and 
four galleys but around one hundred 
and thirty sailing vessels (the largest 
of thirteen hundred tons), exemplifies 
the replacement of the galley by the 
Atlantic type of shipping. 
Improved navigational methods and 
larger freighters permitted freer travel 
on the open ocean, and longer sailings 
eliminated many trans-shipments. 
In addition to the well-known all- 
water route between the North Sea and 
Venice or Genoa via Gibraltar, the 
Dutch and the Germans were able to 
maintain a continuous sea-route be- 
tween the Netherlands and the Baltic 
ports. The explorations of the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries gave still an- 
other impetus to water transportation. 
Not only did the growing commerce 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                         
  
      
  
  
   
       
  
  
    
with the nascent colonies and the 
Far East augment the demands on 
shipping but also intra-European com- 
munications grew because of increas- 
ed traffic in exotic products. . . 
In the seventeenth century, though 
the Dutch had to import most of their 
shipbuilding materials, they were per- 
haps the leading shipbuilders and 
marine carriers of Europe. Pieter J. 
Livorn invented (1595) a type of vessel 
(called in Dutch the fluitschip and in 
English the flute) of slender design, 
light weight, and shallow draft that 
was faster and cheaper to build and 
to run than earlier types. . . 
The Dutch fishing vessels (busses) 
had long excelled in the North Sea 
fisheries, Dutch broad and flat-bottom- 
ed flyboats carried much of Europe's 
cabotage, and Dutch whalers domi- 
A Dutch 
device known as the “ship's camel” 
lifted heavy vessels over sandbars and 
nated the whale oil market. 
through shallow canals. And Drebbel 
built a submarine that in 1620 was 
rowed below the surface of the Thames 
for several hours. . . 
Several improvements in location- 
finding and hygiene facilitated lengthy 
voyages for Dutch and other Euro- 
pean crews. To the magnetic compass, 
known to navigators for several cen- 
turies, was added the telescope, which 
in the seventeenth century was quickly 
adapted to navigation, and finally, in 
the eighteenth century the ship's chro- 
nometer. The planting of vegetable 
gardens at ports of call helped to 
counteract the heavy toll of scurvy. 
— Vol. IV, Chap. 14 
(Technology and Society) 
11

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

h
o
 
cn engir 
  
   
  
29) In 19 
& v d “1:24:11     
    
  realiz 
1 i lie EN 
  
  
  
i 
a
 ie e 8
 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### 59773: The Second scientific revolution

20 
The second 
scientific 
revolution 
by J. Bronowski 
1. most creative cultural 
development of the twentieth century 
was the emergence of a new scientific 
outlook and its impact on the thought 
and life of mankind. 
Beginning at the opening of the cen- 
tury, scientists conceived a new view 
of nature and her laws which made as 
sharp a break with the thought which 
preceded it as the scientific inquiries 
of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies had made with the thought of 
the Middle Ages. 
The new scientific thought may 
appropriately be termed the second 
scientific revolution. The first great 
scientific revolution had evolved the 
scientific method of inquiry. Looked 
at from the perspective of the twen- 
J. BRONOWSKI, author of Chapter 6 “The 
New Scientific Thought and its Impact” in 
Volume VI (The Twentieth Century) of the 
History of Mankind, is the noted British scien- 
tist and thinker, distinguished in several 
sciences. He has written widely on scientific 
and cultural matters. 
> 
3 
Science has opened up vast 
new horizons for 20th-century 
man. Research into the worlds 
of the molecule and the atom, 
including studies of nucleoproteins, 
radioactive isotopes, hormones 
and viruses, already offers 
perspectives of change in 
many aspects of 
human life. Photo 
shows crystals of antipyrine 
(a pain-killing medicine) 
seen through a microscope. 
They look remarkably like 
a chain of volcanoes bordered 
by masses of glaciers. 
Photo © Fotogram - Dr Y. Bruneau 
tieth century the unfolding of scientific 
thought between 1500 and 1700 
appears critical in the creation of 
modern civilization. According to one 
contemporary historian, Professor Her- 
bert Butterfield, it “outshines every- 
thing since the rise of Christianity and 
reduces the Renaissance and Refor- 
mation to the rank of mere episodes.” 
The first scientific revolution was an 
intellectual revolution; it taught men to 
think differently. . . By the end of the 
nineteenth century the scientific meth- 
od had not only brought profound 
changes in outlook; science was re- 
making the world, root and branch. 
The second scientific revolution, too, 
began as an intellectual revolution. 
About the year 1900 the view of 
nature which the first scientific revo- 
lution had established began to 
exhaust its successes and to meet its 
first failures. Delicate new pheno- 
mena were found here and there 
which the established view of nature 
and her laws could not unravel. As a 
result scientists began slowly and with 
many hesitations to form a new con- 
ception of the processes of nature 
and a new assessment of scientific 
activity itself. The shift in outlook was 
subtle but it went very deep. 
Like its predecessor the second 
scientific revolution spread slowly from 
the minds of the specialists who con- 
ceived it. In the course of fifty years 
its practical consequences reached 
far; many of the spectacular applica- 
tions of science in the years following 
the second world war grew out of the 
new concepts and the new approach. 
In time it began to transform the out- 
look of the layman as well as the 
scientist and to enter the minds and 
affect the lives of people in all parts 
of the world. . . 
Underlying scientific knowledge and 
thought in all areas [before 1900] ran 
several strong common assumptions. 
Almost all thought conformed to four 
basic preconceptions, or unspoken 
ways of looking at nature, which at

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### 59773: The Second scientific revolution

h
v
u
.
 
once reflected and directed the thought 
of the age. 
First was the principle that nature 
proceeds by a strict chain of events 
from cause to effect, the configuration 
of causes at any instant fully determin- 
ing the events in the next instant, and 
so on for ever. This principle of 
determinism, of cause and effect, left 
no uncertainty in nature. 
Apparent uncertainty was presumed 
to be the reflection of ignorance; if 
there were full knowledge, it would 
always be possible to predict the 
future precisely. This had been said 
explicitly by the French mathematician 
Pierre Simon Laplace (1749-1827) in a 
famous passage. 
If we were given, said Laplace, the 
whereabouts and the speeds at this 
instant of every atom in the universe, 
then we should be able to forecast 
their whereabouts and speeds at every 
instant afterwards. We could there- 
fore predict without the smallest un- 
certainty the fate of the entire universe, 
its molecules and its men, its nebulae 
and its nations, from now into eternity. 
Indeed we could do more than this, 
because we could go backward in 
time as well as forward and reconstruct 
the past also to eternity. 
With the principle of determinism 
was coupled a second principle which 
expressed the exact spirit of science: 
the quantitative principle. According 
to this principle science consists of 
measuring things and setting up pre- 
cise relations between the measure- 
ments. 
Lord Rayleigh expressed this in 
another famous passage by saying 
that our ideas become clear only as 
they become quantitative, so that only 
that which is measureable is suscep- 
tible to scientific, and indeed to exact, 
discussion and can truly be described 
as knowledge. On this view nature 
should ultimately be described by 
numbers—co-ordinates in space, times 
of events and coefficients which de- 
  
"J 
> 4 
: 4 
. | “4 F 
4 Pe. a —l 
“«® v 
yo vf ) 
Lr > 
scribe physical properties, and know- 
ledge of nature advances by working 
out the relations between these 
numbers. 
The third underlying principle, which 
concerned the transitions of nature 
from one state to another, was the 
principle of continuity. It expressed 
the sense, deeply engrained in the 
outlook of the age, that the movements 
of nature are gradual. They may seem 
sudden and startling—a flash of lightn- 
ing, an explosion, the eruption of a 
volcano. But the suddenness, said the 
scientific thought of the time, is only 
apparent. 
To the nineteenth-century mind the 
processes of nature move impercepti- 
bly from instant to instant. Between 
any two instants there is another, 
shorter instant; between any two posi- 
tions there is an intermediate position. 
If any sequence seems abrupt or inex- 
plicable it is only necessary to divide 
it into smaller sections. And the divi- 
sion could be carried on for ever—the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### 59773: The Second scientific revolution

22 
SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION (Continued) 
The scientist— no longer ‘an island unto himself’ 
processes of nature are infinitely fine 
and continuous. 
With these the nineteenth century 
pictured in nature and in science a 
fourth principle: the principle of 
impersonality. The scientist saw him- 
self not as a person but as an instru- 
ment—passionless, unprejudiced and 
somehow more than human. Nature 
appeared as a great impersonal ma- 
chine, going on its imperturbable way, 
which the human observer could only 
peek at. And the process of watching 
this wonderful engine was conceived 
as a passive one. 
The scientist did not invent; he 
saw. He did not use his imagination, 
but his observation. He did not create 
order among the natural phenomena; 
he humbly found it. Even viewing 
himself as an instrument, he did not 
recognize any interaction between that 
particular instrument and the phenom- 
ena under observation. 
In this way the nineteenth-century 
scientist cut himself off from the imagi- 
native and the creative arts. Determi- 
nism, measurement, continuity and 
impersonality were parts of one vision: 
the vision of science as remote from 
the uncertainties and stresses of 
everyday life. 
Around the turn of the century the 
facts of scientific discovery compelled 
scientists to give up this vision of 
science and the outlook on nature 
which it embodied. nA number of 
discoveries were made and a number 
of irregularities were confirmed which 
could no longer be squared with the 
principles which underlay the accepted 
scientific theories. As scientists faced 
the implications of the new discoveries 
they developed a fundamentally new 
view of nature and of scientific 
activity. . . 
i underlying assumptions 
on which the nineteenth century formed 
its picture were replaced. 
In place of the quantitative principle, 
the scientist of the twentieth century 
thought of himself as pursuing a 
concept of structure. 
In place of the principle of conti- 
nuity, the scientist recognized that the 
underlying structure of the small-scale 
world is discontinuous. 
In place of the principle of deter- 
minism or cause and effect, he recog- 
nized that the smallest units of mat- 
ter and energy follow laws which can 
only be described by probabilities and 
whose predictions are therefore always 
surrounded by an area of uncertainty. 
In place of the impersonality of 
science came an understanding that 
the operations of the scientist enter 
inextricably into his findings. 
These were revolutionary changes 
in the outlook of science, and they 
make it appropriate to speak of a 
second scientific revolution. 
The total effect of the new outlook 
was to overthrow the stark and mecha- 
nical image of the scientist serving an 
inhuman truth, remote from the every- 
day world, which the nineteenth cen- 
tury set up. Its place was taken by a 
richer image in which the scientist saw 
himself as carrying out an essentially 
human and personal activity, from 
which he must create an order, an 
understanding of the world by the pro- 
jection of his own mind. 
This was the most subtle change 
which took place in the view of science 
and of all knowledge. The twentieth 
century broke with the view that know- 
ledge is passive, that it accumulates 
the facts that nature provides like a 
card index, and that the scientist need 
do nothing more than keep the index 
accurate and tidy. Instead it saw 
knowledge as a constant activity. 
It ceased to ask that a law of nature 
be formulated as if there were no 
observers; it asked only that it be 
formulated in such a way that it looks 
the same to all similarly placed obser- 
vers. When it asked that a law should 
be universal, it did not ask for a for- 
mulation which would hold in the 
absence of human observers. It asked, 
rather, for a formulation which should 
be valid for them all, however different 
their circumstances. This was the new 
meaning of universality. 
At the same time, it gave to the 
seeker after knowledge a creative role 
which science in the past had denied. 
A fully deterministic universe, as 
Laplace pictured it, carried the impli- 
cation that everything that men do is 
already determined. On this nine- 
teenth-century view man invents noth- 
ing and adds nothing to the world. 
Everything is wholly conditioned by 
past events. 
This interpretation of nature as a 
machine ticking inexorably on a wholly 
determined course was no longer 
implied by the facts of twentieth-cen- 
tury physics. For the facts of physics 
left no room for any theory which does 
not include an unpredictable chance 
element in every forecast. 
The facts of modern physics say, 
for example, that one half of the 
atoms in a piece of plutonium will 
undergo radioactive disintegration in 
25,000 years, but they do not say which 
half. Nor do they say of any specified 
atom in a piece of plutonium whether 
it will or will not disintegrate in the 
next 25,000 years, or in any other 
period of time. 
To the scientists of the mid-twentieth 
century there appeared no possibility 
that there could be hidden somewhere 
a theory which would allow them to 
make exact forecasts of this kind about 
the small-scale events in the atom. 
The concept of chance, as it entered 
into modern physics, did not mark any 
relaxation of scientific rigour. It was 
as clear and well defined as was the 
principle of strict cause and effect in 
the past. The area of uncertainty 
with which it was necessary to sur- 
round predictions was as well formulat- 
ed and as intellectually lucid as was 
once the point of certainty. These 
were the tools of the new science, 
more supple and less familiar than 
those of the past, and highly practical. 
but no less scientific for that. 
As science and all knowl- 
edge came to be regarded as personal 
activities, the scientist was placed in 
a new relations to this theories. Isaac 
Newton did not think of himself as 
inventing the law of gravitation, and 
Charles Darwin did not think of himself 
as creating the theory of evolution. 
They thought of themselves as uncov- 
ering what had always been there. 
Each pictured the law which he dis- 
covered as wholly objective, something 
which existed in itself, as positively as 
a stone or a clockwork. 
The modern scientist saw this as too 
simple and too impersonal a view of 
knowledge. He presumed that the 
laws of nature did have an existence 
in themselves but that their character 
was more delicate, more elaborate 
and immensely more varied than any- 
thing that men were able to trace. 
Therefore the order that the scientist 
could find in nature was surely only 
one of many orders which might be 
found. And the particular order found 
by the scientist was thus in part crea- 
ted and imposed by his own imagi- 
nation. . . 
The twentieth century thrust the 
achievements of its scientists into 
daily life at a breath-taking rate. The 
legend of the remote scientist, living 
in a world of his own thoughts and 
blundering into discoveries whose 
practical importance he did not under- 
stand, survived énly in the comic 
strips. No sciéntist of the mid-twen- 
tieth century, however abstract his 
work, could be sure that it would not 
sooner or later have a technical appli- 
cation. Few would be so rash as to

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=23) 0

### 59773: The Second scientific revolution

boast that their work could not concei- 
vably do anyone the least practical 
harm or the least good. 
Yet the new and remote worlds 
within the atom, the cell or the uni- 
verse which the modern scientist 
explored demanded such specialized 
knowledge and techniques in order to 
be perceived that they set the scien- 
tist apart from his fellows. He pos- 
sessed the key to mysteries as inac- 
cessible to the layman and as crucial 
to his well-being as those which any 
priesthood had monopolized in other 
societies. 
we, " bo bod Neste co a1 I . Iculated tl A 
  
The public had to depend on him 
and to give him its trust and support; 
he, in turn, faced the age-old problem 
cf how to communicate the meaning 
of his knowledge to those who must 
act in the light of it and whose actions, 
in turn, affected his work. For the 
scientist no longer saw himself merely 
as a man who supplied others with 
the facts and left them to make what 
they could of them. Understanding 
that what he found, however factual, 
had practical implications, he came to 
recognize a responsibility for bringing 
these implications home to others. 
     
In turn, the practical world influenced 
the direction of scientific advance. 
This was not a wholly new develop- 
ment, for the direction in which science 
has looked, its background interests 
and its long term problems, have 
always been influenced by the preoccu- 
pations and the needs of the societies 
in which scientists have worked. 
Each society and age has created a 
climate of interest in its special 
problems. The fundamental scientist, 
immersed in this climate of interest, 
has tried his gifts on such of these 
problems as have challenged his curio- 
sity; and his choice of specific prob- 
lems may have been more or less 
directly determined by the existence of 
facilities for research enabling him to 
pursue the lines of investigation which 
he finds challenging. . . 
As science pervaded more and more 
aspects of life, societies looked to 
their scientists to contribute to national 
survival and well-being; science itself 
became an instrument of national 
defence and a means by which natio- 
nal industry could compete in world 
markets, public health could be achie- 
ved, air and road accidents reduced, 
long-distance communication perfected, 
agricultural production promoted. 
R addition the tremendous 
cost of equipment required for experi- 
mental work, especially in the field of 
nuclear physics and in the exploration 
of outer space, made generous support 
essential; even the wealthiest of the 
American universities found themsel- 
ves hard pressed to equip laboratories 
where their nuclear physicists could 
engage in pioneer research, and sev- 
eral of them joined together after the 
second world war to support such a 
laboratory in common. Furthermore, 
many problems could not be studied 
effectively by a single scientist but 
required the collaboration of a group of 
specialists, and the organization and 
funds to bring them together and 
support their work . . . 
By no means all scientific discovery 
in the twentieth century, however, 
depended on costly experiments or 
the co-operative work of many specia- 
lists. Patience and imagination often 
proved more important than complex 
equipment in yielding new scientific 
insights, especially in the biological 
and social sciences. Important charac- 
teristics of the scattering of light 
know as the Raman effect, were disco- 
vered by the Indian physicist Chandra- 
sekhara Venkata Raman with a mini- 
mum of equipment and much careful 
mathematical work, in 1928 . . . 
The close link between scientist, 
technician and layman placed a burden 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=24) 2

### 59774: The Sinews of industrial society

24 
SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION (Continued) 


### 59773: The Second scientific revolution

The new scientific outlook 
and its impact on the arts 
on the scientist to make the implica- 
tions of his findings clear and under- 
stood by others. In the twentieth 
century this became an ever more 
necessary and more difficult task. It 
was more necessary because the 
impact of “science on the life of 
mankind forced non-scientists constan- 
tly to make judgments involving its 
use, and they needed understanding 
in order to make such judgments 
soundly. It was more difficult because 
of the lack of a language in which 
scientists could communicate to 
laymen. 
The imperative need for the scientist 
to bring home to others the meaning 
of his discoveries was intensified at 
mid-century by the threat to the very 
existence of mankind from nuclear 
explosion and the release of radio- 
activity. 
These fruits of scientific effort not 
only placed on scientists the heavy 
responsibility of making their implica- 
tions understood; they faced the 
scientist with a basic ethical conflict. 
In choosing what search to pursue and 
what instruments to make, scientists 
were forced to think in terms of their 
ethical duties as well as their duty to 
uncover laws of nature. The judgment 
and understanding required of the 
scientist went beyond his competence 
as a specialist in his field. 
But as the sciences grew more 
specialized and their researches more 
detailed it became difficult for the 
individual scientist to present his 
thought in the total context of science. 
With his special vocabulary of words 
and symbols he was often scarcely 
able to communicate even with other 
scientists outside his field who also 
had special vocabularies and symbols 
of their own. To make the nature 
and meaning of his discoveries under- 
stood by the public was even more 
difficult . . . 
Yet a scientific outlook did come to 
penetrate into the daily life of the 
time and some of the new scientific 
concepts, at times diluted or distorted, 
became part of current thought. In 
areas where the scientific point of 
view was accepted—and these were 
constantly growing, both geographi- 
cally as more people came in contact 
with modern techniques and in wider 
areas of daily life—people came to 
respect facts and to approach them 
rationally and empirically. This was 
particularly noteworthy not only in 
practical matters relating to industry or 
travel but in the field of health where 
new knowledge supplanted traditional 
practices at a strikingly rapid rate. 
Perhaps the most significant evid- 
ence of the extent to which science 
had entered the outlook of the twen- 
tieth century was the acceptance of 
change as a continuous and funda- 
mental phenomenon, and adaptation 
to its accelerating pace. Not only 
was this true of the western countries 
where the expectation of change had 
become a well-established attitude. In 
the historically more static societies 
of the East, where change had been 
looked upon as defection from eter- 
nally established norms, it became 
the order of the day. 
Equally fundamental was the concept 
of new potentialities which science 
brought and the public accepted. All 
over the world people who for cen- 
turies had taken poverty and disease 
for granted saw in the methods and 
the fruits of science a new possibility 
of human fulfilment. In the first half 
of the twentieth century this vision 
altered the outlook of mankind. 
Specific concepts from the new 
science were incorporated into atti- 
tudes and thought. Chief among these 
was the idea of relativity. Though 
often enough misunderstood, the idea 
of relativity as a revolutionary concept 
in physics impressed on moralists, 
artists and the man in the street the 
notion that, from other points of view, 
reality may appear different, and yet 
be as valid as that which they them- 
selves perceive. 
The concept of uncertainty also 
entered the popular mind and many 
people learned to think statistically in 
terms of chance and probability rather 
than in terms of the certainty of direct 
cause and effect. Concepts derived 
from psychological studies of learning 
and conditioning and Freudian analysis 
of personality formation entered into 
the lore associated with the rearing 
of children. The scientist's sense that 
the observer is inevitably a part of 
that which he observes was reflected 
in the inner perspective of the modern 
writer. And the fact that physics 
became concerned with atomic struc- 
ture also influenced painters and 
sculptors to portray what they saw 
as discontinuous structure rather than 
as surface appearance. 
In the swiftly changing world of the 
twentieth century science was thus an 
ever-growing force, constantly yielding 
new facts and new capabilities which 
brought changes in structures, acti- 
vities and relationships, often before 
it had developed the means to deal 
with the results of such changes. 
— Vol. VI, Pt.l, Chap. 6 
(The New Scientific Thought and its Impact) 
          

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=25) 0

### 59774: The Sinews of industrial society

; AY rod i) PE danedad Ll 
# ~, 7 4 nm d wh Phy 
or Bae gas aps 
'Y ( *! | “21M ” 
ary Seca BT   
RRR Ag 
a iepiaodd ~ Crp bige] 
AK 
Jd D ’ 11114111 Pei bo " Pc 1 2 2h 
J Pw (oR ed ag Rh on wl 
2 
en 
  
  
       
m were found in | 
ps | 
  
\ Va ; C1 = >rr ile lo Cy ‘M. Romei 
tah a : pbb hes 4 isdn dr Ad 
  
igh Lac). 
her from £erolcom.Zallws felix ca.Depe 
olco. Petroled dtolcum perme 
Pnuemcur suean [loae furfure 
fic ai cum pinguedo teres ad actione 
calories ad igneas couerntor pees. Joue 
nas mieut cnam fu lspides.quod dem per 
al cosrefudarzin ds dl. fopmarcinenit. 
) ol SUDSLdNCce, ped pin 
- 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=26) 0

### 59774: The Sinews of industrial society

26 
THE SINEWS OF INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY (Continued) 
to produce more than ten times the 
power generated by the Grand Coulee 
dam in the U.S.A. which had been 
the largest hydroelectric installation in 
the world in 1955. 
In the first half of the twentieth cen- 
tury the world's supply of energy 
from mineral fuel and water power 
increased threefold. The energy actu- 
ally put to work increased very much 
more because the efficiency with 
which supplies could be used doubled 
for the world during this period. 
Almost all of the increase however 
was in the highly industrialized coun- 
tries. On a per capita basis in 1950 
the only country outside North Amer- 
ica, Europe and Oceania that was 
using one-tenth as much energy as 
the highest energy-user, the United 
States, was Israel. 
With the exception of Japan no 
Asian country used as much as 5 per 
cent. India, the Asian country with 
the second largest industrial output, 
used less than 2 per cent as much 
energy per capita as did the United 
States, while Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Burma and Thailand used less than 
1 per cent. The Latin American and 
Caribbean countries ranged from 
Argentina with slightly less than 10 per 
cent the per capita energy consump- 
tion of the United States to Haiti with 
.003 per cent. 
The disparity between the energy 
consumption of the industrial and non- 
industrial areas had been growing as 
the consumption of the former increa- 
sed. It would clearly require heroic 
efforts by the industrializing countries 
to close the energy gap. 
The sources of power upon which 
industrial development depended chan- 
ged markedly during these years, and 
at mid-century further major changes 
appeared to be in sight. 
At the opening of the century the 
world was drawing about 40 per cent 
of its non-human energy from work 
animals, wood fuel and wind and 60 
per cent from mineral fuels, almost 
wholly coal. At mid-century more 
than 80 per cent came from mineral 
fuels and water power, and of this 
coal supplied only three-fifths while 
more than a quarter came from petro- 
leum and the rest from natural gas 
and hydroelectric power. . . 
The rapidly rising level of fuel con- 
sumption in the industrial countries, 
and the enormous prospective needs 
in the rest of the world, brought to 
the fore the problem of whether the 
world's energy resources were suffi- 
 
CAROLINE F. WARE, American historian and 
sociologist, was editor of “The Cultural 
Approach to History”, published in 1940. She 
is the author-editor of Volume VI (The 
Twentieth Century) of the History of Mankind. 
K.M. PANNIKAR, the distinguished Indian 
scholar, statesman and leader of educ- 
ation, co-edited Volume VI. Died 1963. 
JAN M. ROMEIN, professor of history, Uni- 
versity of Amsterdam, co-edited Volume VI. 
Died 1962. 
cient to continue to sustain industrial 
activity and growth. 
With the rate of petroleum con- 
sumption rising rapidly, fears were 
repeatedly expressed that petroleum 
might be in short supply by the end 
of the century. In 1942 the world 
consumption of petroleum products 
exceeded for the first time the new 
supplies discovered during the year. 
At the rate of increase in consumption 
at mid-century, the proved supplies 
would have lasted about fifty years. 
But unproved supplies in the Middle 
East were thought to be many times 
the proved amounts, great fields in 
the Sahara were being opened up, 
and exploration for new resources was 
being carried on in many parts of the 
world. Improved methods of extrac- 
tion increased the yield from known 
sources. . . 
Although only a small proportion of 
the energy consumed in the world at 
mid-century came from hydroelectric 
power, this source had gained in im- 
portance and immense resources re- 
mained untapped... It appeared that an 
amount equivalent to half the total 
energy which the world was consum- 
ing at mid-century might be deri- 
vable in the future from the great 
resources in the Himalayas, Africa, 
the Andes, the Amazon and the Ori- 
noco, the Columbia River basin of the 
United States and Canada, and the 
great rivers of Siberia and China. 
In addition the power potential in 
the ebb and flow of the tides had 
not been exploited to any substantial 
extent. Nearly half of the world's 
estimated untapped water power lay 
in Africa, approximately one-eighth 
each in Asia, South and Central Amer- 
ica and the U.S.S.R., and the remain- 
der in North America, Europe and 
Oceania. . . 
Great hydroelectric projects were 
at the heart of the U.S.S.R.'s indus- 
trial development programme. Dams 
and generating stations on the Volga 
and Dnieper rivers were included in 
the early five-year plans and these 
were promptly reconstructed after the 
destruction suffered during the second 
world war. In the period after the 
war the Soviet Union was doubling its 
hydroelectric capacity every five years, 
with gigantic projects on the Siberian 
rivers, at least one of which was des- 
igned to generate more than twice the 
volume of electricity put out by any 
existing plant elsewhere in the world. 
Other countries seeking industriali- 
zation gave hydroelectric projects a 
central place in their national plans. 
India looked to her great rivers as a 
major source of much-needed power; 
her Damodar Valley project was des- 
igned to form the basis of a great 
steel complex. The High Aswan Dam 
on the Nile, the Volta River project in 
© West Africa and the Kariba dam on the 
Zambesi in the Central African Fede- 
ration marked the beginnings of major 
developments on the African continent. 
— Vol. VI, Pt. I, Chapter 9 
(Industrial Production) 
 
LF) A wilbee TRL TE 'y 
Photo Avisun Corporation, Philadelphia 
PLASTIC 
SEAWEED

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=27) 0

### 59775: The Era of synthetic materials

ff A 4 The era 
1 q of synthetic 
1 SE. materials 
Bi —— 4 e Th EN Brac to industrial devel- 
; % opment in the twentieth century was 
the growing ability to use more and 
more kinds of materials to serve man’s 
needs and wants. In one sense 
twentieth-century technology was the 
greatest user of resources that the 
world had known; in another sense it 
was the greatest creator, for it 
transformed one after another of the 
elements in the land, sea and air into 
- forms which man could use. . . 
One of the most spectacular and 
revolutionary contributions of tech- 
74 nology to the supply of industrial 
materials was the creation of new 
substances, known generally as plas- 
tics, either in imitation of natural pro- 
ducts or to provide something which 
RV 5 had no counterpart in nature but which 
f possessed properties desired for a 
Ww particular use. 
Using chiefly hydrocarbons which 
could be derived from many sources 
—coal, petroleum, coal tar, cellulose 
- from wood pulp or sugar-cane waste 
y —the chemical industry learned how 
} y to put together enormously complex 
o- chains of atoms by a process known 
; p as polymerization to produce tough 
fibres, sheets or moulded forms. 
x ot , 
Since the variety and complexity of 
the chains which could be created 
was almost unlimited, it became pos- 
sible to introduce many different 
properties, both by the chemical 
elements included and by the process 
of treatment. Additional possibilities 
were being introduced by the use of 
silicones instead of hydrocarbons as 
a base. 
The prototypes of plastics had been 
developed before the turn of the cen- 
tury in the form of celluloid and 
bakelite. The first of the synthetic 
fibres, artificial silk or rayon, was in 
use in the 1890s and its manufacture 
by various methods became well 
ath ER 
  
Coastal engineers of several countries including Denmark, U.K. and U.S.A. 
are experimenting with plastic seaweed as a defence against tides and 
currents that break up sandy ocean bottoms inshore and cause coastal 
erosion. First country to make the tests was Denmark, where it had 
been observed that fishermen took refuge during storms in kelp beds 
which seemed to dissipate the effect of violent seas. Plastic seaweed 
has been set in grids on the sea bed and in experimental basins (photo). 
According to where they are placed they can halt beach erosion, 
build new beaches or prevent sanding up in harbours. Plastic seaweed 
placed on the coast of Jutland (Denmark) caused 3,000 tons of sand to be 
deposited over 1,600 square metres (17,000 square ft) in 12 weeks. 
established in the first two decades 
of the twentieth century. In the 1930s 
a number of new plastic materials 
began to be produced commercially, 
especially in Germany where they 
served as ersatz or substitute products 
for natural fibres and other materials 
in short supply. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=28) 0

### 59775: The Era of synthetic materials

28 
THE ERA OF SYNTHETIC MATERIALS (Continued) 
The full potentialities of plastics, 
however, only began to be envisaged 
during and after the second world 
war with improvements in their quality. 
Such critical war materials as nylon 
for parachutes and synthetic rubber 
to keep motor transport in operation 
when natural resources of rubber were 
cut off emphasized the importance of 
synthetic products. Plastics manufac- 
turers turned from efforts to devise 
substitutes as good as some natural 
product to the development of mat- 
erials with characteristics which natu- 
ral products lacked, and they supplied 
an enormous range of fibres, sheets, 
shapes, paints, and substances which 
could be mixed with other material 
such as wood or glass to give them 
new properties. 
The development of plastics was 
paralleled in the production of glass, 
a material also based on a resource, 
sand, which was unlimited and readily 
accessible. Although glass-making 
was a very old art, glass became a 
cheap material in general use only 
after a machine process for bottle 
blowing was introduced at the begin- 
ning of the twentieth century. In the 
course of these years glass became a 
highly versatile material as ways were 
developed to preserve its impervious- 
ness to corrosion and its transparence 
while overcoming its brittleness and 
fragility. . . 
Concrete had begun to supplement 
brick, stone and wood as a structural 
material in the second half of the 
nineteenth century; during the twen- 
tieth century it became one of the 
most widely used materials for the 
construction of industrial plants and 
for most large urban buildings, 
bridges and main roads. Although 
it had the advantage of being made 
from plentiful material found in many 
localities and of being easy to handle, 
the large amount of cement and 
reinforcing steel required for strength 
condensed form, the 
Part I: Historical Introduction 
Worlds (Africa). 
A RICH MOSAIC OF WORLD HISTORY 
In this number we can give readers only a limited and very incomplete 
sampling of the great variety of subjects covered by the "History of 
Mankind”, and showing the cultural and scientific development of mankind 
in technology and philosophy, literature and the arts, the evolution of 
languages and systems of writing, education and religion, etc. 
the reader appreciate the sweep of the “History”, we publish below, in 
table of contents of Volume 
dominance and the Rise of the West (400 A.D.-1300 A.D.). 
The Migrations of the 5th and 6th Centuries — Invaders and Indigenous 
Cultures in Asia — Invaders and Indigenous Cultures: 
Chinese World of the 7th-9th Centuries — The Indian World — From the 
Arab Conquest to the Abbasids — Europe and Byzantium in the Carolingian 
Period (8th-9th Centuries) — The Moslem Zenith — Byzantium and its 
Influences in Europe (9th-11th Centuries) — Movements in Asia: The 
Chinese Orbit from the 10th to the 13th Century — Berbers, Turks and 
Mongols — Awakening and Expansion of the Christian West — The Other 
To help 
lll—Eastern Pre- 
Romania — The 
Part lll: The Moslem World: 
Part ll: Chinese and Indian Worlds: Cultural Balance-Sheet 
Technological Evolution — Teaching and the Training of Minds — 
Languages — Religion — Artistic Expression — Literary Expression — 
Philosophic Thought — Legal and Political Thought — Scientific Thought. 
Cultural Balance-Sheet 
Part IV: The Western World: 
The Evolution of Techniques — Teaching and the Training of Minds — 
Linguistic Changes — Religion, Law, Philosophy — Artistic Expression — 
Literary Expression — Scientific Developments. 
Cultural Balance-Sheet 
Material and Mental Equipment: 
and Mental Equipment: 
and Mental Equipment: 
Part V: 
The Evolution of Techniques — Material 
Teaching and the Training of Minds — Material 
Language — The Religious Sentiment — Artistic 
Expression — Literary Expression — Philosophic Thought — Legal and 
Political Thought — Scientific Thought. 
Prehistoric New World Cultural Development (Pre-Columbian 
Civilizations)   
The Arctic.   The Arrival of Man — Introduction and Spread of Pottery Making — 
Domestication of Plants — Geographical Differences and Cultural Develop- 
ment — The Interrelated Rise of New World Civilization — Transpacific 
Contacts — (The Circum-Caribbean Area, The Deserts, The Forests, The 
Plains, The Pacific Coast, The Marginal Area) — Transatlantic Contacts —   
made this a heavy building material, 
eminently suited for foundations but 
bulky when used for superstructures 
and roofs. 
New concretes, made by mixing in 
such things as sawdust, volcanic ash 
and certain lightweight minerals or by 
adding chemicals, were lighter and 
more versatile. Panels for roofs and 
partitions could be prefabricated, 
preinsulated and transported with 
relative ease. Prestressing of concrete, 
to give strength to beams at the place 
where strain was greatest, substan- 
tially reduced the amount of cement 
used and achieved the same strength 
with only a fraction of the usual re- 
inforcing material. 
Other materials such as gypsum, 
sugar-cane waste or asbestos were 
pressed and chemically bound into 
sheets for use in building construc- 
tion, and insulating materials were 
made from glass fibre or other non- 
conductors of heat in order to reduce 
the thickness of wall required for 
warmth or to conserve heat. 
Although the industrial development 
of the twentieth century rested pri- 
marily on the use of metals, plastics, 
cement and glass, wood continued to 
serve many of its old purposes and, 
in combination with plastics or sub- 
jected to chemical treatment, was put 
to new uses. New techniques gave 
wood new properties and extended 
available resources by utilizing lower 
grades and much of what had been 
discarded as waste. . . 
At mid-century divergent answers 
were being given to the question of 
whether man by his command over 
nature was so exhausting the resour- 
ces of the earth as to lay an unsound 
basis for future generations, or 
whether the process of technological 
development itself was so enlarging 
the range of possibilities that the 
balance was on the side of ever more 
abundant resources rather than of 
their depletion. . . 
Three points only were clear: that 
at mid-century the limits of technolo- 
gical possibilities in developing resour- 
ces on the basis of already known 
scientific principles were nowhere in 
sight; that the future pattern of 
resource use would undoubtedly in- 
volve as fundamental a shift as that 
of the preceding fifty years, which 
had seen the replacement of wood 
and coal by petroleum for fuel, of 
wood and brick by concrete and 
steel for construction, of iron by alloy 
steel, aluminium and magnesium in 
much machinery, and of wool, cotton 
and leather by synthetic fibres and 
plastic materials; and that the essen- 
tial resource upon which mankind 
would depend for its industrial future 
was not any specific physical material 
but technology itself. 
— CAROLINE F. WARE, 
K.M. PANNIKAR and 
J.M. ROMEIN 
Vol. VI, Pt. I, Chap. 9 
(Industrial Production)

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=29) 0

### 59775: The Era of synthetic materials

  
Photo © Agence Rapho, Paris 
 
A view from the bridge 
In this breathtaking view from a tower of the Golden Gate Bridge, traffic crosses 29 the strait connecting San Francisco Bay with the Pacific Ocean. 
was then the world's longest suspension bridge with 1,280 metres (4,200 feet) of clear span between the main towers. It took second place in 1965 when the Verrazano Bridge (1,298 metres; 4,260 feet) was opened at the entrance to New York Bay. 
Opened in 1937, the Golden Gate

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=30) 0

### 1443: The Study of animal behaviour

Tracking down the slippery eel 
From ancient times men knew that young eels appeared in rivers as if by magic 
at certain seasons and they had seen the grown eels swimming downstream to disappear 
into the sea. What happened before and after was a blank. The full life story 
of this enigmatic fish was revealed by a Danish scientist, Johannes Schmidt, 
who between 1905 and 1933 covered 40,000 miles to track down the eel’s secrets. 
Schmidt showed that adult eels swam from Europe in immense migratory shoals to spawn 
4,000 miles away in the Sargasso Sea south of Bermuda. There the grown eels died 
and the newly hatched lavae, growing as they drifted and swam, made a three-year journey 
back to Europe. Migrating eels (below) have been known to wriggle overland for miles 
in order to pass from one stretch of water to another. 
TL a, VR a TN 1 al ii im -_ ." 
 
  
a 
1 
% 
n 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ve
ro
, 
P
a
r
i
s

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=31) 0

### 1443: The Study of animal behaviour

The study of animal behaviour 
| had considered 
sexual selection to be one of action 
through which natural selection oper- 
ated. He postulated that the display 
patterns of male birds, for instance, 
in species in which the male is brightly 
coloured and the female drab, evolved 
as a result of the preference of female 
birds in that species for bright colour; 
that is, if two males were competing 
for a female's favour, according to 
Darwin's theory, she would choose 
the more brightly coloured for her 
mate, and thus the quality of bright- 
ness of colour would be passed on 
to her offspring. 
Many biologists saw two fallacies in 
this argument. First, a brightly colour- 
ed male might not necessarily have 
offspring all as brightly coloured as 
himself. Secondly, this concept was 
taken by some to attribute to the 
female bird the same aesthetic tastes 
and appreciations that characterized 
her human observers. 
The tendency to endow other ani- 
mals with subjective reactions similar 
to those of man became known as 
anthropomorphism and was soon rec- 
ognized as a principal hazard in the 
interpretation of animal behaviour. The 
ability to discriminate colour patterns, 
and in some cases to prefer them, 
can however be demonstrated on non- 
anthropomorphic grounds. 
In the early part of the twentieth 
century, Julian Huxley observed and 
described the highly complicated and 
seemingly bizarre behaviour patterns 
indulged in by the male and female 
great crested grebe during the breed- 
ind season. In these diving birds the 
two potential or actual mates perform, 
as in a ritual or dance, a sequence 
of different actions. 
Many of these activities, such as 
diving, erecting the crest, lowering the 
head or spreading the wings, result in 
one bird presenting in turn strikingly 
different visual appearances to the 
other. Huxley's interpretation of such 
display as a factor in sexual selection 
was somewhat different from Darwin's. 
He considered that the display of one 
bird stimulated the opposite sex part- 
ner in a combination of emotional, ner- 
vous and biochemical ways. 
This postulate permitted the analysis 
of animal behaviour in less anthropo- 
morphic terms than had previously 
 
JANE OPPENHEIMER, author of Chapter 13 
(Development of the Biological Sciences) in 
Volume VI of the History of Mankind, has 
had a distinguished research and teaching 
career in the United States in marine biology, 
embryology and other biological sciences. 
been practised. Further encourage- 
ment was given to the pursuit of such 
studies when Konrad Lorenz named 
and analyzed the phenomenon of im- 
printing, long familiar to farmers and 
other breeders of birds and barnyard 
animals. 
The reason that a duckling normally 
follows its mother is that she is the 
first organism of a certain size it sees 
when it hatches from its egg. Lorenz 
showed that if it sees for instance a 
crouching man before it sees a duck, 
it follows the man as it would have 
followed its mother; the duckling need 
only see the object for a short time 
in order to establish this pattern of 
behaviour. 
Ways by which organisms give clues 
to one another in many aspects of 
their behaviour were studied subse- 
quently in many countries and were 
incorporated in a sort of sociology of 
nature. One great significance of the 
development of ethology was that, at 
a time when much of biology was be- 
coming narrowed to examination of 
parts or organisms by complicated 
laboratory instrumentation, it, like the 
new classification, encouraged many 
investigators to return to the study 
of the behaviour of the whole orga- 
nism in its natural surroundings. 
Carian studies of 
behaviour patterns in a number of 
related species proved especially 
rewarding. In other words, even in 
the twentieth century biologists were 
continuing to develop fundamental con- 
cepts through studies made without 
complicated equipment and carried out 
by techniques peculiar to biology. 
Ethologists in some cases performed 
experiments simple in type, either in 
the field or in the laboratory. For 
example, David Lack confronted a 
male European robin, a bird which 
fights with other male robins during 
the breeding season, with both an iso- 
lated patch of red breast feathers and 
a complete stuffed juvenile robin which 
had no red breast, to ascertain which 
of these he would attack. 
Such studies led to the important 
concept of specific patterned “sign- 
stimuli” acting as “releasers” of spe- 
cific patterns of activity. The mecha- 
nisms within the robin culminating in 
the attack on the patch of red feathers 
could be inferred, but it was more dif- 
ficult to explain other patterns of be- 
haviour, such as the pulling up of grass 
by a sea-gull in the middle of a fight. 
Nonetheless, the study of such “dis- 
by Jane Oppenheimer 
placement activities” which occur 
when there is conflict between op- 
posing drives showed promise of in- 
creased understanding of animal 
behaviour. 
From the beginning of the century, 
studies on instincts and learning in 
animals were performed by psycho- 
logists as well as by biologists. In 
studies of learning processes in rats, 
they discovered that if appropriately 
rewarded with food for correct per- 
formance or punished with slight dis- 
comfort, as for instance by a light 
electric shock, rats could quickly learn 
to follow mazes or perform other feats. 
These results indicated the importance 
of motivation as a factor in learning, at 
least in rats. 
0. students of animal 
behaviour towards the middle of the 
twentieth century analyzed particular 
behavioural mechanisms in other types 
of organisms. J. Z. Young, for instance, 
studying the behaviour of the octopus, 
observed its alteration after the remo- 
val or separation of particular parts 
of the nervous system, and studied 
the latter by some of the electrical 
methods first worked out for the study 
of mammalian brains. 
Ornithologists showed that in birds, 
day migrants orient themselves with 
reference to the sun, night migrants 
with reference to the pattern of the 
constellations. Some brilliant and suc- 
cessful studies of animal behaviour 
were made on honeybees by Karl von 
Frisch, who discovered experimentally 
that bees know the direction to follow 
between hive and food through their 
ability to analyse the degree of polari- 
zation of light from the sky, and the 
distance between them through some 
internal nervous mechanism. 
He found also that they are able to 
communicate to other members of 
their community, by executing various 
movements in a dance, both the di- 
rection in which food might be found 
and its relative distance from the hive. 
This was a set of processes which to 
some biologists indicated that bees 
in their own way might have evolved 
the powers both to make abstractions 
and to symbolize them, abilities which 
had previously been considered the 
prerogative of man alone, though the 
symbolization was recognized as con- 
trolled genetically and not built up 
artificially as with human language. 
— Vol. VI, Pt. |, Chap. 13 
(Development of the Biological 
Sciences) 
Ji

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

J 
— |etters to the Editor - 
CULTURAL ‘EL DORADO’ 
 
Sir, 
Congratulations on the Dec. 1966 
issue devoted to international tourism, 
and its beautiful illustrations. 
Perhaps the various travel boards 
and tourist agencies could devise a 
scheme for cutting the red tape out of 
tourism so that more people would 
be encouraged to travel farther afield, 
attracted by the historic treasures of 
a new El Dorado. 
Inscribed in a little book on Tilman 
Riemanschneider, which German friends 
gave me are the words: Die Kunst ist 
eine Bricke zwischen den Vélkern 
(Art is a bridge between peoples). 
Cultural tourism is the highway to the 
bridge. 
Margaret Hodson 
Llanyravon, Cwmbran, U.K. 
SEPTUAGENARIAN GRADUATES 
 
Sir, 
Heartiest congratulations to 
Mrs. Dawn Thein, the Burmese 
grandmother who took a university 
degree at Rangoon at the age of 70 
(From the Unesco Newsroom, June 
1966). While this may well be a 
record from the point of view of 
intelligence and determination, | am 
afraid it is not a record as far as age 
is concerned. Last June, in Israel, 
Mr. Pinhas Neeman, aged 76, 
graduated from the University of 
Tel Aviv. : 
It is written in the Talmud that, 
“What we learn in our youth is like 
something inscribed in ink on a fresh 
papyrus; with age, the papyrus seems 
timeworn and much used”. With the 
improved living conditions of more 
recent times, the quality of both ink 
and paper has undoubtedly also 
improved. We may be sure that the 
knowledge acquired by Mrs. Thein 
and Mr. Neeman is in no way blurred 
or clouded but, on the contrary, is 
clear, mature and fruitful. May they 
both be an example to us. 
A. Joel 
Mikve Israel 
Israel 
PEACE THROUGH PLENTY 
 
Sir, 
| have just re-read your disarmament 
issue (Nov. 1964). 
Disarmament is still a major problem 
and yet, for the first time in man's 
history, a solution is possible. 
The biggest asset for peace-loving 
people is not the impossibility of 
world war (except by accident) but a 
new and much more revolutionary 
fact which has emerged over recent 
years. This new fact is the following. 
That men should fight because of 
scarcity in the world is certainly 
immoral but nonetheless human. 
Once all can be provided for without 
others being deprived, or at any rate 
once a start has been made towards 
a situation in which a country grows 
richer much more easily by developing 
its economy than by robbing its 
neighbours, then war is a thing of 
the past. It becomes more absurd 
than ever. 
It is primarily this which gives 
grounds for hope. Present and 
potential technical advances mean 
that poverty and misery can be 
eliminated at a rate which was 
inconceivable only a few years ago. 
M. J. Mestrallet 
Avesnes-sur-Helpe, France 
MELANCHOLY SPECTACLE 
 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Mi
ch
ae
l 
Re
id
 
¢ MS “a 
ee iS ad 
destruction work 
relentlessly against monuments and 
Sir, 
The forces of 
buildings everywhere. Your issue on 
“Monuments in Peril” (Jan. 1965) 
showed some remarkable examples of 
statues and buildings destroyed by 
climate or vegetation in jungles and 
deserts. 
In Trinity College, Dublin, there 
exists a good example of a “monument 
in peril". The second Provost of the 
College, Lucas Challoner, died in 
1613 and an alabaster statue was 
erected to his memory. The tomb is 
situated outside the college chapel 
and the recumbent statue of Lucas 
Challoner (above) presents a melan- 
choly spectacle, ruined as it is by the 
action of the elements. 
Michael Reid 
Jiri F. Vranek 
Dublin, Republic of Ireland 
UNIVERSAL UNIVERSITY 
 
Sir, 
Unity must begin at the top. The 
crowd follows where the guide leads 
and it is therefore essential to reach 
the guides. 
The task of all the world's uni- 
versities is to train guides and they 
do so on what is now a classic and 
universal basis designed to turn out 
living encyclopaedias solely for the 
benefit of individual or national 
egotism. How can universal peace 
be expected in such circumstances? 
A new basis must be found for 
this education by creating a university 
open to students of every nation and 
capable of transforming them into the 
ideal guides of tomorrow. Run under 
Unesco's sole responsibility and sub- 
sidised by those countries responsive 
to international causes, this university 
should rigorously select students in 
terms of their intellectual and moral 
qualities and it should be responsible 
for them throughout their studies. 
Professors should be even more 
carefully selected with regard not to 
their nationality but their knowledge 
and humanism. 
A universal and accepted language 
chosen by experts on the basis of its 
clarity and teaching possibilities 
should be adopted by all professors 
and students. 
In this way, an elite from all 
countries would be developed and 
would be united in friendship. 
Without useless and destructive 
revolutions, it would remove forever 
the barriers between men. 
Marcel Brun 
Albi, France 
A PORTUGUESE COURIER 
Sir, 
Since | have been a subscriber 
to the Unesco Courier | have found 
all your articles stimulating, and 
I wonder why so interesting a 
publication, appearing in Italian, 
Japanese and German (not languages 
which are particularly widely spoken) 
is not also produced in Portuguese 
which is spoken by nearly 110 million 
people, virtually all of them in 
developing countries. 
| have a particular interest in this 
question since | am an economist 
specializing in economic develop- 
ment, mainly in Portuguese-speaking 
countries. 
Nicole Suetens 
Berchem/Antwerp 
Belgium 
iONOSPHERONAUTS? 
  
Sir, 
A reader, F.E. Ducommun of Geneva, 
suggests in your letters column of 
Nov. 1966 that the word “cosmonaut” 
(or astronaut) should be replaced by 
“stratospheronaut” since space tra- 
vellers have not yet left the 
immediate vicinity of the earth. But 
if we consider that the upper limit of 
the stratosphere barely exceeds 
65 kms (40 miles) whereas manned 
vessels have recently reached an 
altitude of 700 kms (435 miles) and 
hence have crossed the ionosphere, it 
seems illogical to talk of “strato- 
spheronauts”. Meanwhile, if it is 
premature to use “cosmonaut”, what 
should we call these space explorers? 
Franz Bleichenbacher 
Rorschach, Switzerland

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco NewSHBOMA: er x= — 
Unesco literacy 
project for Guinea 
A five-year adult literacy pilot project to 
be launched in Guinea as part of Unesco's 
experimental world literacy programme has 
been approved by the United Nations 
Development Programme (Special Fund). 
Guinea becomes the sixth country—with 
Algeria, Iran, Mali, Ecuador and Tanzania— 
to receive aid for projects designed to 
boost economic, social and cultural develop- 
ment by combining literacy teaching with 
training in industrial and agricultural tech- 
niques. A seventh literacy project being 
carried out in Venezuela and financed en- 
tirely by the government is also included in 
Unesco's experimental programme. Projects 
in Guinea will involve 3,500 industrial 
workers and 75,000 workers in agriculture. 
Fellowships in bacteriology 
and immunology 
An international post-graduate course in 
Bacteriology and Immunology has been 
arranged by the Institut Pasteur in Paris 
with the sponsorship of Unesco and the 
French National Commission for Unesco. 
It will last from October 10, 1967 to July 13, 
1968. Fellowships, including travel ex- 
penses, will be awarded by France. Appli- 
cations should reach the Direction de 
I'Institut Pasteur, 28, rue du Docteur-Roux, 
Paris-15¢ by June 15, 1967. 
A town of readers 
The bookshops of Bratsk a Soviet town 
in the vast forests of Eastern Siberia, sell 
a million books and pamphlets a year. 
Bratsk is not yet twelve years old, but has 
over 100,000 inhabitants. It has 65 libraries 
(stocked with nearly 600,000 books), and 
fifty travelling libraries keep readers sup- 
plied at their places of work. 
Spotlight on migration 
New York City has been one of the 
world's greatest receivers of migrants. In 
1960 it had over one and half million 
foreign-born residents and nearly 3,800,000 
residents whose parents or grandparents 
were born outside the U.S.A. In 1962 
  
[TF 
i 
J 
! 
: 
| 
  
  
there were 57 foreign language newspapers 
published in 26 languages, and 17 langua- 
ges are used daily in radio programmes. 
Yet much of the literature and data on the 
migrations which filled New York and the 
U.S.A. remains unanalyzed from the stand- 
point of either social science or social 
policy. To gather and organize this mat- 
erial, preserve it for posterity and make 
it available to scholars and public education 
officials, Brooklyn College, New York has 
established a Center for Migration Studies. 
Cooking by sun power 
A solar cooker which, in bright sunlight, 
will bring two litres of water to boiling point 
in 22 minutes has been developed by scien- 
tists at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. 
The device consists of 12 identical concave 
mirrors, one foot in diameter and mounted 
in an iron frame, which reflect the sun's 
radiation on to the bottom of the cooking 
pot. Costing only $10-12, it can be packed 
compactly for transport. Israeli scienticts 
have already successfully developed solar 
water heaters which which are used by 
100,000 households in Israel, and a sun- 
driven electric generator. 
Learning by telephone 
The University of Wisconsin, U.S.A., has 
organized courses which can be followed 
from a distance by means of a special 
telephone circuit. Two hundred doctors 
in 18 hospitals have been following a course 
from the University's medical centre. Each 
group can hear the questions put by other 
groups and the lecturer's replies. Language 
courses are being provided for 28 secondary 
schools by the same system. 
Film centre for Stockholm 
A centre for advanced academic, tech- 
nical and artistic training in film, theatre, 
television, broadcasting and ballet is to 
be built in Stockholm. The six-storey 
building will be completed in 1969 and 
will house three film studios, three cinemas, 
eight ballet studios, a theatre “laboratory”, 
lecture rooms and libraries. The building 
will serve as a cultural centre, offering 
facilities for group work in the arts. 
  
A global view of the arid lands 
From 1951 to 1962, Unesco’s Arid Zone Programme (from 1957 a Unesco Major 
Project) promoted research into the problems or areas covering over one-third 
of the land surface of the globe. Today, the work continues within the Natural 
Resources Programme of Unesco. “Arid Lands: a Geographical Appraisal,” an 
outstanding book recently published by Unesco and Methuen and Co., Ltd. (see 
Bookshelf) describes the vast range of this research and surveys the geography of 
lands in whose potential productivity and use the whole world has a stake. Seventeen 
authors from eight countries contributed to this important work. There are chapters 
on meteorology, geology, geomorphology, botany and zoology, and almost half the 
book is devoted to the activities of man: irrigation and crops, industry, animal 
breeding, human survival in the desert, social life and other aspects. More general 
chapters sum up the extent of knowledge about the proper ways of exploring and 
using arid land, and point the way for future research and development.   
  
  
BOOKSHELF 
  
HM Arid Lands 
(A Geographical Appraisal). Edited 
by E.S. Hills. Unesco-Methuen and 
Co. Ltd., London, 1966, hard cover 
($15.00; £3.15.0 stg.; 51 F). 
See box below left 
BM The Environment Game 
(A long-term analysis of man's need 
to make major adjustments with 
his environment) 
By Nigel Calder. Secker and War- 
burg, London 1967 (30/- stg.) 
BM Index Translationum 
(International bibliography of transla- 
tions. Vol. 18), Unesco, 1967 (paper 
bound: $30.00, £7.10s (stg); 105 F; 
hard cover: $34.00, £8.10.0; 120 F). 
BW Metropolitan Public Library 
Planning Throughout the World 
By H.C. Campbell (International Ser- 
ies of Monographs in Library and 
Information Science. Vol. 5), Perga- 
mon Press Ltd, 1967 (50/- stg.). 
BM The Rise of the South African 
Reich 
By Brian Bunting (Penguin African 
Library). 
Penquin Books Ltd.,, 1964 (paper- 
back: 4/6 stg.). 
BM Growing Up 
(How we become alive, are born, 
and grow). By Karl de Schweinitz. 
The Macmillan Company, New York; 
Collier-Macmillan Ltd., London, new 
revised edition, 1965 ($2.95). 
BM The Panama Canal 
By Rolt Hammond and C.J. Lewin. 
Frederick Muller Ltd., London, 1966 
(30/- stg.) 
BM Education and Changing West 
African Culture 
By John Wilson. Oxford University 
Press, 1966 (8/6 stg.) 
ASIA'S PEOPLES 
AND CULTURES 
BM Asia: a Guide to Books 
for Children 
(A selection covering 18 countries 
and regions) The Asia Society, 
112 East 64th Street New York, 1966. 
HB Japanese Painting 
(A Brief History). 
By Kenji Toda 
Charles E. Tuttle Company, Rutland, 
Vermont, U.S.A. and Tokyo, 1965 
($2.50) 
BM Ancient Art from Afghanistan 
(Treasures from the Kabul Museum). 
By Benjamin Rowland, Jr. 
Catalogue of an exhibition held in 
New York, Los Angeles and Wash- 
ington in 1966. The Asia Society, 
1966. 
BM Ancient India 
(A textbook of history for middle 
schools). 
By Romila Thapar. National Council 
of Educational Research and Train- 
ing, New Delhi, 1966 (Rs. 3.60).   33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

4 
Quarter million Palestine 
refugee children in school 
Over 250,000 Palestine refugee children 
now attend elementary and lower secondary 
schools. Nearly 192,000 are enrolled in 
441 UNRWA-Unesco schools in Jordan 
Gaza, Lebanon and Syria, reports the United 
Nations Relief and Works Agency. A further 
60,000 refugee children attend government 
or private schools, most of them with grants 
from UNRWA. The rate of increase in 
school enrolment is substantially larger 
than the rate of population increase among 
Palestine refugees and there has been a 
significant rise in the enrolment of girls. 
 
Unesco Geography 
Wallcharts 
Will readers please note that the price 
of Unesco Geography Wallcharts, Set | 
(Europe), is 70/-stg. in the U.K., and not 
64/-as stated in our February 1967 issue. 
World’s women engineers 
and scientists 
The Second International Conference of 
Women Engineers and Scientists which 
opens in Cambridge, England, on July 1, 
is basing most of its work on the theme 
“Enough for Everyone—The Application of 
Technology to World Food Problems.” 
Regional food problems and ways of tack- 
ling them will be discussed by speakers 
from every continent. Other topics include 
meteorology and the world food supply, 
water use and abuse, protein from oil 
fermentation and planetary food potential. 
International aid 
for Florence and Venice 
Cyprus is to contribute £1,500 and Leba- 
non $6300 to Unesco's international 
campaign for the restoration of works of 
art damaged in Florence and Venice. These 
contributions follow a gift of $5,000 by 
Iran. 
(/) UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 
Nations 
a
 
" 
U
N
I
T
E
D
 
N
A
T
I
O
N
 
oq
 
L
E
C
 
F
h
 
{ 
oe
 
=
 
  
The stamp of development 
In January 1967, the United Nations Postal Admi- 
nistration issued a stamp to commemorate the United 
Development 
project commitments of over $ 1,000 million, the 
U.N. Development Programme conducts the world's 
largest programme of multi-lateral aid to developing 
As the United Nations Postal Admi- 
representative in France, the Unesco 
Philatelic Service has supplies of all United Nations 
stamps currently available. 
apply to the Unesco Philatelic Service, place de 
Fontenoy, Paris (7). 
countries. 
nistration's 
Programme. With current 
For further information,   
Auroville— 
India’s International City 
A new city to be built near Pondicherry, 
India, to house a community of 50,000 peo- 
ple from all countries, will be called Auro- 
ville, after the Indian spiritual leader, Sri 
Aurobindo, who died in 1950. The aim is 
to bring together in this new city the 
values and ideals of all civilizations and 
cultures. Four zones—residential, inter- 
national, cultural and industrial—will be built 
over next 15 to 20 years. The project 
was launched to coincide with the 20th 
anniversary of Unesco. 
Flashes... 
  
BM Guyana has become Unesco's 121st 
member state. 
BM More than 50,000 people still die every 
year of tetanus, a disease readily prevent- 
ed by vaccination, says WHO. In many 
European countries tetanus causes more 
deaths than diphtheria, typhoid, scarlet 
fever and rabies combined. 
BM Kenya has become the 53rd country to 
join the Unesco-sponsored agreement 
exempting books, newspapers, works of 
art, scientific equipment and many educa- 
tional materials from import duties. 
BM One person in every three in New Zea- 
land is attending an educational institution, 
reports that country's Minister of Education. 
B The Netherlands is the 55th country to 
join the Universal Copyright Convention 
under which states grant foreign works 
the same protection accorded works by 
their own nationals. 
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Longmans of Australia Pty Ltd., Railway Crescent, 
Croydon, Victoria; sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
tion of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne C. |. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only : Dominie Pty Ltd, 463 Pitt- 
water Road, Brookvale (N.S.W.) (SA 2.25). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.2). — BELGIUM. All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgiélei 147, Antwerp. |. For 
The Unesco Courier (140 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only : 
Louis De Lannoy, 112, rue du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380.00. — CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont. 
($3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chittam- 
palan Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, Colombo, 2 (Rs. 7). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS. 
“MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L, 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); Zahranicni 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, Ltd., Prags Boulevard 47, Copenhagen S. (D. 
Kr. 17). — ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O. 
Box 120, Addis Ababa (10/-). — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 9.40). — 
FRANCE. Librairie de |'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48. (10 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, 8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
Ltd., Atlantis House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis, Nikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Académiai Konyvesbolt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.V. Koényvtirosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasig utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
(120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New Delhi. 
1; Sub-Depots : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16 and Scindia House, New Delhi: 
Indian National Commission for Cooperation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 
10.50). — INDONESIA. P.T.N. “Permata-Nusantara" 
c/o Department of Commerce 22, Djalan Nusantara 
Djakarta — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid 
Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, University 
of Baghdad, P.O. Box 12, Baghdad — IRELAND. The 
National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. 
4. (15/5). — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blum- 
stein's Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1£8). — JAMAICA. Sang- 
ster's Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, Kingston. (15/-). 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, Nihon- 
bashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo (1,200 yen). 
— JORDAN. Joseph I. Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road. P.O.B. 66, Amman. — KENYA. ES.A. 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi (10/-). — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., 
Ltd., P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286. Monrovia (10/-). 
— LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand- 
Rue, Luxemburg (F.L. 140). — MALAYSIA. Federal 
Publications Ltd., Times House, River Valley Road, 
Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3rd floor), 110, Jalan 
Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M. $ 7.50). — MALTA. Sapienza’s 
Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta, (15/-). — MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port- 
Louis (15/-). — MONACO. British Library, 30, Bld. 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (F. 10). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 8.50). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. NLA. (NA fl 4,50). — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 20, Molesworth Street (Private 
Bag), Wellington; Government Bookshops: Auckland 
(P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dune. 
din (P.O. Box 1104) (15/-). — NIGERIA. C.M.S. Book, 
shops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-). — NORWAY. 
All publications: A.S. Bokhjornet, Akersgt 41. 
Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: AS. Norvesens Litte- 
raturjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, (17.50 kr.). — PA. 
KISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco 
Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore; 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree 
Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad. — PHILIPPINES. The Mo- 
dern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila. 
— POLAND. “RUSH", ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 
(zl. 60.). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria 
Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO. 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115- 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — SOUTHERN RHODESIA. 
Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67, Union Avenue, Salisbury, — 
SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications : A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stock- 
holm 16. — For the Unesco Courier: The United, 
Nations Association of Sweden, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 12); SWITZERLAND. All publications : 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse, Zurich. Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 10). — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panith’ Mansion, 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 ticals). — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala (10/-).— SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications : Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty) Ltd., 
Libri Building. Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only : Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. (R1.-50). 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Sub/agent : 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.l., and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester. 
Birmingham and Bristol. (15/-). — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, New York, 
N.Y. 10016 ($ 5.00). — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska 
Knjiga Terazije, 27, Belgrade. 
D
L
 
2°
 
tr
im
es
tr
e 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
 
P
A
R
I
S
 
I
m
o

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

    FC HISTOR 
| OF 
| o IBZ ER 
| | MANKIND 
Ri wid CULTURAL AND 
SCIENTIFIC 
DEVELOPMENT 
Published by George Allen and Unwin Sponsored by UNESCO 
  
  
  
This six-volume set will present for the first time in lively and 
readable form, a global history of mankind planned and written 
from an international standpoint by experts of world-wide 
reputation. Produced under the auspices of UNESCO, this 
unparalleled publishing project shows vividly—in words and 
pictures—the ways people lived, developed their customs and 
arts, borrowed from each other, and diffused their cultures. 
Here is the continuous evolution of man’s cultural and scientific 
developments from Prehistory to the Atomic Age, told 
against the background of religion, politics, economics and the 
historical events that mark the course of mankind. 
  
    
A | Li} | 
d h 
|   
nr ll | JR - orsnedvens Bupvossion I |             
 
 
Price in the U. K.: 75/- Price in the U.K.: 126/- Price in the U.K.: 168/- 
(postage 2/9) (postage 3/6) (postage extra). The two parts 
Also available in two parts: Separate parts 42/- each. are not sold separately. 
PREHISTORY, 35/- 
THE BEGINNINGS 
OF CIVILIZATION, 42/- 
a remarkable achievement... | cannot believe that any historian who 
thinks the study of history of value will not be excited by seeing 
completed for the first time a genuinely international account of the 
history of the world in which differences have been sufficiently contained 
to enable an agreed version to be published. This is a triumph for the 
people who have had the patience and faith to carry such an enterprise to 
its conclusion.” —Professor Alan Bullock. 
U.S. edition published by French edition published by Spanish edition published by 
Harper and Row, New York. Editions Robert Laffont, Paris. Editorial Sudamericana, S.A. 
Buenos Aires. 
Also published or in preparation: Greek, Hebrew, Italian, Russian, Serbo-Croatian and Slovenian editions

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/059709eng.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

r
o
d
 
A
o
t
i
 
’ 
i 
-
 
o
n
 
G
o
a
l
,
 
|
 
r 
: 
- 
T
R
I
B
,
 
—
—
 
. 
-
 
i
e
d
 
n
l
n
 
. 
I
.
 
5 
-
 
1
a
 
x
 
1508 
(3 
¥ 
       
   