# [078222](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

A window open on the world 
OUricr 
January 1967 (20th year) U.K.: 1/6-stg. - Canada: 30 cents - France: 1 F 
  
  
  
- Sa RIN oT i —— r - 
FLORENCE 
© VENICE 
Unesco 
opens 
world 
campaign 
13 -. . . > Ta ’ 
    
     
 
. 
- 
n 
E
E
 
L
L
 
Ah
 
a
l
s
 
-
_
 
A
 
me
 
2 
Ga
 
a
 
R
E
 
T
a
 
   
  
   
J li 
Pr ly op nT pn AT

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART 
12 
 
Photo © Unesco 
Adam and Eve spared by the flood 
The only existing works of Masaccio, one of the great Florentine painters of 
the early 15th century, are his frescoes in the Brancacci Chapel of the 
Carmelite Church in Florence. These works were spared by the recent 
flood that ravaged Florence. Masaccio died in 1428 at the age of 27. But the 
masterpieces he produced in his short life mark him as the true creator of Renaissance 
painting. Above, detail of Masaccio’s “Adam and Eve driven out of Paradise”. 
From * Masaccio: Frescoes in Florence “, published by the New York Graphic Society, by 
arrangement with Unesco, in the Unesco World Art Series (1956); 32 full colour plates.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

‘WCourier 
JANUARY 1967 - 20TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 
NINE EDITIONS 
  
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
. Japanese 
Italian 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7e. 
Annual subscription rates: 15/-stg.; $3.00 
(Canada); 10 French francs or equivalent: 
2years:27/-stg.; 18 F. Single copies 1/6-stg.; 
30 cents; 1 F. 
* 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except 
in July and August when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Arabic, 
Japanese and Italian, In the United Kingdom it is distributed 
by H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.L 
Individual! articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the 
opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. ) 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Read- 
ers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
* 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7¢, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Lucio Attinelli 
Managing Editors 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Arturo Despouey (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel! Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Shin-Ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian * Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
lflustrations: Betsy Bates 
Research: Olga Radel 
Layout & Design: Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief 
The international campaign 
for Florence and Venice 
Page 
12 
15 
17 
18 
24 | 
30 
35 
42 
N
e
l
 
- 
19
67
 
M
C
 
66
-1
-2
20
 
A 
  
  
 
Special issue 
 
FOR FLORENCE AND VENICE 
By René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco 
YEARS TO REPAIR THE DAMAGE 
By Bruno Molajoli 
THE PLIGHT OF THE FLORENTINE ARTISANS 
By Rex Keating 
DIMENSIONS OF A DISASTER 
THE ‘CRUCIFIX’ BY CIMABUE 
A masterpiece destroyed 
THE BATTERED ‘GATES OF PARADISE’ 
THE PAINTING HOSPITAL IN THE LEMON GROVE 
By Harold J. Plenderleith 
OVER A MILLION WATERLOGGED 
BOOKS AND MANUSCRIPTS 
THE ANATOMY OF THE FLOOD 
By Dino Tonini 
TO HELP THE INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN 
FOR FLORENCE AND VENICE 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
Adam and Eve (Masaccio) 
3 
Cover photo 
 
The Uffizi in Florence is one of the 
world's most celebrated museums. 
Last November invading flood- 
waters wrought havoc in its base- 
ment where innumerable works of 
art from the museum’s reserve col- 
lections are stored. Here, after the 
waters had subsided, some of these 
works lie half submerged in mud. 
Photo Soprintendenza alle Gallerie, 
Florence

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 59339: For Florence and Venice: appeal launched on December 2, 1966 by René Maheu, Director-General of UNESCO, at the opening of the International Campaign for Florence and Venice

launched 
on December 2, 1966 
by 
RENE MAHEU 
Director-General 
of Unesco 
at the opening 
of the International 
Campaign for 
Florence and Venice 
D uing the first days of Nov- 
ember, Tuscany and Venetia were 
devastated by floods of extraordinary 
magnitude and violence. The damage 
has been enormous. To the toll in human 
lives and the loss of property were add- 
ed the destruction, in Florence and Ve- 
nice, of creations of the human spirit 
which made the enchantment of the 
culture and art of living that Italy has 
given to the world. 
   
  
In all, 885 works of art of the first 
importance, eighteen churches and some 
10,000 other objects have suffered. Sev- 
enty libraries and learned institutions 
have been stricken. More than 700,000 
volumes of archives comprising some 
50 million items, of which 10,000 were 
of inestimable historical and scientific 
value, have been damaged. 
Florence and Venice! The names 
alone say why ltaly’s grief is ours. But 
they indicate also why Italy's resolution 
to preserve and restore everything that 
can be saved will be the common pur- 
pose of us all. Venice sinking into the 
waters, it is as if one of the most radiant 
stars of beauty were suddenly engulfed; 
Florence bemired, it is the springtime 
of our hearts which is for ever disfigur- 
ed. We will not resign ourselves to 
such disasters. 
The General Conference of Unesco, 
which has just concluded its fourteenth 
session, has decided unanimously to 
issue an urgent appeal “to the spirit of 
fellowship of Member States to assist, 
to the fullest extent of their means, the 
efforts of the Italian people and autho- 
rities to preserve and restore cultural 
property that has been or is in danger 
of being damaged”. 
 
    
In so doing, Unesco in no way wishes 
to take the place of the aid and co-op- 
eration, public and private, which Italy's 
innumerable friends throughout the world 
have spontaneously offered and are 
prepared to furnish directly. The bro- 
therhood of man that the international 
agencies seek to promote and to 
organize is nurtured by the living springs 
of natural and historic friendships bet- 
ween persons and peoples. 
But Unesco, called upon by its Cons- 
titution to assure “the conservation and 
protection of the world’s inheritance of 
books, works of art and monuments of 
history and science” can, as the Italian 
Government has requested, assemble 
and distribute information regularly on 
the needs, on the one hand, and offers 
of aid on the other. In this way out- 
side assistance may be best directed by 
stages, in agreement with the Italian 
authorities, to meet the needs and fit 
the possibilities of the situation. 
Most important, Unesco can stimulate 
international solidarity—and that indeed 
should be its role. Just six years ago, 
from this very platform, my predecessor 
launched a pressing appeal to the world 
to save the monuments of Egyptian and 
Sudanese Nubia which were threatened 
to be flooded as a result of the construc- 
tion of the Aswan High Dam. Fifty 
countries responded to that appeal. 
Today it can be said that the safeguard- 
ing of the antiquities of Nubia is accom- 
plished or assured, including the unique 
monumental ensemble of Abu Simbel. 
| am sure that once again mankind will 
not fail to acknowledge and act to save 
its common heritage, thereby acknow- 
ledging again and reaffirming its pro- 
found spiritual unity. 
  

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 59339: For Florence and Venice: appeal launched on December 2, 1966 by René Maheu, Director-General of UNESCO, at the opening of the International Campaign for Florence and Venice

    
VENICE 
On behalf of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, = 
| address a solemn appeal to the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind 
for the preservation and restoration of the damaged cultural treasures 
of Florence and Venice. 
® | call upon the 120 Member States of Unesco, and first of all 
upon their governments, to give generous aid in the form of money, 
equipment and services to carry out this immense task of preservation and 
restoration which will require several years. 
® | call upon museums, libraries, archives and learned institutions 
in all the countries to put their experts, their laboratories and their workshops 
at the disposal of the corresponding Italian institutions whose 
installations and collections have suffered. | call upon those international 
organizations of specialists which are closely associated with Unesco’s work 
in this field—the International Council of Museums, the International Council on 
Monuments and Sites, and the International Federation of Library 
Associations and the International Council on Archives—to promote and 
co-ordinate efforts in this respect. 
® | call upon the writers, artists, musicians, critics and historians, indeed all 
those—and they are legion—whose works have been inspired by the 
treasures of Florence or Venice, to donate a part of what they have 
gained—they know better than anyone else that they can never repay their true 
debt, which is a spiritual one—and to help us with their talents in 
reaching the public. 
® | call upon museums, art galleries, theatres, and concert halls, foundations 
and private collections, which glory in the works we owe to the genius 
of Florence and Venice, to organize exhibitions, performances, and 
other events, devoted to Florence and Venice, the proceeds of which would go 
to the Funds that have been set up in many countries, and by Unesco 
itself, to receive voluntary financial contributions. 
® | call on the millions and tens of millions of persons who have visited these 
famous cities, even if only once, and who have returned enriched for the rest 
of their lives, to send one dollar—or whatever they can—to Unesco. 
® Finally, I also call on all those who have never been to Florence 
or Venice, and many of whom may never have that chance, to contribute 
something: be it money or work—something of themselves. 
Each one of us knows himself to be a member of the family of Man. 
How then could any one of us remain indifferent to the fate of these most 
precious jewels of our common human heritage? 
Photo © Epoca - Giorgio Lotti 
A 
——

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 59437: Years to repair the damage

Years 
to repair 
the 
damage 
by Bruno Molajoli 
Photo © Epoca - Sergio del Grande, Milan 
  
  
             
  
      
  
  
Smashed cars hurled 
into a heap by the 
violence of the Florence 
floods lie outside the 
church of Santa Croce 
(left). Six metres 
(20 ft.) of water invaded 
the church's famous 
museum. Right, 
wading through a 
Florence street as waters 
began to recede on the 
evening of November 4. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
D..c the first anxious 
days, those in my country stricken by 
the sudden violence of the floods had 
to stifle their distress and devote all 
their efforts to the immense task of 
rescue and protection. At that time, 
the sympathy shown by the whole 
world stirred feelings of deep gratitude, 
encouragement and hope in Italy. 
In Tuscany and Venetia, two regions 
which are among the richest in monu- 
ments and works of art, the toll of 
  
BRUNO MOLAIOLI is Director-General of 
Antiquities and Fine Arts at the Italian 
Ministry of Education, Rome. He is an art 
historian and a lecturer at the Faculty of 
Architecture of the University of Naples, 
and has written some 30 books of art 
criticism and on the history of art. 
 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 59437: Years to repair the damage

damage and destruction is immense, 
particularly in Florence and Venice, 
though other important historical 
centres have also been hit in vary- 
ing degrees. 
In Venice it has been found that 
the most precious works of art (sculp- 
tures and paintings) in the museums 
and churches have escaped injury. 
But very serious damage-—much of 
it irreparable—has been caused to the 
libraries (including the historically im- 
portant Biblioteca Marciana), the Gior- 
gio Cini Foundation, archives and art 
collections, art and antique shops. 
The chief cause for alarm in Venice 
is the state of monuments, churches 
and palazzj in the picturesque old parts 
of the city. Water polluted with fuel 
oil from tanks replenished for the win- 
ter has risen several metres and 
seriously defaced and fouled these 
  
buildings. Their restoration will be 
long and difficult. 
Great anxiety is also felt about the 
stability of many important historic 
buildings—already in a precarious 
state—and in fact of the entire city. 
The surge of the floodwaters placed 
abnormal stresses on old walls already 
weakened by constant dampness and 
on their foundations which, as is well 
known, rest on piles. (See Unesco 
Courier, January 1965). 
The most immediate problems are 
those of inspection and of carrying 
out the necessary reinforcement and 
restoration operations. We fear that 
there are unpleasant surprises in store 
for us here. 
Venice's old ills have become more 
acute, thus making us better aware of 
the price which has to be paid for its 
beauty. 
Photo © Epoca - Giorgio Lotti, Milan 
The situation «calls for radical 
measures: 
HB the movement of water in the 
lagoon must be controlled by making 
it independent of the tides in the Adria- 
tic: this is an enormous undertaking 
but absolutely essential; 
BH sufficient financial and technical 
resources must be made available for 
the restoration and maintenance of the 
monuments and the historic setting; 
HB a new use as public and cultural 
buildings must be found for the main 
private palazzi, in order to save them 
from the threat and hence from the 
risk of being left derelict. 
As for Florence, it is a city disfigur- 
ed, an artistic heritage built up over 
long centuries of artistic fervour gra- 
vely damaged and in part lost forever 
because of the violence of the natural 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 59437: Years to repair the damage

Dual threat to Venice 
Venice has never been in greater peril. Last November, storm tides 
breached its protective walls, flooding the city to a depth of several feet 
(right) and exposing it to a powerful additional impact from the Adriatic. 
The Italian Government has earmarked nearly 40,000 million lire 
($63 million) to help save the city. Venice is built on a foundation of 
old wooden piles (below) driven into the soft ground of several hundred 
tiny islands. The stability of its buildings is increasingly threatened by 
subsidence of the lagoon bed (see the “Unesco Courier”, January 1965). 
Erosion from the surge of waters is also attacking the foundations and 
causing increasing damage to monuments, churches, palaces and other 
old buildings. An enormous programme of reinforcement and restoration 
throughout the city is needed, and also protection from the Adriatic tides. 
a ey STE ——— au RE RG 2 B  IT : : 
  “ea iu 
Re O8 Zi 
Photo HA dh Monument, Ven 
TO REPAIR THE DAMAGE (Continued) 
International aid 
from every continent 
forces unleashed in the space of a 
few hours. 
In the centre of Florence, 18 chur- 
ches, with a wealth of works of art, 
were flooded with water and mud, 
their altars and ornaments overturned, 
their paving stones uprooted, the fres- 
coes and paintings on wood—adorn- 
ments which made them living mu- 
seums—seriously damaged. 
Many palazzi of historic interest—as 
well as museums and libraries—have 
been damaged. The picturesque 
shops of the Ponte Vecchio have 
been destroyed. The embankments of 
the Arno have been damaged and 
parts of them have collapsed. 
The list of treasures affected by the 
flood is still incomplete. But it is 
known already that the following works 
of art, to take account of “only the 
most famous, have been rescued from 
the water: 
313 paintings on wood, 
431 paintings on canvas, 
11 series of frescoes, 
39 individual frescoes, 
31 frescoes which had been remov- 
ed from their original settings, 
14 groups of sculpture, 
144 individual sculptures, 
22 wood carvings, 
23 illuminated codices. 
In all, more than 1,000 works of art 
of outstanding importance. 
Considered by their 
periods, 
clude: 
over 30 paintings of the 13th and 
14th centuries, including works by Ci- 
mabue, Lorenzo Monaco, Lorenzetti, 
Bernardo Daddi, Giovanni del Biondo; 
including 
respective 
the damaged paintings in- 
 
over 40 paintings of the 15th century, 
including works by Fra Angelico, Co- 
simo Rosselli, Lorenzo di Credi, Paolo 
Schiave, Domenico Veneziano, Neri di 
Bicci, Alessio Baldovinetti; 
nearly 150 paintings of the 16th cen- 
tury, including works by the greatest 
artists of the age, from Bronzino to 
Vasari and from Cristoforo Allori to 
Poppi and Naldini. 
To these must be added the loss 
of a quantity, yet to be established 
but certainly very great, of lesser 
works of art, church ornaments and 
vestments, and documents, which, 
together with the major works of art, 
created in Florence an incomparable 
atmosphere of artistic civilization. 
Faced by this disaster, we have 
tried to provide for the most urgent

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 59437: Years to repair the damage

im iii ii] {114 
T_T 
needs and to deal with the grave situa- 
tion by every means possible. 
We have been greatly touched by 
the offers of assistance, the personal 
contributions and the supplies of 
equipment which began to come in 
from all sides as soon as the first 
news of the disaster became known. 
Foreign museums, international insti- 
tutions, Unesco's International Centre 
for the Study of the Preservation and 
Restoration of Cultural Property in 
Rome, and scholars and scientists in 
all countries have offered their sup- 
port. 
The emergency and the absolutely 
exceptional situation in the city of Flo- 
rence made it impossible for us at the 
start to call on anyone except the peo- 
ple already on the spot. There is no 
doubt, however, that we shall need 
to take advantage of these exceptional 
offers in the future programme of work 
and we shall indeed be glad to count 
on them. 
For the most pressing needs, the 
italian Government has already allo- 
cated 4 thousand million lire (over 
$6.4 million) to save cultural property, 
as well as 1,300 million lire (over 
$2 million) for the University of Flo- 
rence alone. But it can already be 
seen that these costs will have to be 
multiplied five-fold for the work of res- 
toration to be undertaken over the 
next few years. For Venice, the 
government has added 9,000 million 
lire ($14.4 million) to the 30 thousand 
million lire ($48 million) already allo- 
cated to the preservation of the city. 
Over sixty priority operations are at 
present in progress in the chief histo- 
ric buildings of Florence and the sur- 
rounding area: they are being cleared 
Photo @ Camera - Foto, Venice 
out, the mud is being removed, shaken 
structures are being strengthened and 
technical studies in view of subsequent 
integral restoration work. are being 
carried out. 
As regards works of art (paintings, 
sculptures, tapestries, ancient wea- 
pons, miniatures), priority has been 
given to their recovery and then to 
a preliminary clean-up; the main 
effort is being concentrated on fixing 
painted surfaces, which, where they 
have not already been lost, are all 
in great danger. This is an extremely 
delicate operation. 
Fifty technicians sent from the main 
specialized laboratories in Italy (the 
Central Institute of Restoration at 
Rome, and the restoration workshops 
of Bologna, Milan and Naples) are 
now working in the Florence labora- 
tories under the direction of the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

Photo © Rizzoll Press, Milan 
Wi HW A § 
r : J) 2. i 4 2 
oR 
mn i= 
aM 
   
       
    
— 
RE 
Photo © Epoca - Giorgio Lottl, Milan 
  
S
w
e
 
—
—
—
 
ov 
FT
 
A
E
A
    
(
5
 
yy 
Photo © Epoca - Glorglo Lottl, Milan 
10 
Florence after the deluge. 
Above, tattered and 
shapeless bundles of paper 
—the remains of a 
bookstore's stock. Left, 
plodding through oil-polluted 
water, people recuperate 
a few household goods 
and personal belongings. 
In foreground, oil-coated 
books and paintings. Below, 
between the Cathedral 
(Duomo) and the Baptistery, 
chairs and benches are 
stacked in street while 
first aid is given to damaged 
art in these churches. 


### 59437: Years to repair the damage

Years 
to repair 
the damage 
(Continued) 
Superintendent of the Galleries of Flo- 
rence, Professor Ugo Procacci and 
his immediate colleagues. Thanks to 
their courageous efforts in this diffi- 
cult work, carried out with self-sacri- 
fice and devotion, it has been possible 
to rescue a great part of this artistic 
heritage and return it to a state in 
which it can be saved. 
Shifting one crate may be work for a 
handyman, but shifting a thousand 
crates becomes work for an engineer. 
The restoration of a picture is 
always a delicate and complex opera- 
tion; but we have to restore several 
hundred works of art simultaneously. 
This raises problems of unprecedented 
scope and complexity: co-ordination of 
research in each individual case; mobi- 
lization of technical resources; assess- 
ment of restoration costs, which will 
certainly be very high. 
Even under the most favourable 
conditions, this immense artistic heri- 
tage cannot be quickly and fully res- 
tored. There are technical reasons 
why short cuts cannot be taken in 
certain operations. It is expected that 
several years will be required, certainly 
more than five. 
Never before have we been faced 
with the need to operate on such an 
enormous scale, for so many works 
of art. 
We have a long-term programme 
before us, involving much work and 
responsibility, We are ready to face 
it. We pledge ourselves to this task, 
for which we shall be responsible to 
the world of culture, convinced that it 
will continue to support us with its 
understanding, sympathy and co-op- 
eration as it has so admirably done 
up to the present. 
  
In the Piazza della Signoria, 
littered with debris, the 
famous statues of Hercules 
(right) and David (left}—a 
marble copy of Michelangelo's 
famous work—still flank 
the main entrance to the 
Palazzo Vecchio. Third 
statue (background) 
surmounts the great fountain 
of Neptune. Statue casualties 
loaded in truck (foreground) 
are being taken to 
a restoration studio.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 59437: Years to repair the damage

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ep
oc
a 
- 
Gi
or
gi
o 
Lo
tt
i,
 
Mi
la
n 
        
   
a Ss 
BER 
aa 
i 
  
  
  
 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

Against its background 
of cypress-covered hills, 
the tower of the Palazzo 
Vecchio has overlooked 
the roofs of Florence 
for six centuries (right). 
In the 15th century the city 
boasted some 60 square 
towers clustered around 
its central square, the 
Piazza della Signoria. 
Below, damage wrought 
by the flood on the Ponte 
Vecchio, the oldest 
bridge in Florence, and 
until the flood almost 
unchanged since 1345. 
It is flanked with 
goldsmiths shops, but 
many of these are now 
badly damaged and their 
stocks destroyed. 
Photo (CG) Reporters Associés 
  
4 A RIT) POPS 
  
 
OP) 
A stupendous edifice 
in white, green and red 
marble, the cathedral of 
Santa Maria del Fiore, 
the “Duomo”, stands 
in the heart of Florence 
(right). Begun in 1296 
under the direction of 
Arnolfo di Cambio, the 
Photo © Robert Descharnes. From “Florence que }'aime® work was continued b 
(The Florence | love) by Carlo Coccloli, Editions Sun, Paris Giotto. Andrea Pisano y 
3 
and Francesco Talent. 
In 1417 Brunelleschi 
designed the cupola—the 
Duomo—which has given 
its name to the entire 
cathedral. The building 
did not escape the 
flood waters, which ruined 
two organs, the marble 
floor and a work by the 
15th century Florentine 
painter Giovanni Balducci. 


### 59440: The Plight of the Florentine artisans

The plight 
of the 
Florentine 
artisans 
F LORENCE is the treasure house of Renaissance 
art and thought, but it is also a treasure house of living 
people, people who are heirs to the traditions that were 
established when that grand creative upsurge of the human 
spirit had subsided. In and around Florence live some 
7,000 artisans, men and women who fashion the objects 
which generations of visitors to Florence have been 
delighted to admire and to buy. 
Working with the skills of centuries in his fingers and 
using tools that make mockery of machines, the Florentine 
artisan is unique. Yet some 6,000 of them have lost their 
all—tools, materials, workshops. Most of them are not 
young and it is feared that they will lack the resources 
to start again, painfully to reconstruct their shattered lives,

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 59440: The Plight of the Florentine artisans

‘s
au
iB
yo
sa
q 
M
a
q
o
y
 
 
o
0
l
o
y
d
 
su
ed
 
‘u
ng
 
su
on
ip
3 
‘t
o]
99
00
 
ow
en
 
Aq
 
‘(
aA
o0
) 
| 
ao
ua
lo
){
 
By
] 
o
w
e
 [
 
            
- 
. a, 
a Fr TREE EE ava: 
WEA ——_- 
  
  
  w
o
u
 
    
an
b 
ao
us
io
|4
, 
        
and instead will turn to other kinds of work for a livelihood. 
The world will be the poorer for their loss. 
it was heartbreaking to wade through the byways of 
Florence and see the owners of the little shops for which 
Florence is celebrated struggling to put things to rights. 
Some, hopefully, displayed the pitiful remains of their 
stock, saturated and stained, for sale at rock-bottom prices 
in the hope of recovering a few lire to help start again. 
But more often than not the stuff was unsellable. 
Some 6,000 of Florence's 10,000 shops have been des- 
troyed. Thousands of families are homeless and those 
lucky enough to have ground-floor apartments still habit- 
able are doomed to live for many months in rooms satu- 
rated with water and reeking of fuel oil. Many houses, 
wg — 
  
  
N 
, 
R
i
n
a
 
  
    
  
    
undermined by the surging torrent of the flood have started 
to collapse and are shored up with great timbers. 
Nevertheless, the work of clearing the streets of debris 
and mud is going ahead swiftly and methodically right 
through the night. Every little shop has its owner, some- 
times alone, more often with helpers, busily scrubbing 
walls, repairing floors and hammering up counters and 
showcases, and every shop has in it a brazier or even 
a bonfire, to dry off the interior. Over all the rain pelts 
down as it has ceaselessly for weeks, perpetuating the 
slimy mud in streets and alleys and adding immeasurably 
to the discomfort of the shaken city. And over everything, 
in every building, in every street, a dank humidity and the 
acrid tang of fuel oil. 
REX KEATING

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

I 
». 
« . 
» r A hg 
Mor —— an 
- 
) Ao gh - 
rs . - 
 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

Mi
la
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ep
oc
a 
- 
Gi
or
gi
o 
Lo
tt
, 
DIMENSIONS 
  
"a
 
’ 
- 
4 
§ 
. 
D
h
 
IEE
 
4h
 
bn 
To
 
"
"
 
vr 
Fifteen hundred paintings were damaged in Fiorence alone. An emergency 
“hospital” has been opened for these flood-damaged masterpieces in the huge 
building that normally houses the unique collection of iemon trees of the Palazzo Pitti. 
The building, 120 metres long by 10 metres high (400 ft. by 30 ft.), has been 
transformed into a vast insulated chamber equipped with furnaces and air blowers. 
Paintings on wood which demand a long and delicate treatment are set on wooden 
tables and sprayed with special disinfecting gas to kill mould. Above, 
“Noli me tangere”, a celebrated work by Pontecormo (1531) based on a sketch 
by Michelangelo, It was preserved in the Casa Buonarroti {Michelangelo's home). 
Except for a hand, the figure of Christ has been completely effaced (right 
of photo). A city set on the hills in background has almost vanished. Left, works 
in marble, bronze and ceramic from a museum storeroom after rescue from the mud. 
    Ph
ot
o 
Re
po
rt
er
s 
As
so
ci
és
, 
Pa
rl
s 


### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

F A DISASTER 
The list which follows of artistic 
and cultural casualties suffered 
by the city of Florence alone is 
necessarily incomplete. It will be 
months, perhaps years, before a 
detailed and definitive assessment 
can be made of the losses. 
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES 
MUSEO ARCHEOLOGICO. Thirty-four 
ground-floor rooms, including Etruscan 
topographical museum, invaded by floods. 
Floors burst open, glass cases demolished 
and exhibits buried in mud. Over 9,000 
vases and other valuable relics, including 
many objects in bronze and other metals, 
await cleaning and restoration. In restora- 
tion studio, equipment and objects being 
restored, including six painted Egyptian 
sarcophagi, badly damaged. Photographic 
studio equipment destroyed and records 
damaged. 
MUSEO BARDINI. Entire ground floor 
flooded. Celebrated collection of musical 
instruments (16th to 19th centuries) gravely 
damaged. Large wooden model by Ghe- 
rardo Silvani (project for church of St. 
Firenze), “Madonna” by Cranach and a 
“Hercules” painted by Domenico Becca- 
fumi all severely damaged. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

16 
DIMENSIONS OF A DISASTER (Cont'd) 
MUSEO BARGELLO. Four metres (13 ft) 
of water in exhibition room of Michelangelo 
sculptures submerged and stained these 
works. Three terracotta figures by Tribolo, 
another by Vincenzo Danti and the bronze 
“Samson and the Philistine” by Perino da 
Vinci all broken. Courtyard sculptures by 
Ammammati and Giovanni Bologna stained 
by oil and water. Valuable collection of 
armour and weapons damaged. 
CASA BUONARROTI. Ground floor flooded 
up to the vault. All works on this level 
suffered. Two paintings by Bronzino and 
Battista Franco almost ruined. The collec- 
tion of portraits of Michelangelo (including 
the well-known one by Bugiardini), and the 
“Two Lovers” attributed to Titian immersed 
and covered with mud. Some della Robbia 
statuettes broken. Recently discovered 
“Crucifix” by Michelangelo unharmed. 
CONSERVATOR!IO CHERUBINI. In the 
library, two shelves of autograph and in 
part unpublished musical manuscripts (16th 
to 10th centuries), including the “Fondo 
Pitti", and unpublished manuscripts by 
Rossini flooded and bemired. Much of 
this material may still be saved. Collection 
of musical instruments, including works by 
Stradivarius, was fortuitously saved, having 
been temporarily moved upstairs. 
MUSEO DELL’ OPERA DEL DUOMO. Over 
100 statues covered with mud and oil 
Uninue collection of models for construction 
of cathedral and Brunelleschi's model for its 
dome severely damaged by upthrust of 
air and water under floor. Over 6,000 
volumes of ancient archives in basement 
damaged plus 55 illuminated Renaissance 
musical codices. 
MUSEO DI STORIA DELLA SCIENZA. 
Many collections of inestimable value 
engulfed by mud. Collections of ancient 
clocks, alembics, scales and scientific 
instruments (16th to 20th centuries), inclu- 
ding Edison's phonograph, destroyed or 
seriously damaged. 
MUSEO HORNE. This museum, present- 
ed to Florence by an English scholar 
and collector, Herbert Horne, was seri- 
ously damaged. Over four metres (14 ft.) 
of water and mud in ground floor 
and cellars. Among damaged works: a 
stucco attributed to Luca della Robbia; 
“Drunkenness of Noah” and a *"Madonna” 
by Beccafumi; a “Saint Sebastian™ by 
Ferrarese; a “Madonna” by Begarelli; an 
“Adoration” by Bartolomeo di Giovanni; a 
school of Ghiberti stucco, “Madonna and 
Angels” (shattered); a bust by Matteo 
Civitali. One hundred volumes of archives 
(14th to 18th centuries) saturated and fine 
Renaissance furniture and woodwork partly 
destroyed. 
MUSEO MEDICEO, PALAZZO RICCARDI. 
Oily water in ground floor flooded glass 
cases and damaged tapestries. Medici 
family portrait collection untouched except 
for “Duke Alessandro” by Vasari. The 
“Madonna” by Filippo Lippi was just clear 
of water. 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 21 
  
  
  
  
  
a = oe — 
ity Rate Pp 
o 
    
—- 
if p. 
nN q Y 
h— ; 7    
  
          
  
  
  
  sR Ril] — 
Photo © Epoca - Sergio del Grande 
Using vegetable strainers to sift carefully 
through the mud, specialists search for tiny 
fragments of paint from the celebrated “Crucifix” 
by Cimabue. In the museum of the church 
of Santa Croce water submerged most 
of the big wooden crucifix. When water withdrew, 
blisters opened on the paintwork and 60% 
of the painted surface flaked away.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

‘The 'Crucifix’ 
by Cimabue 
  
 
A SEVEN 
CENTURIES-OLD 
MASTERPIECE 
RUINED 
Cimabue’s “Crucifix” (detail 
right), the masterpiece which 
launched a new era in Florentine 
painting in the 13th century, 
is now ruined (below). 
The work had already survived 
a series of disasters. 
Placed high on the choir screen 
in the church of Santa Croce, 
it came through the great floods 
of 1333 and 1466 unscathed. 
About 1500 it was moved 
to the left wall of the church, 
otherwise it would have been 
destroyed in 1512 when a storm 
toppled the campanile, which hurled 
down a mass of debris on top 
of the choir screen. 
After being moved in and out’ 
of various chapels, the “Crucifix” 
ended up on the top floor 
of the Uffizi Gallery, where it 
would have been safe 
in the recent floods. But less 
than two years ago the work was 
returned to Santa Croce and put 
in the low-lying museum where 
the waters reached 
it on November 4. 
Ph
ot
o 
So
pr
in
te
nd
en
za
 
al
le
 
Ga
ll
er
ie
, 
Fl
or
en
ce
 
  
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Re
po
rt
er
s 
As
so
ci
és
, 
Pa
ri
s 
11

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

  
    
  
  
  
     
 
     
  
    
    
    
     
  
  
    
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
] 
x 
r
e
 
=
 
\ Y
i 
=
 
P 
f
o
 
.~ - 
“
h
e
 
JX 
    
5
 
, 
T
L
 
—
—
 
J 
$
x
 
i
 
i\ 
by 
5 
. 
w
p
e
 1 
F
O
 
ri
 
{
 
I
f
 
E
Y
 
  ¥ { 
d
r
,
 
L
a
c
o
n
 
p
I
 
(o
w 
{ 
A
u
!
 
4 
w
 
» 
i 
= 
3 
» 
TH
 
- 
. 
vai
 
v 
1] 
» 
E
y
 
2
 
i
E
 
g
e
 
i
T
,
 
R
r
 
a
 
- 
n 
£
.
/
 
US
, 
L
E
R
 
=X
 # 
& 
AL
E \ 
) 
) 
. 
. 
—
 
¥ 
oe
 
~ 
J 
L
R
 
a 
: 
y 
' 
Le 
A
L
 
i 
E 
. 
a
 
r
i
 
: 
—
 
—
—
—
—
 
t
—
 
N 
»
 
g 
* 
R 
W
h
 
/ 
AL
S 
* 
A
N
Y
 
’ 
= 
- 
| 
-,
 
ad
 
'.
 
N 
i 
n
d
 
ES 5S 
N
S
)
 
J 
ad
 
A
 
S
 
7 
o
u
 Le
 a
 
Y 
—
-
 
    
  
  
Photo @ Roger Viollet, Paris 
Left, the “Gates 
of Paradise”, 
one of three 
doorways in the 
Baptistery. Its ten 
gilded bronze 
panels fashioned 
by Lorenzo 
Ghiberti illustrate 
stories from the 
Old Testament. 
Right, the panel 
“loseph and 
his Brothers” 
is taken to safety 
after recovery from 
the sea of mud. 
Panels 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
and frieze (6) 
were ripped off.   
Ghiberti's 
‘Gates 
Rl ———"ttt t el 
of Paradise’ 
9 PANELS 
OUT OF 10 
RIPPED OFF 
  
 
{ frm torrents sweep- 
ing at over 60 kph. (40 mph.) into 
the Piazza del Duomo, in Flo- 
rence, battered and shook the 
immense bronze doors of the 
Baptistery. The celebrated 
“Gates of Paradise”"—so named 
by Michelangelo—were especial- 
ly badly hit. The sculptor and 
goldsmith Lorenzo Ghiberti spent 
27 years (1425-1452) fashioning 
these doors. Five of their ten 
massive gilded bronze panels 
were torn away, but were later 
recovered from the mud, their 
exquisite reliefs stained with oil. 
Reliefs on three panels—"The 
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

19 
 
 
“Gates of Paradise” 
and coated with oil 
, “Joseph and 
and mud. Above, 
“Jacob and Esau”, 
split in several places; 
Two of the five panels 
dislodged from the 
left 
his Brothers.” 
 
 
 
 
Photos Unesco - Dominique Roger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F
n
 
a
 
 
 
 
 
Florence 
 
 
 
 
Foto - Fiorenza, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A
N
N
E
 
a 
Bs 
—
 
BT 
W
e
t
t
o
n
 
AR 
| © 
~ 
 
 : 
y 
odin. 
¥ 
X 
L
o
 
; 
: 
og 
- 
A 
a
 
’ 
4 
d 
a
 
2 
4 
T
E
 
# 
v 
a
d
 
! 
- 
W
a
s
 
-
 
I 
+ 
" 
E 
’ 
a 
- 
=. 
A 
- 
¢ 
. 
" 
v
5
 
., 
3 
“ 
q 
" 
) 
t} 
« 
: 
=r 
| 
” 
a 
, 
a, 
. 
wv 
J 
A
 
{ 
W
Y
 
a 
4 
+
R
 
i 
S
R
E
 
C
e
e
 
n
e
 
. 
a 
" 
. 
A
 
’ 
: 
J 
eb 
! 
gh— 
. 
A 
i
r
 
f 
a
f
 
” 
¢ 
# 
- 
» 
“ 
: 
“1 
: 
>. 
’ 
i
y
 
a
 
og 
0s 
N
t
 
A
u
 
‘ 
5 
; 
w
r
,
 
Ts 
- 
ChE 
A
 
— 
” 
- 
~ 
Ly 
y 
. 
. 
re’ 
r
y
 
i 
} 
a
5
 
Ee 
5 
\ 
‘, 
* 
—
 
i. 
- 
x 
8 
’ 
e
l
 
vy 
L
A
 
hw 
2 
N
T
 
y- 
y 
/ 
: 
¥ 
- 
> 
’ 
A 
. 
r
a
l
 
T
e
 
y 
- 
d 
a
 
. 
4 
: 
c
a
 
" 
m
n
 
1 
" 
T
e

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

‘GATES OF PARADISE’ (Continued) 
Creation”, “Cain and Abel” and 
“Jacob and Esau"—suffered dam- 
age. Two of the five dislodg- 
ed panels—"Joseph and his 
Brothers" and “Cain and Abel” 
—were displayed at Unesco 
H.Q. in Paris on December 3 and 
4, 1966, following the launching 
of the International Campaign 
for Florence and Venice by the 
Director-General of Unesco. Also 
on view was a smaller panel, 
“The Angel Appears to Zacha- 
rias,” wrenched from another 
Baptistery door. 
    
  
          
This doorway was wrought in 
1336 by Andrea Pisano, who 
related the life of John the Bap- 
tist, patron saint of Florence, in 
twenty bas-reliefs to which were 
added eight allegorical panels 
representing the virtues. 
  
  
   
Photo © Reporters Associés, Paris 
Photo Unesco - Bablin 
Pisano’s doors 
of bronze 
Chips and splits in these heavy 
bronze doors on the south side 
of the Baptistery show the 
devastating force of the floodwaters 
and the debris they hurled forward 
like projectiles. From the panels 
in this doorway by the sculptor 
Andrea Pisano, two have been torn 
away. Above the empty frame, 
a relief showing the entombment 
of John the Baptist is intact. Left, 
“The Angel Appears to Zacharias”, 
a panel from the same door 
recovered after the waters subsided. 
   

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

DIMENSIONS OF A DISASTER (Continued from page 16) 
UFFIZI. Main collection intact, but store- 
rooms on ground floor flooded to depth 
of nearly two metres (5 ft). Works dam- 
aged in restoration studios include: triptych 
by Pietro Alemanno, a polyptych by Lorenzo 
di Niccolo. Works by Botticelli, Tiepolo, 
Masaccio and Filippo Lippi rescued in time, 
but photographic archives containing over 
130,000 negatives inundated. 
CHURCHES 
AND MONASTERIES 
  
 
SANT’ AMBROGIO. Over two metres 
(11 ft.) of water half immersed nave altar- 
pieces. Works by Baldovinetti, Bicci di 
Lorenzo, Cosimo Rosselli and Raffaellino, 
and wooden “St. Sebastian” by Leonardo 
del] Tasso seriously damaged. 
SS. ANNUNZIATA. Lower areas of walls 
and columns smeared with mud and oil. 
Damage to backing of frescoes by Baldo- 
vinetti, Andrea del Sarto and others. Fres- 
coes by Castagno immersed up to 
30 centimetres (1 ft). 
SS. APOSTOLIL. Water rose to over three 
metres (14 ft.) in nave and left behind a 
pile of mud and debris a metre (3 ft.) 
high. All works of art and other objects 
in nave. damaged or destroyed. Della 
Robbia tabernacle coated with muddy oil. 
Vasari’'s masterpiece, “The Immaculate 
Conception” has flaked with some complete 
paint losses; the panel is distorted and 
split. Altarpieces by Maso de San Friano 
and Lorenzo di Niccolo seriously damaged. 
BAPTISTERY. Impact of flood waters and 
debris battered and cracked the bronze 
doors. Andrea Pisano’s right hand door 
cracked across; one panel was torn away. 
Five panels of Ghiberti's famous “Gates 
of Paradise” were wrenched off. All were 
recovered, though some damaged. Inside 
building, serious damage done to Dona- 
tello’'s wooden “Magdalene” and to the 
“Baltassare Coscia” monument of Donatello 
and Michelozzo. 
SANTA CROCE. Six metres (nearly 20 ft.) 
of water in the refectory and the Pazzi 
Chapel. Floor in a museum room “explo- 
ded” under pressure of water in cellars, 
which surged up to height of vaults. The 
celebrated “Crucifix® of Cimabue, one of 
the most precious Florentine masterpieces, 
irreparably damaged. Taddeo Gaddi's great 
fresco “The Last Supper” submerged and 
seriously damaged. Bandinelli's beautiful 
marble “Pieta” totally covered by oil in 
crypt. A long list of damaged pictures 
includes works by Santi di Tito, Giorgio 
Vasari, Maso di Banco, Bronzino and many 
others. Frescoes by Giotto literally escap- 
ed by inches. 
THE DUOMO (Cathedral of Santa Maria 
del Fiore). Flooding in excavations of 
previous church, Santa Reparata, caused 
structural collapse which affected marble 
floor of Duomo: new floors required in 
two sacristies. Two organs damaged. A 
. “Last Supper” by Giovanni Balducci, plac- 
ed temporarily in a cellar for restoration, 
was immersed and badly damaged. 
BADIA FIORENTINA. All ground floors of 
convent buildings damaged, particularly 
flooring tiles. 
SAN FIRENZE. Serious damage to the 
foundations, floor and sacristy. 
SAN GIUSEPPE. An “Adoration” by Santi 
di Tito is badly buckled and cracked in 
the lower half. Water covered “Crucifix” 
by Lorenzo Monaco and several altarpieces 
to half their height or more. 
SAN JACOPO SOPR’ARNO. Three metres 
(10 ft.) of water in the nave. Damage to 
altarpieces (largely on canvas and mostly 
17th or 18th century). 
SANTA MARIA DEL CARMINE. Structural 
damage to floors. Masaccio’s frescoes, 
ranking among the great Renaissance 
masterpieces, untouched. 
SANTA MARIA MADDALENA DEI PAZZI. 
Enormous masses of sludge mixed with 
debris and oil damaged church and clois- 
ters. Frescoes by Perugino and his pupils, 
the “Crucifixion and the “Deposition” 
harmed and all altarpieces by Puligo, Santi 
di Tito, Carlo Portelli, Cosimo Rosselli, 
Raffaellino and others partly immersed. 
SANTA MARIA NOVELLA. A metre and a 
half (5 ft) of flooding in the nave. Thick 
coats of oil covered the great frescoes of 
the Spanish Chapel, the Strozzi Chapel and 
the Chiostro Verde. Panel of altarpiece 
by Bernardo Daddi (Spanish Chapel) 
buckled and paint flaked off. Damage 
done to the ancient pharmacy and the 
adjoining chapel with frescoes by Spinello 
Aretino. 
OSPEDALE DI SANTA MARIA NUOVA. 
Vaults and floors in basement damaged. 
. Public library books and stocks of books 
from fine arts, historical and theatrical 
collections completely submerged. 
ORATORIO SAN NICCOLO AL CEPPO. 
Fra Angelico’s “Crucifixion” seriously 
damaged. 
SAN NICCOLO OLTR'ARNO. Rising to a 
height of three metres (13 ft), waters 
defaced lower two-thirds of altarpieces by 
Allori and Jacopo da Empoli. In the 
sacristy, intarsia fumiture (16th and 17th 
centuries) completely destroyed. 
SAN REMIGIO. A “Madonna della Mise- 
ricordia” from the school of Cimabue and 
a fine “Immaculate Conception” by Jacopo 
da Empoli seriously damaged. 
SAN SALVI. One of the few places where 
waters rose less high than during the flood 
of 1557. Even so its force flattened a 
massive protective stone wall. Three metres 
(9 ft.) of water in nave reached lower 
parts of altarpieces. Collection of 16th 
century paintings and 14th and 15th cen- 
tury frescoes in storage partially immersed. 
A large “Adoration” by Francesco Brina 
seriously damaged. In the refectory, water 
almost reached the beautiful but fragile 
“Last Supper” by Andrea del Sarto. Floors 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
Mi
la
n 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ep
cc
a 
- 
Gi
or
gi
o 
Lo
tt
i,
 
  
 
Stucco Madonna and child, now defaced 
with oil, was modelled by Ghiberti, 
the celebrated 15th century sculptor who 
made the “Gates of Paradise” doorway 
for the Baptistery in Florence. Cleaning 
demands infinite care. Statue was 
caught by floodwaters in the restoration 
studio of the Uffizi Museum. Most 
of works undergoing restoration there 
were saved in the nick of time.

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

  
DIMENSIONS OF A DISASTER (Continued) 
collapsed and the building is now consider- 
ed unstable. 
SAN SIMONE. Several altarpieces sev- 
erely damaged, including an important one 
by the Saint Cecilia Master (1308). 
SANTO SPIRITO. None of the Renaissance 
masterpieces which grace this church was 
harmed. Minor structural damage to 
cloisters only. 
ARCHIVES 
AND LIBRAIRIES 
  
  
ACCADEMIA ECONOMICO AGRARIA DEI 
GEORGOFILI. Europe's oldest academy of 
agronomics, founded in 17353. Over 
35,000 volumes damaged by mud and water, 
including 10,000 of great historical and 
scientific importance. Severe losses in 
archives for 1753 to 1801. 
ARCHIVIO DI STATO. Forty rooms and 
five kilometres (3 miles) of shelves covered 
by mud and water. 40,000 volumes con- 
taining 50 million documents (45 collections 
of archives dating from 13th to 1Sth cen- 
turies, including many rare parchment 
manuscripts) seriously damaged. 
ARCHIVI PUBLICI. Public, church and 
private archives all suffered severe losses. 
Public archives badly hit include archives 
of the city of Florence and those of Conser- 
vatorio di Santa Maria degli Angeli, 
Academy of Arts and Drawing, and 
Chamber of Commerce. 
BIBLIOTECA NAZIONALE. Three hundred 
thousand books affected, including the 
entire Magliabecchiana collection, the larger 
Photo Unesco - Dominique Roger 
    
AE YEW TIT a 
volumes of the Palatina, 30,000 volumes 
of newspaper collections, 20,000 collections 
of periodicals, and collections of reviews 
and manuscript catalogues. 
GABINETTO VIEUSSEUX. Two hundred 
and fifty thousand volumes submerged by 
mud and oil-polluted water. Serious losses. 
CENTRO DIDATTICO. Rooms in national 
educational museum invaded by five metres 
(16 ft) of water. Great damage done to 
5,000 volumes of documents dating from 
the 15th to 19th centuries and to rare 
incunabula. Equipment and ancient furni- 
ture totally destroyed. 
THEATRES. The Piccolo Teatro Stabile 
suffered heavy losses: official archives, 
props, costumes, decors, etc. Heavy 
damage done to electrical and sound 
apparatus, stage and auditorium. Two other 
theatres—Teatro Communale and Teatro 
della Pergola—invaded by waters and seri- 
ously damaged. 
UNIVERSITA. One hundred thousand 
volumes, including those in Papini and 
Berenson libraries, destroyed or severely 
damaged in Faculty of Letters and Philo- 
sophy. In Geographical Institute, half 
library and all topographical and geogra- 
phical maps destroyed. In Faculty of Law 
and Political Science, 2,000 ancient volu- 
mes damaged; 1,000 volumes from the 16th 
and 17th centuries and 20,000 volumes and 
periodical collectons destroyed; 60,000 
volumes and collections of reviews dam- 
aged. In Institute of Chemistry, many books 
ruined and almost all equipment put out 
of action. In Faculty of Architecture, most 
of the library destroyed. In many other 
faculties and institutes, serious losses and 
damage in equipment, books and records. 
Oil-poliuted floodwater 
has left ugly smears 
on part of the frescoes 
by Andrea Bonaiuti 
in the Spanish Chapel 
of Santa Maria Novella 
(right). Effects of 
the floods may well 
continue for years since 
dampness in the walls 
may in time affect 
the entire surface 
of the frescoes. 
Nor does anyone know 
the final effects of oil 
—an entirely new 
hazard. Left, mutilated 
wooden statue removed 
from Sant’Ambrogio 
church for restoration 
in studios of the 
Uffizi Museum. In box 
are statue’s hands 
and hair tress, broken 
off when wood fibres 
swelled and split. 
   
   perv 
: Nhl 
. ( at 
| ro | 
Fo 
  
Ph
ot
o 
So
pr
in
te
nd
en
za
 
al
le
 
Ga
ll
er
ie

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 59442: Dimensions of a disaster

ot ad 
: we ; + : 
: 
| 
: 
LRRLSE 
. 
. 
- MAN VRE AY N 
¢ I 
; TT \ ” 
TY VA AAA 2
a 
   

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 59443: The Painting hospital in the lemon grove

24 
THE PAINTING HOSPITAL 
IN THE LEMON GROVE 
by Harold J. Plenderleith 
0. November 4, 1966, the 
swollen Arno river burst its retaining 
walls and flooded all the central sec- 
tion of Florence, the level of the waters 
reaching heights between 1.50 and 
6 metres (4 to 20 ft.) above street 
level. In Venice the sea broke the 
coastal dams at several points and the 
water rose to about 1.50 metre above 
street level. 
Because these events took place at 
an early hour (between 8 and 12 a.m.) 
and due to the fact that the day was 
a national holiday, the death toll was 
less than might have been expected 
from the magnitude of the catastrophe. 
The damage to cultural property, 
however, was immense; while initially, 
at all events, the relatively slow rise 
of the waters left time for people to 
reach higher ground, not much could 
be done for the immense wealth of 
works of art, the libraries and the 
archives that stood in the path of the 
flood. 
It must be recognized that the flood 
level was far above anything that had 
  
HAROLD I. PLENDERLEITH is director of 
the International Centre for the Study of 
the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural 
Property in Rome. He was in Florence 
on November 3, 1966, and thus wit- 
nessed the catastrophic floods. Before 
becoming the first director of the Rome 
Centre in 1959, Mr. Plenderleith was 
professor of chemistry at the Royal Aca- 
demy of Arts, London, and Keeper of the 
Research Laboratory at the British Museum. 
His best known work is “The Conservation 
of Antiquities and Works of Art" (Oxford 
University Press, London, Toronto, New 
York, 1957). 
ever been recorded even though 
records went back to the 11th century 
in Florence. This explains why large 
numbers of objects that were suscept- 
ible to damage even by short expo- 
sure to damp now found themselves 
inundated—completely immersed in 
muddy water contaminated with black 
oil from domestic central heating plants 
and from submerged cars. 
Dramatic rescue operations took 
place in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence 
where the waters progressively invad- 
ed the painting storerooms and the 
restoration cabinet; in the latter, paint- 
ings by Giotto, Simone Martini and 
other great masters were evacuated 
just ahead of the rising water. 
Part of the collection in the store- 
rooms could be lifted to upper levels 
through a window which had to be 
broken, as the door was already 
obstructed by water, but many paint- 
ings had to be left behind. At the 
very time that the salvage operations 
were taking place, the Renaissance 
stone building of the Uffizi, exposed 
to the full blast of the raging torrent, 
was felt to be shuddering violently 
and many thought it would collapse as 
a whole. 
Not even a partial salvage was 
possible in other parts of the city: the 
museum of Santa Croce and the Cap- 
pella dei Pazzi were buried under 5-6 
metres (16-20 ft.) of water. Paintings 
on wood by Cimabue, Bronzino, Va- 
sari, Salviati and detached murals by 
Orcagna were completely submerged. 
Other inundated areas were Casa 
Buonarroti with a complete art gallery, 
the church of SS. Apostoli with a 
famous Vasari panel, S. Ambrogio, 
S. Piero a Ponti and a number of 
other churches, less known perhaps, 
but each one a small precious museum 
with altarpieces some of which had 
been standing in their original positions 
within their original frames ever since 
the 15th century! 
The bronze doors of the Baptistery 
in Piazza del Duomo were forced open 
by the great flood of water now hav- 
ing obtained a calculated speed of 
40 mph; some of the precious reliefs 
by Ghiberti and Andrea Pisano fell 
down and a famous piece of sculpture 
in wood by Donatello (the Maddalena) 
was reached by the water, and 
seriously damaged. 
What happened to books and arch- 
ives was even worse: the National 
Library (300,000 volumes) and the Uni- 
versity Libraries (100,000 volumes) 
were completely inundated. So was 
the State Archive of Florence with its 
unique collection of codices and 
manuscripts, an immense amount of 
still unstudied and unrecorded material 
essential for the study of Florentine 
history and art, one of the reference 
points of western civilization. Here 
some 40,000 volumes were involved. 
In the Archaeological Museum 
where the Etruscan collection was at 
least as important as Villa Giulia's in 
Rome, the flood filled up the cellar, 
then the vaults burst open under the 
upward rush of ascending water: show- 
cases on the ground floor were shatter- 
ed and the objects dispersed. 
In Venice the Marciana Library was 
invaded by waters, but paintings and 
other precious works of art could, for 
the greater part at least, be transport- 
ed away from the menaced areas. 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 26

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 59443: The Painting hospital in the lemon grove

  
  
  
   
i 
APRs 
52 ; 
, : 
-. 
a ia 
8 
rs 
[ 
ot 
“ 
vw, a . 
nA > 
¢ 
in 
H 
ol TE .. i y 3 Pe 
Ay Vy Rio 4 x on ts Sy Be 
(3 
LA h. : \ - oo 
5 ] A . 
i : Bagh fit of od 
4 5 - " NE  / a " i Es 
Ef ” . : RT Ee . <: 
, ; ila Fa > : 25 
i A A » ¥ WRIT oman, . . nee J j , ; ov v . RR) . t hh a “ - ome “ y 
Hs = . ; ERE IR wi 
Photo Unesco - Dominique Roger 
Masked against the fumes of ether and benzol, a specialist sprays an oil-coated 
marble figure of Mary Magdelene, a 17th century Florentine work. Solvents are the most 
effective answer to oil stains, but they can only be used on stone sculptures.

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 59443: The Painting hospital in the lemon grove

PAINTING HOSPITAL (Continued) 
ae [ ] 
Mobilizing 
On the evening of November 4 the 
waters started to recede and by night 
the river in Florence was back within 
its original boundaries; more slowly 
the sea retired in Venice. On ground 
floors the submerged objects reappear- 
ed covered by a thin layer of fine drab 
coloured mud; black residues of oil 
marked the walls and statues, parallel 
black lines indicating the levels of the 
receding flood. 
On superficial examination the 
objects appeared dirty but unaltered, 
but the processes of deterioration ini- 
tiated by the immersion in water were 
under way; a dramatic race against 
decay had to be begun at once, if 
ever the works of art were to be 
saved. 
Wood, even very old wood, absorbs 
water readily: the process is accom- 
panied by expansion across the fibres. 
On painted panels the gesso layer is 
softened by the action of water on its 
binding medium and loses much of its 
consistence while both gesso and co- 
lour layers are distorted by the dimen- 
sional changes in the wooden support. 
The big crucifix by Cimabue had 
been submerged up to the top of the 
head of the Christ; when the water 
withdrew blisters appeared on the 
surface due both to loss of strength 
of the gesso layer and to the rather 
speedy contraction of the wood to 
which the colour layer could not so 
quickly adjust itself. The enormous 
weight of the crucifix and its deform- 
ation made it very hard to remove 
from its vertical position. 
The rescuers hindered by working 
over a floor covered by a foot of mud, 
were unable to save the situation 
in time, and blisters opened and, to 
the dismay of all, about 609%, of the 
painted surface flaked away to fall in 
the mud. The friars of S. Croce care- 
fully sifted the mud for days after- 
wards; they retrieved a large number 
of paint flakes, but it is doubtful whe- 
  
The state of this 13th century triptych 
(left) dramatically shows the destructive 
effects of water on painted wooden 
panels. The painting has been taken 
from the Santa Croce museum for 
treatment in the picture hospital 
at the Palazzo Pitti. The child in the 
Virgin's arms disappeared as paintwork 
fell away after the swelling of the 
wooden support. Months may go by 
before a painting regains its former 
state; it is the time taken to “heal” 
paintings that determines the length 
of restoration programmes. Right, 
delicate cleaning operation on a 
self-portrait by Velasquez, the great 
master of 17th century painting in 
Spain. The work was damaged in 
the flooding of the Uffizi Museum 
restoration studios. Ph
ot
o 
S
o
p
r
i
n
t
e
n
d
e
n
z
a
 
al
le
 
Ga
ll
er
ie
, 
F
l
o
r
e
n
c
e
  

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 59443: The Painting hospital in the lemon grove

an army of art surgeons 
ther it will be possible to use them to 
reconstruct even part of the lost areas. 
Other panels underwent the same 
destructive process before the res- 
cuers could reach them, for some 
churches remained flooded for days 
and it was often quite an acrobatic 
feat just to reach paintings located in 
positions that were almost inaccessible 
even in normal times. 
With successive drying of the 
wooden panels one could expect that 
their condition would further deterior- 
ate because of the dramatic warping 
of supports, splitting due to opposing 
and contrasting forces in frames and 
panels, extensive blistering and flak- 
ing of the colour layer: It was observ- 
ed that the paintings having thick 
layers of transparent varnish exhibited 
better resistance to water than the 
thinly varnished ones. 
Canvas paintings showed in general 
good resistance, except when physi- 
cally damaged by objects transported 
by the flood; however, the latter kind 
of damage is less disfiguring by far 
than would appear at first sight, a 
simple relining operation being the 
traditional and effective answer. The 
  
excellent resistance to water of lin- 
seed oil based grounds was here the 
deciding factor. Neither, in general, 
did mural paintings suffer substantial 
damage; the hardboard supports of 
detached murals, however, easily be- 
came distorted by exposure to chang- 
ing humidity and careful control of 
their stability will be necessary in the 
future. 
Two immediate dangers lie ahead 
for submerged books and documents: 
rotting and physical disintegration of 
paper, and the cementing together of 
contiguous sheets to form single blocks 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
Lp 
SLlaT yl, 
"old : No 
pT, | » > LIN 
- . ~~. hg 
- Giorgio Lotti, Milan 
27 
1 
3 
       
   

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 59443: The Painting hospital in the lemon grove

28 
PAINTING HOSPITAL (Continued) 
Preventing the warping and blistering 
of the art treasures 
on drying. Farther on in time mould 
growths are to be expected on par- 
tially dried paper and these produce 
disfiguring marks. While such a 
situation might be easily handled in 
the case of a small number of books 
and documents, the problem now was 
to deal simultaneously with over 
a million books and an archive which 
had covered a surface of some thous- 
and square metres (over 10,000 sq.ft.). 
More stable materials like bronzes 
and porcelain were better able to 
survive, always provided that they 
were not damaged by mechanical 
impact; some della Robbia polyptychs 
were submerged but reappeared appa- 
rently in perfect condition. 
The facilities available to the local 
Soprintendenza were greatly exceeded 
by the magnitude of the disaster, and 
almost no emergency action was 
possible with the means immediately 
at hand. But even before an official 
The International 
Centre for studies 
on restoration 
The International Centre for the 
Study of the Preservation and 
Restoration of Cultural Property was 
set up by Unesco in Rome, in 
1958. It operates as an international 
advisory centre for every kind of 
technical and scientific problem 
relating to the preservation and 
restoration of cultural property. 
It is an international laboratory 
for the study of diseases of stone, 
wood and other materials, and also 
co-ordinates and stimulates research 
into restoration techniques, It helps 
to train researchers and technicians 
and compiles and publishes special 
reports and studies. 
It works closely with Unesco, the 
International Council of Museums 
(ICOM), the International Institute 
for the Conservation of Historic and 
Artistic Works (ICC) and many 
institutes and laboratories in Italy 
and other countries. 
Thirty-nine member countries sup- 
port and contribute financially to 
its work. 
Advice given by the centre is 
usually based on the reports of 
specialists which it sends to make 
on-the-spot studies of monuments 
and other cultural property in need 
of conservation or restoration. Typ- 
ical examples include the preserv- 
ation of monuments in Nubia, the 
painted murals of Bonampak (Mexi- 
co} and Buddhist monuments in the 
Republic of Korea, and also the 
setting up of conservation services 
in Tunisia and Morocco.     
call for help was made volunteers 
came quickly to the rescue. 
Private experts and art students 
from Florence and from elsewhere in 
Italy rallied to help salvage the collec- 
tions and restorers arrived even from 
abroad. They had received the news 
of the water levels in the town and 
they knew what it meant; a painting 
restorer drove in from Lugano (Switzer- 
land) across the partially inundated 
highway system, though not really 
believing what he was being told (“it 
must be one of those inflated news- 
paper stories”). Others came from 
Bologna and Rome; the Rome Centre 
made its own immediate contribution 
in supporting an emergency expedi- 
tion of the neighbouring Istituto Cen- 
trale del Restauro. 
Panel paintings were the first worry 
of the painting experts; to avoid the 
sad catastrophe of the Cimabue, panels 
- had to be laid down flat so that paint 
would not fall from them even if blister- 
ing occurred. Then they had to be 
faced with specially fine tissue to give 
a strong support to the paint layer, 
now held only weakly by the gesso, 
and this in view of the foreseen shrink- 
ing and warping of the support. 
Prior to facing, the paintings had 
to be cleaned from mud, a very deli- 
cate operation as the mud overlay 
softened and swollen surfaces; exper- 
Yo 
fot : % S AAD 
«3 * 
N 
ience taught that the best way was 
to damp the mud again with water 
using a soft brush, then to suck up 
the muddy water with a very soft 
sponge. While Japanese tissue was 
generally used as a facing material, in 
the rush of the moment almost any 
kind of available material had to be 
brought into service. 
Reconsideration of the problem after 
a few hours led to general agreement 
that there should be a standard policy 
using acrylic resins (Paraloid B72 or 
Elvacite 2045) because they would be 
easier to re-dissolve in the future and 
were not subject to the danger of 
being nutrients to mould growth. As 
soon as the technique became uni- 
fied the emergency teams ran out of 
materials, and a frantic search start- 
ed for Japanese paper and acrylic 
resins and their solvents. 
Here the Rome Centre had a key 
function in assessing the needs and 
transmitting the call to possible sup- 
pliers. Acrylic resins came from many 
sources in ltaly and abroad. A res- 
torer from Bologna had a stock at 
home; his family went on for days 
shaking the slowly dissolving polymer 
with the solvent. One great ltalian 
firm which by chance did not manu- 
facture the precise material required 
was kind enough to purchase a large 
supply and ship it free to Florence. 
      
  
a. - & Sa 
Pe 
  
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
- 
Do
mi
ni
qu
e 
Ro
ge
r 
    

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 59443: The Painting hospital in the lemon grove

The Laboratory of the National Gal- 
lery, London, gathered all that was 
available and sent it at the earliest 
moment: it arrived (via Rome) on the 
table of a restorer in the Uffizi Gallery 
within the day and just when he had 
exhausted his own personal supply. 
It was found that Kleenex tissue 
could be used as a substitute for Japa- 
nese paper but it was not easy to find 
usable tissue in downtown Florence 
where all chemist shops and drug- 
stores had been flooded. The first 
packs of Kleenex that the Rome Cen- 
tre secured were of a pale blue shade 
and this accounts for the bluish tinge 
of the faced Bronzino and Vasari 
paintings in Santa Croce today! 
Parallel with this work carried out 
in feverish haste, plans were deve- 
loped for drying the wet panels slowly 
under controlled conditions in order 
to minimize shrinking and warping. 
The Rome Centre took care of placing 
hygrometers in the key points where 
damaged panels were being collected 
and when, seven days after the inun- 
dation the weather turned cold and 
dry, the faced panels were lowered 
closer to the wet muddy floor, and 
wet sawdust was added to keep the 
areas damp. 
An immense storeroom was in the 
meanwhile being prepared where the 
400 panels and 1,000 canvases which 
had been victims of the disaster could 
be sheltered under controlled humidity 
and temperature conditions. The so- 
called Limonaia, a huge (120 m. long 
and 10 m. high) masonry shelter for 
Florence has been called 
“The Athens of the 
Modern World". The 
Etruscan collections in 
its archaeological museum, 
along with those of 
Rome, rank as the finest 
in the world. Under 
pressure from water in the 
museum's cellars, floors 
in groundfloor rooms 
literally exploded (right) 
and glass cases of exhibits 
were demolished. 
Thousands of exhibits, 
including bronze and 
ivory objects, sculptures 
and sarcophagi were 
destroyed. Left, taped 
like an ancient mummy, 
a valuable Etruscan 
terracotta work awaits 
reconstruction. 
the unique collection of lemon trees 
of Palazzo Pitti, was requisitioned for 
this purpose, and incidentally there 
arose the problem of finding another 
shelter for the lemon trees which were 
threatened with destruction because of 
the decreasing temperature. 
In a little over one week the Limo- 
naia was converted to become a hospi- 
tal for paintings. It was equipped with 
a stock-room for materials and wooden 
stands for the pictures; thermal insu- 
lation of walls and windows was im- 
proved and finally a heating and 
humidifying system was created. Two 
weeks after the inundation the paint- 
ings started to come in; it appeared 
that no further damage had taken place 
in the panels after the first dramatic 
hours. 
For: books and documents the 
emergency teams were composed of 
students, Benedictine friars of abbeys 
like the one of Grottaferrata (near 
Rome) dedicated over the centuries to 
the restoration of codices and manu- 
scripts and of experts from the Istituto 
di Patologia del Libro in Rome. The 
emergency procedure consisted in 
getting rid of the mud, interleaving 
with a suitable kind of paper, then 
drying as soon as possible. 
Many hundreds of high school and 
university students formed lines in the 
mud passing books from hand to hand 
to evacuate the flooded areas in the 
libraries and in the archives. Part of 
the books were sent away in blocks 
of 10,000 to the Benedictine abbeys 
of Praglia, Monte Oliveto, Grottafer- 
rata, Cesena, S. Maria Novella, or to 
the Istituto di Patologia in Rome, but 
some of the most urgent treatment 
was begun immediately in Florence. 
Water could be squeezed out by 
means of hand presses, drying could 
be accomplished using industrial dry- 
ing equipment of large dimensions. It 
was found for example that tobacco 
and brick manufacturers had just the 
kind of equipment that was needed. 
This work is in progress now. On 
the other side precious codices were 
removed to the Vatican Library for 
specialized treatment. 
At the present time it is still impos- 
sible to assess the amount of losses 
among the books and archival materizis 
damaged by the inundation. 
At the Archaeological Museum no 
emergency intervention has been 
carried out so far; here are housed 
ceramic and metallic objects from 
excavations and these have already 
been acclimatised to conditions in 
damp soil. The danger here is thought 
to be in the mechanical damage to 
fragile objects or the possible loss of 
loose parts in any hasty recovery 
campaign. 
Meantime the museum has been 
secluded from the rest of the world: 
nobody is allowed in the rooms. The 
semi-dry mud will be excavated inch 
by inch using the most refined archaeo- 
logical techniques. Repair of the dam- 
aged objects will come in due time, 
using methods that are already well 
established. 
Temporary protection of panel paint- 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 34 

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

  
Photo © Epoca - Welter Mori, Milan 


### 59449: Over a million waterlogged books and manuscripts

OVER A MILLION AER: Boee BOOKS AND MANUSCRIPTS 
 
  
   
   
     
Hundreds of thousands of books old and new, irreplaceable historical 
documents, unpublished manuscripts of literary and musical works were 
submerged by floodwaters in the basements of Florence. At the National 
Library alone, 300,000 volumes had to be rescued from scenes of indes- 
cribable chaos (photo left). Teams of helpers came spontaneously to 
Florence. Among them were many young people, including Italian and foreign 
students. Chains of volunteers worked day and night (above) to evacuate 
the sodden, muddy volumes. These were washed and then stored in safety 
(right) to await first-aid treatment. Below, volunteer helper puts blotting 
paper between pages. This operation has to be repeated three times for 
each page, for each volume, for hundreds of thousands of volumes. 
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32 
        
     
’ 
1 
\ 
~
~
 
- 
' 
\ 
A
 
—
—
 
O
r
.
 
—
—
 
P
I
R
 
a
"
,
 
   
a
>
 
a 
Ph
ot
o 
©@
 
Ep
oc
a 
- 
Wa
lt
er
 
Mo
ri
, 
Mi
la
n 
   Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
- 
Do
mi
ni
qu
e 
R
o
g
e
r

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 59449: Over a million waterlogged books and manuscripts

 

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 59449: Over a million waterlogged books and manuscripts

Over a million waterlogged 
books and manuscripts 
(Continued) 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
A
N
S
A
,
 
R
o
m
e
  
  
  
Florence, city of the arts, is today a city of 
volunteers engaged in saving its treasures. 
Specialists and student volunteers work 
side by side in improvised centres through- 
out the city, as well as in restoration studios 
and monasteries elsewhere in Italy, giving 
first-aid treatment to books. The volumes 
are taken apart and washed page by page 
in tanks of water (right) and then hung out 
to dry. Above, innumerable pages dry out 
slowly. Too rapid drying would make the 
paper brittle. Enemy No. 1 of these books 
is mould. To combat it a vast oper- 
ation has now begun to disinfect the 
volumes by injection (left) or fumigation.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 59449: Over a million waterlogged books and manuscripts

33 
 
 
Photo Gieffe, Florence 
 
 
Photo Unesco - Dominique Roger 
  
H 
a 
4 
“i 
iH 
8: 
TM 
: 
a
e
 
H 
i
i
l
 
A 
\! 
3 
S
H
E
L

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 59443: The Painting hospital in the lemon grove

   
The painting hospital in the lemon grove (continued from page 29) 
ings by facing and controlling their 
environmental conditions obviously is 
no final solution of the problem of 
ensuring permanency and full visibility 
of the paintings. Many roads, how- 
ever, are opened for possible treatment 
and one can safely assume that the 
treatment will be diversified and that 
it will be adapted to the particular 
conditions of each single panel. 
Probably an effort will be made to 
avoid transfer of panel paintings to a 
new support, since this operation may 
imply a substantial alteration of the 
work of art. It may well be that the 
damp wood could be treated with solu- 
tions of synthetic or natural resins in 
order to displace the water from the 
inner structure by substituting the 
inert resin, thus avoiding collapse of 
the cell walls on drying. 
It must be remembered, however, 
that the gesso ground might have lost 
part of its cohesive strength, so impair- 
ing the adhesion of the colour layer 
to the support. In such conditions the 
painting would live in perpetual dan- 
ger of blistering and flaking of the 
paint. When, as in such a case, the 
strength of the ground cannot be res- 
tored by appropriate fixing operations, 
transfer to a new support is likely to 
be inevitable if the painting is to be 
saved. 
Problems lie ahead also for books, 
archival documents and manuscripts, 
for obviously industrial dessication 
cannot be pushed too far or it would 
damage the mechanical properties of 
the sheets. If left too humid, on the 
other hand, the paper would be subject 
to mould infection. This underlines the 
importance of adopting a disinfection 
procedure. It appears that vacuum 
fumigation with ethylene oxide will be 
the preferred procedure, but there is 
a serious problem of obtaining spec- 
ialized equipment and technical person- 
nel to handle it. 
Since books and documents are 
being distributed in different locations 
for treatment, the Istituto di Patologia 
de! Libro is planning to use movable 
fumigation units which could be post- 
ed according to momentary require- 
ments and at the time of writing a 
hue and cry is being issued in the 
hope of locating such additional help. 
The superb frescoes in the Museum of Santa Croce—one of the great legacies . 
of Renaissance painting—were submerged under several feet of water. Below, deterioration 
is clearly visible on Vasari's “Last Supper”, painted in 1546 (left of photo) and on 
"Descent from the Cross“ by Alessandro Allori (1561). The water had hardly subsided 
when rescuers began to apply first aid—cleaning mud from paintings and covering 
them with special paper to absorb moisture and consolidate the paint. 
rT EE RE Te . . — . ~~ LO, 
vor 
  
Who will do the restoration of manu- 
scripts? We have seen that a solu- 
tion to this problem has already been 
found for paper materials; it is fortun- 
ate that many religious institutions 
in ltaly are specialized in this kind 
of work. Far more difficult is the 
problem for paintings (for a total of 
over a thousand paintings requires 
restoration work by skilled personnel). 
This exceeds the limits of possibi- 
lity for all the state institutions and 
private restorers in Italy. However, it 
must be remembered that offers of 
help by specialized experts are com- 
ing in from all over the world: Britain, 
U.S.S.R, U.S.A, Yugoslavia, the Fede- 
ral German Republic, Canada, Poland 
among others. 
The Florence disaster thus opens 
the way for a major project in inter- 
national co-operation which, aside from 
its spiritual value as a proof of good- 
will, has deep implications for techni- 
cal exchange and progress. If pro- 
gress results from disaster, as often 
happens, it will not be for the first 
time in Italian history that victory has 
been thus achieved. 
Photo © Epoca - Giorgio Lotti, Milan 

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

The river that lost 
its way. A roaring 
torrent from the Amo 
sweeps through the 
Via Tornabuoni in 
the heart of Florence 
on November 4, 1966. 
Photo © ANSA, Rome 


### 59445: The Anatomy of the flood

The 
anatomy 
  
0 
the 
   
flood 
by Dino Tonini 
  
  
  
A. atmospheric distur- 
bance of exceptional violence on 
November 3, 4 and 5, 1966 poured 
torrential rain over vast areas of Italy 
for more than 48 hours. Snow already 
accumulated in the mountains thawed 
rapidly. Abnormally high tides and 
gales lashed the Gulf of Venice. 
These are the cause of the rampaging 
floods that have devastated large parts 
of Central Italy. 
Almost one-third of the country, 
about 100,000 sq. km. (nearly 40,000 
  
DINO TONINI is honorary president of the 
International Association of Scientific 
Hydrology and a member of the Italian 
National Commission for Unesco. A pro- 
fessor at the University of Padua, Italy, 
he is the author of many studies on hydro- 
graphy and hydrology. 
  
square miles), with its historic cities, 
industrial centres and fertile farmlands 
has suffered grievous loss of life as 
well as serious damage and destruc- 
tion, not only to public works, technical 
installations and industrial plants, but 
also to some of the finest treasures in 
an artistic heritage that belongs to all 
mankind. 
In the last fifty years, Italy has been 
the victim of 130 serious floods and 
innumerable lesser inundations. In 
the Po delta alone (the Province of 
Rovigo between the lower reaches of 
the Po and Adige), 20 floods occurred 
between 1945 and 1965 alone. 
For centuries Italy has been fight- 
ing floods. But the immense techni- 
cal and financial efforts employed have 
inevitably had to be dispersed over 
large areas and many years with the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
33

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 59445: The Anatomy of the flood

36 
THE ANATOMY OF THE FLOOD (Continued) 
Over 8 million acres 
need new forests to check erosion 
result that they have succeeded only 
in the case of the most recurrent 
floods. 
Take the work of afforestation and 
the stabilization of mountain regions. 
This is the very basis of any struggle 
against floods, but its results are not 
seen for at least a generation. Storms 
nearly always occur when the soil is 
just beginning to become firm and in 
a matter of hours a cloudburst destroys 
the work and hopes of many years. 
Embankments are built, destroyed 
and then rebuilt higher and higher in 
a continuous battle against the enor- 
mous quantities of solid matter brought 
down by rivers in spate because there 
are no natural or artificial lakes to halt 
them. These alluvial deposits even- 
tually raise the level of river-beds 
above that of the surrounding country- 
side. ) 
Finally, man's hunger for land has 
meant that the unfarmed areas bet- 
ween one embankment and the next, 
or in the vicinity of deltas where floods 
were once able to spread and lose 
some of their force, have shrunk more 
and more. People settle in areas 
which should have continued to play 
a protective role, and where meas- 
ures taken against the most recurrent 
and therefore less important floods 
may well have created a false feeling 
of security. 
R Italy there are few large 
rivers but tens of thousands of tor- 
rents, due to the morphology and 
hydrographic structure of the Italian 
soil: 10.4 million hectares (26 million 
acres) of mountains; 11 million hec- 
tares of hilly ground, and less than 
6 million hectares (15 million acres) 
of plains. So the waters rush down 
steep, bare slopes, no longer impeded 
by the forest which once covered a 
great part of the peninsula. 
Since the Middle Ages entire forests 
have been destroyed, either to provide 
timber for Europe's fleets, or to obtain 
land for farming or pasture. Three and 
a half million hectares (8.6 million 
acres) need replanting with trees; 
meanwhile the erosion of the land 
continues unchecked and the waters 
continue to carry away rich humus to 
the sea and to cause landslides and 
avalanches. 
All this was demonstrated more 
violently than ever during the recent 
floods. The waters tearing down the 
mountain sides brought with them 
stones and rocks and earth. An 
already precarious situation was ag- 
gravated by temporary obstructions— 
backwaters, diversion of river beds, 
silting—the disastrous effects of which 
persist long after the waters have 
retreated, as though the waters them- 
selves had become petrified in a new 
world of apocalyptic appearance. 
0. the plains the muddy 
waters have left a malodorous deposit 
of mud and oil as well as the putrefying 
remains of animals and plants to sully 
alike fertile fields and.famous monu- 
ments, the patient work of small crafts- 
men and vast installations of modern 
industry, irreplaceable manuscripts and 
yellowing papers in some humble 
office. 
To this must be added the on- 
slaught of the raging sea on the barely 
reclaimed lands of the Po delta lying 
just beyond the battered and broken 
defences of Venice. 
The discharge of flood waters 
depends on various meteorological, 
geological and hydraulic factors: in- 
tensity, distribution and duration of 
the rains (sometimes accompanied by 
the rapid melting of accumulated 
snow); general climatic conditions; 
greater or lesser permeability of the 
basic geological formations and of the 
layer of detritus covering them; types 
and extent of cultivation; shape of the 
major and minor hydrographic basins; 
gradient of the slopes and drainage 
channels; natural and artificial lakes; 
areas for the spreading of flood waters; 
stabilization of the river-beds or along 
the river-beds ; river defences; public 
or industrial works ; human habitations. 
Every flood is the result of a special 
combination of some of these factors, 
each of which has a specific im- 
portance. Those in which an almost 
equal number of predominant factors 
of average magnitude are combined 
cause the normal floods which occur 
with some regularity (on an average 
once a year or once every two, three, 
five or ten years). Combinations of the 
maximum number of factors of extreme 
magnitude cause exceptional floods 
which may occur only. once every 
50, 100, 200 or 1,000 years, or even 
longer. 
The chief stumbling block to fore- 
casting the recurrence of exceptional 
floods is the lack of precise inform- 
ation about the number and importance 
of the factors involved, and parti- 
cularly the maximum figures for rains, 
snow, temperatures etc. Available 
statistics, which rarely date back more 
than a century, at best indicate a 
tendency and certainly not maximum 
figures, which we are still unable to 
calculate even by theoretical studies. 
Observations of present-day floods 
give some indication of the extent of 
floods in past times, but they do not 
tell us how many of the factors in- 
volved had attained their maximum 
intensity. 
Such figures, in any case, usually 
apply to water levels and not to the 
corresponding discharges. Water levels 
fluctuate even with the same discharge 
because they depend to a great extent 
on local conditions in the river-bed, 
the existence of breaches and whether 
or not there is room for the water to 
spread. 
| speak of a maximum 
flood, as people often do, is absurd. 
Instead, we should talk of floods with 
a probability of one-in-a-hundred, or 
one-in-a-thousand; floods, in fact, that 
occur on an average once every 
hundred years (centennial floods), or 
once every thousand years (millennial 
floods) etc. “On an average” in this 
context stresses the aspect of prob- 
ability; centennial floods may occur 
twice in a century, in consecutive 
years even, and there may be no 
floods at all in the next century. 
Hence, forecasts can do no more 
than assess approximately the prob- 
able scale of flooding. The larger the 
flood, the less often it is likely to 
occur because of the reduced pos- 
sibility that all the factors involved in 
a large flood will reach their maximum 
levels simultaneously.

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 59445: The Anatomy of the flood

  
  
  
Over 100 persons 
died in the Italian 
floods of November 
1966. Many 
industrial 
installations were 
damaged or 
destroyed. Nearly 
a million acres of 
fertile lands were 
inundated, 50,000 
cattle drowned 
and enormous 
reserves of fodder 
submerged. In the 
countryside 
12,000 buildings 
were destroyed. 
Here, tree trunks 
have jammed the 
village street at 
Caprile (Venetia). 
Photo © 
Associated Press 
centuries to descriptions contained in 
old, forgotten chronicles; in other 
cases, these floods are a repetition of 
recent events, considered so excep- 
tional that their recurrence was believ- 
ed impossible. 
In the Venetia region, the rains of 
3-4 November 1966 came when the 
draining lands of the hydrographic 
basins were already saturated by the 
heavy rainfall of the previous months, 
which had already produced consider- 
able flooding at a very unusual season 
(August 1966). 
A point to note is that other 
floods, likewise fairly serious, had 
occurred in 1965. In November 1966 the 
downpour continued for about 38 hours 
without a break, and increased steadily 
in intensity from about 10 mm (4 in.) per 
hour at the beginning to 20 mm. per 
hour in the last three hours. This 
accounts for the formation of a single 
flood wave which attained, and in 
many cases exceeded, the maximum 
levels previously recorded in a number 
of streams. 
The actual rain which fell in 24 
hours amounted, in many cases, to 
: [3 15-20% of the mean annual rainfall, 
and the amount which fell in the 
38-hour period totalled as much as 
    
* 
a « Xb 
it is impossible to predict when 
exceptional floods are likely to occur, 
except in general terms—that they are 
much more likely to happen in certain 
seasons (autumn and spring, for 
example)—or just before the floods 
actually begin, on the basis of rain- 
fall observations, the state of the 
ground, the capacity for water storage 
and so on. 
This also requires a careful analysis 
of previous floods, their seriousness 
in relation to presumed orders of 
magnitude and the time taken by the 
floodwaters to reach the primary and 
secondary basins. The analysis itself 
presupposes that an efficient hydro- 
meteorological network and communi- 
cations system has already existed for 
some time and, above all, that the 
phenomena will develop according to 
a certain pattern. 
The system for protection against 
floods is based, in short, on an em- 
pirical knowledge of the past which 
becomes increasingly uncertain the 
further we go back. It can never be 
foolproof since it cannot cover certain 
factors the maximum value of which is 
not known. 
Furthermore a system designed for 
protection against very infrequent 
events is so little used that the floods 
of the past are forgotten and the 
system comes to be regarded as a 
perfect guarantee of safety for all 
time. 
I. result is that its upkeep 
is neglected and its efficiency impaired 
by failure to apply safety measures 
to a wide enough area. But the play 
of forces keeps on shifting until one 
day an exceptional combination of 
circumstances brings disaster in its 
wake. Paradoxically, the stronger the 
defence system, the more catastrophic 
the results of its collapse. 
The Italian floods of November 1966 
fit into this pattern. To find examples 
of similar floods in the past we have, 
in some instances, to go back several 
30% or even 37% of the annual mean. 
This exceptionally heavy rainfall 
caused flood waves which rose almost 
everywhere to levels higher than the 
maximum previously recorded, even 
during the disastrous flooding of the 
Adige in 1882. The recent flooding of 
the Adige downstream from Trento 
was considerably lessened by dis- 
charging 70 million cubic metres of 
water into Lake Garda through the 
recently completed run-off canal. 
The situation in the terminal sections 
of the rivers in Venetia was aggravated 
by a high tide which reached a level 
never before recorded .in Venice: 
1.90 metres (6 ft.) above sea level, 
against 1.53 metres (5 ft.) recorded 
in November 1951. Statistics indica- 
ted that on the average the level 
would probably rise to 1.60 metres 
only once in a century, and to 1.93 
metres (just over 6 ft.) only once in a 
thousand years. What happened to 
Venice can thus be regarded as a 
once-in-a-thousand-years event. 
The normal tides at Venice cause a 
maximum rise of 0.60 metres (2 ft) 
above the mean, but this level can be 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 59445: The Anatomy of the flood

THE ANATOMY OF THE FLOOD (Continued) 
A third of a year’s rain 
in 38 hours 
raised considerably by, among other 
factors, an exceptionally high velocity 
sirocco and atmospheric pressures 
that are low over the Upper Adriatic 
and high over the Southern Adriatic 
and Central Mediterranean. 
The exceptionally high tides over- 
came the centuries-old defences built 
at the time of the Republic of Venice 
to protect the lagoon and the city; 
further south they flooded a large part 
of the lands in the Po delta. For- 
tunately the great river did not join 
forces with the sea, but remained 
threatening, a few inches below the 
level of the ground already flooded. 
In the Arno basin rain was also quite 
exceptional—15% of the average 
When the turbulent, eddying waters became less 
dangerous, every boat that had escaped damage was 
mobilized for rescue and relief work in Florence. Roofs 
of cars, previously totally covered, began to break surface. 
  
  
  
Photo © Epoca - Giorgio Lotti, Milan 
  
annual rainfall in 24 hours and 25% to 
30%—in 48 hours. The level of the Arno 
reached 11 metres (36 ft.) in Florence 
as against 7.08 metres (24 ft.) in 1942. 
In the Ombrone basin and the neigh- 
bouring Grosseto area, rainfall of 268 
millimetres (over 10 inches) was 
recorded at Baetignano as against a 
previous maximum of 114 millimetres 
(over 4 inches), and 232 mm at Gros- 
seto as against 103 mm. 
The floods of November 1966 render- 
ed more catastrophic by the heavy 
seas and by landslides due to the rapid 
melting of snow, caused over a 
hundred deaths, including those of 
nine of the rescuers. The damage to 
works of art and to state and private 
archives is incalculable; material dam- 
age is estimated at $2,000 million. 
As for agriculture, 310,000 hectares 
(990,000 acres) of fertile land were 
inundated, 5,000 kilometres (3,000 
miles) of country roads were destroyed 
or deteriorated, 50,000 cattle were 
drowned, 12,000 buildings and 16,000 
agricultural machines were damaged, 
112 agro-industrial plants and over 
three million quintals (170,000 tons) 
of fodder were ruined. 
Industry counts over 200 damaged 
factories; thousands of small enter- 
prises had to close down, putting 
60,000 out of work. At least 20,000 
artisans’ workshops and 40,000 shops 
were damaged. 
The damage to public works, the 
tourist industry, private houses and 
cars is enormous. 
But reconstruction is already in full 
swing. 
  
The Unesco Courier wishes to thank 
the Italian Fine Arts and Antiquities 
Service, Rome, and the following 
magazines and photo agencies: 
Epoca (Milan), Rizzoli Press (Milan), 
ANSA (Rome), Gieffe (Florence), 
Reporters’ Associés (Paris), Euro- 
press (Paris) and Roger Viollet 
(Paris) for their co-operation in the 
preparation of this special issue.     

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
AU 
NR 
pe a 
Nel: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
URDA 
  
 
 
wun 
13 a 
p
e
r
 
w 
h 
- 
®
 
4 
3 
. 
: 
. 
0 
< 
a 
© © = o [= 8 
) 
& 
- 
f
o
 
a
 
= 
be] 
v 
EF 
2 
= 
, 
«9 
}, . 
n 
vo. 
-
 
= 
© 
ee 
" 
\
 
4 
+ 
F 
e
y
 
T
I
E
 ~
 
- 
‘ 
Cc 
O
v
 
2 
= 
F
T
I
 
CD 
jie 
! 
"
E
E
R
E
 
a 
2
0
 
o 
0 
= 
“4 
I~ 
w 
—_— 
J 
Q
 
-
 
-
—
 
Q
 
w 
. 
A 
© 
g
e
 
w
y
 
a. 
 
E
£
3
5
 
Go 
: 
- 
N
a
o
 
¥ 
& 
3 
d
¥
,
 
2 
- 
- 
5) 
c
T
V
o
 
A
y
 
- 
=
 
- 
. 
©
 
—
_
~
 
- 
. 
©
 
©
 
QO 
1) 
w
 
o
=
 
E
Z
 
0 
: 
S
0
3
 
mn 
- 
O
2
3
 
- 
} 
~ 
= 
~ 
3
 
\ 
> 
| 
2
P
E
a
 
La 
: 
o 
+= 
0
s
 
: 
: 
om=+ 
Et 
= 
=
0
 
4 
8 
8
 
e
@
 
! 
R
o
 
A
»
 
=
~
 
E
 
a
 
o 
0
 
o
O
 
fi. 
. 
ov 
9
a
 
>
 
py 
= 
wo 
© 
F
E
 
re 
; 
- 
-
o
 
8 
- 
— 
3 
(© 
. 
0 
© 
w
 
c
L
 
E
y
 
Su 
(T 
© 
a
T
 
O
o
 
> 
- 
r- 
- 
250% 
pe 
rh 
= 
wa 
<
 
Z
a
o
 
-
 
E
g
)
 
- 
° 
. 
-~ 
v 
oh 
S
C
 
D
e
e
 
my 
. 
g
l
x
 
g 
® 
2
 
w
w
 
O
i
 
» 
Na 
4 
* 
- 
r
r
 
L
O
 
©
 
~
 
‘ 
, 
Gd 
@w 
2
3
 
-— 
OL 
: 
=
o
 
n 
© 
.¢ 
od 
: 
. 
=
 
a) 
DL 
O 
( 
)
 
§ 
4 
= 
0
3
 
: 
OT 
ul 
¥ 
[0] 
-
 
> 
. 
= 
3 
O
n
 
x 
a
 
xZuS 
: 
2 
. 
g
'
=
<
£
o
 
! 
of 
| 
E
S
T
 
@
 
o
k
 
( 
: 
M
e
 
a
s
 
E 
\» 
0 
a
 
w
o
"
 
E 
pn 
om 
. 
o
e
 
c
E
 
L
T
 
- 
© 
DS 
S
E
N
 
\ 
- 
> 
8
g
e
c
 
: 
Q 
- 
nw 
eo 
c
o
 
S
x
 
> 
~ 
- 
val 
, 
o
h
 
o
>
 
fi) 
~ 
m
 
)
 
~ 
a
x
 
: 
4 
: 
=
 
5
g
a
3
 
-
 
0. 
/ 
a
r
d
 
B
e
E
w
3
 
~ 
st 
- 
G
o
g
 
: 
a 
SN 
S
c
 
w
n
d
 
i 
.
 
a
x
 
c
l
 
Z
E
 
Jk 
 

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

125,000 U.S.-international 
educational exchanges 
A record total of 125,000 college and 
university students, teachers and scholars 
participated in educational exchange pro- 
grammes between the U.S.A. and 150 other 
countries in 1965-66, according to “Open 
Doors 1966", the annual census of the 
Institute of International Education, New 
York. Nearly 83,000 students and over 
9,000 scholars from overseas studied, 
taught or did research at U.S. colleges 
and universities. As in past years, the 
largest group of students, 23,049, or 35 per 
cent of all foreign students, came from the 
Far East. 
‘En avant’ language lessons 
for Britain's 8-year-olds 
Children in over 100 British primary 
schools are learning French, using a special 
language course developed for 8 to 11- 
year-olds by the Nuffield Foundation. 
Entitled “En avant” (Forward), the course 
lasts for three years in primary school 
and two in secondary. Early stages are 
based on games, acting, cartoons and 
recordings of songs and conversation in 
Franch schools. From these oral lessons 
the course progresses to reading and 
writing, translations and finally, revision 
and practice. Experiments in British schools 
with these methods showed that children 
learned an average of 500 words a year. 
In three years they could write and speak 
simple French without difficulty. Similar 
courses in Spanish, Russian and German 
are being tested for introduction in 1967 
and 1968. 
U.S.S.R. gives 300 books 
to Unesco Library 
Three hundred books and two documen- 
tary films have been presented to the 
Unesco Library by the Soviet National 
Commission for Unesco on the occasion 
of Unesco's 20th anniversary. The books 
consist of Soviet political, scientific and 
literary works, dictionaries, textbooks on 
science and education and art albums 
devoted to major Soviet art galleries. The 
titles of the documentary films are: "The 
Road to Science” and “Steps to the World 
of Beauty”. 
  
     
From the Unesco Ne 
Small industries, big results 
International experience is helping to 
boost the activity of small industries in 
Malaysia. In Singapore alone, some 2,000 
small enterprises come within the orbit of 
a programme assisted by the International 
Labour Organization to expand and improve 
light industry and thereby create more 
employment. 
Electricity from hot water 
A power station operating on hot under- 
ground water and designed to supply cheap 
electricity to a wide area is being built at 
Makhach Kala, near Baku, in the U.5.S.R. 
Though not the first station of its type, 
it is the first to be built outside a volcanic 
area (where superheated water 1s found 
close to the surface). To tap subterranean 
sources which attain a temperature of 
160 degrees C., engineers at Makhach 
Kala drilled down more than 15,000 feet. 
Youth science leaders 
for Mali 
A Unesco-organized training course for 
youth science leaders was held recently 
in Bamako, Mali. Lectures and practical 
work covered optics, astronomy, electricity, 
radio, aerodynamics and other scientific 
subjects. Youth leaders who took part will 
now organize science courses for groups 
of young people in six regions of Mali. 
Record world fish catch 
A record catch of 52,400,000 metric tons 
was made by the world's fishing fleets 
in 1965, reports the Food and Agriculture 
STAMPS FOR 
UNESCO'S 
20 YEARS 
  
  
  
  
Peru was Organization. 
with 7,400,000 tons, followed by Japan and 
then, FAO believes, by Mainland China 
leading country 
and the Soviet Union. Mr. Oris V. Wells, 
Deputy Director-General of FAQ, recently 
said that better fishery administration and 
services were essential if the world's 
protein diet was to be improved with more 
fish. Problems of control and rational use 
occurred because most fish stocks are in 
international waters. 
$2.5 million water project 
for Istanbul 
More than $2.5 million will be spent on 
a Turkish Government project for the 
Istanbul region water supply and sewerage 
system. Istanbul is the largest city in 
Turkey and its population of 1,600,000 is 
double that of 25 years ago. Basic 
services of water and sewage have been 
unable to keep up with a rapidly expanding 
demand. Over $1,250,000 has been allo- 
cated from U.N. Development Programme 
funds for the project, scheduled for 
completion in 1968. 
Improving crops 
in the Mekong Delta 
New types of crops would be grown in 
four Cambodian and ten Vietnamese prov- 
inces following the construction of a 
proposed barrage across the Tonle Sap 
tributary of the Mekong River in Cambo- 
dia, according to a recent report based 
on the Mekong River Delta Model Study, 
being made by Unesco with assistance 
from the U.N. Development Programme. By 
regularizing the flow of irrigation water, 
such crops as maize, cotton and tobacco 
could be added to the region's staple crop 
of rice. In this Unesco-U.N. study an 
electronic computer is being used to 
analyse the hydrological and hydraulic char- 
acteristics of the Mekong Delta from 
Chlong to the Gulf of Thailand and the 
South China Sea, as well as those of the 
entire Tonle Sap and Great Lake Basins. 
‘The school under a tree’ 
    
   
  
    
    
  
   
  
        
  
         
“The school under a tree” is the name 
: BL] given to the lteracy campaign that now 
3°32 = covers the whole territory of Cameroon. 
; — mr — rr Over 1,700 literacy centres have been set 
i PITA o 3 Vp —— EY, ’ 
IA | AEREO] | a BF up, attended by over 75000 people. Two 
\ Fa | MEX] TEE TOOR AES SM booklets on this four-year campaign have 
pl Ml A yp COE tid 5 3 = iol I been published, and a monthly journal and 
NF SE Em | RE 3 weekly broadcasts report its progress. 
rm RL          
Television for another 
African country 
The Democratic Republic of the Congo's 
first television transmitter began operating 
in Kinshasa, the capital, on November 23. 
Nearly 90 countries have issued stamps to commemorate Unesco’s 
20th anniversary. Above, stamps from Mali, Finland, Mexico and Cam- 
bodia. All the Unesco anniversary stamps and first day covers can be 
obtained from the Unesco Philatelic Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7.

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### IGNORE

Technical aid in setting up the service was 
given by the French state Office de Coo- 
pération Radiophohique, which also trained 
a team of Congolese technicians to run 
the transmitter. 
Library without books 
For years past, long lines of students 
have formed almost every day outside the 
Hibiya Library in downtown Tokyo. They 
are- not interested in the library's books; 
they bring their own. They are merely 
looking for a quiet place to study. Some 
of the pressure may now be taken off the 
Hibiya Library with the opening of a study 
room in a building that formerly housed 
an Education Research Institute. Report- 
ing the opening of this “library without 
books”, the Japan Times Weekly suggests 
that the idea might well be copied else- 
where. 
New Unesco art slides 
of Austria’s medieval murals 
The 24th series in Unesco's Art Slides 
Collection is devoted to the medieval wall 
paintings of Austria. It reproduces fres- 
coes dating from the end of the 11th to 
the end of the 13th centuries, which 
embellish churches in Carinthia, Styria and 
the Eastern Tyrol. The series consists of 
30 colour slides mounted in cardboard 
frames, with explanatory notes in English, 
French and Spanish. Order through Publi- 
cations Filmées d'Art et d'Histoire, 44 rue 
du Dragon, Paris 6 (in UK. from Educa- 
tional Productions Ltd., East Ardsley, Wake- 
field, Yorks) or through Unesco's national 
distributors (see page 43). Price, approx- 
imately $10.00 or equivalent. 
Preserving the painted tomb 
of Kazanluk 
A Unesco commission has studied pre- 
servation problems of a unique Thracian 
tomb and its mural paintings at Kazanluk, 
Bulgaria, and reported on its findings to 
Bulgaria's cultural conservation authorities. 
The tomb dates from the late 4th or early 
3rd century B.C. It is the only tumulus 
among the thousands dotting the Thracian 
plain that has been found to contain 
frescoes which thus constitute a rare 
document of the art of that period. The 
Unesco Commission, which went to Kazan- 
luk at Bulgaria's request comprised specia- 
lists in physics, chemistry, the history of 
art and architecture, archaeology and the 
conservation of paintings and monuments. 
World’s largest publication 
lists 500 years 
of printed books 
Publication of the British Museum's 
general catalogue of printed books —the 
world’s largest single publication to date— 
has just been completed. The catalogue 
contains over 4 million entries in 263 large 
volumes and covers 500 years from the 
start of printing in Britain to 1955. It has 
taken nearly seven years to produce, and 
has now been delivered to libraries in 
40 countries. 
Peruvian pre-lnca ‘fardo’ 
presented to Unesco 
A Peruvian fardo —a mummy seven 
centuries old— offered to Unesco on its 
20th anniversary by the Peruvian Govern- 
ment, was unwrapped recently before 
television cameras at the Natural History 
Museum in Paris. The fardo had been 
discovered at Puruchoco, a pre-Inca site 
near Lima, by Professor Arturo Jimenez 
Borja, director of Peru's archaeological 
site museums. The fardo, believed to be 
the first of its kind to arrive in Europe 
intact, contained the bones of a young 
Indian boy who died in the 13th century, 
and a collection of toys, a whip, a catapult, 
a spinning top, and clothes made from 
delicately woven material. The burial 
objects were all in a perfect state of 
preservation. 
 
African music on records 
The first four discs are on sale of a 
Unesco Collection of recordings entitled 
“An Anthology of African Music”, produced 
for the International Music Council by the 
International Institute of Comparative Music 
Studies and Documentation. The first disc 
is devoted to the music of the Dan, a 
people living in the Ivory Coast and Liberia. 
The second consists of vocal and in- 
strumental music from Rwanda: among 
instruments included are drums, table- 
zither, vertical flute, musical bow, trumpets, 
horn and a kind of fiddle. The third disc 
offers a selection of the music of the 
Pygmees who inhabit the vast equatorial 
forest zone in the south west of the 
Central African Republic. The last disc 
is devoted to Ethiopia, where the liturgical 
music of the Coptic Church has remained 
unchanged since the beginning of the 
Christian era. (Order from Le Chant du 
Monde, 32 Rue Beaujon, Paris 8 price: 
38,55 Frs per disc.) 
Flashes... 
  
road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O, Box 386, New Delhi, 
1; Sub-Depot : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16: Scindia House, New Delhi, 
Indian National Commission for Cooperation with 
Unesce, Ministry of Education, for New Delhi 3. (Rs. 
10.50). — INDONESIA. P.T.N. “Permata. Nusantara” 
c/o Department of Commerce 22, Djalan Nusantara 
Diakarta — IRAQ. Mackenzie's Bookshop. Al-Rashid 
BM The Unesco Executive Board has 
approved- an agreement between Unesco 
and the Inter-American Development Bank 
“to join efforts in activities designed to 
promote education in Latin America, parti- 
cularly higher, technical and vocational 
education.” 
BM The U.S.A. is joining two Unesco inter- 
national agreements to promote the free 
flow of educational, scientific and cultural 
materials, 
WM Mexico's education budget for 1965- 
1966 (about 400 million dollars) represents 
26 %, of the national budget. It js the 
top item in the budget and twice as much 
as is spent on the army. 
W Over the past century mankind has 
doubled its numbers, but in the same 
period the world's” city population has 
increased 10 or 11 times. Today one 
person out of three lives in a town. 
— 
 
BOOKSHELF 
  
  
RECENT U.N. BOOKS 
BM World Population: Challenge to 
Development 
Highlights of the 1965 World Popu- 
lation Conference, Belgrade, 1966 
($0.75). 
BM World Population Prospects 
(Population Studies No. 41). U.N. 
Dept. of Economic and Social Affairs, 
1966 ($2.00 or equivalent). 
HB Yearbook of the United Nations 
1964 
UN. Office of Public Information, 
New York, 1966 ($16.50 or equi- 
valent). 
BM Apartheid in South Africa 
(Extracts from the report of the U.N. 
Special Committee on Apartheid). 
U.N. Office of Public Information, 
1966 ($0.30 or equivalent). ' 
HB Yearbook of International Trade 
Statistics 1964 
UN. Dept of Economic and Social 
Affairs, 1966 ($11.50 or equivalent). 
U.N. Publications can be ordered 
through bookstores or from United 
Nations, Sales Section, New York 
or Geneva. 
UNESCO BOOKS 
BW Evaluating Development Projects 
Prepared for Unesco by Samuel 
P. Hayes, Jr. (Technology and Society 
series). Revised edition (1966) of 
“Measuring the Results of Develop- 
ment Projects”, ($2.50, 13/- stg., 9 F). 
WM The Planning and Organization 
of Adult Literacy Programmes in 
Africa 
By Peter du Sautoy. (Manuals on 
Adult and Youth Education) 1966 
($1.50, 8/- stg... 5.50 F). 
BM International Yearbook of Edu- 
cation. Vol. XXVII, 1965 
Co-edition: International Bureau of 
Education, Geneva-Unesco, Paris, 
1966 ($9.50, 48/- stg., 33 F). 
WM Source Book for Geography 
Teaching 
Co-edition: Longmans, Green and 
Co., London-Unesco, Paris 1965 
($3.50, 16/- stg., 11.50 F). 
Bl Access to 
Vol. II 
(The Development of Higher Educa- 
tion series). Co-edition: The Inter- 
national Association of Universities, 
Paris-Unesco, Paris, 1965 ($9.50, 
Higher Education 
. 48/- stg., 33 F). 
* 
HB Science Year: The World Book 
Science Annual 1966 
Field Enterprises Educational Corpo- 
ration, Chicago, U.S.A. ($5.95). 
HM Educreation 
(Education for creation, growth and 
change). By Paul Ritter. Common- 
wealth and International Library, 
Pergamon Press, 1966 (30/- stg.). 
BM Gitanjali (Song Offering) 
By Rabindranath Tagore. Prose 
translations by the author from the 
original Bengali. Macmillan’s Pocket 
Library, 1965 (8/6 stg.).   41

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

42 
letters to the Editor 
MEMORABLE ANNIVERSARIES 
OF 1967 
Sir, 
For two countries 1967 will be a 
memorable anniversary year. The 
Soviet Union will celebrate the 50th 
anniversary of its revolution. My 
country, Canada, will commemorate 
the centenary of its confederation. 
Its most ambitious celebration will be 
the Universal and International Exhi- 
bition, Expo 67, held in Montreal. 
You thus have an appropriate 
occasion to devote two issues, though 
not necessarily exclusively, to these 
countries. 
Expo 67's theme will be “Man and 
his World". The time would thus be 
ripe for you to open your “window” 
on the “world” created for Expo 67 
on a complex of mainly man-made 
islands in the St. Lawrence River. 
Open it, in fact, on the whole of 
Canada which, as far as | know, is 
only mentioned in your excellent 
magazine in the context of perpetual 
statistics. 
Yves Daoust 
Masson, Quebec, Canada 
ARTIFICIAL GRAVITY 
FOR SPACE CREWS 
Sir, 
Your issue on Man and Space 
(May 1966) stated that artificial 
gravity would be provided for crews 
of future space stations placed in 
orbit around the earth. How can this 
be done? 
Hassissene Mokhtar 
Benjaia, Algeria 
One way to protect astronauts from 
possible ill effects produced by long 
exposure to conditions of weightless- 
ness would be to spin the space 
station on its own orbit. The centri 
fugal force thus created would produce 
the same effect as grayity. Thanks 
to this “artificial gravity,” astronauts 
and unsecured objects would no 
longer float freely inside the space 
platform—Editor. 
NEVER TOO OLD TO LEARN 
 
Sir, 
[ have on my shelf Volumes | and 
I of the Unesco-sponsored History of 
Mankind, The immensity of informa- 
tion in these volumes offers me many 
occasions to compose popular lectures 
for my old audience here in our Home. 
You might think that we do not like 
history (80 9% of us are over 80), but 
you are wrong. We are still full of life. 
| myself have “come of age" four 
times (21 times 4 equals 84). 
My knowledge of languages com- 
prises English, German, French, 
Spanish, Italian, High Dutch and Afri- 
kaans, and | subscribe to the English 
and Spanish editions of the Unesco 
Courier. 
On reading your wonderful issue on 
Unesco's first twenty years (July- 
August 1966) | learned that Unesco’s 
biggest single best-seller is the 
Unesco Source Book for Science 
Teaching—400,000 copies sold to date 
in 22 languages. | do not know what 
is in it, but 400,000 readers cannot 
go wrong. There must be lots of stuff 
to tickle even the oldest fancies and 
imaginations. 
! cannot put down in adequate 
words how rich, how happy | feel NOT 
to be illiterate. 1 am getting a little 
stiff already, but still | will plunge into 
Science like a retrieving dog into 
water, 
C. van Beest 
Old Age Home 
Uitenhage, South Africa 
POEMS OF 
JAIME TORRES BODET 
 
Sir, 
Your “Bookshelf” (April 1966} lists 
works from Unesco's Translations 
Series including my own book, 
Selected Poems of Jaime Torres 
Bodet, which you say is a bilingual 
volume of 44 works by the celebrated 
Mexican poet and educator. But my 
name as the translator and as the 
person who wrote the critical intro- 
duction is not given. May | ask you 
to correct this omission. 
Sonja P. Karsen 
Saratoga Springs, N.Y. U.S.A. 
ROLL-CALL FOR BAGPIPES 
 
Sir, 
I am working on a study of the 
gaita (the traditional instrument of 
Galicia, Spain) and its counterparts 
elsewhere in Europe. The best known 
of these ancient instruments are the 
| 1 4 IIPS DE | ho Liam QR witém 
(Majorca), corobout (Brittany), horn- 
pipe (England), zampogna (Abruzzi 
and Calabria, ltaly), gaida (Bulgaria). 
| have been unable to find a biblio- 
graphy on the subject and so | would 
be glad to receive information on the 
instruments named above and on any 
similar ones, particularly their shape, 
the materials used to make them, 
their ornamentation, tonality and scale, 
and how many drones (pipes produc- 
ing a fixed continuous note) are fitt- 
ed. Photographs and historical and 
iconographical data would also be 
welcomed as well as details of typical 
pieces of “bagpipe music”. 
Jesis Diaz Garcia 
Paseo del Marqués de Zafra 2, 
Piso 40, D, Madrid 2, Spain 
ANOTHER MAGIC SQUARE 
 
Sir, 
The arrangement of numbers in Alb- 
recht Direr's “magic square” (Unes- 
co Courier, June 1966) is not the only 
one which produces 34 when the num- 
bers are added up by rows, diagonals 
or columns. Here is another one: 
  
  
  
16 2 3 13 
5 8 1" 10 
12 9 6 7 
1 15 14 4           
Other features of this version are: 
® Numbers in the corner squares also 
total 34. 
® Numbers in the top and bottom 
squares of each colums always total 
17, ie. half of 34 (16 + 1, 2 + 
15, etc). 
@® Numbers in the inner squares of 
each column thus also add up to 17 
5 + 12,8 + 9, etc.) 
Paul Slosse 
Uccle-Brussels, Belgium 
STUDENT SERVICE ABROAD 
 
Sir, 
| am very glad to endorse the 
Unesco Courier. It is unbiased and 
therefore doing good work by giving 
fair opinions of the views of different 
nations. | was a little disappointed, 
however, that no mention was made 
of the Canadian University Service 
Overseas in the article on youth 
organizations (July-August 1965). Of 
course it is small compared to the 
U.S. Peace Corps. It was formed 
shortly before the Peace Corps and 
s a private organization. The young 
Jeople are paid by the country in 
which they work. The son of a 
riend of mine is in Ghana and is 
jiving most of his salary to help the 
>oys he teaches to continue their 
education. 
K.M. Tempest 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
GREAT AUTHOR OF THE MONTH 
 
Sir, 
The article on Natsume Soseki, the 
most popular writer in Japan (October 
1966); was particularly inspiring. 
Why not put aside a page or two in 
each issue for an article on a great 
writer? | am sure it would be of 
great value to all those readers’ who, 
like me, are perhaps not so well 
acquainted with the world's many 
great writers 
P.R. Reeves 
Yeovil, Somerset, U.K. 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
—
 
D.
L.
 
4¢
 
tr
im
es
tr
e 
19
66
. 
— 
C.
 
Ne
 
1 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
P
A
R
I
S
.

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### IGNORE

A GIFT SUBSCRIPTION FOR FRIENDS AND RELATIVES 
  
  
A hinder for your 1967 collection 
Now is the time to order a new binder for your 1967 
collection of the Unesco Courier. We offer subscribers an 
attractive and convenient binder, handsomely produced 
in red cloth. It holds a year's issues of the magazine and 
costs only: 
15/-stg. 
$3.00 
10 F. 
Order today from Unesco National Distributors listed 
below. 
One year's subscription 
to the Unesco Courier only : 
15/ - stg. 
$3.00 (Canada) 
10 F (France)   
® A magazine unlike any other 
 
  
® A new approach to the outstanding 
problems of our time 
m The great adventures of art and science 
m A vivid picture of the endless diversity 
of peoples and cultures 
A CHOICE OF EIGHT LANGUAGE EDITIONS 
English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, 
Arabic, Japanese, Italian 
Each month friends will remember your gift and thank you for it 
WHERE TO RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Miniscry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Longmans of Australia Pty Led, Railway Crescent, 
Groydon, Victoria; sub-agent United Nations Associa- 
ion of Australia, Victorian Division, 4th Floor, Askew 
House, 364 Lonsdale St., Melbourne C. 1. (Victoria); 
for the Unesco Courier only : Dominie Pty Ltd, 463 Pitt- 
water Road, Brookvale (N.S.W.} ($A 2.25). — AUSTRIA, 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*,, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70.-). — BELGIUM. All publications: Editions 
“Labor”, 342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-We- 
tenschappelijke Uitgeverij Belgiélei 147, Antwerp. lL. For 
The Unesco Courier (140 FB) and art slides (488 FB) only : 
Louis De Lannoy, 112, rue du TrBne, Brussels 5. CCP 
3380 00. — CANADA. Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont. 
($3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House Bookshop, Sir Chittam- 
palan Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, Colombo, 2 (Rs. 7). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CYPRUS. 
“MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 
1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA, S.N.T.L, 
Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); Zahranicni 
literatura Bilkova 4, Prague 1, — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, Ltd., Prags Boulevard 47, Copenhagen S. (D. 
Kr. 17). — ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O. 
Box 120, Addis Ababa (10/-). — FINLAND. Akateeminen 
Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (Fmk. 9.40). — 
FRANCE. librairie de ['Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48. (10 F). — GERMANY. All 
publications: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich, 8. For the Unesco Kurier (German ed only) 
Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 
276650 (DM 10). — GHANA Methodist Book Depot 
Led., Atlanus House, Commercial Street, POB 100, Cape 
Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — 
GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, 
Athens; Librairie Eleftheroudakis Nikkis 4, Athens. — 
HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, 
" Kowloon. -— HUNGARY. Académia Konyvesbolt, 
Vici U. 22, Budapest V: A.K.\V. Konyvtarosok 
Boleja, Nepkoztarsasag utja 16-Budapest VI— ICELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., M.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
(120 Kr.) — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd., Nicol 
Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutea 13; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson 
House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New Delhi. 
1; Sub-Depot : Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 
Park Street, Calcutta 16; Scindia House, New Delhi, 
Indian National Commission for Cooperation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, for New Delhi 3. (Rs. 
10.50). — INDONESIA. P.T.N. “Permata. Nusantara' 
¢fo Department of Commerce 22, Djalan Nusantara 
Djakarta — IRAQ. Mackenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid 
Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, University 
of Baghdad, P.O, Box 12, Baghdad — IRELAND. The 
National Press, 2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. 
4. (15/5). — ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, formerly Blum- 
stein’s Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road and 48 Nahlat 
Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1£8). — JAMAICA. Sang- 
ster’s Book Room, 91 Harbour Street, Kingston. (15/-). 
JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd, 6 Tori-Nichome, Nihon- 
bashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo (1,200 yen). 
— JORDAN. Joseph 1. Bahous & Co., Dar ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road. P.O.B, 66, Amman. — KENYA. E.S.A. 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi (10/-). — KOREA, 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Cen- 
tral 64, Seoul. KUWAIT The Kuwait Bookshop Co., 
Led, P. O. Box 2942, Kuwait — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286. Monrovia (10/-). 
— LUXEMBURG. Libraine Paul Bruck, 22, Grand- 
Rue, Luxemburg (F.L. 140). — MALAYSIA. Federal 
Publications Ltd., Times House, River Valley Road, 
Singapore, 9; Pudu Building (3rd floor), 110, Jalan 
Pudu, Kuala Lumpur (M. $ 7.50). — MALTA. Sapienza's 
Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta, (15/-). — MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd.,, 30, Bourbon Street, Port- 
Louis (15/-). — MONACO. Briush Library, 30, Bld. 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (F. 10). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Marunus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 8.50). — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G. C. 
T. Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Cura- 
cao. NLA. (NA fl 4,50), — NEW ZEALAND. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 20, Molesworth Street (Private 
Bag), Wellington; Government Bookshops: Auckland 
(P.O. Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dune- 
din (P.O. Box 1104) (15/-}. — NIGERIA. C.M.5. Book- 
shops, P.O. Box 174, Lagos (10/-) — NORWAY, 
All publications: A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille Grensen 9, 
Oslo. For Unesco Courier only: AS. Norvesens Litte- 
rathrjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, (17. 50kr.). — PA. 
KISTAN. The West-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco 
Publications House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O.,, Lahore: 
Showrooms : Urdu Bazar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree 
Highway, G/6-1, Islamabad. — PHILIPPINES, The Mo- 
dern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, Manila, 
— POLAND, “RUCH", ul. Wronia, 23, Warsaw 10 
zl. 60.}. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria 
Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO. 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115- 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. —~ SOUTHERN RHODESIA. 
Textbook Sale (PVT) Ltd., 67, Union Avenue, Salisbury, — 
SUDAN. A! Bashir Bookshop, P. O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications : A/B C.E. 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stock- 
holm 16. — For the Unesco Courier: The United, 
Nations Association of Sweden, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 12}; SWITZERLAND. All publications : 
Europa Verlag, $ Rimistrasse, Zurich, Payot, rue Grenus 6, 
1241, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 10). — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 2775, Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. 
Suksapan Panit Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
(35 ticals). — TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. —~ UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala (10/-). — SOUTH AFRICA. 
All publications : Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty) Ltd., 
Libr Building. Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
For the Unesco Courier (single copies) only : Central 
News Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. (R1.-50). 
— UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). Librairie 
Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Cairo. Sub/agent : 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. 
Box 569, London, S.E.l., and Government Bookshops 
in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester. 
Birmingham and Bristol. (15/-), — UNITED STATES. 
Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34¢h St, New York, 
N.Y, 10016 ($ 5.00). — U.5.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow. G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska 
Knjliga Terazije, 27, Belgrade.

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078222engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
        
Oh Venice! Venice! when thy marble walls 
Are level with the waters, there shall be 
A cry of nations oer thy sunken halls, 
A loud lament along the sweeping sea! 
BYRON 
“Ode on Venice “’ 
| =
i 
a
l
 
oi
 
i 
al
i 
  
       | 
gi
 
-
-
 
| ! E
A
E
 
i
 
il
l 
        
   
a
r
 fii 
} ia
 
W
l
 k 
   gee 
Photo © Associated Press 
VENICE'S SUNKEN HALLS 
Floods, caused by a tidal surge in the northern Adriatic lashed by violent gales, invaded 
Venice in November 1966, damaging and defacing monuments and historic buildings. The 
buildings in Venice stand on piles driven into the bed of an Adriatic lagoon, and the city IS 
slowly sinking, dragged down by subsidence of the lagoon bed. The recent floods—the 
worst for 200 years—reveal the vulnerability of this ancient island city and the urgent 
need for protective action. Here, tidal waters beat against the columns of the Doge's palace.