# [062313](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
CHALLENGE OF OUR CENTURY  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
        
  
EA 
pw 
‘Photos © R. Michaud, Paris 
Wo WA RR why | 
_- 
Paintings by Ethio- 
EER CLE: Ta CX {Ta 
a fascinating panor- 
ama of life in village 
~ and countryside. An 
CAVETQVZ. EAVARET TT CR 11 1 
“women laden with 
CER UCLA ELCRYEL Clg 
ELC GE LL EE 
captured by one of 
these artists in the 
~ painting above. Ethi- 
opia’s art has always 
been an art of the 
‘people (see page 18). 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

OCTOBER 1964 
17TH YEAR ‘mCourier 
PUBLISHED IN 
‘NINE EDITIONS 
English Page 
French 
Spanish 4 THE STRUGGLE AGAINST ILLITERACY 
Russian The most exalting venture of our generation 
German By René Maheu 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 9 INVESTMENT IN PEOPLE 
Japanese A new approach to economic development 
Italian By H.M. Phillips 
12 THE HIGHEST SCHOOL IN THE WORLD 
Sir Edmund Hillary's latest conquest in the Himalayas 
By R.J. Spector 
18 ART OF ETHIOPIA 
: A folk tradition centuries old 
rR By Otto A. Jager 
24 A SAFARI ARMED WITH MICROSCOPES 
Hunting Africa's tiniest animals 
By Janos Balogh 
  
COVER PHOTO 
literacy affects some 700 mil- TT 
lion adults in the world. If it 32 LE ERS TO THE EDITOR 
is ever to be eradicated a two- 
fold effort is required : adequate 
Primary [Jusation for all child- 33 G R EAT 
ren; and well-planned literacy 
programmes for adults, Unesco M EN, G REAT EVENTS 
has been concerned with both 
problems for years and has 
just drawn up a 5-year expe- 
rimental programme for mass 34 
literacy (see p. 4). Cover photo 
shows a fisherman and his son 
learning to read and write, 
 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Paolo Gasparini 
THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition ; Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Victor Goliachkov 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-ichi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
{talian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin july and August when 
it is bi-monthly (11 issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, 
Arabic, Japanese, and italian, In the United Kingdom itis distributed by H.M, 
Stationery Office, P, O. Box 569, London, S. E. I. 
individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit fine reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postsge. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Uneaco Courier is Indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
Annual subscription rates : 15/-stg.; $3.00 (Canada); 
10 French Francs or equivalent. Single copies 1/6-stg; 
30 cents; 1F. 
(M.C. 64.1., 195 A) 
N°* 10, 1964 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief. 
 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 62296: The Struggle against illiteracy; the most exalting venture of our generation

  
THE MOS   
The struggle   
against illiteracy  
 
 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 62296: The Struggle against illiteracy; the most exalting venture of our generation

T EXALTING VENTURE 
"OF OUR GENERATION 
  
© Gh. Serban 
  
by René Maheu 
Director-General of Unesco 
  
here are more than 700 million men and 
T women in the world over 15 years of age 
who cannot read or write. This figure, which 
emerged from a study that Unesco carried out 
in 1962 at the request of the United Nations 
General Assembly, represents two-fifths of the 
adult population of the globe. 
In certain countries of Africa, Asia and Latin 
America, the number of illiterates stands as high 
as seventy, eighty or even ninety per cent 
of the total population and in many countries 
the female population is almost entirely illiterate. 
Despite the spectacular expansion of education 
for children, a by no means insignificant number 
of youngsters attending primary school leave 
before they have had an adequate schooling 
and sooner or later end up as illiterates. 
As a result, the number of illiterates is rising by 
20 to 25 million persons each year according 
to certain estimates. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 62296: The Struggle against illiteracy; the most exalting venture of our generation

ILLITERACY (Cont'd) 
The new strategy: a five-year selective 
These figures speak for themselves and need little comment. They mean that 
in our era of unprecedented advances in science and technology, millions of men and 
women are condemned to live on the fringe of modern civilization. They mean that 
a large portion of the Intellectual potential of mankind is being lost forever. Such 
a state of affairs Is not only a disgrace and a scandal on the grounds of human con- 
science and Justice but in terms of economics is the height of absurdity and a sheer 
waste of manpower. Little wonder then that the map of the world's illiteracy is prac- 
tically Identical with that of underdevelopment. Economists and specialists in ques- 
tions of planning have clearly shown the importance of human resources in imple- 
menting development programmes and have equally demonstrated that adult literacy 
is an essential factor governing returns from other forms of investment. It is not 
surprising, therefore, as | had occasion to point out recently in Geneva at the 1964 
summer session of the U.N. Economic and Social Council, that the underdeveloped 
countries consider illiteracy a top priority in their plans for development. 
Countries where Illiteracy is widespread have been making determined—indeed 
sometimes heroic—efforts to combat this affliction, and in many instances the 
results have been remarkable. But we must also face the fact that a number of 
national literacy campaigns have had discouraging results even though they were 
launched with much enthusiasm and were financed with more than adequate funds, 
simply because in the initial planning stages certain conditions indispensable for 
success were underestimated. It has now become clear too that isolated national 
efforts varying considerably in size and nature cannot be the answer to a problem 
which is worldwide in scope and that international action is needed. 
T was within this framework that the General Conference of Unesco at its 
twelfth session held at the end of 1962, decided to submit a report to the 
U.N. General Assembly on the eradication of illiteracy in the world, which included 
a plan for International action to encourage and bolster national efforts. This report, 
which | had the honour of presenting personally to the General Assembly in October 
1963, was the subject of a long discussion that led to the unanimous adoption of a 
resolution approving the principle of a World Literacy Campaign. 
The resolution called on countries with a high proportion of adult illiterates to 
intensify their efforts to reduce illiteracy, and asked countries which had solved the 
problem to assist those that had not. : 
It invited the Secretary-General of the United Nations “in collaboration with 
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, the Managing Director of the Special Fund, the Executive Chairman 
of the Technical Assistance Board and the President of the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development and its affiliates, to explore ways and means of 
supporting national efforts for the eradication of illiteracy through a world campaign 
and any other measures, if appropriate, of international co-operation and assistance, 
both non-financial and financial, and to submit a report thereon, together with appro- 
priate proposals, to the General Assembly at its 19th session.” 
Since this important decision was adopted by the General Assembly a number 
of significant events have occurred within the framework of the U.N. and Unesco 
which reveal the interest the idea of a mass literacy campaign has aroused around 
the world. 
Thus, two U.N. regional bodies—the Economic Commissions for Africa and for 
Asia and the Far East met respectively at Addis Ababa in February and Teheran in 
March 1964 and adopted resolutions recommending that the governments of those 
regions include adult literacy programmes in their national education plans as a part 
of overall development. Similarly, the regional conferences of the Asian and Arab 
National Commissions for Unesco, the former held in Bangkok in February and the 
latter in Algiers in March, used almost identical terms to stress the importance of 
literacy in those countries. At Algiers the idea was advanced for a regional sys- 
tem to co-ordinate activities in this field. 
Africain trainee in the sheet 
metal workshop of a vocational 
training centre. One aim of 
Unesco’s proposed experi- 
mental programme for mass 
literacy is to open the door 
of vocational and technical 
training to illiterate workers. 
    

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

programme 
© Paul Almasy 
  
In March of this year, a regional technical conference on literacy, organized by 
Unesco at Abidjan, drafted a series of recommendations which the conference of 
African Ministers of Education, meeting in the same city a few days later, endorsed 
unanimously. In particular, the Ministers agreed that since literacy was the starting- 
point for any vocational training, even at the minimum level, and for the improvement 
of workers'qualifications through continuing adult education, it was directly instru- 
mental in raising productivity. They therefore felt that literacy projects should pre- 
ferably be directed at the organized sections of production where the desire for 
literacy is strongest. 
AST April, an expert committee on literacy which had been specially conven- 
ed by Unesco in Paris urged that a “selective strategy” be adopted in the 
literacy campaign and that it be started in those sectors of the national economy 
which were already organized, such as factories and other public or private enter- 
prises, co-operatives, trade unions, village councils and community development 
services. This committee also advocated a strategy of intensive projects, at the 
beginning of the campaign, to be carried out on an experimental-demonstration 
basis in a limited number of pilot countries. 
Finally, a conference of non-governmental organizations having consultative 
status with Unesco, which met in Paris in June, likewise emphasized the impor- 
tance of action to reduce illiteracy and promised the support of the many organi- 
zations and associations it groups together, including a number of highly influential 
ones. 
It was in the light of this consensus of opinion reached by all the responsible 
authorities and competent experts in their conclusions and recommendations, that 
| submitted to the 67th session of the Unesco Executive Board last May the broad 
outlines of an experimental programme for mass literacy as a preparatory step in the 
launching at a later stage of a world campaign, the principle of which, as | have 
previously indicated, has been adopted by the General Assembly of the U.N. 
This programme would apply the idea of “selective strategy” in two ways. 
Firstly it would operate in a limited number of countries—eight at the most—chosen 


### 62296: The Struggle against illiteracy; the most exalting venture of our generation

on the basis of a number of factors such as the illiteracy rate of the given coun- 
try, the priority given to literacy programmes in its overall education plan, the 
support its people could be expected to give such a programme, etc. Secondly, it 
would be limited to those sectors of the national economy which were already 
organized. 
HESE intensive projects at the national level In a few countries would be 
supplemented by regional co-operation services for research, the training 
of leaders and mutual assistance designed to strengthen existing institutions. 
The idea is that the experimental programme will extend over a period of five 
years, from 1966 to 1970, and as each project reaches the end of its operational 
stage the results will be analyzed and evaluated immediately. 
The experimental programme has been approved unanimously by the Executive 
Board of Unesco and goes before the Unesco General Conference when it con- 
venes in Paris this month. It has won the wholehearted support of the Secretary- 
General of the United Nations and was submitted to the Economic and Social Coun- 
cil which recently met in Geneva. The Council unanimously adopted a resolution 
recognizing the importance of literacy programmes in national education plans and 
approved the broad lines of the experimental programme, recommending that the 
General Assembly should give it favourable consideration and entrust its execu- 
tion to Unesco. 
This, then, is the progress which the idea of a mass literacy campaign has made 
thus far within the family of the United Nations. Of course, we should realize that 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

8 
ILLITERACY (Cont'd) 
Simultaneous attack on two fronts 
other groups too have grappled with this problem, such as the World Congress 
for the Combating of llliteracy, to name only one, which met in Rome in September 
1962, 
In a little over two years, enormous strides have been made in focusing attention 
on the problem of illiteracy and in the study of its possible solutions, but certainly 
the most striking development of this period has been the recognition of the neces- 
sity for universal literacy, the necessity that every adult person on our planet know 
how to read and write. This idea has struck a deep, responsive chord in world 
public opinion, as Unesco has found in the understanding and support it has receiv- 
ed from men and women everywhere—often expressed in the most deeply moving 
terms—irrespective of their religious or cultural backgrounds, their economic or 
social status, or their country’s political system. 


### 62296: The Struggle against illiteracy; the most exalting venture of our generation

Personally, | consider the struggle against illiteracy to be the most imperative 
and the most inspiring task of our present generation. | believe that having recognized 
the universal right to education it is our duty to make that right a living fact, at the 
very least on this elementary level. If illiteracy is really to be wiped out, the battle 
must be fought on two fronts simultaneously. First and foremost, we must see to 
it that primary and compulsory education becomes a reality everywhere, for without 
this, as | have already said, new multitudes of illiterates will continue to loom up 
and cloud the world horizon. At the same time we must redouble our efforts to reduce 
the present large number of adult illiterates. It is essential that the two types of 
action should go hand in hand since obviously generalized primary education is 
impossible in a society of illiterate adults, and adult literacy is pointless if no steps 
are taken to ensure the adequate education of children. 
BJ to bring literacy to adults on a mass scale will have no chance of success 
without the understanding and active support of the general public, since it 
calls for nothing less than a general mobilization of all mankind. This is so not only 
because of the funds it would require but, more important, because the very unity 
of mankind is at stake. At a time when science is opening the gateway to the 
stars, it is unthinkable that two-fifths of mankind should still be prisoners of ances- 
tral darkness. Or are we to have two types of human beings—one for the stars, 
the other for the caves? There could be no hope of peace if we tolerated an 
iniquity as flagrant as this unequal division of the benefits or progress. 
It is most important that both governments and people be fully informed of 
these things. They must know and understand the reasons which have prompted 
the proposed programmes as well as its ultimate goals. 
The countries with widespread illiteracy will of course have to provide the bulk 
of the resources needed for carrying out the literacy programmes. It is expected 
that national efforts will represent at least three-quarters of the total resources to 
be mobilized. It will be the task of both the parliaments and the governments in 
those countries to give the necessary priority to literacy and to continuing adult 
education in relation to the nations’ overall development needs. 
As for the countries where illiteracy is no longer a problem it is hoped that 
they will lend technical or financial aid as part of their bilaterial, regional or inter- 
national assistance to countries which need it for their adult literacy programmes. 
Unesco invites all nations and all peoples to join in this great venture for the 
unshackling of men's minds and the liberation of a new technological, civic and 
moral potential everywhere. 
The stake is a colossal one. Ultimately, it involves no less than opening up 
the path of enlightenment and the portals of history to two-fifths of mankind now 
stagnating in ignorance and resignation. 
An address to the Interparliamentary Union, meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, on August 26, 1964. 
  
© Louis Normand 
Bureau d'Etudes 
Henri Chomette

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
  
MARINE METROPOLIS. Strolling citizens dot the vastness of “Independence Square” at the port of 
Cotonou, Dahomey, where a rising metropolis and fast-expanding port offer one of Africa’s most striking 
examples of urban planning and economic development. Building in background is Cotonou’s Congress Hall. 


### 62297: Investment in people

INVESTMENT 
IN PEOPLE 
] HE economics of education and investment In 
human resources has been one of the 
neglected subjects In the sclence of economics, though 
the great founder of modern economics, Adam Smith 
in his Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the 
Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, placed great 
stress on education. In the middle and at the end of 
the next century, other great economlists—notably Karl 
Marx and Alfred Marshall—also stressed the influence of 
education on economic and social development. But for 
“much of the first part of our century the subject has 
had little study. It 1s only in the last few years that 
a growing number of economists have been making it 
one of their principal pre-occupations, and that the 
words “human capital” are coming into widespread use. 
When an economist speaks of “investment in human 
resources” or refers to the creation of “human capital,” 
he covers all of the activities which Increase the effective- 
ness of the human factor in production. These Include 
by H.M. Phillips 
education, training In Industry, basic research; sclence, 
applied technical research and development, and the 
creation of all types of knowledge which increase pro- 
ductivity. He also covers the means for the better 
distribution of such knowledge, communication media, 
fellowships, libraries, travel abroad, as well, of course, 
as all measures in the fleld of health, nutrition and 
social organization which improve man’s output. While 
we are concerned here mostly with education, no aspect 
of human resource development can be neglected with- 
out grave economic waste. 
The sudden recognition by economists of the role of 
education in economic development caught some edu- 
cators by surprise. Used to thelr high calling 
as custodians and transmitters of human and social 
values they had not sufficiently realized that they held 
in their hands one of the most powerful means of 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10 
INVESTMENT IN PEOPLE (Cont'd) 
Teamwork for educators and economists 
wiping out the pathetically low lving levels prevalling 
over most of the globe. Finance ministers were also 
caught by surprise. Used to regarding education as a 
purely soclal expenditure, they suddenly found their 
economists on the side of the education ministers, and 
educational budgets as a whole are increasing more than 
proportionately to total budgets and population growth. 
The words “human capital” can easily be misunder- 
stood and they are repugnant to some people because 
they sce In the use of them a materlalist view of human 
personality, and perhaps they are best avoided. There 
are two assurances needed. First what must be in mind 
is investment in people, and not the using of people as 
if they were investments. 
to be defined in the final analysis as the science of 
how to increase consumption rather than production, 
Le. the satisfaction of human needs, desires and expec- 
tations. : 
Economists have seldom disagreed on these points. 
J. S. Mill stated: “the human being I do not classify as 
wealth. He is the purpose for which wealth exists.” 
Marx, in the same vein, wrote “Modern industry, 
indeed, compels soclety, under penalty of death, to re- 
place the detail-worker of today, crippled by lifelong 
repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and 
thus reduced to the mere fragment of a man, by the 
fully developed individual, fit for a varlety of labours, 
ready to face any change of production, and to whom 
the different soclal functions he performs are but so 
many modes of glving free scope to his own actual and 
acquired powers.” A century later, Keynes was wrli- 
ing: “consumption—to repeat the obvious—is the sole 
end and object of all economic activity.” 
While economics has to express itself in the form of 
measurable human preferences, and is therefore mainly 
concerned with matters which can be measured, “psychic 
income” as well as “physical income” has long had re- 
cognition in economic analysis so long as it can be 
expressed in terms of preferences. The economist draws 
the demand curve; he does not make lt. Moreover, even 
in the narrow sense of economics, the desire to work 
is a fundamental part of man’s nature and a great 
source of satisfaction to him. There is nothing de- 
meaning in thinking of man in hls economic aspects 
so defined, even though he is also made for bigger 
ngs. 
Clearly what is required in an approach which Is 
“convergent” to use the term Mr. René Maheu, the Di- 
rector General, has introduced Into Unesco’s programme. 
The problem is not only to use the educational system 
as an instrument to ralse lving levels, but to use it 
to enable man to protect and to develop his highest ac- 
complishments and aspirations. Of the world’s popu- 
lation of 3,180 million, 40 % are under 15. 


### 62297: Investment in people

These young people will be the mature 
population of the world in 1990 and 
2000, when they will hold in their 
hands man’s vast technological power 
and with it man’s destiny. 
But because of the poverty in so many parts of the 
world today great numbers of these children are not at 
school. Only half of the child population of five to 
fourteen years of age Is at school, and a large number of 
these do not complete the full primary school cycle. 
There is therefore an urgent task for educators and 
economists working together on the economic aspects of 
education. 
Poets, as well as economists, have likened men to 
money. Lorca in his volume Romancero Gitano says 
of the death of the gipsy, Autonito el Camborio, Viva 
Secondly economics has. 
moneda que nunca Se volvera a repetir (llving coin 
which can never be minted again). Antonito, the gipsy, 
was Illiterate and could not read Lorca’s poem. There 
are 700 million illiterates in the world today, and, as 
Lorca saw, they have stamped on them the irreplaceable 
mintage of the human individual. No man must receive 
less respect because he is illiterate. But every man 
has the right to be literate. : 
Lorca himself, who wrote this famous line, was shot 
while still in his thirties. With his death, the world lost 
the full years of his genius, which can never be repeated. 
It is a terrible thought that there is 
an international convention for the 
preservation of monuments and 
works of art in times of war, but 
none for the preservation of human 
capital. 
From the tragic death of a poet it is, I fear, piling 
on the agony to take the reader to a further subject of 
depression, the charnal houses of the Middle Ages. But 
the frst econometrician (economist-statistician) of 
human resources, Sir Willlam Petty, lived at the time of 
the Black Death, the greatest single destroyer of human 
capital In history—the power of the plague microbe far 
exceeding man’s own destruction of man. 
A witness of the plague in London, he estimated sta- 
tistically that it would have been worth while, in eco- 
nomic terms, for the bodies of the plague victims, since 
they were the chief sources of infection, to have been 
put in gold coffins and transported out of London. The 
capital value of the lives saved would have far exceeded 
that of all of the gold involved. Sir William Petty 
was an educational pioneer as well as an econometri- 
cian, He described the education of his day as a “rabble 
of words.” , 
In his book “Advice to Samuel Hartlib,” he advocated 
a more practical education, and sald: “For we see 
children do delight in drums, pipes, flddles, guns made 
of elder-sticks and bellows’ noses, piped keys, etc., paint- 
ing flags and ensigns with elder-berries and corn-poppy, 
making ships with paper and setting even nut-shells 
a-swimming, handling the tools of workmen as soon 
as they turn thelr backs and trying to work them- 
selves, fishing, fowling, hunting, setting springs and 
traps for birds and other animals, making pictures in 
their writing-books, making tops, gigs and whirligigs, 
quilting balls, practising divers tricks upon the cards, etc, 
with a million more besides.” The controversy between 
the “rabble of words” and the “gigs and whirliglgs” and 
“setting even nut-shells a-swimming” schools of thought 
still persists today in the writings of educators and 
economists. 
Sir William would have been delighted to read in the 
reports of the Community Education Centre at Djajagiri 
that modern Indonesian children write their texts on 
dried banana skins, on planks, and on the sand, when 
their notebooks are used up, and new ones have not 
arrived. Ingenuity is one of the most preclous economic 
assets. 
For the next great econometrician of human capital 
let us move to Soviet Russla in the early 1920's, when 
a country which Is now an industrial giant was going 
through the first troubled years of its transition from 
an underdeveloped country. In 1924, Professor S.G. Stru- 
milin, doyen of Soviet economists and still working today 
in Moscow at a ripe old age, undertook a scientific 
analysis of the value of years of schooling of different 
length in raising the output of wealth.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 62297: Investment in people

50 Sr — 
: 
. 
Fs «< 
» 
   
  
~ 
es 
N he 
" -. 
~~ 
p—— “a 
7 
© Paul Almasy 
For this Indian woman from an isolated valley in the Andes, the 
streets of a large modern city are an entirely new world. Edu- 
cation could help to make this the everyday world of her children. 
His studles showed the large superlority of productl- 
vity of workers who had had formal schooling, together 
with vocatlonal training, as compared with those who 
had only training on the job. Many people had, of 
course, been aware of this before, but no-one had estab- 
lished clear-cut results based on statistical measurement. 
These and similar studles, since Strumilln himself was 
one of the architects of the GOSPLAN, led to the 
concentratlon of the Soviet Unlon on education over 
the following years. 
It was estimated In 1960 by the Oxford economist, John 
Valzey, who has contributed so much to the study of 
the economics of education, that the U.SS.R. had, for a 
period of over 30 years (starting, of course, at a lower 
level than the Western European countries and with a 
higher proportion of young age-groups), Invested bet- 
ween twice and three times as much of its national 
product in developing education than had the average 
Western European countries. 
In the inter-war years, economists were mostly con- 
cerned with problems of stability, having scen the world 
economy shaken periodically to the base by devastating 
industrial slumps. It was not until the solutlon to this 
problem was found through the revolution in economic 
thought brought about by Keynes, that attention was 
concentrated on development. 
The division of the world into the 
developed and underdeveloped coun- 
tries with a growing gap between 
them was seen as a danger equal to 
or greater than that of the great 
slumps. 
  
The new thinking which took place on development 
brought with it new light on the role of human resources. 
In a study made for the United Nations In 1948, Professors 
A Lewls, T. Schultz, A. Baltra and G. Hakim—an cxpert 
group from the UK. the U.S.A, Chile and the Lebanon— 
stated : “In our opinion most underdeveloped countries 
are in the situation that investment in people Is likely to 
prove as productive, in the purely material sense, as 
any Investment In material resources, and in many 
cases Investment In people would lead to a greater flow 
of goods and services than would follow upon any com- 
parable Investment in material capital.” 
Over the next few years pressure was high from the 
governments of the economically less-developed countries 
to have education treated among top priorities in thelr 
request for assistance, the political demand for better 
education belng very Intense in those countries: while 
In the developed countries Interest was stimulated, not 
only by the new economic thinking and the demands of 
technical progress, but also by the power competition 
between the western group of countries and the socialist 
republics, 
Professor Schultz, studying the economic progress of the 
United States, has estimated that between 1919 and 1957, 
with the addition of only one per cent of total Inputs of 
tangible capital and labour, real income had increased 
at the rate of about three per cent per year, the rest being 
attributable to a somewhat mysterious “residual factor” 
in which education played a prominent part. Professor 
Denison, using a different approach, found the contribu- 
tion of education to economic growth in the U.S.A. in the 
period 1929 to 1956 amounted to about 23 per cent of the 
growth rate of national product. 
Work was also done in Norway by Professor Aukrust, 
who came to a similar conclusion In respect of the growth 
of national production of his country between 1900 and 
1955; while in the United Kingdom, Professors Reddaway 
and Smith showed that capital and lab-ur inputs 
accounted for only a quarter of the Increased output per 
head in manufacturing industries between 1948 and 1954. 
CONT'D ON PAGE 28 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 


### 62299: The Highest school in the world: Sir Edmund Hillary's latest conquest in the Himalayas

Sir Edmund Hillary’s latest 
conquest in the Himalayas 
THE HIGHEST SCHOOL 
IN THE WORLD 
by R. J. Spector 
    
    
Ii MEN OF EVEREST. The Sherpa, 
~~ Tenzing Norkay (left) photographed by 
" SirEdmund Hillary (below) on the summit 
of Mt. Everest at the moment of their 
victory over the world's highest mountain, 
on May 29, 1953." Tenzing carries the 
flags of the United Nations, Nepal, India 
and Gt. Britain. Above, a Buddhist shrine 
in the Sherpa country silhouetted againsta 
towering background of Himalayan peaks. 
+ 
N
a
s
 
Ap cs “0 R 1 
, ENS 

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Photos © The Mount 
Everest Foundation 
  
  
© M. Peissel 


### 62299: The Highest school in the world: Sir Edmund Hillary's latest conquest in the Himalayas

Qome of the Sherpa villages on the flanks of the Himalayas 
near the foot of Mt. Everest now have schools for the 
first time thanks to the efforts of Sir Edmund Hillary, the 
New Zealand mountaineer, who (with the Sherpa, Tenzing 
Norkay) was the first to set foot on the summit of Everest 
in 1953. Since 1961 Sir Edmund has been seeking new conquests 
in the Himalayan mountain lands of northeastern Nepal. But 
this time his assault is not so much on the grim forces of 
nature as on ignorance. 
Inspired by his long experience and appre- 
clation of the qualities of the engaging and 
hardy Sherpa people of this Sola Khombu 
region, without whom none of the Himalayan 
expeditions from 1920 onwards could have 
been conceived, let alone accomplished, Sir 
Edmund’s primary interest has become focus- 
ed on the mountain folk themselves rather 
than on the giant Himalayan peaks. 
Soon after Sir Edmund had led a search 
for the Yetl, the “Abominable Snowman” 
(whom he judges, incidentally, to be a com- 
posite figment of imagination) he asked his 
Sherpa helpers, “in order to show gratitude 
In terms more meaningful than money”. 
what they would best like to have. Their 
unanimous reply, “A school for our chil- 
dren,” sparked off his new venture. A few 
months later the village from which most of 
his Sherpas came, Khumjung perched 13,000 
feet up on the flank of the sacred mountain 
Khomb'Ila—the “God of Khombu,” which 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 62299: The Highest school in the world: Sir Edmund Hillary's latest conquest in the Himalayas

HIGHEST SCHOOL (Contd) 
A class for Sherpas, 
man must never cllmb—and only fifteen miles 
from the foot of Everest, was able to boast of 
having the region's first school. 
The two-room prefabricated structure, 
donated by The Indlan Aluminium Company, 
was flown In sections by the International 
Committee of the Red Cross to the expedition’s 
Mingbo airstrip, a hard day's Sherpa-march 
from Khumjung, and assembled by Hillary 
and his team-mates assisted by the Sherpas. 
A teacher was recruited in Darjeeling, just 
beyond Nepal's eastern frontier with India, 
and after an official blessing by the head lama 
of the neighbouring Thyangboche monastery 
the school was soon a flourishing concern. 
In 1963, It ‘was followed by two more schools 
set up by Hillary in the villages of Pangboche 
and Thami with the approval of the Nepalese 
Government and with money derived from 
book rights, lecture tours and donations from 
private sponsors. 
Between them, the three schools, which 
follow the official curriculum, now have about 
170 pupils, with ages ranging from six to 
twenty-six (for some of the parents also 
attend). Many more children would be only 
too happy to join in, for enthusiasm for learn- 
ing runs high, but the parents cannot spare 
them from farm work, and quite often will 
select a favourlte son to receive these coveted 
benefits, although the better-off famllies may 
send a couple of sons, or even a daughter. 
But a higher economic level would elimi- 
nate the need for child labour, and Sir 
Edmund's basic aim 1s to raise that level, and 
health standards also. However, he feels 
that little can be done in that direction untll 
there is a general ability to read and write. 
At the moment, about one In ten of the 
Sherpa men, through having worked in Dar- 
jeeling and elsewhere, can read and write a 
fathers & sons 
little; but among thelr womenfolk, the Sher- 
panis, 1lliteracy Is total. Sir Edmund there- 
fore plans this year (In conjunction with an 
attempt to scale the 21,700 feet high Mount 
Thamserku) to set up another three schools 
—In the regional “capital” Namche Bazar 
and in the villages of Chaunrikarka and 
Junbesi. : 
In the meantime, Sir Edmund has already 
helped to Install a plastic pipeline to provide 
Khumjung village with water; and he intends 
to bulld a new airstrip (at 9,500 feet) to facl- 
litate the administration of the schools as 
well as the delivery of supplies. In the 
absence of roads and rallways supplies depend 
on human porterage which may take weeks 
or months along the rugged upland tralls. 
But the prime necessity, he feels, 1s medical 
and agricultural ald. One of the scourges Is 
smallpox, and Sir Edmund this year plans to 
set up a temporary medical clinic with a view 
to something more permanent in the future. 
He is also anxious to find some means of 
ensuring food supplies for the villages (the 
potato crop, on which the Sherpa mainly 
subsist, was gravely damaged this year by 
frost). 
One of the main problems is the training of 
teachers for work in the Sherpa schools. Sir 
Edmund has so far managed to recruit five 
teachers from Darjeeling and has also 
arranged to have some of the most gifted of 
the pupils train for teaching at Nepali-type 
schools in Darjeeling or Kalimpong. The task 
of providing teacher training In Nepal has 
been carefully studied by Unesco in a report 
on “Primary Teacher Training In Asia,“ pre- 
pared by Dr. E.A. Pires for the Unesco Regio- 
nal Office for Education in Asia (Bangkok). 
Dr. Pires noted that only 1,500 out of 4,600 
teachers in Nepal had received training. 
Teacher training is now being provided by 
  
  
HIMALAYAN SCHOOLHOUSE. Above, Sir Edmund Hillary at work on a swing at the Pangboche school, 
one of those opened for the Sherpa people by his "Himalayan Schoolhouse Expedition”. Above right, in another 
of the schools, at Khumjung, children and parents watch a display of Tibetan acrobatic dancing. Below left, 
young Sherpas in the Khumjung school. Below right, hardy Sherpa mountaineers from the Sola Khombu region. 
a" ; AW 
 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 62299: The Highest school in the world: Sir Edmund Hillary's latest conquest in the Himalayas

© The Mount Everest 
Foundation 
  
training units (four more scheduled to be 
added) travelllng from one selected locality 
to another. 
Another study, by a joint mission sent to 
Nepal by Unesco and the United Nations 
Economic Commission for Asla and the Far 
East (ECAFE) to assist the Government to 
prepare an overall plan of educational de- 
velopment integrated with national economic 
development plans found that the people of 
Nepal were among the most under-privileged 
fn the world In respect of social services. 
They live on a marginal subsistence basis, 
with an annual average Income of about 
370 rupees (less than $50) and are 94% 
illiterate. And one of the decisive reasons for 
Nepal’s economic underdevelopment, the re- 
port concluded, is its under-educated people, 
70% of whom live in tiny villages averaging 
225 inhabitants. 
Even after an intensive effort of educa- 
tional development between 1951 and 1961, 
only 158% of all children of primary school 
age were attending school (the proportion for 
the Sherpa region being infinitely smaller). 
Photos Himalayan Schoolhouse Expedition 
The 1964 target Is 21.2%. For all these 
children teachers have to be found; and the 
report recommended a better distribution of 
trained teachers throughout the country. 
The problem Is to train Nepalese teachers 
who will be prepared to work in the least 
privileged parts of the country, including the 
land of the Sherpas, and to provide children 
with the sort of education that will not detach 
them from their surroundings and send 
them to the town to swell the ranks of the 
semi-educated unemployed. The UNESco/ 
ECAYE report refers to “over-education” and 
the danger of “desertion of the rural areas 
and saturation of the large centres by primary 
school graduates seeking jobs which do not 
exist or demanding secondary and higher 
education opportunities which the Nepalese 
economy is not at this time able to afford.” 
Sir Edmund is also strongly of the opinion 
that instead of “over-educating” the Sherpas 
and thus initiating a drift to the towns where 
they will be non-productive, it would be more 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 62299: The Highest school in the world: Sir Edmund Hillary's latest conquest in the Himalayas

16 
HIGHEST SCHOOL (Cont'd) 
A land 
of gaiety 
and courage 
appropriate to fit them to cope more effecti- 
vely with their harsh environment and maln- 
tain their links with their community—a view 
which is likewise upheld by another famous 
traveller to Nepal, Ella Malillart. 
In her “Land of the Sherpas” she wrote : 
“It is in their own homes that the Sherpas 
must be judged, and not as they exist on the 
outskirts of Darjeeling, uprooted, living as 
best as they can, often without work, badly 
housed and in ill-health, victims of the uni- 
versal viclous circle of over-population.. In 
their high valleys the Sherpas are at home 
in their own world.” 
As to the outstanding qualities of the Sher- 
pas, “lving in their own world” all are 
agreed. Sir Edmund, like everyone who has 
worked with them, has nothing but praise for 
thelr gaiety, adaptability and intelligence. 
W.H. Murray, who was deputy-leader of the 
1951 Everest reconnalssance in which Hillary 
took part, describes the Sherpa, in his “Story 
of Everest,” as a “free and independent man, 
full of resource in his own way of life and 
schooled from earliest youth in self-reliance.” 
While only a minority of Sherpas can read 
and write, he adds, thelr way of life “develops 
in most of them a keen intelligence. Above . 
all, they can laugh.. they are, Indeed, the 
happlest people I have ever met.” 
Such are the people for whom Sir Edmund 
Hillary has been so devotedly working. 
Within five years, the Nepalese Government 
is due to take over the schools founded by 
him. In the meantime, assisted by his sole 
staff, Lady Hillary (who in 1963 journeyed to 
Khombu valley to present the first school 
prizes ever awarded here), he is pursuing his 
“Expedition Schoolhouse” and the related 
schemes with the same singleheartedness that 
took him to the “roof of the world.” 
Recently passing through Bangkok in the 
course of his promotion efforts, Sir Edmund 
visited ECAFE and the UNEsco Regional 
Office, whose staff assembled to hear him give 
an account of what he described as “the most 
satisfactory project of our Himalayan adven- 
ture.” 
Unesco Is now studying the possibility of 
supporting thls educational venture through 
its Gift Coupon Scheme. Anyone wishing to 
give assistance to Sir Edmund's project may 
wish to contact the Unesco Gift Coupon 
Office, Place de Fontenoy, Paris. 
R. J. Seector is publications officer at the 
Unesco Regional Office for Education in Asia 
(Bangkok, Thailand). He has been on the 
staff of Unesco since 1957. 
an 
  
  
  
  

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 62299: The Highest school in the world: Sir Edmund Hillary's latest conquest in the Himalayas

iy Rime GEES, © SRS RE reli 
Seven centuries ago the Sherpa people crossed 
the plateau of Tibet and settled on the slopes 
of the Himalayas in what is now northeastern 
BO C=ToT-  BCEAL EAVT-Te GET ERT ERC TET 3 ETT SVTE IVES 
from the solid rock, threw bridges across 
rushing torrents, and built villages and mona- 
steries. Left, two monks sound their 15-foot 
trumpets at the monastery of Thami. In 
~ Buddhist monasteries and scattered over the 
countryside, innumerable prayer-wheels turn 
endlessly in the mountain wi le 
 
BUDDHIST BOOKS & PRAYER-WHEELS 
‘Buddhist monks in the Himalayan monasteries are skilled printers and make 
books with high quality paper produced by long-established Sherpa paper mills. 
Below, books are wrapped in silk and protected by wooden covers. Left, Sherpa 
children try vainly to turn a giant prayer mill containing hundreds of religious books. 
     
  
       
 
    
 
 
" : ’ 
. 3 = 
wyr— ‘ - — 
Ny 
Brrr sw - 
MN L ¥ aan oT Nes gir {2a ar PT we 3 A — hd - 2 « —  -— "0, 
aE 4 i Bg Te CA i -— a 
Be |i ab 4 5A SAIL a ANY 5 ws) WEEN vw nly in TEI yg +» - “ 
y ole’ a Ly » eT gd w—— “ wih i LA yy ’ v a - 
Fad - ARE Ss i pur ¥. Ya i = epg oil os vppr > Z » - 
#3 Lpva— —_—y ois hp es ® Sar wy Nw nn 7, Se a > - . he 3 
ii. yagi, et 1 a be AP of ng Re -— ~ 
Lr - fe -t a Wy - , a - AR ain Fo = A Sate 
bene reaps | pts 330 ~ — » wor ” 
A | hp 
Ly lg TE, ’ ne ’ v eer sur + bo - 
ARE hie SA RS : BN ™ 4 . p—— Ar pS — ew - gy 
pL Rcd ich al Rt & — 
pot gt nfs - Pl dl he phi MF ro “poy ' hp : 
tol le 
- — 
  
on PE = as 
A rE a TNE 
a : 
> A a 
17 
     - ) Fans - . - rr op su - 
AE ol pe A Sr INC | a rr 
RI EN oe , ed Lane al — — an Sa SRL] 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18 
The most celebrated 
of all Ethiopta’s legen- 
dary stories is that of 
the meeting between 
King Solomon and the 
Queen of Sheba, and 
the birth of their son 
Menelik, who founded 
the Ethiopian ruling 
dynasty some 3,000 
years ago. It is also 
the most popular of 
all folk art themes in 
Ethiopia where it has 
been portrayed in the 
same form (right) by 
many generations of 
painters. Below, an 
Ethiopian artist works 
on a series of paintings 
recounting the story of 
Solomon and Sheba. 
« Paul Almasy. Paris 
  
© 
EES vate Hl ne 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
     
  
  
  
     
  
  
  
 
R. Michaud. Paris 
eae, ht eed dS JERE eX OAR 2 “% - 
Ea mE Ee, 
\ 
d 
    
i aan aiid Ll iii, gr FN 


### 62301: Art of Ethiopia: a folk tradition centuries old

    
DITION 
by Otto A. Jager 
ART OF ETHIOPIA 
22 AFOLKTR 
2 CENTURIES OLD 
{70 . ry -—— rr A — 
y. 
i yA \ \ 1 2 - rT 
- IT U 
4 = 774 \ E> 
r 
~~ = + W | A ' \ 
\ - , o - «J, x ” A - \ 
» , \ | L 3 \¢ x J of &) A 
- | , \ / ¥ d 
) ’ | ~— 
y : A f - 
— | / | ’ "\ i ! t y — 
4 — bb | SN ASS \ Aq ~ 
» 144 - / be : } - “iM = Lr 
: 
hae 
// Wk i t wT Na 
] 
L 
J 4 2 «rer TI DN Ne 4g h Oh Nhe RLY NG. @&: Noir h ~n 77% on led: ~ ow 4+ Pe APFINA, So» a PLY ELL NLT MYA { 4 
. : — 
; > 2 J » ‘a Ca “) Uh 
LS 5 x A AMY 
— LN - ' - | = "J - 
|» ~g ) \ - v r ] , S 3 h | y- 
\ ’ y \ / 4 
>. 
. 
3 - a i: 
, | . etl | i" \ 
R — a 
: | | ) ’ 
! . . 
» 
4 WCVB YCIRT nL [RAIA L 33%: 18 nN Ky 33 FOL AE VNC: NADY In 3 mo. @a hr 2H: Y:MMIAT 4 PAG, co .axP & n 29 10 3: hN47:00 me y O®a ® 
'p A [o) Dees ~ "Cy A ifs | 5 \. 
® \ we 4 . ‘J, - yl w . —— "ra xf . 
A NS N\ ! / // 4 y 7 , = : A) 
a ah - i 
hy! t 2 Q NN E x 
L » “ > | > > - () J \ oY - 
f 
- - y 
{ /) © 1 h ) 
i | ™ / 
\ ; CAA \ / 
\ \ Zz 
| N )'/ I 4 dl %e 
\ | \ \ / J ~ 
} | \ | / / : — 
wR AAI. Y LT SPR la AD ADP: KA +4: hb Bs At aV.n L547. + DNH TPAD d7:CHD IY , A 41 A2Zt N40 wwFITeaanonce:. ve OO Am Vom a MH: TD 3 y OD. 
1 ", \ > by \ - - } . 
~ ~ \f > 
3 — 
= | - - - 
. 
| L ~~ * } > y T a . 7 
= 
1 \ 
x Fy CR \ | { - IN h 
2 350 / / 3 ) | // ji - 1! 
w : Q f a Ys ’ \ re ~~ ’ 
| | N A ? i) J // J TK } — RS ‘ r | 
i f NN : ‘ y 7 = : PD) v { 47 
) \ > ag? oF A \ i a [1 " } 
b val ? ' ~~ "i 
CWA ALS An TITRA (EAI EINY, | ERISREEY | PEREIEE) /, EY S@TiTn /  SE IEEE /. EEX a san / TINS | ERY Eas | EET i 
—a 1 dG Braver = - ~ o> - ni ——— : — ——— a re ay TTR NR + . Pe i 2 n » r r - A Pores AC El Aa = a - : ; wm , 
AREER A RR SE a LS ERE TY REA ASR EEE IC a Be = , 
  
T= history of Ethiopia goes back over 3,000 years to the 
time of Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. According to 
tradition the queen bore King Solomon a son, Menelik, who became Ethiopia's 
first ruler and founded the royal dynasty. Modern Ethiopia has developed in 
an unbroken historical line from the ancient (Ist century A.D.) Axumite King- 
dom which took its name from its capital city at Axum. 
Christianity has been Ethiopia's official religion since early in the 4th 
century A.D. when the reigning monarch at Axum was converted to this faith. 
Except during the five years of Italian occupation (1936-41) Ethiopia can look 
back on 3,000 years of independence. 
Ethiopian art, especially painting, has always been an art of the people. 
This same tradition is found in every branch of artistic expression from 
architecture, music and dancing to woodcarving, pottery, wickerwork and 
the products of silversmiths’ and goldsmiths’ skills Ethiopia has produced 
many specially talented artists, particularly architects and painters, whose 
masterpieces—now universally recognized as such—mark periods when 
Ethiopian emperors embarked on ambitious projects or when there was an 
upsurge of religious fervour. 
Ethiopia lies mid-way down the continent of Africa yet culturally 1t belongs 
to the world of the orient. How has this come about ? 
Lake Tana in northern Ethiopia 1s the source of the Blue Nile and men 
followed the banks of this river northwards to the Mediterranean and Alesen- 
dria: from Egypt others passed southwards to the highlands of Ethiopia. 
Close ties were thus formed with the Mediterranean Cushite culture of Egypt 
CONT'D ON PAGE 22 
19

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 62301: Art of Ethiopia: a folk tradition centuries old

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 62301: Art of Ethiopia: a folk tradition centuries old

ART OF ETHIOPIA (Cont'd) 
TWIN 
IMAGES 
OF 
DAILY 
LIFE 
DANCE OF THE PRIESTS. Liturgical dances are performed in Ethiopia on 
the occasion of great religious festivals such as the ” Timkat “ (Epiphany) when 
the populace is symbolically rebaptised and on Palm Sunday. Above, to 
the sound of drums and sistrums lines of priests perform dances accord- 
ing to a time-honoured ritual. Below, artist's impression of the scene. 
 
   
  "ne ‘ 
Photos © R. Michaud 
  
‘Boats made from papyrus (depic- : 
ted in Ethiopian painting above) | 
ELL EST ETS CR UTERO RUTR LIT SE. 
Egyptians are still used today on 
Lake Tana in Ethiopia (below). 
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 62301: Art of Ethiopia: a folk tradition centuries old

  
  
ON THE ROAD TO MARKET. All rural life in Ethiopia revolves around the weekly village market. When market 
day arrives farmers and their wives (above), some carrying umbrellas of plaited reeds, set off from home laden 
with produce. The group in the painting below includes a priest (second from left) wearing a white turban. 
  
  

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 62301: Art of Ethiopia: a folk tradition centuries old

ART OF ETHIOPIA (Cont'd) 
Other African territories south of the Sahara had no such natural lines of » 
Meetin lace communication. 
To the east the narrow confines of the Hed Sea were a bridge rather than 
a gulf between Ethiopia and “Arabia Felix” (“Fortunate Arabia” as the Yemen 
was named by early European geographers), in whose fertile territories there 
0 two was wealth and a high level of culture. The constant traffic between the 
shores of the Red Sea took the influence of Arab culture far into Ethiopia. 
Again, West and South Africa had no contacts of this kind. 
n Ethiopia's contacts with other more distant civilizations were made possible 
continents by a natural phenomenon of the weather, the monsoon, which blew from 
Africa to India from April to October and from India to Africa during the next 
six months. Using these winds ships sailed safely and swiftly from Africa to 
India and, with the turn of the monsoon, back to Africa again. We are told that 
2,000 years ago as many as 70 ships laden with spices and fabrics from India 
dropped anchor in a single day in the Ethiopian harbour of Adulis on the 
Red Sea. At that time Ethiopia exported ivory, leopard skins, monkeys, gold, 
slaves, myrrh and musk. 
Ethiopia's unique geographical position is also shown in the racial compo- 
sition of its people. A high proportion of Egyptian Cushites and Semite 
peoples from southern Arabia, a smaller percentage of indigenous African 
peoples and small groups of oriental origin all mingled in the ethnic cons- 
titution of Ethiopia several thousand years ago. 
Just as these different peoples merged in Ethiopia and became a homo- 
geneous new one, so Ethiopia took over cultural influences from outside its 
borders and recast them in new forms of expression. This was chiefly made 
possible by the country’s geological character, a “mountain fastness” which 
bred in its inhabitants a special appeciation of the hermit's life and an outlook 
divorced from earthly concerns. 
N Ethiopian art the after-life and the irrational figure pro- 
minently and allusions to the other world, as perceived by 
its people through myth and magic, determined the main lines of its deve- 
lopment. Painting is not realistic, but tends rather towards abstract forms. 
This art is always of a religious kind. In the pre-Christian era its main 
concerns were with life after death and the adoration of the moon, the earth 
and water. In Christian times its contemplation has been devoted to God's 
sphere, to heaven and hell and to angels, saints and devils. 
ER One of the earliest characteristic elements of Ethiopian art is the braid 
: A Voiconury Ethiopian Sve) motif found on a wide variety of objects from parchment paintings to silver 
Toes his Ee crosses. These silver crosses were made by the “lost wax” process, being 
art as a symbol of eternity. first modelled in wax and then encased in clay. When the clay was heated 
Ge TH LA EE SP ty the wax ran out, after which the mould was filled with molten metal. 
Wy B Ea °L 
The braid motif with its endless intertwining lines is probably a symbol of 
eternity. The same motif is also found in Coptic art generally, woven into 
fabrics, carved in wood and stone, worked in silver and gold and painted on 
parchment. The braid motif is also commonly found in early Irish miniature 
religious paintings to which, strangely enough, Ethiopian miniatures often bear 
a remarkable stylistic similarity. Among other characteristic motifs found in 
Ethiopian bas-reliefs and illuminated manuscripts are the ornamental repre- 
sentations of people and animals. 
The most important remains of Axumite culture dating from pre-Christian 
times are the funerary monuments. They were cut from a single block of 
stone and the tallest of them were over 100 feet high. The only one still 
standing in Axum is 88 feet high. These monuments probably symbolize the 
dwellings of the dead kings in the world beyond the grave. 
Compared with these Ethiopian monuments, Greek or Roman temples of 
about the same period have a far stronger “earthbound” quality, with heavy 
roofs resting on columns that seem to anchor them still more firmly to the 
ground. In contrast the remarkable Ethiopian works have practically no 
foundation and their forms suggest celestial dwelling-places that have been 
planted in the earth like an arrow fallen from the sky. 
Ethiopia's other unique religious monuments are its rock churches which 
probably date back to the 13th century. They have the appearance of carefully 
planned structures built of squared stones and beams, but have in fact been 
entirely hewn from the natural rock and so remain one with their foundations. 
Here again inspiration seems to have come from above, leaving its imprint 
on the surface of the ground, in contrast to European temples and cathedrals 
which rise upwards from man-made foundations. The Ethiopian building is 
like an engraving; it is as if God had impressed His seal upon the earth. 
Along with architecture, painting is a widespread and vigorous form of 
- Ethiopian artistic expression. Early murals, executed in the old Ethiopian 
style, are found at Deir Makaryus in the desert between Cairo and Alexandria. 
At Farras in Nubia there are 9th-century wall paintings which are to some 
extent related to the Ethiopian style.  

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 62301: Art of Ethiopia: a folk tradition centuries old

THE MINSTREL. In former times the "azmari™ or minstrel was 
attached to the Ethiopian court or the houses of noblemen (above). 
Today he is a wanderer (below) and travels from village to village 
accompanying his songs on a "masenko”, a kind of one-string fiddle. 
From the 13th-century onwards the number of paintings from the Ethiopian 
monastery schools in the region of Axum, Lake Tana and Lalibela and from 
the Gunda Gunde monastery increased. The fullest and most varied expres- 
sions are on the pages of manuscripts. Decorative designs adorn the chapter 
headings and pictures illustrate incidents from the life of Christ, the Virgin and 
the saints. Some of these masterpieces were reproduced in “Ethiopia: lllu- 
minated Manuscripts” one of the albums of colour reproductions in the 
Unesco World Art Series (See “The Unesco Courier”, December 1961). The 
style of the paintings is abstract and visionary in contrast to the lifelike 
representations of the same period in Europe. 
In early times there was probably no secular painting in Ethiopia. The 
earliest paintings of this type, which are actually examples of Ethiopian folk 
art, date from the 19th-century. Their subjects are legends, battles, judge- 
ment scenes and images of everyday life. By far the most common subject 
for these folk art paintings is the 3,000 year-old legend of the meeting 
between the Queen of Sheba and King Solomon. 
 
Otro JAGER is the author of several works on Ethiopian painting including 
“Aethiopische Miniaturen” (Ethiopian Miniatures) published by Mann, 
Berlin, 1957. He was a contributor (with Jules Leroy and Stephen Wright) 
to the album of colour reproduction, “Ethiopia, Illuminated Manuscripts”, 
in the Unesco World Art Series. A pediatrician, Dr. Jager has worked as 
a specialist for the World Health Organization. 
we 
Photos «i B. Michaud 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 62304: A Safari armed with microscopes

24 
       
   
  
    
Vi gg . 
I N 2 ~~ - — 
\ i ARDS 
4 v re? q 
5 Li ‘ \ ed 
1 - we 3 
  
 
This fearsome looking monster from Chile is actually 
only half a millimetre in length. A member of the col- 
lembola family, it is one of the tiny animals which 
inhabit the soils of temperate and tropical countries.     
Drawing © Poivre, Ecological Laboratory, Brunoy, France

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 62304: A Safari armed with microscopes

  
A SAFARI ARMED 
WITH MICROSCOPES 
by Janos Balogh 
RAVAGED FOREST 
In ever more extensive 
areas of Africa forests 
are being torn up to 
make way for crops 
(left). But deforestation 
is not without its dan- 
gers Left without pro- 
tection topsoil is quick- 
ly washed away. Today 
scientists are studying 
problems of the “sick 
soils” in tropical Africa. 
© H. Zicsi 
TINY GAME HUNT 
Two members of the 
expedition which made 
a census of soil fauna 
in the Congo (Brazza- 
ville) collect specimens 
for examination from 
their catch of well over 
half a million. These tiny 
animals help to main- 
tain the life of the soil 
and thereby increase 
the size of harvests. 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Through their application to agriculture, recent discoveries in soil biology 
have an important role to play in economic de velopment. Unesco is es- 
pecially concerned with research into the soil problems of tropical 
and sub tropical regions wheré each year soils become increasingly 
impoverished. As part an its extensive programme in soil science, Unesco 
sponsored the sending of a scientific mission to Africa from October 1963 
to January 1964, to survey, collect and compare the animals found in 
the soil of the Congo (Brazzaville). Similar missions are to be sent to 
Australia, New Guinea and Central and South America. Below we publish 
an article by the leader of the Unesco mission to the Congo (Brazzaville). 
I: school geography books of the 
19th century the maps showed many 
blank spaces marked “unexplored.” Since 
then men have penetrated the densest jun- 
gles and crossed the most remote deserts, and 
the last empty spaces have disappeared from 
the world’s maps. But this is true only in 
a strictly geographical sense. A modern blo- 
logist still sees plenty of vast empty spaces 
awaiting exploration by “Stanleys” and 
“Brazzas” from among the world's sclentists. 
Today's expeditions of explorer-scientlsts, 
however, are nothing Illke the parties that 
set out a century ago. The modern explorer is 
invited by the government of an independent 
country. Hls equipment too has changed. The 
only arms he carries are a mlcroscope and 
devices for capturing and conserving insects. 
The discovery of a new species of mammal 
or bird is now so rare that it earns news- 
paper headlines. It thus seems all the more 
astounding to hear that during the past five 
years sclentists have discovered more than 
400 hitherto unknown species of animals in 
different parts of equatorial Africa. All these 
creatures are minute: most measure less than 
half a millimetre and even the largest never 
exceed one millimetre, 
Why should scientists take the trouble to 
search for such tiny lving creatures? Why 
is so much money spent to send out missions 
to jungles and savannahs on operations which 
seem to have no immediate value? Certalnly no 
one would clalm that this kind of research 
brings any immediate improvement in the 
food production of the regions concerned. 
In this case, as in many others, science has 
to look to the future. The research being done 
here might be compared with a doctor's 
examination of a patient. For in many ways 
the soll of tropical regions Is like a sick orga- 
nism. In their original, healthy state these 
soils were covered with virgin forest. Down 
the years great stretches have been cleared 
with no regard to the consequences. Heavy 
tropical rains falllng on these deforested 
areas wash away so much of the humus, or 
vegetable mould, that the forests never grow 
again. 
Because unsuitable methods are often used 
to cultivate the land in most areas of trop- 
ical Africa harvests are pitifully small and 
each year the soll becomes more Impo- 
verished. 
In the past twenty years sclentific research 
has shown that close links exist between the 
minute fauna In the soil and the life of the 
soll itself and consequently with the quality 
and size of the crops It produces. 
It hardly seems believable that tiny crea- 
tures, not even one millimetre in length, should 
determine whether harvests are lean or plenti- 
ful. Yet the results of sclentific research are 
Irrefutable. In Central Europe it has been 
shown that on every two and a half acres of 
arable land the minute creatures living In the 
soil produce substances equivalent to 25 tons 
of organic fertilizer. This far cxceeds the 
amount of organic and synthetic fertilizers 
which are used to feed the soll under the most 
advanced methods of modern farming. The 
tiny soll fauna thus improve the soll at no 
cost to man and on a scale which he Is at 
present unable to match. It is not surprising 
that science Is now taking a keen interest in 
the work of soll fauna, and that our expedi- 
tlon should have been sent to the Republic 
of the Congo (Brazzaville). 
UR mission can be summed up as a 
broad census and stock-taking of all 
the animals lving in the soil, from earthworms 
to microscopic fauna. It took three of us 
working as a team three months to make this 
census In five different regions of the country 
covered by troplcal jungles and forests, 
savannahs and crops. 
Collecting specimens of soil fauna is cer- 
tainly one of the most unusual forms of 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 62304: A Safari armed with microscopes

SAFARI WITH MICROSCOPES (Cont'd) 
Mysterious creatures 
that fertilize the soil 
26 
hunting. The ordinary hunter carries a rifle 
and the entomologist a net, but the soll zoo- 
logist goes back to the most ancient hunting 
techniques and sets traps for his quarry. 
The simplest technique we used was to sink 
plastic containers the size of flower-pots into 
the soil of the virgin forest. Each one was 
protected from the rain by a metal cover and 
contained a liquid chemical product to pre- 
- serve the tiny creatures which 
it trapped. “Another of our 
methods was to place some forest 
soll on a sleve over a funnel   
  
leading to a flask containing pres- 
erving fluld. As the earth grows 
drier the little animals burrow 
deeper and deeper until they fall 
into the funnel and are carried 
to the flask. 
We set hundreds of these 
traps and collected an enormous 
quantity of soil animals—well 
over 500,000 according to a pro-   
    
A collembole from 
New Zealand, one of 
the innumerable spe- 
cies of a family of 
soil animals whose 
members are often 
invisible to the naked 
eye. Between 10,000 
and 200,000 of these 
creatures may live in 
a square yard of soil. 
visional count. After we have 
analyzed and catalogued this 
huge collection we shall be able 
to publish a report on the fauna living in the 
soll of Africa's virgin forests and also 
determine the role it plays in the formation 
and loosening of productive soil. 
One of our most interesting finds was that 
forest humus is formed not only at soll level 
but also among tree foliage. We thus confirmed 
the finding of Professor Delamare-Deboutte- 
ville of the Ecological Laboratory at Brunoy, 
near Paris, who has already observed that 
plants can take root in the dust which some- 
times accumulates in the axils of tree branches. 
We ourselves noted that where virgin forest 
vegetation 1s really dense, dead leaves can 
accumulate among the branches and the 
lianas which cling to the trees. Rain reduces 
the leaves to a form in which soil animals 
can make their habitat and the 
excrement of these creatures 
falls on the forest floor like an 
  
  
unceasing rain of powdered 
manure, Even worms are some- 
times found in this “suspended 
detritus,” of which we collected 
many samples from the Congo 
forests. Studies are now being 
made of the fauna found in this 
humus from high in the air.    
An Andean collem- 
bole. These soil ani- 
mals have very poor 
vision and thus rely 
on their organs of 
smell inthe antennae. 
Drawings Q Poivre, 
Ecological Laboratory, 
Brunoy, France 
In the Sibiti district in the 
heart of the virgin forest country 
we came across groups of pygmy 
peoples. Had we been ethnologists we should 
certainly have made good use of these en- 
counters, but in fact we were more concerned 
in studying one of the most interesting 
animal species in the forest, the giant nephila 
spider. 
The nephila is one of the most fascinating 
creatures of the region. The females are 
often between three and five centimetres in 
size whereas the male barely exceeds eight 
to twelve milimetres. The disproportion 
between the weights of the two sexes is even 
greater. It is as if a woman weighing 50 
kilogrammes (110 lbs) were to have a husband 
weighing two and a half kilogrammaes. 
An explanation for the existence of these 
dwarf male spiders has been offered by the 
evolutionist theory. The female Is so vora- 
cious that it often devours the male. The 
smaller males have escaped this fate more 
often than those whose size offers a more 
substantial meal. Thus by a process of natu- 
ral selection operating over millions of years 
a race of tiny males has been evolved. 
We have seen six or more of these dwarf 
males gathered around the female's web and 
walting an opportunity to approach her. 
Finally one of them will set off for an encoun- 
ter with the female. The instant the female 
attacks him, the little male releases a thread 
and quick as a flash descends to safety. 
The giant nephlla’s web is spun from 
threads that are golden-yellow in colour and 
often measure a yard in diameter. Mada- 
gascar's ancient kings were -traditlonally 
buried in a shroud made from the glant 
nephila’s web and such shrouds are sometimes 
still found in the old royal burial places on 
that island. About half a century ago an 
effort was made to acclimatize the giant 
nephila in Europe so as to use its thread for 
producing textiles. But with the development 
of synthetic fibres the experiment was 
abandoned. 
The tiny males are not 
the only visitors to these 
great golden webs. Spider 
parasites make their 
homes in them and 
scavage the remains of 
the female's banquets, 
collecting tiny mosquitoes 
which she disdains on 
account of their size. 
The two or three families 
of guest spiders living 
on each web pay for 
  
  
     
their meals by keeping 
the web clean. 
Altogether we spent 
110 days in the Congo 
(Brazzaville), a fascinat- 
ing country of great . 
beauty, especially the spectacle of the Stan- 
ley Pool betwen Leopoldville and Brazzaville 
where the Congo resembles an immense lake. 
Here masses of a lovely aquatic plant named 
the water hyacinth from its handsome large 
blue flowers, form great floating islands on the 
surface of the waters. A native of America, it 
was only recently imported into the Congo but 
it has so quickly infested large stretches of 
the river that it is now a threat to navigation. 
A collembole 
found in the 
Congo region. 
During our mission we travelled over 
3,000 miles through the Conge with no wea- 
pons more offensive than our entomologists’ 
tweezers. Less than 90 years ago the explo- 
rer Stanley had terally to fight his way 
through the same regions. Africa has indeed 
changed in the past century and is destined 
to change even more in the near future. 
Our expedition was only the first of many 
scientific missions which in the years ahead 
will study the soil fauna of equatorial 
regions. 
  
PROF. JANOS BALOGH, a soil biologist, is head of 
the zoological research group of the Hun- 
garian Academy of Sciences and is president 
of the Hungarian Zoological Association. Prof 
Balogh, who has discovered over 300 hitherto 
unknown species of animals living in tropical 
soils, is the author of many scientific works.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 62304: A Safari armed with microscopes

© A. Zicsi 
ei 
» 
® He 
 
Ais 
: 
‘J A] Lk 
SCOURGE OF RIVERS 
Early this century a tropical South American floating aquatic plant, named the 
water hyacinth from its handsome large blue flowers, made its appearance in 
Africa. It began to spread with terrifying speed, choking great rivers, blocking 
irrigation canals and smothering dams. Efforts to halt its progress by spraying 
weedkiller from helicopters have been unsuccessful and scientists are still seek- 
ing ways to check this invader plant. One possible solution might be to induce 
the manatee or sea cow which feeds off the water hyacinth to take up residence 
in African rivers (See The Unesco Courier, Feb. 1963, p. 23). Below, a carpet of 
water hyacinth plants that now infest large stretches of the Congo River. 
© Paul Almasy 
 

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 62297: Investment in people

28 
: (oles) fe Mifeln) 
page 11 INVESTMENT IN PEOPLE 
 
These studies dealt mainly with education as a factor 
in production, but attention was drawn to Its role as an 
item of consumption. By “consumption” is meant that 
people want education for thelr chlldren quite apart 
from Its economic value, and are prepared to pay a 
lot for it, because It contributes to the enjoyment of 
lite and Is a soclal and individual asset. It was also 
noted that it is an item of consumption which Is 
an economic and soclal end in itself—that is to say, it 
is one of the components of living levels. 
A few years ago the United Nations set up an Expert 
Group on the definition and measurement of living 
levels. This group selected twelve indicators which cov- 
ered the whole range of human needs, including both 
those measurable In monetary terms and those which are 
not. Among the twelve indicators selected, the third 
was education, and In the assessment made of the prio- 
rity of the different indicators, it was preceded only by 
expectation of lite and Infant mortality rates (clearly 
it is better to be uneducated and allve than educated 
and dead), and natlonal average food supplies (man can- 
not live by bread alone, but needs bread to live). 
Further, education seems to be, as John Stuart Mill 
maintained, the only item of consumption not subject 
to the law of diminishing utility. One may, of course 
say of a particular curriculum that as needs change its 
utility diminishes, but it would be most unlikely for 
anyone to clalm he had all the education he could - 
usefully possess. Indeed, the evidence is, the more edu- 
cation people have, the more they want. A report by 
the British adult educational societies showed that the 
three quarters of the population who finished school at 
14, and the four per cent who finished at 17 to 20, were 
each represented by a quarter of society-members. 
This does not, of course, mean that there is no limit 
to the amount of education people should be given at 
public expense. Indeed, the economics of education 
Is concerned precisely with trying to determine what 
proportion of national resources should be devoted to 
education. Ideally, this would be done by measuring 
the cost and benefits of education, and investment would 
be made in education wherever the benefits exceed those 
of alternative forms of investment. 
However, while it 1s possible to measure the costs of 
education, it is extremely difficult, to measure its future 
benefits. 
The mysterious residual factor already mentioned 
consists not only of education, but also of research and 
the whole range of man’s skills which make physical 
resources productive. Clearly, research is an Indirect 
return on education of very high value. 
Estimates show that as of 1955 the 
return on the average dollar invest- 
ed in hybrid corn research in the U.S. 
was at least 7009, per annum. 
Results of this kind—and it is unfortunate that all 
research is not as successful as this—spring from high 
levels of education. But the highest inventive skills of 
this kind, whether scientific or organizational, have to 
be supported by ranks of middle technicians, and by 
entrepreneurs or educated farmers who will exploit 
market possibilities, and complementary technical and 
vocational education is required. Further, they need 
to operate in a society with an informed electorate, and 
to operate in a society where there is a sense of indivi- 
dual opportunity based on a broad educational system. 
In an American context we may note the findings by 
Dr. G. Lewis and Professor C.A. Anderson from their study 
of the social origin and social mobility of businessmen in 
the city of Lexington. The enquiry covered all the 
businessmen in a city of 100,000 persons and showed 
that “the most important single factor favouring busi- 
ness success was education.” If we look at economically 
underdeveloped areas, we find the same kind of data. 
A survey in a backward rural area 
in Jamaica showed that “for persons 
in low status occupations, education 
is the main channel of social mobi- 
lity. ” 
The whole question of the relation of education to 
social mobility and soclal structure, is, however, a diffi- 
cult one. Education can also be a conserving force. And 
even in societies with the best legislation and intentions, 
people receive better education than others because of 
original privileges of wealth and parenthood. Studies 
in developed as well as developing countries illustrate the 
danger of generalization as to the effect of education 
on social structure without careful study of the particular 
society and type of educational system involved. 
Interesting studies have been made on this aspect by 
Professor D. McClelland of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology of the relation between economic progress 
and what he calls “the need for achievement” or “n 
achievement,” a desire to do well, not so much for the 
sake of social prestige, but for the sake of an inner feeling 
of personal accomplishment. McClelland has applied 
laboratory findings to workers in factories and has also 
conducted a study of history relating degrees of “n achie- 
vement” and economic growth on the one hand, and 
with education and “n achievement” on the other. 
In modern times it is in the school that motivation for 
“n achievement” is developed at an early age by school 
examinations, the desire to emulate in competitions, 
games, etc. All these, of course, presuppose that the 
values transmitted by the society are progressive and 
entrepreneurial; unless they are, the school can be the 
custodian and transmitter of traditional forces opposed 
to change. One must always remember that education 
is what educators make of it. 
The difficulty with the “n achlevement” approach is 
that it seems to make too easy assumptions as to what kind 
of activities are worthwhile. Thus the young Buddhist 
performing his year's service in the priesthood shows 
high “n performance” in spiritual terms, but the begging 
bowl which he carries reflects his performance in eco- 
nomic terms. Indeed, the more “n” he is, the more 
aversion he will have to economic gain, while doing his 
priestly service. 
The question of what is of economic utility and what 
is not is a difficult one. Some years ago a firm making 
ball-point pens received an order from a developing 
country for a large number of tops of pens. The firm

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 62297: Investment in people

  
© Paul Almasy 
 
The world-wide expansion of education will call for millions of new teachers. Despite advances in teaching aids the 
teacher remains the life core of education. Here, future science teachers are given practical laboratory experience. 
queried the request. Had a mistake been made? Not 
at all. The pens were wanted by people who could not 
write, but put the tops of pens in their breast pockets 
for prestige purposes. Sheer waste? A small and harm- 
less imposture like high heels worn by short band 
leaders? A good. advertisement for literacy. 
Education tends to reduce excessive population growth. 
An interesting speculation which I have heard made is to 
suppose that developing countries experiencing the “popu- 
lation explosion”—the average rate of population growth 
of the poorer countries of the world is 70 per cent higher 
than that of the wealthier countries—instituted as their 
first priority compulsory education up to the age of 
16 limited to females. 
Whatever may be the political difficulties of such a 
course, the effect would probably be to cause a direct and 
immediate reduction of population expansion since many 
births take place in that age group. This measure 
would also create a better educated female population 
which would be a source of recruitment for teachers 
in primary educational systems, as well as increasing 
the efficacity of teaching in the home—a form of edu- 
cation not dealt with here, but of great importance. 
The cost of education varies from country to country, 
according to the demographic situation. Most developing 
countries have a larger proportion of children to total 
population than developed countries, and the relative 
cost of teachers’ salaries in relation to average income 
is higher. The usual pattern seems to be that about two- 
thirds of the annual cost of education consists of the 
salaries of teachers. Education is therefore proportion- 
ately more expensive if the same standards are aimed at. 
It is an unfortunate fact that normally the poorer 
a country is, the more relatively dear is its unit cost 
of education. It is not easy to make comparisons of 
expenditure on education between countries, but it seems 
that the percentage of national income spent on edu- 
cation varies between 2 per cent and 6 per cent, the 
highest levels being attained in Japan and the USSR. 
There is another approach to measurement of the cco- 
nomic returns of education, which has attracted much 
interest. A rough description of it Is that it takes 
the average earnings over a lifetime of pcople in occu- 
pations for which specific degrees of education are 
required, and compares them with the earnings of people 
without the same degree of education. 
Professor G. Becker, in his studies for the United States 
National Bureau of Economie Research, using a method 
simllar to this, estimated, that as of 1950 the U.S. male 
population was earning 14.8 per cent annually on what 
they had privately invested In obtaining thelr high- 
school, college and university educations. If public costs 
were added, the rate was about 11 per cent. 
At the other end of the scale of economic develop- 
ment, Professor Oscar Lewis, in a survey of a slum area 
on the outskirts of Mexico Clty (1) employing simpler me- 
thods, showed a close relationship between the Income 
and the years of schooling of the inhabitants—-even a 
bare modicum of extra primary education enabling mem- 
bers of a poor community to outstrip the income of their 
neighbours. This research gave results similar to that in 
the Soviet Union which were described earlier, under- 
taken by Professor Strumlilin. 
(1) See “The Children of Sanchez,” Random Ilouse, New 
York, 1961 (37.50); Secker and Warburg, London, 1962 (36/-); 
Penguin Modern Classics (paperback ed.), London, 1964 (8/6). 29 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 62297: Investment in people

INVESTMENT IN PEOPLE (Cont'd) 
A call for millions of new teachers 
The foregoing material, while perhaps Impressive as 
Indicating the overall economic value of education, is not 
usable as a practical gulde to specific educational plans 
and programmes. It Indicates only a pre-disposition to 
invest In education unless it is clear that there Is some 
other investment which is of more vital importance. 
Governments, therefore, are still faced with an extreme- 
ly difficult problem In evaluating actual educational 
plans and programmes in relation to other alternative 
investments. On this Issue many of us lean to the more 
specific method of finding out what are the educational 
requirements of a given economic and social plan or 
perspective of a given country. 
In the same way the cultural demand from education 
can be derlved from the standards which the society 
wishes to set. 
Sometimes society’s standards are 
higher than the economy can bear, 
and in these cases there has to be a 
slowing up of educational expansion 
until such time as the economist has 
created the necessary resources. 
But here agaln because of the long-term effects, direct 
and indirect, it 1s unwise of finance ministers and planners 
to be too rigid and to try to pin back education to narrow 
economic limits, because of the impact of education on 
the vitality of the whole economic and social system. 
There is much evidence that careful and long-range 
planning of education builds up in society the ‘residual 
factor” which acts as a stimulus to and a multiplier of 
production, as well as meeting manpower needs. 
What are likely to be the educational priorities of the 
developing countries from an economic standpoint? 
Clearly they should take action in the field of vocational 
and technical education needed to fill existing gaps in 
skilled manpower. In such cases the return is huge. 
Then there is vocational and technical training for 
known expansions of industry, and In new States lacking 
administrative cadres the quick training of administrators 
and managers for industry is also of the highest priority. 
But “crash” action of this kind rapidly peters out unless 
it is based on long-term extension of secondary, technical 
and higher education, and thls takes us at once to one 
of the most vital needs of the day—namely educational 
planning. Very close attention has to be pald to future 
demand, which has to be met by planning now. 
At the same time, the problem of the unemployed “white 
collar” worker is a serious one in many developing 
countries, as is the surplus of lawyers and the shortage 
of engineers, and the drift of young labour from the 
Jand. It is here that close co-ordination is required 
between economic planning and educational planning. 
The newly developing countries are advancing on new 
ground. Better educational systems and improved curri- 
cula are required. Aiming at quick growth with small 
resources, they cannot afford the waste involved of 
leaving this to chance. Nor Is it an answer to say that 
in the older countries “laissez-faire” produced the 
necessary results. Serious errors and dislocations in 
educational development occurred in these countries at 
30 various times. One of these has been over-specialization 
on the part of students taking technical training. 
Increased emphasis is now being placed on accom- 
panying technical training with a good general educa- 
tlon—in the developed countries because of the Increased 
rate of technical change, and in the developing countries 
because of the need for flexibility in the use of thelr 
limited resources. 
While technical and secondary education have the 
clearest economic returns, no country can obtain really 
high or even medium-high leaving levels widely spread 
over the population without a compulsory school system 
of at least seven years, covering the primary grades and 
extending into secondary a substantial proportion of 
better pupils. Moreover, widespread literacy among the 
adult as well as the pupil population is necessary not 
only to increase the productivity of labour, but for social 
and political purposes. 
Importance must also be given to adult education in 
subsistence areas to give people incentive to rise above 
the poverty line and in rural areas to move from subsis- 
tence production into the market economy. This will 
help to break the vicious circle of governments being 
unable to raise taxes for education because of lack of 
revenue, which in turn is due to.a large proportion of 
the population remaining outside the monetary economy. 
Countries divided into literates and illiterates are dual 
societies, where part of the population is not in the 
position of being fully “legitimised” members of the 
nation-—able to read, write and take effective part in 
political and legal processes. What is true of individual 
nations also applies to the world as a whole. 
The world is today a dual society, 
with hundreds of millions of people 
who have had no effective education, 
who cannot read and write. 
Even for thelr children compulsory education of seven 
years Is still a future hope rather than a present fact. 
Literacy programmes do not fall within the normal 
planning of the formal educational system and call 
for a special approach. There is, of course, a close Inter- 
lock between the extent and effectiveness of primary 
education in a country and its rate of literacy. Today, 
the number of illiterates in the world is increasing, despite 
adult literacy campaigns, because compulsory primary 
education does not yet cover the large population of 
children swelling every year the number of adult 
illiterates. This is one of the results of “the population 
expansion”. 
The approach of the economist to literacy is that 
adult literacy campaigns should be related to the work 
environment, and then spread out over the whole 
country. Thus the first and most productive step is to 
make literate all the country’s factory workers. The 
productivity of literates in factories as compared with 
illiterates is so well established that the cost of the 
literacy programme in factories is paid off in a short 
time. 
Further, the financial burden can be and should be 
transferred from the State to the industries concerned 
who will recover it later in the additional efficiency of 
the labour force. Then the central government should 
extend literacy campaigns to: the public services, the

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 62297: Investment in people

post offices, railways, etc. dealing not only with the 
literacy of their employees, but utilizing the same facilities 
to the families and relatives. This could be done by 
passing the cost on to the consumer of public services, 
with the State only paying the central charges for teacher 
training, the production of materials, etc. Then rural 
areas where there are large-scale projects of development 
or modernization schemes or other forms of inter- 
vention in development through river valley projects, 
etc. should be treated in the same way as factories. 
The cost of the salaries of the teachers and of the 
buildings should, as far as possible, be borne in the costs 
of the projects themselves. 
As resources become available, the central government 
should extend over the whole country facilities for 
creating literacy, training first the most productive age 
groups and the most fast developing regions in order 
to obtain the most rapid returns on the investment in 
literacy. The development thus brought about and the 
increase of the central budget should then be used as 
early as possible to put the whole country on a uniform 
basis of literacy as part of citizenship rights. 
In addition to creating a well-planned educational 
system and eflective measures to eradicate illiteracy, 
it is necessary for the developing countries to give 
increased attention to science and technology. Here 
again, the approach of the economists is a selective one. 
Not all research leads to the huge returns we noted 
earlier in the case of hybrid seed corn. Some research 
is extremely costly and is on economic grounds best 
carried as part of the costs of production of large scale 
industry. 
A number of developed countries rely heavily on the 
importation of research results rather than creating their 
own research facilities. Japan is historically such a 
case, although today it is planned to double the amount 
of per capita income which is spent on research between 
1960-1970 from just over one to two per cent. Germany, 
currently, is spending very much less on research, even 
allowing for its special military position, than either the 
U.S. or the UX, and its importation of foreign patents 
is very high. 
Many developing countries spend less than a 1% of 
their gross national product on research and develop- 
ment activities whereas in the case or the U.S.A., US.S.R. 
and U.K. the amount rises from 2.5 to 3 %, a good deal 
of this, or course, being for military purposes, but at the 
same time having substantial application to industrial 
production as a whole. The importance of scientists in 
economic growth, like the role of education, was greatly 
neglected in the past. 
In 1940 there were only 200 doctors 
of philosophy in physics in the whole 
of the U.S.A., and many less in the 
European countries. In 1961 the 
annual rate of production of Ph.D.s 
in physics was 561. 
Today the employment of scientists of all types is 
growing at a rate four times that of over-all employment. 
The great expansion of science and development of 
technology which is taking place calls for increased 
effort in the social sciences. Man is not showing the 
same mastery over himself and the problems of his 
social and political environment as he is obtaining over 
the physical world. The great advance which has taken 
place in the last half century in man’s power to create 
material wealth, and in technology, could, with im-: 
provements of social and political organization, solve in 
a few decades the world's problems. 
The danger is that technology will steer the ship instead 
of providing the motors, and that opportunities for 
leisure, culture and the full flowering of the human 
genius will become the secondary instead of the pri- 
mary objective, Once again we come back to the concept 
of convergence. A great effort is called for in the 
social and the human sciences, and In our schools in 
improving both the philosophy and the practice of educ- 
ation. In education the factor of quality as well as 
quantity must never be overlooked. 
The newness of the economic approach to education 
calls for speclal understanding and collaboration between 
educators and economists. Education is one of the most 
sensitive aspects of national policy, and economists, when 
moving into the field of educational planning in company 
with educators, have to be closely informed as to the 
social and political as well as the economic aspects of 
education. 
Some countries regard education policy as too important 
to be left to local authorities. Others regard it as too 
important to be left to the central authorities. 
It would be a strange world in which 
we were all educated on a single 
system under methods chosen only 
for their economic efficiency. 
At the same time the task of educational expansion is 
so great that it can only be done by eliminating waste in 
existing educational systems as well as expanding them. 
All this calls for the close international co-operation 
which it is UnEsco’s role to sponsor. 
Unesco’s has educational planning to the forefront 
of its draft programmes and budget for 1965-8, which 
includes over $5 million out of its educational budget. 
International ald for education, including emergency 
programmes in Africa and the Middle East, has been In 
recent years probably of the order of $130 million 
annually, while direct country to country ald has 
amounted to about $500 million. The International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development and the International 
Development Association have, in their new programme for 
ald for education, already granted credits of about $20 
million to countries. 
But international aid will never be a solution in itself. 
It can only be a stimulus and a supplement (though a 
vital one) to national effort. The educational budgets of 
the developing countries amount annually to about $14 
thousand million, and in most countries education is the 
greatest single employer of trained manpower. 
The great expansion of education which must take 
place will call for millions of new teachers. For the years 
1950 to 1970 the developing countries of the world will 
probably need more than 700,000 additional secondary 
and two-and-a-half milllon additional primary teachers. 
Teachers, despite mechanical advances, remain the life 
core of education. The teacher's profession is about 
to meet a tremendous and unprecedented challenge. 
H. M. PHILLIPS i$ economic adviser and director of the 
Economic Analysis Division of Unesco’s Department of 
Social Sciences. He is the author of many studies on 
economic and social research in education, on the human 
factor in economic development and on demographic and 
manpower problems.

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

32 
letters to the Editor 
ROSETTA STONE RESEARCH 
 
Sir, 
I have recently read the article 
“Cleopatra and Ptolemy gave Cham- 
pollion his missing clue” (The Art of 
Writing, March 1964 issue) and would 
like to mention that although Cham- 
pollion was the first person who 
was actually able to read longer 
passages and connected texts, credit 
should also be given to the Swedish 
diplomat, Jean David Akerblad, who 
in 1802, in a letter to the French 
philosopher Silvestre de Sacy, dis- 
cussed the demotic inscription on the 
Rosetta Stones, and in the same year 
published an alphabet of the cha- 
racters. If Champollion’s alphabet, 
published in his Lettre @ M. Dacier, 
Paris, 1822, be compated with that 
of Akerblad, sixteen of the charac- 
ters will be found to be identical. 
The English scientist, Thomas Young 
should also be given more credit as 
he identified correctly the names of 
six gods, and those of Ptolemy and 
Berenice; he also made out the true 
meanings of several ideographs, the 
true values of six letters of the alpha- 
bet, and the correct consonantal 
valucs of three more. As priority of 
publication must be accepted as indi- 
cating priority of discovery, the work 
of these two men and their contribu- 
tion towards the decipherment should 
be more widely accepted. 
F. S. Hindmarsh 
Tawa, New Zealand 
THE ART OF WRITING 
Sir, 
1 have just finished reading your 
issue on The Art of Writing. I am 
completely captivated by the subject 
as you present it and offer my congra- 
tulations on this issue. Every aspect 
is clearly explained and the issue is 
completely free from pedantry and 
abstruseness. Thank you for helping 
me to discover, at the age of 17, a 
new and passionate interest: the pic- 
tograms, ideograms and all the other 
interesting and intriguing kinds of 
writing. 
Frangoise Martin 
Paris, France 
INCA MEMORY AIDS 
Sir, 
Congratulations on the remarkable 
qualities of your magazine and in 
particular your issue on The Art of 
Writing to which I should like to 
add this small item. In the deci- 
pherment of systems of writing used 
by different peoples one of the greatest 
enigmas concerns the writing of the 
Incas. 
Did the Incas ever have a system 
of writing? Some people have sought 
an answer by investigating the mystery 
of the Inca quipus (knotted cords) 
which are perhaps the strangest and 
most original form of written language. 
The American historian, Hiram 
Bingham, has affirmed that a relatively 
simple form of writing was once used 
by the scribes of the first Inca dynas- 
ties. When knowledge of this writing 
spread among the people, the scribes 
maintained that government would 
become impossible if the people gained 
access to state secrets through this 
knowledge. They pursuaded the Inca 
kings to abolish this simple script and 
to replace it by the system of quipus 
which had previously been used solely 
for numerical calculations. This was 
also the view of the Spanish chroni- 
cler, Montesinos. In “The Socialist 
Empire of the Incas”, published in 
Paris in 1928, Professor Louis Bau- 
din describes the quipus as a form 
.of “writing” in the broadest sense of 
the term. 
Francois Schmitt 
Strasbourg, France 
Ed note: In the work mentioned 
by our reader, Professor Baudin writes: 
“The quipu is neither a method of cal- 
culation nor a system of writing; it is 
a numerical memory aid.” And he 
questions the statement by Montesi- 
nos”. In a study published in Paris 
in 1948, James Février, of the Ecole 
Pratique des Hautes Etudes, declares 
that the quipus were simply a kind 
of memory aid. Ten years later in 
a work published in Stuttgart, 
L.C. Gelb declares “all the interpre- 
tations of the ancient chroniclers on 
the different uses made of the quipus 
are completely fanciful.” 
CHINESE IDEOGRAMS 
Sir, 
Your issue on the Art of 
Writing is a highly interesting one. 
Both text and illustrations are valuable, 
May I comment briefly on the part 
involving Chinese writing. On page 
30 the last sentence reads: “The cha- 
racter for ‘words’ is simply ‘mouth’ 
with several additional strokes.” This 
is not correct. Professor Bernhard 
Kalgren of Sweden describes = as 
originally a drawing of a kind of flute. 
On page 32, last paragraph, one 
reads: “But even earlier, in 1403, the 
Koreans had already invented print- 
ing with movable type.” This too is 
wide of the mark. The Chinese deve- 
loped movable type in the eleventh 
century, and the art passed from them 
to the Uighur Turks on the west and 
the Koreans on the north-east. 
L. Carrington Goodrich 
Dean Lung Professor Emeritus 
of Chinese 
Columbia University, U.S.A. 
MAN THROUGH HIS ART 
Sir, 
We were very pleased to read about 
volume 2 of “Man Through His Art” 
in your June issue. This should give 
great impetus and interest to this new 
series, which we are happy to be dis- 
tributing in the United States. 
“tion at $7.95. 
We noticed in the box on page 24 
listing the distributors that our price 
for the school edition was omitted. 
Could you make a note in THE UNESCO 
CourIER that the New York Graphic 
Society distributes a school edition at 
$ 5.25 net, as well as the general edi- 
We would greatly 
appreciate it as we know that there 
will be great interest in Volume 2, 
“Music”, as there is in Volume 1, 
“War and Peace”. 
Jean C. Tuton 
New York Graphic Society 
Greenwich, Connecticut, U.S.A. 
CULTURAL THEMES NEGLECTED 
Sir, 
As a reader of your magazine for 
several years I have noticed that more 
and more space is being devoted to 
science and education, in other words, 
to didactic subjects: I know these are 
urgent problems and cry out for solu- 
tion, but this has caused you to 
neglect cultural and artistic themes. 
I must admit that first rate articles 
have been published on Tagore, Rous- 
seau, Art in the Life of Man, Stanis- 
lavsky and Shakespeare. But your 
scientific articles are not sufficiently 
popular in style for the tastes of many 
readers, and though the didactic sub- 
jects offer revealing and interesting 
facts, they by far outnumber the 
occasional articles on art. Artistic 
questions are just as important as 
social ones, as I am sure you realize. 
André Claubart 
Paris, France 
HELPING YOUTH IN ISRAEL 
Sir, 
I read with great interest your arti- 
cles about juvenile delinquency, (May, 
June and Sept. 1964). Try to write 
more about this serious problem of 
adolescence and how countries deal 
© with it. 
I am a teacher of a group of the 
same sort of children (deprived, ne- 
glected, social cases) in Israel in a 
Kibbutz (collective settlement) called 
“Sdot Jam”. Many of the Kibbut- 
zim try to educate such groups. 
In Israel an institution called “Youth 
Alija” provides funds for the work 
being done with immigrant children 
and social cases. Every group has 
forty children. They come to us 
when they are 13 years old and stay 
until they go to the army. In the 
beginning they have six hours of les- 
sons and two hours work, but -after- 
wards four hours of lessons and four 
hours work. They live in nice houses 
two to four in a room, and are helped 
and taught by a team of three or 
four adults, all members of the Kib- 
butz. 
I have been working for years with 
such groups in the Kibbutzim and 
have seen much progress and success 
achieved. 
Miriam Neeman 
Kibbutz Sdot-Jam, Israel

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

  
~~ ABU BAKR 
~ | MUHAMMAD 
(AL RAZI) 
864.925 
    
    
A UTHOR of one the greastest medi- 
cal encyclopadias in the Arabic tongue, 
Al Razi, a Persian physician, enjoyed an 
uncontested authority in medical matters 
until the 17th century. His treatises on 
medicine won wide fame In medieval 
times and were translated into Latin. A 
mathematician and philosopher, he had 
a bold and searching mind. In physics 
he argued against the Aristotelian theo- 
ries held by certain Muslim scholars of 
his day and in chemistry he rejected all 
supernatural and symbolistic explanations 
that were advanced at that time. 
~ JAGIELLONIAN 
UNIVERSITY 
Ne 7 XL 
This year one of Europe's oldest and 
most distinguished centres of higher 
[0 TEENIE WE TN ET TEE | LT TET SO TVET 1 SORT 
Cracow, Poland, celebrates the 600th 
anniversary of its foundation by King 
Casimir the Great (above). The university 
is named after the 14th century Jlagiello- 
nian dynasty which enlarged and endowed 
it. During the 15th and 16th centuries as 
many as 40,000 students attended its 
classes, including the future astronomer 
Copernicus (from 1492 to 1494). 
[ICE SE EL ETT I EYE (1) I ER FT 
century and it now has five faculties. its 


### 62307: Great men, great events

f the great men and great events whose anni- 
  
CARL OLUF 
JENSEN 
1864-1934 
  
A precursor of modern cancer research, 
this Danish bacteriologist and vete- 
rinary surgeon, born at Copenha- 
gen on March 18, 1864, was the 
first scientist to prove that cancerous 
tumours could be transferred from affect- 
ed mice to healthy ones by skin grafts. 
His discovery gave an entirely new direc- 
tion to research on malignant tumours. 
Dr. Jensen devoted much of his life to 
the study of contagious diseases in ani- 
mals and did major work on the functions 
of the thyroid gland. 
  
MIKHAIL 
LERMONTOV 
1814-1841     
  
Born 150 years ago on October 3, 
1814, Lermontov ranks second after Push- 
kin among the great poets of Russia. It 
was Pushkin's death in a due! in 1837 
that sparked the young army officer's lite- 
rary career and provoked his first angry 
poem against Czar Nicolas |, Exiled twice 
for his exposure of sosial injustice, he 
died In a duel at the age of 27. His 
novel, "A Hero of Our Times" is justly 
considered a masterpiece of world litera- 
ture. Tolstoy, Turgenev, Dostoievsky and 
others revered him as a teacher and model. 
  
RICHARD 
STRAUSS 
1864-1949 
THe early performances of the sympho- 
nic poems and even the operas which 
Richard Strauss, the German composer, 
produced between 1880 and 1835 shocked 
many of his contemporaries. His striking 
musical innovations were regarded as 
exaggeratedly modernistic. But time and 
growing familiarity with these works have 
brought them well-deserved acclaim. Rich- 
ard Strauss who was born on june 11, 
1864, is now regarded as one of the 
world's major composers and his songs 
rank him as one of the great lyric masters.   
JOSE G. 
ARTIGAS 
1764-1850     
Born in Montevideo in June, 1764, José 
G. Artigas can rightly be considered as 
the father of Uruguayan democracy. In 
1810 he joined in the struggle to free the 
countries of South America from Spanish 
domination. Foremost among his thoughts 
was the education of his people. “After 
bread,” he said, “education is the people's 
first need.” Artigas, who kept up a regu- 
lar correspondence with George Wash- 
ington, died in voluntary exile in Paraguay 
at the age of B6. 
2 GEORGE 
= | WASHINGTON 
A CARVER 
1864-1943      
A Negro plant chemist, George Wash- 
ington Carver, is one of the famous 
names in American scientific agriculture, 
In a simple laboratory and working 
mostly with home-made equipment, he 
discovered how to make hundreds of 
new products from a few plants. From 
the peanut he made more than 300 pro- 
ducts, ranging from instant “coffee” 
and salad oil to soap and Ink. He 
conjured 100 more from the sweet po- 
tato, including flour and shoeblacking. 
He also succeeded in making marble 
from wood shavings, dyes from clay 
and gum from cotton stalks. The son of 
slave parents, Carver gained a repu- 
tation as a “plant doctor”® while still a 
child. He earned his way through 
schoo! and college and eventually 
headed the department of Agriculture at 
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama, where he 
spent a total of 46 years. His research 
and discoveries at Tuskegee brought 
him international fame. Carver pur- 
suaded the farmers of Alabama to grow 
peanuts, pecans and sweet potatoes in 
place of cotton. Since then a single 
year's peanut crop from the southern 
states of the U.S.A. has brought in as 
much as $60 million. Carver was a 
talented musician and also won inter- 
national recognition as a palnter. In 
1940 he gave his life savings towards 
setting up a foundation for research In 
agricultural chemistry. 
I |" | ({1] 8 
~ DE UNAMUNO 
Le 1864-1936 
; - rw APSR sn x ; by l ll 
Sh in Bilbao of Basque descent on 
September 29, 1864, Miguel de Una- 
muno is one of the great names of 
Spanish letters. He belonged to the 
famous “generation of 1898", a writers’ 
group of “angry young men” which in- 
cluded Azorin, Pio Baroja, Valle Inclan 
and Blasco Ibafiez. Philosopher, essayist 
poet and novelist he wrote on an aston- 
ishingly broad range of subjects. His 
philosophical essays “The Tragic Sense 
of Life”, “The Agony of Christianity”, and 
“The Life of Don Quixote and Sancho” 
‘brought him international fame. A 
Christian philosopher, he was a man 
extraordinary erudition (he was profes- 
sor of Greek at Spain's oldest and most 
venerable university, the University of 
Salamanca, and later its rector). All his 
life he was an individualist and strugg- 
led against dogmatism and intellectual 
fetters, fearlessly taking stand on all 
public questions. One critic called him 
“an oak tree with an owl's head.” His 
diatribes against the government cost 
him his post and he spent two years in 
exile. All of Unamuno's works are per- 
meated by an everrecurring theme—his 
anguish over life and death and man’s 
longing for immortality. It was this that 
drew him to Kierkegaard, his favourite 
author, and he learned Danish so as to 
read him in the original. Like Kierke- 
gaard, much of modern existentialism 

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
NT ON 
\ From the Unesco New fom. 
UNESCO 
1965-1966 
A special priority 
to science 
for economic 
development 
CIENCE as an aid to economic deve- 
S lopment has a special priority in the 
programme which will be submitted 
to the UNeEsco General Conference when 
it meets in Paris on October 20. In this 
proposed programme for 1965-1966, Unesco 
embarks on an expanded international poli- 
cy in science and plans to give, as a matter 
of urgency, increased scientific aid to deve- 
loping countries. 
The need for this aid was made clear at 
last year's UNscAT Conference in Geneva 
on the application of science and techno- 
~<a 
  
  
Unesco 
 
i - le " 
LL 
LC I GUAARRRARR AS 
rrr) : ARE DARE AN SITUA 
M | AA 
LIRA ALAR 
SEARRARAAA 
ARRERRRA RA 
ARARRR 
ULL 
TEAL AREER | 
RAR 111) ALLER | 
RR 
11040 
Unesco-Dominique Roger 
Unesco’s Executive Board has just assembled for the first time in a new meeting 
room that has been built for it in Unesco’s H.Q. in Paris. The Executive Board Room 
(aboveright) and an adjoining committee room are the first sections to be completed 
in the 4th building now being constructed on Unesco’s Paris site. This building 
will include 350 offices around six patios below ground level. Above left, 
Mr. Rodolfo Baron Castro, Unesco Executive Board chairman (on right) and 
Mr. René Maheu, Unesco Director-General, at an Executive Board meeting in May. 
logy for the benefit of the world’s less-deve- .. 
loped areas. (See THE UNEscoO COURIER, 
July-August 1963.) As part of its contri- 
bution to the Development Decade launch- 
ed by the United Nations General Assem- 
bly in December 1961, UnEsco plans to 
devote two-thirds of all funds available for 
science—from its own science budget 
conference on 
HE idea of creating an Inter- 
national voluntary service of 
young people to help in technical 
assistance programmes was unani- 
mously endorsed by an International 
Conference on Youth, in Grenoble, 
France, recently. The first Inter- 
governmental conference ever held on 
youth problems, it was sponsored by 
Unesco and the French Government. 
If an international voluntary service 
of this kind were set up it would 
encourage young men and women 
from all nations who had completed 
their university education to spend 
a year or two in developing countries 
where their knowledge and skills 
could be applied to projects for social 
and economic advancement. 
Noting that Unesco had already 
proposed to study the problems and 
possibilities of voluntary service of 
this kind, the Conference urged 
Unesco to consider carrying out a 
pilot project, using volunteers recruited 
on a broad international basis. The 
Conference hoped this would even- 
tually lead to the regular use of 
qualified long-term volunteers: in 
Unesco technical assistance pro- 
grammes and particularly in campaigns 
against illiteracy. 
The Youth Conference, under the   
The first intergovernmental 
youth problems 
chairmanship of Mr. Moussa Keita, 
High Commissioner for Youth and 
Sports in the Republic of Mali, dis- 
cussed ways in which all types of 
out-of-school education could be 
improved to prepare youth for work- 
ing life and leisure, for civic and 
social responsibilities and for “inter- 
national understanding and co-opera- 
tion. 
Delegates, who came from 73 
Unesco member states, stressed 
the importance of youth's role in the 
modern world, an importance under- 
lined by Mr, René Maheu, Director- 
General of Unesco, at the opening 
of the conference. “Never have young 
people been so truly themselves,” he 
said. “Never have they given such 
evidence of their virtues and defects. 
Never have they exercised their gifts 
to such an extent nor incurred so 
many risks as nowadays.” 
Among other recommendations, the 
Conference urged Unesco to set up 
an International Committee on Youth - 
to advise on future programmes, to 
send youth leaders and vocational 
guidance counsellors to developing 
countries to help improve youth 
organizations and services, to convene 
regional youth conferences and to 
study problems of out-of-school edu- 
cation.   
(increased by 57 % compared with 1963-64) 
and from extra-budgetary resources—to 
projects concerned with science and tech- 
nology for economic development. At 
the same time it will continue to promote 
international scientific co-operation. 
While giving new emphasis to science in 
its programme, UNEsco will also maintain 
the high priority it has always accorded to 
education, especially since 1960. An out- 
standing feature of its educational plans 
for 1965-66 is the proposal to launch an 
intensive experimental programme in mass 
literacy (see page 4). Other important pro- 
jects in UNEscO’s programme relate to edu- 
cational planning, teacher training and the 
improvement of teaching methods. 
In the fields of social and human sciences 
UNEsco proposes to study some fundamen- 
tal world problems concerned with the pro- 
motion of human rights and the consolida- 
tion of peace. These include racial preju- 
dice, the economic and social problems of 
newly-independent and developing countries 
and the economic consequences of disarma- 
ment. 
In its programme of cultural activities 
Unesco will survey problems of artistic 
creation in literature and the fine arts and 
will continue its efforts for the protection 
of the world’s cultural heritage. The Inter- 
national Monuments Campaign which it 
launched in June 1964 will be continued 
through measures to establish international 
agreements for the protection of cultural 
property. The Major Project on the Mu- 
tual Appreciation of Eastern and Western 
Cultural Values will remain a focal point 
of its efforts to spread knowledge of cul- 
tural values among different peoples. 
In the field of mass communication 
Unesco will continue to work for the 
exchange and diffusion of ideas through 
press, radio, films and television and to 
develop the use of these media for educa- 
tion and the promotion of international 
understanding. 
A budget of $47,460,000 has been pro- 
posed for the programme to be submitted 
to the Unesco General Conference. UNESCO 
should also be able to dispose of just 
over $46 million from funds provided by 
the U.N. Expanded Programme of Techni- 
cal Assistance and the U.N. Special Fund. 
These substantial extra resources will be 
used to help developing countries to extend 
and improve their educational systems. im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
E
N
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

3 
and published 
RICUE ET ERCT-To [YS 
From Africa: 
YOU READ 
these memorable works of world 
literature translated into English 
in the Unesco 2 
  
fos 
[Fs 
LOVE SONGS OF VIDYAPATI, translated from the Maithili by 
Deben Bhattacharya. George Allen and Unwin, London, 30/-. 
SACRED WRITINGS OF THE SIKHS (ADI GRANTH), translated 
from the Punjabi by Trilochan Singh, Bhal Jodh Singh, Kapur 
Singh, Bawa Harklshen Singh, and Khushwant Singh; Intro- 
duction by Sarvepalll Radhakrishnan ; foreword by Arnold Toyn- 
bee. George Allen and Unwin, London, 22/.. 
From Indonesia: 
LETTERS OF A JAVANESE PRINCESS, by Raden Adjeng Kar. 
tin, translated from the Dutch by Agnes Loulse Symmers; pre- 
face by Eleanor Roosevelt. W.W. Norton and Co., New York, 
$1.95. 
POEMS FROM BLACK AFRICA. Edited by Langston Hughes; 
translated from various languages. Indiana University Press, 
Bloomington, Indiana, $4.95. 
From China: 
STORIES FROM A MING COLLECTION, translated from the 
Chinese by Cyril Birch. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 
Indiana $3.95; The Bodley Head, London, 18/-. 
MENCIUS, translated from the Chinese by W.A.C.H.Dobson. 
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, $5.00; Oxford University 
Press, London, 25/-. 
From Israel : 
SIBERIA, a poem by Abraham Sutzkever, translated from the 
Yiddish by Jacob Sonntag; preface and lilustrations by Chagall. 
From Japan: 
THE MAKIOKA SISTERS, a novel by Junichiro Tanlzakl; trans- 
lated from the Japanese by Edward Seldensticker. Knopf, New 
York, $4.95; Secker and Warburg, London, 21/-; McClellan and 
Abelard-Schuman, London (21/-), New York and Toronto ($5.00). 
Stewart, Toronto, $4.95; Charles E. Tuttle Co., Tokyo, 850 yen. 
RECORDS OF THE GRAND HISTORIAN OF CHINA, by Ssu-Ma 
Ch'ien, translated from the Chinese by Burton Watson. Colum- 
bia University Press, New York and London. Two volumes: 
$20 or £8. 
From Greece: 
SIX POETS OF MODERN GREECE (Cavaly, Sikelianos, Seferls, 
Antoniou, Elytis, Gatsos), translated from the Greek by Edmund 
MODERN JAPANESE STORIES, an anthology; translated by Ivan 
Morrls, Geoffrey Sargent, Edward Seidensticker and George 
Saito. Charles E. Tuttle Co., Tokyo and Rutland, Vermont, 
$6.50; Eyre and Spottiswood, London, 30/-. 
THE INK-SMEARED LADY AND OTHER KYOGEN, Comic skits 
Keeley and Philip Sherrard. Thames and Hudson, London, 21/-; 
Alfred A. Knopf, New York, $5.00. 
From India: 
KRISHNAKANTA'S WILL, a novel by B.C. Chatterji; translated 
from the Bengali by J.C. Ghosh. New Directions, New York. 
$1.65. 
and folkplays, translated from the Japanese by Shio Sakanishi. 
Charles E. Tuttle, Tokyo and Rutland, Vermont, $2.95. 
These books may be obtained from the publishers io 
through your local bookseller, 
DO NOT ORDER FROM UNESCO 
  
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Prest Department, Royal 
Aghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Tradco Agencies, 109 Swanston Street, G. P. OQ. 
Box 2324 V, Melbourne C. I. (Victoria); United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
8th Floor, McEwan House, “343 Little Collins St., 
Melbourne C. |. (Victoria). ( ). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 70... ~~ BELGIUM, Editions ‘*Labor”, 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgiélei 151, Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (140 FB) and art slides only; Louis De Lannoy. 
112,rue du Trdne, Brussels 5. CCP 3380.00. — BURMA. 
Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, Ran- 
goon. — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. (8 3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, 100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 
2. ( ). — CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chung- 
king South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — 
CYPRUS. Cyprus National Youth Council, P, OC. Box 539, 
Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, 
Prague 1 (permanent display); Zahrahnici literatura 
Bilkova 4, Prague 1, — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard, 
Prags Boulevard 47 Copenhagen § (—). 
ETHIOPIA. International Press Agency. P.O. Box 120, 
Addis Ababa. — FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa. 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. ( J). — FRANCE. 
Librairie de I'Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7°. C.C.P. 
12598-48.(10F.). — GERMANY, R. QOldenbourg Verlag, 
Rosenheimerstrasse 145, Munich. 8 For the Unesco 
Kurier (German ed only) Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 (DM 10). — 
GHANA Methodist Book Depot Ltd . Aclantis Hous, 
Commercial St., POB 100, Cape Coast.— GREAT BRI- 
 
  
 
TAIN. See United Kingdom, — GREECE. Librairie H. 
Kauffmann, 28, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. 
Swindon Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon, — HUN. 
GARY. Kultura, P. O. Box 149%. Budapest, 62. — 1CE- 
LAND. Snaebjérn Jonsson & Co. H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, 
Reykjavik. — INDIA. Orient Longmans Ltd. Nicol Road, 
Bellard Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Cal- 
cutta 13;Gunfoundry Road, Hyberabad, 1: 36a, Mount 
Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. 
Box 386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co., 17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scindia 
House, New Delhi, Indian National Commission Co-ope- 
ration with Unesco, Ministry of Education, for New 
Delhi 3. (Rs. 7), — INDONESIA. P. N. Fadjar Bhakti 
Dijalan, Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — TRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. -—- IRELAND. The National Press, 
2. Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (15/), — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores 35, Allenby Road 
and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv (1 £ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA, Sangster’s Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. (15/-). — JAPAN, Maruzen Co. Ltd, 
6 Tori-Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo 
Central, Tokyo. ( ). — JORDAN, Joseph L. Bahous 
& Co., Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B, 66, Amman. — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia, == 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg, —~ MALAYSIA. Federal Publications Ltd., 
Times House, River Valley Rd., Singapore (————). 
MALTA. Sapienza's Library 26 Kingsway, Valletta. (15/- ). 
— MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis, — MONACO. British Library, 30 Bid 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (—). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 8). —= NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G. C. T. 
Van Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant.) N.Y., Willemstad, Curacao. 
N.A. (NA fl 4,50). — NEW ZEALAND. Government 
Printing Office 20, Molesworth Street (Private Bag) Wel, 
lingston, C. 1 Government Bookshops: Auckland (P.O, 
Box 5344), Christchurch (P.O. Box 1721), Dunedin P. 0, 
Box 1304) (15/-). — NIGERIA. C.M.S. Bookshops, P.O’ 
 
Box 174, Lagos ( /-}. — NORWAY. AS. Bokhjornet- 
Lille Grense 7 Oslo For the Unesco Courier only: AS, 
Narvesens Litteratur Tijeneste, Stortingsgt. 2 Oslo, Post, 
boks 115 ( }. — PAKISTAN. The West-Pak Publis- 
hing Ceo. Ltd., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374 
56-N Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore, — PHILIPINES. 
The Modern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue Manila. — 
POLAND. “RUCH", ul, Wronia, 23, Warnaw 10 
(=~—). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lda, Livraria 
Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — PUERTO RICO, 
Spanish English Publications, Eleanor Roosevelt 115, 
Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. — RHODESIA & NYA. 
SALAND. The Book Centre, Gordon Avenue, Salisbury, 
Southern Rhodesia. —- SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, 
P. ©. Box 1118, Khartoum, — SWEDEN, A/B C.E, 
Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16, 
= For the Unesco Courier; Svenska Unescoridet, Vasa- 
gatan 15-17, Stockholm, C (Kr. 12); SWITZERLAND, 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du 
Marché, Geneva C.C.P. 1-236. “Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 10). — TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B, 9030, Dar-es-Salaam, — THAILAND, 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
(35 ticals). — TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 469 Isuklal 
Caddesi, Beyogly, Istanbul, — UGANDA. Uganda Book- 
shop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. —- UNION OF SOUTH 
AFRICA. Yan Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri Building, Church 
Street, P.O. Box 724 Pretoria. For the Unesco Courier 
(single copies) only: Central News Agency P.O.Box 1033, 
Johannesbourg.(RL.50). - UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC 
(EGYPT). Librairie Kasr Et Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil 
Cairo. Subfagent: La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly. 
Pasha, Cairo, — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l. and Government 
Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, Man. 
chester, Birmingham and Bristol. (15/-). — UNITED 
STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 317 East 34th St, 
New York, N.Y, 10016 (3 5.00) and (except periodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broadway, New York, 
27, NY. — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow, 
G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Yugosloventka Knjig, 
Tzrazije 27, Belgrade. 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062313engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

hat 
i
 
»
 
Cy 
a 
  
 