# [152042](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Im 
EE
FT 
eee - 
United Nations + 
Educational, Scientific and  - 
Cultural Organization * 
  
2007 * number 4 » ISSN 1993-8616 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Pl
an
tu
 
  
  
Contents 
2007 - N°4    
MEDIA UNDER ATTACK 
  
  
KILLING THE MESSENGER - 
THE DEADLY COST OF NEWS 
In the past decade, over 1,000 journalists 
have been murdered. According to Rodney 
Pinder, Director International News Safety Institute, 
as long the issue of impunity is not addressed, 
the number of deaths will remain high. 4 
.. SENSE AND CENSORSHIP jo _— 
€ b 1% Press freedom brings responsibilities 
as well as privileges for journalists. 
Unlike its ‘ugly sister’ — censorship — 
media regulation protects the public from disinformation. 
But is it enough? 9 
  
  
  
   
.l 
 .4 2 FEATURE 
The Courier looks back 
before the United Nations Conference. 11 
Control of the media has always been a temptation. Repressive regimes without a free 
press go to extreme lengths to silence journalists. New media are harder to control than 
traditional media, but so is the quality of the information they put out. 3 
  
a 1] 
| ~. ANNA POLITKOVSKAYA: 
— "" MURDERED BECAUSE SHE 
mi &" _ stoop ALONE 
For the first time this year, the UNESCO-Guillermo Cano World 
Press Freedom Prize was awarded posthumously, 
to the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya. Despite fear 
and threats, she continued to cover the situation in Chechnya 
until she was murdered . 7 
PHOTOJOURNALISM: 
ow.» FREEZE-FRAME 
{ ¥ 5 A decisive shift to digital photography, increas- 
24) ing use of amateur snaps, mass distribution 
of images over internet: these realities have significantly altered 
photojournalism. Is it doomed to become extinct? 8 
GHASSAN TUENI : 
THOSE WHO ATTACK 
JOURNALISTS MUST KNOW 
THEY WILL HAVE TO PAY 
Politician and journalist, patriarch of the Lebanese press corps 
at age 81, Ghassan Tueni is one of the Arab world's most il- 
lustrious advocates for freedom of expression. 9 
Dr Julian Huxley, UNESCO's first Director-General, outlined his views on press freedom in a speech 
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### 152073: Media under attack

MEDIA 
UNDER ATTACK 
Control of the media has always been a temptation. Repressive regimes 
without a free press go to extreme lengths to silence journalists. 
New media are harder to control than traditional media, but so is the quality 
of the information they put out. 
E 
a 
= 
a 
<C 
© 
¢cording to the latest (April 2007) 
Roy. Morgan poll of Australians’ 
perception of professions, journal- 
ism ranks near the bottom, with just 
12% of those polled feeling that 
newspaper reporters have ‘high’ or 
‘very high’ standards of ethics and 
honesty. This is just below Mem- 
bers of Parliament (16%) but ahead 
of car salesmen (4%) and Estate 
Agents (9%). Yet one of the first ac- 
tions following a political coup is for 
the new leaders to take control of 
the media, such is their perceived 
power to influence public opinion. 
And, over the past decade, accord- 
ing to the International News Safety 
Institute (INSI), over 1,000 journal- 
ists and support staff have been 
killed worldwide. 
Some of these deaths attract in- 
ternational attention, like the mur- 
der last October of Anna Politkovs- 
kaya, special correspondent for the 
independent Moscow newspaper 
Novaya Gazeta and laureate for 
this year's UNESCO/Guillermo 
Cano World Press Freedom Prize. 
But dozens of other, less celebrat- 
ed journalists meet a similar fate 
each year. Prahlad Goala, of India’s 
Asomiya Khabar Assamese-lan- 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 
The APM (Association for Private Medi 
coordinated by UNESCO and supporte 
 
rinting plant project, a) 
di by international donors. 
guage daily, was rammed by a truck 
while riding his motorcycle and 
then stabbed to death. According 
to the Committee for the Protection 
of Journalists (CPJ), he had been 
reporting on corruption among lo- 
cal forestry officials linked to timber 
smuggling. 
Journalists — like all other citizens 
- are protected under Article 19 of 
the 1948 Universal Declaration on 
Human Rights. But this right isn't 
enforced. On the contrary, under 
repressive regimes, journalists are 
imprisoned for speaking out. 
Promoting 
press freedom 
“One of the tasks of UNESCO, 
through its Division for the Freedom 
of Expression and Peace’, says Syl- 
vie Coudray, a Senior Programme 
Specialist at UNESCO, “is to 
provide assistance to its Member 
States, who wish to adapt or trans- 
form their media and press legisla- 
tion to internationally-recognised 
principles, which are respectful of 
freedom of expression” UNESCO 
also uses World Press Freedom 
Day (3 May) “to highlight free press 
issues and the importance of an in- 
dependent media in the democratic 
process, she adds. 
And a growing number of non- 
governmental organisations, includ- 
ing CPJ, Reporters Without Bor- 
ders (RSF), Article 19, International 
Freedom of Expression Exchange 
(IFEX) and the International Fed- 
eration of Journalists (IFJ), publish 
continually updated regional alerts 
on abuses of press freedom and 
put pressure on governments impli- 
cated. 
“A key part of promoting freedom 
of expression and freedom of the 
press around the globe is to give 
it maximum visibility, says Cou- 
dray. And there are some surprises, 
demonstrating that Western de- 
mocracies do not have monopoly 
on press freedom. The 2006 RSF 
Worldwide Press Freedom Index, 
which ranks 168 countries on a va- 
riety of criteria, puts the USA in joint 
53rd place, alongside Botswana, 
Croatia and Tonga, and far below 
Costa Rica (29th place). The top 
15 places are all taken by countries 
in Northern Europe. 
Rapidly-changing 
media 
Meanwhile, the media are also 
changing rapidly, providing new 
opportunities to get around censor- 
ship. Not only do most major news- 
papers in developed countries have 
online editions, but some of the 
leading new players in online news 
production, like Yahoo! do not even 
have a print edition. And, most sig- 
Article 19 of the 1948 universal Declaration on Human Rights protects 
journalists. It states that “everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interfer- 
ence and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any 
media and regardless of frontiers”

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

nificantly, the rise of blogs has given 
anyone with an internet connection 
the opportunity to contribute to 
news and information, creating a 
new corpus of ‘citizen journalists’ 
In March 2007, the blog search en- 
gine, Technorati, registered over 70 
million blogs, with a new one cre- 
ated every half second. 
The ‘blog’ - and associated citizen 
journalist - brings new problems nits 
wake. Repressive regimes increas- 
ingly use sophisticated technology 
to jam offending websites and even 
force internet service providers to 
identify inconvenient bloggers, who 
may then be arrested. There is also 
the question of the reliability and 
impartiality of the information pub- 
lished on blogs. “The phenomenon 
will place a heavy responsibility on 
professional journalists to maintain 
high standards of fact-checking, 


### 152073: Media under attack

MEDIA UNDER ATTACK 
  
honesty and objectivity, according 
to Timothy Balding, Chief Executive 
Officer of the World Association 
of Newspapers in his opening ad- 
dress to a conference on New Me- 
dia: The Press Freedom Dimension 
held at UNESCO Headquarters on 
15-16 February, 2007. 
The determination of people not 
just to read news, but to be read, 
has also had an impact on tradi- 
tional news media, through their 
websites, where the public is en- 
couraged to send email commen- 
taries, SMS messages, photos and 
videos of breaking news from mo- 
bile phones. Far from being a threat 
to the profession of journalism, says 
Rosenthal Calmon Alves, of the 
University of Texas at Austin (USA) 
speaking at the UNESCO confer- 
ence, “it gives journalism a chance 
to survive, by becoming more inclu- 
sive, more connected with the com- 
munities it serves” 
Despite the new technology, old 
media, especially radio, are still 
powerful means of overcoming 
restrictive controls. SW Radio Af- 
rica, broadcasting out of studios 
near London (UK) on short-wave, 
is aimed at listeners in Zimbabwe. 
“Hardly anyone has broadband in 
Zimbabwe,” according to Gerry 
Jackson, the station's manager, 
speaking at the UNESCO confer- 
ence, “and connections are ex- 
tremely slow” SW Radio Africa also 
uses SMS messages — where the 
challenge is to compress the news 
into 160 characters — and the inter- 
net. “The moral to the story, says 
Jackson, ‘is try absolutely every- 
thing you can to circumvent the 
censors, and don't give up. 
Peter Coles 
in London, UK 
     
  
      
rding to Killing the Messen- 
ger, the report on a two-year global 
inquiry just published by the In- 
ternational News Safety Institute 
Sl), 1,000 journalists and sup- 
port staff died trying to report the 
news around the world in the past 
10 years. But, alarmingly, the great 
majority died in peacetime, working 
in their own countries. Only one in 
four news media staff died cover- 
ing war and other armed conflicts. 
“At least 657 men and women were 
murdered,” says the report — “elimi- 
nated as they tried to shine light 
into the dark recesses of their so- 
cieties.” In two-thirds of cases, the 
report goes on, “the killers were not 
even identified, and probably never 
will be, underlining the absence of 
full and proper investigations when 
a journalist or other news profes- 
sional is killed” 
This question of impunity is the 
shocking secret at the heart of the 
inquiry. In many countries, murder 
has become the easiest, cheapest 
and most effective way of silenc- 
ing troublesome reporting, and the 
  
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 


### 152074: Killing the messenger: the deadly cost of news

KILLING THE MESSENGER - 
THE DEADLY COST 
OF NEWS 
In the past decade, over 1,000 journalists have been murdered. 
According to Rodney Pinder, Director International News Safety Institute, 
as long the issue of impunity is not addressed, 
the number of deaths will remain high. 
       © 
He
ct
or
 
Ca
st
il
lo
 
Riots in Venezuela 
4 
TN] 
~ py

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 152074: Killing the messenger: the deadly cost of news

more the killers get away with it the 
more the number of deaths spirals 
upwards. 
UNESCO has long recognised 
this problem. On 3 May 20083 — the 
day INSI was founded — Director- 
General Koichiro Matsuura declared 
“war on impunity”, saying: “Whenever 
one journalist is exposed to violence, 
intimidation or arbitrary detention be- 
cause of his or her commitment to 
conveying the truth, all citizens are 
deprived of the right to express them- 
selves and act according to their con- 
science...” 
Protecting journalists 
better 
So what can be done? At the end 
of 2006, the UN Security Council 
unanimously passed Resolution 
1738 on the protection of jour- 
nalists in conflict. The resolution 
reminds countries of their respon- 
sibility to end impunity and to pros- 
ecute those responsible for serious 
violations. But it only addresses the 
safety of journalists in conflict — the 
tip of a black iceberg. 
The Parliamentary Assembly of 
the Council of Europe, on the other 
hand, in Resolution 1535 this year, 
recalled the legal obligation of mem- 
  
  
ber states to investigate any mur- 
ders of journalists as well as other 
acts of severe violence and death 
threats. “Where attacks against 
journalists can be carried out with 
impunity, democracy and the rule of 
law suffer,’ says the resolution. 
The INSI report suggests a number 
of more specific actions that would 
increase the safety of journalists, not 
least for governments to live up to 
their responsibilities under Resolu- 
tion1738. It also urges international 
development institutions, such as 
the World Bank and the Internation- 
al Monetary Fund, to reinforce the 
Resolution by including a country’s 
record on the murder of journalists 
when assessing the granting of aid 
and other assistance. 
The report also encourages gov- 
ernments and international organi- 
sations sponsoring media training 
in developing countries to include 
safety training. There is no point in 
training new journalists to be fear- 
less reporters without showing 
them how to take care of them- 
selves. Safety training, indeed, is 
critical in this hostile environment. 
With support from international do- 
nors, including UNESCO, INSI has 
now provided free safety training to 
almost 700 news media staff in 13 
countries. 
Caring for their own 
But journalists cannot escape re- 
sponsibility for their own safety by 
only pointing fingers at others. They 
too have responsibilities. The INSI 
report calls on all news organisa- 
tions to observe the INSI Safety 
Code and acknowledge that they 
have a duty to care for all people 
in the newsgathering team. There 
is a responsibility to provide prop- 
er safety training and equipment 
in both peacetime and in conflict. 
Meanwhile, news executives need 
routinely to provide confidential 
professional counselling to journal- 
ists who have experienced trauma 
and other forms of extreme stress 
in the course of their duties. 
In the end, though, journalists can 
best help themselves by being true 
to quality, independent reporting. 
The support of society is essential 
in the campaign against those who 
kill and physically attack journalists. 
Rodney Pinder, 
Director International News Safety 
Institute, in Brussels, Belgium 
Dr
aw
in
g 
© 
Pl
an
tu
 
    
    
    
    
ournalists may be central play- 
rs in the defence of an open so- 
iety — but, without regulation, they 
an also be used as protagonists 
f deceit and propaganda, serving 
political or commercial interests. 
Rwanda's infamous ‘hate radio 
Radio-Télévision Libre des Mille Col- 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 


### 152075: Sense and censorship

SENSE 
AND CENSORSHIP 
Press freedom brings responsibilities 
as well as privileges for journalists. 
Unlike its ‘ugly sister’ - censorship - media regulation protects 
the public from disinformation. But is it enough? 
lines (RTLM), broadcast from 1993 
to 1994 and played a key role in 
fuelling that country’s genocide, in 
which an estimated 800,000 Tutsis 
and moderate Hutus were massa- 
cred in just three months (Human 
Rights Watch). But, thirteen years 
on, Rwanda’s journalists, like their 
5 
colleagues in neighbouring Burundi 
and the Democratic Republic of 
Congo (DRC), are gradually rebuild- 
ing public — and professional - cred- 
ibility, after years of state censorship 
and control. And, central to this evo- 
lution, is regulation of their profes- 
sion by journalists themselves.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### 152075: Sense and censorship

© 
CP
J 
Modeste Mutinga 
Ironically, it was a 1991 law allow- 
ing media pluralism, passed soon 
after Rwanda adopted a multi-party 
system that opened the way for 
‘hate media’ to emerge. But the 
devastation spurred on by RTLM 
later led the new Rwanda Patriotic 
Front (RPF) government to be sus- 
picious of uncontrolled media — a 
situation that has only begun to re- 
lax in the past few years. 
An improving situation 
“The government is still cautious, 
and hasn't given the media a com- 
pletely free rein,’ says Cyprien Ndi- 
kumana, representative in Burundi 
and Rwanda for the international 
non-governmental organisation, Pa- 
nos Institute Paris. 
“And, of course, journalists are 
still careful what they say, Ndiku- 
mana adds. “But, given the histori- 
cal and cultural context, there has 
been a very positive development 
since 2004, with pluralist media, 
including ten or so independent 
radio stations!” One of these, Con- 
tact FM, broadcast a live phone-in 
programme with the head of state, 
President Paul Kagame, in Septem- 
ber 2006. 
In 2002, the Rwandan govern- 
ment established the High Council 
of the Press (HCP) with responsi- 
bilities for regulating the media. But, 
says Ndikumana, “it is a consulta- 
tive body, and does not have much 
power. It can give advice to the 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 
  
  
Minister for Information, who licens- 
es new media and has the power 
of sanction” A new law is currently 
before parliament, though, which 
will transfer these decisional pow- 
ers to the HCP. Meanwhile, journal- 
ists are gradually becoming more 
organised, with a recently estab- 
lished Press Centre and fledgling 
Commission for ethics and codes 
of conduct set up by the Rwandan 
Association of Journalists (ARJ). 
The Democratic Republic of 
Congo may have a recent bloody 
history as the theatre for what has 
been dubbed ‘Africa's World War’, 
in which over three million people 
were killed (Amnesty International). 
And yet, the country has also made 
remarkable progress in institution- 
alising press freedom. In 2003, as 
part of the Sun City Agreement, a 
new, independent regulatory body 
— the High Authority for the Media 
(HAM) — in particular to ensure that 
the media gave fair and balanced 
coverage to all parties during the 
first multiparty elections for over 40 
years, in July 2006. 
“At one point during the elections; 
recalls Cyprien Ndikumana, “made 
itself very unpopular with both the 
party of the incumbent president, Jo- 
seph Kabila, and the opposition par- 
ty of Jean-Pierre Bemba. This was 
a sign that the HAM was indepen- 
dent and neutral. It even suspended 
some radio stations, including the 
public radio and television channel’ 
6 
MEDIA UNDER ATTACK 
As well as its solid legal basis, the 
HAM also owes its success to the 
strong leadership of its president, 
Modeste Mutinga, a courageous 
journalist, often imprisoned for 
his views, and who, in 2000, was 
awarded the Committee for the 
Protection of Journalists Interna- 
tional Press Freedom Award. 
The creation of OMAC (Organisa- 
tion des Médias d'Afrique Centrale) in 
2001 by a wide range of media stake- 
holders in the region, including journal- 
ists, press media owners and press 
freedom associations was an attempt 
to enable national media to draw on 
regional strengths. With backing from 
UNESCO and other international or- 
ganizations, OMAC issues alerts on 
abuses against the press, as well as 
providing training and support for jour- 
nalists in the region. 
More steps needed 
The institutionalisation of press free- 
dom, through laws that protect jour- 
nalists, independent media regula- 
tory bodies, journalists’ associations 
and media monitoring bodies, is still 
only a part of the solution. 
“The press cannot be free so long 
as journalists live and work in impos- 
sible conditions,’ says Ndikumana. 
“In countries like Rwanda, and 
several countries in Central Africa, 
there is no central labour agree- 
ment, salaries are often not paid 
and are inadequate, Ndikumana 
adds. “So journalists are some- 
times manipulated by political and 
financial interests, which obviously 
compromise the quality of their 
work! 
One practice, prevalent in DRC, is 
so-called ‘coupage’ — where vested 
interests pay journalists to publish 
favourable articles about them. “lt 
kills press freedom," says Ndikuma- 
na. “The only solution is to improve 
the conditions of journalists, pro- 
vide better training and strengthen 
the capacity of the profession to 
regulate itself” 
Peter Coles 
in London, UK

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

    
   
    
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
. 
Anna Politkoviskaya 
ANNA POLITKOVSKAYA: 
    


### 152078: Anna Politkovskaya: murdered because she stood alone

MEDIA UNDER ATTACK 
  
MURDERED BECAUSE SHE 
STOOD ALONE 
For the first time this year, the UNESCO-Guillermo Cano World Press 
Freedom Prize was awarded posthumously, to the Russian journalist 
She used to say “Words can save 
pkovskaya was murdered on Saturday 
7 October 2006, shot down as she 
as coming home, on Lesnaya street 
in Moscow. Her last article on Chech- 
nya, unfinished, was published by her 
newspaper Novaya Gazeta (circula- 
tion: one million) a few days after her 
death. 
To pay tribute to her courage and 
commitment, the Director-General of 
UNESCO, on the recommendation 
of an independent international jury, 
decided to name her laureate of the 
UNESCO-Guilermo Cano World 
Press Freedom Prize posthumously, a 
first in the prize's history. The chairman 
of the jury, Kavi Chongkittavorn, hailed 
Ms Politkovskaya's “incredible stub- 
bornness’, which pushed her to con- 
tinue “chronicling events in Chechnya 
when the whole world had lost interest 
in that conflict”. “This prize means a lot 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 
Anna Politkovskaya. Despite fear and threats, she continued 
to cover the situation in Chechnya until she was murdered. 
to us, her colleagues at Novaya Gaze- 
ta. It help us and allows us to con- 
tinue working, declared Viatcheslav 
lzmaylov, journalist at Novaya Gaze- 
ta, assigned the investigation on her 
murder. “It represents recognition 
and is important for her children!’ 
Among her collection of interna- 
tional prizes, Ms Politkovskaya had 
received the Golden Pen of Rus- 
sia award, a Special Diploma of the 
Jury of the Andrei Sakharov Prize, 
the Olof Palme Prize and the 2003 
Organization for Security and Co- 
operation in Europe (OSCE) Prize 
for Journalism and Democracy. Her 
global fame did not suffice, however, 
to keep her safe. Nor did the security 
plan that on several occasions pro- 
vided her (and other Novaya Gazeta 
journalists now) with 24 hour police 
protection. 
Several times, she was offered 
political asylum in Europe, but she 
always turned down the possibility. 
“She couldn't abandon people who 
7 
counted on her,’ her Novaya Gazeta 
colleague explains. “She never took 
sides, but she denounced all viola- 
tions. Her articles talked about peo- 
ple, justice and law.” The United Na- 
tions High Commissioner for Human 
Rights Louise Arbour recognized 
these qualities when she said “Her 
death is an immense loss for the 
Russian Federation and for all who 
fight for human rights! 
The woman whose warmth belied 
her rather severe appearance was 
born in 1958 in the United States, 
the daughter of Soviet diplomats. 
Mother of two children, now aged 
26 and 28, she began her career at 
Izvestiya in the 1980s, during pere- 
stroika. She joined the editorial staff 
of the opposition biweekly Novaya 
Gazeta in 1999, and was respon- 
sible for the paper's coverage of the 
war in Chechnya. 
In 2001, accused of entering 
Chechnya without authorization, she 
was abducted for three days. Seven 
months later she received a threat- 
ening letter from an officer convicted 
of executing Chechen civilians. She 
had written extensively about him 
and her articles had weighed upon 
the trial. Ms Politkovskaya lived un- 
der the shadow of constant menace. 
“But during the last weeks, the 
threats had stopped. We noticed 
and found it strange; recalls Mr Is- 
maylov. In the diary she kept on her 
computer, she admitted her fears. 
“She was afraid of doing her job, of 
going to Chechnya. It was painful 
work. Yet her conscience compelled 
her to surmount her anxiety. No one 
noticed that in the seven years she 
worked at Novaya Gazeta, her hair 
had turned white! 
“If all journalists had been as cou- 
rageous as Anna Politkovskaya, she 
wouldn't have been killed," affirmed 
the head of the journalists’ union in 
Russia on the day of her funeral, “be- 
cause those who killed her would 
have hesitated at the thought that 
another journalist would take her 
place. She died because she stood 
alone’ 
Cristina L’Homme, 
Paris, France

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 152077: Photojournalism: freeze-frame

PHOTOJOURNALISM: 
FREEZE-FRAME 
A decisive shift to digital photography, increasing use of amateur snaps, 
mass distribution of images over internet: 
these realities have significantly altered photojournalism. 
Is it doomed to become extinct? 
© 
Fl
ic
kr
/A
le
xa
nd
er
 
Ni
co
ll
 
Peru elections ne 
he days are long gone when 
obert Capa and Henri Cartier 
resson roamed the world immor- 
lizing the faces of Spanish repub- 
cans, capturing the drama of D- 
ay or the liberation of Paris in vivid 
images. Photojournalism now is 
enduring a profound crisis. For one, 
most newspapers have set up web- 
sites and increasingly they resort to 
using amateur photos. Second, the 
sheer multiplication of available im- 
ages has created inflation on inter- 
net and caused prices to drop. The 
decline is further accentuated by 
the internet's overtaking of paper 
media, affecting press publications 
on every continent. The result: the 
idea of cheap or even free infor- 
mation is spreading. 
“Associating information with 
something available free of charge 
is dangerous,” warns Alain Fri- 
let, editorial director of Magnum 
agency in Paris. “Because then 
we are no longer concerned with 
the content or with ethical crite- 
ria.’ Yet as Lorenzo Virgili, admin- 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 
istrator for the Association Natio- 
nale des Journalistes Reporters 
Photographes et Cinéastes, re- 
minds us, “Amateur photo scoops 
have always existed” The best- 
known example is still the film 
of President John F. Kennedy's 
assassination, made by a Dallas 
clothing manufacturer on 22 No- 
vember 1963. Amateur shots of 
the Madrid (Spain) bombings in 
March 2004 and those in London 
(United Kingdom) in July 2005, 
have also circulated. “It isn't a real 
threat to professional photogra- 
phy, because it can't replace its 
relevance,’ continues Virgil. “But 
that's on the condition it isn't used 
simply to produce cheap editorial 
content, which is unfortunately 
more and more often the case. 
But if you point the finger at ama- 
teur photography, you've picked 
the wrong target” 
True, internet has given the phe- 
nomenon greater scope. Busi 
nesses have rushed into the gap, 
acting as intermediaries between 
8 
MEDIA UNDER ATTACK 
amateur photographers and press 
editors. Fotofolia, for instance, 
a French image bank, receives 
some 20,000 photos a day and 
sells them at prices ranging from 
one to ten euros (half of which is 
theoretically paid to the photogra- 
pher). 
In addition, the development of 
affordable digital equipment has 
changed the odds. Until now, 
photo reporting was reserved 
mainly for Western professionals 
who had access to cutting-edge 
technique and to the newspapers 
in industrialized countries. With 
digital, photographers in develop- 
ing countries have emerged from 
the shadows. “Managing editors 
are saving money. They no longer 
send professionals all over the 
map because they know they can 
find a journalist on the spot who 
knows the place and owns a digi- 
tal camera,” comments Leonardo 
Antoniadis, an Argentine photog- 
rapher based in Paris. 
“Today, here's the real question, 
what place do we want to give to 
images?” says Frilet. “Will media 
corporations take into account 
that photography is a source of in- 
formation in itself? In France, 80% 
of photos used by magazines and 
daily papers are merely illustrating 
text” On an international scale, 
only a few American magazines, 
opposing the tide, continue to as- 
sign photo reporting. “The outlook 
is grim,” mourns Frilet. “For agen- 
cies, 80% of photos sold to maga- 
zines come from archives. Assign- 
ments now account for only 10%" 
“When Sebastidao Salgado was 
shooting in the Sahel in the mid 
1980s, he was the only one 
denouncing famine used as a 
weapon of war, long before televi- 
sion,” says Alain Mingam, photo- 
journalist and former director of 
the French agencies Sygma and 
Gamma. “His photos definitely 
caused a massive change in peo- 
ple's awareness around the world. 
These days you'd go find a star 
and photograph them in that loca-

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 152077: Photojournalism: freeze-frame

© 
A
n
-
N
a
h
a
r
 
tion” The consequence: “The bud- 
get allocated to celebrity photos 
tends to be rising, at the expense 
of photo reportage.” An agency like 
Sipa currently makes two-thirds of 
its sales on celebrities. 
All these factors make photojour- 
nalism precarious, and profession- 
al photographers’ paycheques are 
shrinking. Forced to expand their 
  
MEDIA UNDER ATTACK 
  
field of activity, they turn to corpo- 
rate annual reports. Furthermore, 
their rights are rarely defended. 
So? Is this the end of photojour- 
nalism? In October 2006 at the 
war correspondents’ awards in 
Bayeux (Calvados, France), pho- 
tojournalists showed they can rise 
to the challenge, as proven by the 
work of American Magnum pho- 
tographer Chris Anderson on the 
war in Lebanon*. To go with his 
pictures, he presents his recorded 
observations, producing a three- 
dimensional report that undoubt- 
edly foreshadows a new style of 
internet magazine. 
Cristina L’Homme, 
Paris, France 


### 152079: Ghassan Tueni: those who attack journalists must know they will have to pay

GHASSAN TUENI: THOSE WHO 
ATTACK JOURNALISTS MUST KNOW THEY 
WILL HAVE TO PAY 
Politician and journalist, patriarch of the Lebanese press corps at age 81, 
Ghassan Tueni is one of the Arab world’s most illustrious advocates for 
  
Ghassan Tuéni 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 
freedom of expression. 
Son of the founder of An Nahar, 
the independent daily created 
in 1933, he took over from his 
father as director. In 1949, his 
column brought him his first jail 
term. His son Gebrane Tueni, 
who in turn had become the 
newspaper's director, was assas- 
sinated in 2005 in a car bomb 
attack. One of his best-known 
editorial writers, Samir Kassir, 
was also murdered. Cofounder 
of the first Arab university for law, 
economics and political science 
and a former ambassador, 
Ghassan Tueni has replaced 
his son in Parliament as Beirut 
deputy with the Future party. 
Interview by Bassam Mansour. 
You and your family have paid 
heavily for your commitment to 
freedom of the press. Is it worth 
so much sacrifice? 
When it comes to freedom of 
the press, and freedom, there's 
no room for calculation - they are 
priceless. You can't put a price on 
9 
freedom; it's the very essence of 
free people. It's impossible to judge 
whether information, as such, “risks 
costing too much”... to me, expres- 
sions like this circulating in the me- 
dia seem alien to the cause of free- 
dom. A journalist doesn’t count up 
the “price” of freedom before serv- 
ing it, because the end goal isn't 
his or her own freedom. Journalists 
devote their work to a general free- 
dom, human rights, the homeland, 
and so on. Any calculation within 
that commitment desecrates our 
profession. 
Since the civil war, Lebanese 
journalists have been exposed 
to attacks and the danger has 
reoccurred in recent years. 
What can be done to protect 
the press and its work? 
Unfortunately the only guarantee 
is a law-based state ensuring that 
security prevails. Journalists have 
only their pens; using the same 
methods as their opponents to 
defend themselves would mean 
betraying their principles, so they

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 152079: Ghassan Tueni: those who attack journalists must know they will have to pay

are particularly at risk. That said, 
| hope the international tribunal 
will investigate the assassinations 
of Samir Kassir, Gebrane Tueni 
and Georges Haoui. It can help 
prevent such attacks, no matter 
who is guilty. We must also stress 
the political condemnation of the 
culprits, and the tribute paid to 
martyrs. The killers and those who 
hire them must know that they will 
pay a higher price if they continue 
to carry out their crimes than if 
they refrain. 
Al y 
2005 by a car bomb assassination. 
     
  
Solr and0 HR) 
igs INE) 
2 fies 
Sr BRAZIL 
An CTY 
REPORTERS 
SANS FRONTIERES 
[Foi cx inaiva be La Psea 
  
 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4  
© 
A
n
-
N
a
h
a
r
 
FREEDOM OF THE 
  
MEDIA UNDER ATTACK 
  
Do recent security threats 
greatly limit the work of the 
press and its approach to sen- 
sitive issues? 
| don't think so. Opinions ex- 
pressed remain just as lively and 
distinct, even if the verbal violence 
has abated somewhat. We are per- 
haps getting closer to political chit- 
chat. 
In other Arab countries, the 
work of a journalist is still far 
from being independent. How 
do you see the future for the 
profession in the region? 
It's hard to generalize. The press 
in Lebanon, for instance, is differ 
ent from the one subsisting under 
a totalitarian regime, where it “be- 
longs” to the state. In that situation, 
you don't have to worry about your 
freedom, because you no longer 
have any! 
An abundance of new media 
is being launched in the Arab 
world, notably satellite 
television channels. Do you 
  
1x8 
or 
i SACLE - m 7) 
Difficult situation Situation difficile 
Very serious situation Situation trés grave 
10 
Good situation Situation bonne 
Satisfactory situation Situation plutot bonne 
Noticeable problems Problémes sensibles 
think this phenomenon can 
promote freedom of expression 
and the press? 
This profusion certainly expands the 
space for freedom of expression. Yet 
we could call it a “collapse into free- 
dom”. | have misgivings about televi- 
sion programming. | prefer not to men- 
tion the names of channels, but the 
superficiality, even on the most sensi- 
tive issues, the endless running time, 
the repetition of a lot of programming, 
these cause profound boredom. Pro- 
fusion unfortunately also means filling 
up air time with gratuitous and medio- 
cre productions and imported series. 
More seriously, some shows are de- 
liberately provocative, instead of open- 
ing the door for rational exchange and 
making a positive contribution to soci- 
ety by bolstering mutual understand- 
ing and promoting the search for truth. 
In that way the danger is that they con- 
tribute to solidifying or even amplifying 
problems. In this “abundance”, the 
news is the most likely victim of this 
collapse, because it's presented 
like entertainment sandwiched 
between two fruitless analyses. 
   
PRESS WORLDWIDE IN 2007 
 
   
  

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### 152080: The Courier looks back

  
The Courier looks back 
Dr Julian Huxley, UNESCO's first Director-General, outlined his views on press freedom in a speech 
before the United Nations Conference on Freedom of Information in Geneva on 25 March 1948. 
The following month, The Courier carried an abridged version of his address. An excerpt: 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
    
   
  
     
           
   
ZR 
| \\ 
4 HR 
al. oY 3 IN 
— 
      
wh 
Dr Julian Huxley, UNESCO's first Director-General. 
“The realisation of freedom of information 
does not consist simply in opening up ac- 
cess to more and more masses of infor- 
mation of any and every kind. Nor does it 
mean the absence of let or hindrance to 
information...A laisser-faire anarchy in the 
services of information is incompatible 
with the true nature of liberty, and can only 
derive from a blindness to the real needs 
of the world, to the real inequalities which 
exist, to the basic character of many of the 
obstacles which have been established, 
and to the true sources of the differences 
of opinion on the nature of these obsta- 
cles... 
We must have it in our considered minds 
to denounce both the distortion of news 
and the common vulgarity of which the 
purveyors of news are so frequently guilty. 
Here the professional organisations in the 
field of information, with their undoubted 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°4 
awareness of the problem before us, have 
a great social role to play in applying them- 
selves even more intensely to the consid- 
eration of the self-criticism, self-discipline 
and self-education which the occasion 
requires. 
What criteria are we to adopt in the 
evaluation of the content of information? 
If we attach ourselves, as in the old days 
of artisan press solely to the individual's 
right to express himself, the only criterion 
we can adopt is the criterion of truth. From 
this standpoint, the only constraints you 
can ask for are those rooted in the require- 
ments of public order. Further, it has be- 
come plain to us how much too general is 
this criterion of abstract truth...It would be 
better, | suggest, to describe freedom of 
information in terms of the functional rela- 
tionship of information to the needs of the 
people, whether it be in recognition of the 
11 
mass of the people as the only true fount 
of right and law, or whether it be simply in 
recognition of their right to the information 
they need... 
It is, | believe, when we look on the prob- 
lems of information in this way that we be- 
gin to realise their deep relationship with 
science and culture. Every group, scien- 
tific, artistic, professional or social which 
has its reality in performing a service to 
mankind should, for this reason, have its 
own organs of information and expression. 
Though from one angle they may repre- 
sent different and sometimes conflicting 
professional interests, their contributions 
are necessary to the common welfare of 
mankind and to the international under- 
standing and unity we seek. 
Julian Huxley 
 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/152042eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

gp 
        
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour I'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacién 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHu3aups 
O6beanHeHHbIX Hauuin no 
BOMpPOCaM 0b6pa30BaHus, 
HayKN WU KyNbTYpbl 
saaiall any daldis 
dala] Lu fo sill 
KE EAE. ot 
Bree ROU AA 
  
  
  
      
  
 
  
   
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
http://www.unesco.org/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
courier.unesco@unesco.org 
Director 
Saturnino Munoz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Enzo Fazzino 
EDITORS 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org 
English 
Stephen Roberts, Edna Yahil 
French 
Agnes Bardon 
Russian 
Vladimir Sergueev, Katerina Markelova 
Spanish 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
Editorial Assistant 
José Banaag 
Photo editor 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web Platform 
Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be 
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” 
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without 
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations 
of the countries and territories concerned.