# [074116](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

ISNA : nA 492, 
) 
| Publication No. 2, 
VOLUME Il — N° 9 _ Lo PRICE : 10 Cents (U.S.) or é Pence (U.K.) | OCTOBER, 1949. . 
 ¥ 
    
  
im 
$ 
  
® Maivarsal Daclaration of Human 
Rights ws adopted by the General 
Assembly of We. United Nations, 
\ mpeting in Paris, on 10 December, 
\: Tula. was the fourth highoric Act of its 
} . 
   
» \ 
   
p Wad, proclaimed by a free Assembly or reluc- 
Wnty accepted by a reigning sovereign, within 
a non of seven and ao quarter centuries, 
« gna Carta » was signed by King Henry II 
cof England in 1225 AD. Nearly 600 years 
later the « Bill of Rights » was embodied in the 
Constitution of the United States of America, 
and the « Declaration of the Rights of Man » 
was incorporated in that of the French Republic. 
Now, after a second World War in which the 
flame of human liberty come perilously near 
extinction, the age-old refusal of enlightened 
peoples to submit to tyranny finds expression 
in a new Daclaration, signed and proclaimed 
Lhis time not by @ monarch, @ group of citizens 
or a national assembly, but by the representatives 
of 58 nations, united in defence of democracy. 
* 
   
   
   
   
  
 
bY 
" 
tal principles underlying these successive 
charters of human freedom have not chang- 
Sed. The very similarity of their languoge 
proves how constant is the need for vigilance 
iM the rights of the individual are to be preserved. 
The complexity of this ancient problem 
in modern limes may be gothered from the 
symposium on Human Rights prepared by Unesco 
this year. Let vs quote some passages: 
w Personal liberty can be mode secure only by 
gbolishing the abuse of power altogether. Unesco 
is engoged ot present In facilitating the task 
of mitigation; but it is in the fortunate position 
being able to proceed, if it so desires, to the 
Mcomparably more important task of prevention, 
of the radical removal of present impediments to 
liberty. This is primarily on offair for the scientific 
section of the Orgonizetion. » 
wit is vital for the future of the world that 
intense onimosities ond hotreds be allayed. This 
connol be done solely by social and psychological 
studies... The immediate objective of the scientist 
should be to ensure that oll branches of society 
in all nations are freed from economic anxiety.» 
# The common gools inherent in the ideal of the 
rights of man con only be attained as programmes 
of educotion ond instruction are based on the 
realization that there it no national culture which 
does not owe for more than is usually admitted 
to the Influence of the cultural heritage of man 
of ell races and of oll oges. » 
Lastly, an opinion from Unesco House itself: 
« From the moment that information comes 
to be regarded os one of the rights of man, the 
structures and practices which make of it an in- 
strument for the exploitation, by alienation, of the 
minds of the masses, for money or for power, 
con no longer be tolerated. » 
* 
I’ spite of the lapse of centuries, the fundamen- | 
experts has his own point of view, but ali 
of them, in effect, give the same warning 
fo mankind. The Rights of Man must be defended 
collectively, with every weapon in the armoury 
of peace. « Freedom of speech, freedom of 
religion, freedom from want, freedom from 
fear n—and, let us add, freedom from ignorance 
~=these are ine conditions of emancipation. 
Ser Education, Information—each of the 
 
    
CTOBER 5th 
5 
/ F TI Y N A I / O N S Only when these separate freedoms are 
truly guaranteed can the world hope to see the 
MB ERS : OF LINES CO dawn of a universal Freedom born of tolerance, 
Alo Ben ahd AEE ge LE : justice and goodwill towards men. : 
« When we enumerate man’s rights, we are 
@lso enumerating duties té6 be accomplished. None 
touches us more nearly than the right to education. » 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
 
 
      
— — — __ IN BRAZIL 
  


### 74117: In Brazil educators stirred by new approach to continental campaign against illiteracy

EDUCATORS STIRRED 
BY NEW APPROACH 
TO CONTINENTAL 
C AMPA G N 
AGAINST ILLITERACY 
Unesco-sponsored Seminar 
launches "global attack for 
education of 70 million 
adult 
     
August, the tourist books say, are 
the most delightful periods to 
visit Rio de Janeiro. For a small 
group of educators, who had come .to 
participate in the Inter-American Semi- 
nar on Literacy and Adult Education, 
{he pleasant Brazilian winter, however, 
was no holiday. 
They began to arrive, mostly by 
plane, towards ihe end of July. .\t the 
Santos Dumont airport in the heart of 
Rio, they were bundled into high- 
powered, spacious taxis and whisked 
through the Federal Capital past the 
Sugar Loaf and Guanabara Bay. Two 
lwours later, still breathless and dizzy 
from the winding, tortuous road trip 
through the Organ Mountains behind 
Rio, they were deposited at the door of 
the sumptuous Hotel Quitandinha, near 
Pelropolis. Here, they remained. for tive 
fall weeks, from July 27 to September 
2. to examine one of the most burning 
problems of fhe entire .\merican conti- 
nent: 0.000.000 adult illiterates and 
19.000.000 American children deprived 
of schools. 
To the Inter-American Seminar, or- 
ganized jointly by Unesco, the Organi- 
zation of American States (OAS), and the 
Brazilian Government, came some of 
the most distinguished educational 
leaders from the New and the Old 
World : the originator of Mexico's fam- 
ed « Cultural Missions » for literacy 
Professor Guillermo Bonilla yv Segura 
known throughout his country simply 
as « El Maestro »; young, energetic 
Ismael Rodriguez Bou, educational re- 
searcher from Puerto Rico: witty Er- 
nesto Nelson, statistical giant of Argen- 
tina; Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget: 
literacy primer specialist Ann Nolan 
‘Clark, of the United States; and Colo- 
nel George Selwyn Simpson, bringing 
with him 35 years experience in literacy 
teaching in the British Army. 
- For the occasion, the Brazilion Gov- 
ernment called in some of its best edu- 
T" mid-winter months of July and 
  
  
SUBSCRIBE NOW! 
get them to subscribe too. 
80 Chichester Street. 
Voorhout, The Hague. 
Broadway, New York 27, N.Y.   
The Unesco Courier is an international monthly periodical devoted to 
th: work of Unesco and to activities and developments throughout the 
world in education, sciencz: and culture. 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $ 1.00 US, or 5/-. 
Tell your friends about the Unesco Courier and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to Unesco 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16°, France. 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana S. A. Alsina 500 Buenos-Aires 
Australia : H A. Goddard Ltd., 255 a. George St., Sydney. 
Belgium : Librairie encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Bruxelles IV. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, Toronto. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, R. de Smdt, O'Reilly, Habana. 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard, 8, Norregade, Copenhague. 
Great Britain : MM. Stationery Office : London : York House, Kingsway 
(Retail Counter Service) : P.O. Box 509. London. S.EI. (Post orders). - 
Manchester 2 : 39-41 King Street. - Edinburgh 2 : 13a Castle Street. - 
Cardiff : I St Andrew's Crescent. - Bristol I : Tower Lane. - Belfast : 
France : Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Soufflot, Paris (5°). 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale, Athens. TL 
India : Oxford Book and Stationery Co. Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie universelle, av. des Frangais, Beirut. 
Low Countries : N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Afd., Fondsaministratie, 9 Lange 
Portugal : Unido Portuguesa de Impresa, Caixa Postal €15, Lisboa 
Sweden : Ab. O.E. Fritzes, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
Switzerland : Librairie Payot, Lausanne. } 
Uruguay : Libreria international S.RL., Calle Uruguay 183, Montevideo. 
U. S. A. : International Documents Service, Columbia University Press 2960 
i[literates and 
19 million children with- 
out schools in the Americas 
cational experts : Fernando Tude de 
Souza, Antonio Almeida Junior, Mario 
Teixeira de Freitas and Mario Paulo de 
Brito. 
Dr. Lourenco Filho, director of Bra- 
zil's hignly successtui 2 -4 year cam- 
paign against illiteracy, left his desk. 
on the fourteenth floor of the ultra- 
modern Ministerio de Educacao e¢ Saude 
to take over leadership of the interna- 
tional seminar. With him were Guiller- 
mo Naanetfi. 39-year old former Mi- 
nister of Education of Colombia and 
special OAS representative, and Dr, 
Frederick J. Rex, eminent American 
educator and Unesco's field representa- 
tive, in Fundamental Education. 
vo 
Fresh Ideas 
And Techniques 
educationists the Seminar sought 
and achieved no miracles. The 
70.000.000 adult illilerates still remain to 
be integrated into the life-stream of 
Latin-American communities and na- 
tions, But from the careful, five-week 
exchange of ideas and experiences there 
emerged a scries of new ideas, new 
methods and techniques, which have 
set the bases for the first co-ordinated 
attack ever planned on -a continental 
scale against what Torres Bodet has 
termed “one of the most disquieting 
problems of our century”. 
During recent years, a number of 
Latin-American countries have made 
special efforts to combat illiteracy 
among their urban and rural popula- 
tions. In spite of successful advances 
in some regions, progress in most Latin- 
American Republics has been slow. 
What was needed, it was felt, was a 
linking up of forces, a pooling of ex- 
periences, the weeding out of out-mod- 
I spile of this impressive {eam of 
  
  
  
 
THE SECOND ABOLITION. 102-year old Senhor Cequeira of the littie town of 
Guaratinguetd is a symbol of the desire of Brazilians to benefit from the nation- 
wide adult education campaign against 
S. Paulo). 
ed methods and lechniques, and a 
fresher approach to the entire problem. 
This the Unesco-sponsored Seminar 
at Quitandinha definitely. provided. 
IL provided, above all, a fresh 
approach to the continental problem of 
illiteracy by inspiring all participants, 
in all five groups, with the new con- 
cept -— for Latin-America — of Adull 
Eaucation, which aims at raising the 
general living conditions of the people 
through the improvement of health, 
agriculture, and family and community 
life, with literacy training as only one 
step towards the accomplishment of 
that end. 
In this respect. the inspired contribu- 
tion of Dr. Guillermo Nannetti, as lea- 
der of the working group on Literacy 
and Adult Education, won the admira- 
tion and enthusiastic praise of the en- 
tire Seminar. This vast and unexplored 
field in Latin America, came alive in the 
short space of five weeks and took on 
breadth and force. By the end of the 
Seminar, 30 educators and experts, 
working under the guidance of Dr. 
Nannetti, had produced the first Hand- 
book on Adult Education ever to appear 
in Portuguese and Spanish. This 65-page 
volume, which represents the most am- 
bitious achievement of the Seminar cov- 
ers an extensive range of subjects. 
ranging from the role of the media of 
- mass communication and agricultural 
extension in adult education to labour 
organizations and co-opéralives. 
Most Heated 
Debate of Seminar 
tainly the most heated debate of 
the Quitandinha Seminar was 
touched oft when the working group 
studving literacy teaching methods, led 
by Dr. Frederick Rex, presented its 
findings and conclusions to the final 
plenary session of the Seminar. 
For five weeks, the group of educa- 
tors had studied and analyzed the difter- 
ent methods for teaching people to 
read and write. This included the meth- 
od most widely used and adapied in 
Latin-America and in other parts of the 
P EruAPs hie most important and cer- 
world — the Laubach Method — based 
on the use of "picturable words rela 
ted to groups of sounds”. The educa- 
tors also made a detailed and careful 
study of the “Global or Senlence Meth- 
nd” — Dbased on the principle that the 
student first understands the meaning 
of a senlence or thought before he 
knows and analyzes its parts (ie. 
words, letters and groups of sounds:. 
In its conclusions the group went on 
record unanimously favouring the Glo- 
hal Method. 
When these conclusions were pre- 
sented to the plenary meeting of ihe 
~cminar. the “battle of the methods” 
raged for over three hours. Tempers 
illiteracy. (Photo « O. Cruzeiro», 
rose, nerves were frayed. But in the 
end, the Global Method was upheld by 
an overwhelming majority of Seminar 
participants, who agreed that : 
Concerning the problem of method, the 
Seminar wishes to go on record that it 
accepts the scientific evidence in favour 
of the sentence or global method for 
teaching children to read. On the ba- 
sis of objective data and corroborative 
evidence of the psychology of adults, 
of their interests and ways of learning, 
the Seminar recommends the same me- 
thod for the teaching of adult illite- 
rates until such time as the results of 
research and controlled experiments 
prove the contrary. This preference 
does not suggest, in any way, the in- 
advisability of extensive experiments to 
strengthen, modify, or change the me- 
thodological position expressed by the 
Seminar. . : 
Teacher of the 
Americas 
whose work as leader of Brazil's 
successful literacy campaigns has 
won him inlernational recognition, 
should have taken over responsibility of 
one of the most important working 
groups of the Seminar§ on The Organi- 
zation of Literacy Campaigns. At the 
end of the five weeks, Dr. Lourenco, 
with the aid of his small group, had 
completed a series of basic papers 
which will be invaluable to any govern- 
ment or organization seeking to under- 
take or improve a compaign for literacy 
in any given pari of Latin-America. 
For his leadership at the Inter-Ameri- 
can Seminar, for his unselfish devotion 
to the cause of education, not only in 
his own country but in all the Ameri- 
can Republics. every member of the 
Seminar acclaimed Lourenco Filho as 
“El Maesro de las Americas”. 
Already, the influence of the Inter- 
American Seminar has left its mark. 
During the final days of the plenary 
meetings, the State Representatives of 
the Brazilian Literacy and Adult Edu- 
cation Campaign met at the Hotel Qui- 
tandinha for their annual conference. 
As a result of their direct contact with 
the participants at the Seminar they vot- 
ed to put into application immediately 
one of the final resolutions passed call- 
ing for the organization of national 
seminars whose aim would be to study 
the application in each country of the 
conclusions reached at the Rio de Ja- 
neiro Seminar. The first national semi- 
nar {o be held in thie Americas will take 
place next month in the city of Sao 
Paulo. 
Finally, the participants unanimously 
voted a recommendation calling for the 
creation of a Centre to train writers 
and illustrators from different coun- 
tries to prepare basie, supplementar 
and general reading materials, a< wel 
as a Centre [o train teachers of aduli 
vilieation, 
I was fitling that Dr. Lourenco Filho,

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### 74118: Concentrated programme' for UNESCO urged by delegates to 4th General Conference

Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
‘CONCENTRATED PROGRAMME 
For Unesco Urged “ 
by Delegates To 4th 
General Conference 
HIS issue of the « Courier » covers only the opening 
and first days of the UNESCO General Conference 
Our last month’s 
containing 32 pages, gave a comprehensive preview of the 
subjects to be discussed. Full details of the results and 
conclusions reached at the conference as well as reports 
on the 3-day debate scheduled to open at the Maison de la 
Chimie in Paris on September 27 will be found in our next 
now meeting in Paris. 
number. 
FTER travelling to Mexico City 
A in 1947 and to Beirut in 1948, 
Unesco’s General Conference 
“came home” to Paris, this year, 
for its Fourth Session which on Septem- 
ber 19 opened in Unesco House — only a 
few steps away from the historic Arch 
of Triumph. 
Into the plenary hall, on Monday 
morning, filed over 250 delegates and 
observers under the “fire” of world 
press and film photographers who are 
reporting the conference. 
Sharply at 10.30 a.m. the noise and 
talking in the crowded assembly stopped 
as HE. Ahmed Bey Daouk, head of the 
Lebanese Delegation, advanced to the 
speakers platform, which had as its 
backcloth the flags of Unesco’s 50 Mem- 
ber States, and declared the Fourth Ses- 
sion open. 
Following the Unesco tradition, its 
General Conference is opened by the 
representative of the country which 
provided the chairman of the previous 
Conference. This tradition, Ahmed Bey 
Daouk remarked, “brings to my mind 
the ceremonies of the Olympics of 
ancient Greece in which runners, handing 
  
eed 
number, 
on a flaming torch, carried it finally to 
the altar of Prometheus”. 
Later in the morning, Dr. E. Ronald 
Walker, head of the Australian Delega- 
tion, was unanimously elected chairman 
of Unesco’'s fourth annual conference. 
Previous chairmen have been: M. Leon 
Blum in Paris (1946), H.E. Don Manuel 
Gua! Vidal in Mexico (City (1947) and 
M. Hamid Bey Frangie in Beirut (1948). 
‘M. Georges Bidault, former Prime 
Minister and head of the French Dele- 
gation, who had been proposed as 
chairman of the Paris Conference had 
declined, stating that as Unesco would 
now meet in Paris every two years, it 
could not be expected that a French 
delegate be chairman every other year. 
HE first days of the conference, 
which this issue of the COUR- 
RIER is reporting, were taken up 
almost entirely with the presentation 
and discussion of the annual report of 
the Director-General. Presenting this 
report, Sir Radhakrishnan, 
recently appointed Indian Ambassador 
to Moscow and Chairman of Unesco's 
Executive Board, warned delegates that 
Unesco's mission could be fulfilled only 
Sarvepalli 
Some of the 250 delegates and ob- 
servers (above) at the General Con- 
ference. Right. Mr U Ba Lwin, head 
of the Burmese Delegation. 
 
ISRAEL 
and PAKISTAN 
Join UNESCO 
T° countries. which recently gain- 
ed their independence — Pakis- 
tan and Israel — joined UNESCO on 
the eve of its Fourth General Confter- 
ence und thus brought the total 
number of its member countries to 50. 
Delegations from both these coun- 
tries have been present at the Confer- 
euce, Israel’s being led by the Israeli 
Minister in Paris, Mr Maurice Fisher 
and Pakistan’s by M. S.M. Sharif.     
if governments and National Commis- 
sions played their full part. “Unfortu- 
nately”, he said. “the activity of many 
member states does not extend bevond 
attendance at sessions of the General 
Conference. It is obvious that at the na- 
tional level, there is a breakdown in the 
means of implementation of Unesco's 
programme.” 
The second day of the conference was 
marked by a British proposal to alter 
the agenda so as to allow the conference 
immediately to fix a ceiling for Unesco’s 
1950 budget. This proposal, coming 
24 hours after news of important cur- 
rency devaluations in Great Britain and 
other countries, provoked lively opposi- 
tion from delegates of a dozen nations, 
and was finally wichdrawn., = 
IDEAS 
Piao EECA ul — 
AND OPINIONS 
LIED Ew SIE EE UR ES EE ELI, 


### 74119: There must be no question of a devaluation of UNESCO

~~. THERE MUST BE NO QUESTION 
~~ OF A DEVALUATION OF UNESCO 
EORECR UT SR AIR SEE 
  
  
  
  
 
     
    
 
  
In some respects, the Paris conference 
differs from previous ones. In principle 
it was to have been “a short business 
session”, but it has come to be definitely 
more important than was at first expected 
. because of vital discussions on Unesco's 
participation in the UN plan for techni- 
cal assistance to underdeveloped areas 
and the interest already aroused in the 
“Duties of the State” debate. 
OME "of the latest technical facili- 
ties and equipment have been mo- 
bilized to bring the conference's 
message to the public. Thus, for the 
first time in conference 
practice, the speeches of delegates are 
not being set down in shorthand but are 
being registered on magnetic-wire record- 
ing apparatus. Sound recordings of the 
Fourth Session are being made at Unesco 
House studios for French, Belgian and 
other radio networks and are also being 
flown to Lake Success for broadcast on 
special UN radio programmes. Similar 
recordings will also be made for the 
international debate beginning on Sep- 
tember 27 which will be placed at the 
disposal of broadcasting systems through- 
out the world. 
international 
5Y ROBERT LOMBARD 
SPECIAL COUR       
  
HE General Conference of Unesco is more 
than a crowd of people invading the « tran 
quility » of Unesco House, and more than 
mere academic or diplomatic discussions. It is 
a meeting of men and women who have come 
together for a short time to give to the world 
living proof of the work of Unesco. With the 
presence of delegates from all over the world, 
Unesco’s different projects, experiments and 
investigations take on a greater human interest 
and warmth. 
An educational mission to the Philippines or 
to Afghanistan for example might appear to be 
of limited interest. It seems very different, 
however, when the Afghan representative tells of 
the hopes his country places in the work of the 
Unesco mission there, or when the delegate of 
the Philippines in her striking butterfly-wing 
dress expresses the thanks of her war-devastated . 
country for the help sent to schools, laboratories 
and libraries. 
But above all a Unesco general conference is a 
sign of hope, perhaps one of the few real hopes 
for peace that still remain for mankind. This 
very idea was expressed by India’s representative 
world ten years after the beginning of the last 
war, four years after the victory was won. One 
after another the illusions which we have 
cherished are disappearing. We thought that the 
sense of community would resolve all class dis- 
tinctions, as it did during the period of the 
war. It has not happened. We thought again that 
the United Nations would be the beginning of a 
new world. Well, again it has not happened. We 
thought that the allies who fought the war and 
won the victory would stand united and win the 
peace — that has not happened ». 
Sir Sarvepalli ended with an urgent appeal to 
delegates : « These days are big with fate The 
issue of war or peace haunts us; there is an 
atmosphere of gloom; conflict is creeping slowly 
and steadily. Is it not possible under such cir- 
cumstances for all our leaders, for those who 
stand up for the great ideals, to get together? 
For, say half a dozen of them — two from Asia 
two from Europe, America and Russia, to get 
together, not for achieving any political results, 
but for breaking down this blinding mist of 
misunderstanding, breaking through this moun- 
tain w3l! of prejudice and trying to understand 
Dr G. Zook (United States). on left, explains a point to Dr F. 
Bender (Netherlands) and Sir Ronald Adam (Great Britain), 
: seated. Ca 
Sir Sarvepalli’ Radhakrishnan, when, in moving 
words, he said : « Look at the condition of tne (CONTINUED ON PAGE 4)

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 74119: There must be no question of a devaluation of UNESCO

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 
Nd 5 ©, ed 7 eae SUT 
C
u
n
’
 
LS 
B
E
S
 
  
i fCantinued from Poge 3) od 
: MEAS hi ir ‘ 
we are real lovers of peace. Is it impos- 
sib.e? We are meeting in this great 
city, a city of artists, scholars, scien- 
tists, writers, a city of a gay, coura- 
geous and inspired people, a city which 
has seen so many revolutions, born of 
distress of mind, of anxiety itself, Well, 
can’t we, from this city, in the name of 
Unesco, send forth a messags, asking 
the leadzrs to listen to the cry of 
anguished humanity, asking them to 
bui.d peace, net on the bloodshed of 
the peoples of the worid in the battle- 
fields of earth, water and air, but on 
truth and justice, built into the minds 
and consciences of human pzop.e. Can’t 
we do that ? » 
Building truth and justice into the 
minds and consciences of human pzop.e 
is what Unesco is seeking to do in its 
day to day work. But the work is too 
often hampered by all sorts of difficul- 
ties. Like all other efforts of man, 
Unesco cannot claim perfection. 
That is why. for Unesco, the G:aneral 
Conference serves as a means of celf- 
examination. It forces Unesco to take 
stock of the efforts made as compared 
with the resuits achieved. At the same 
tim= it enables Unesco’s friends not 
only to support it, but to offer an ever- 
watchful and ccastructive criticism. 
And, in fact, such suggestions or criti- 
cism concerning Unesco’s working 
methods, were frankly voiced by the 
37 speakers who addressed the Assem- 
bly during the discassion of the Direc- 
tor-Gzaneral’'s annual report. Space, 
however, permits us to quote only a 
few of the many important views ex- 
pressed during the first four days of 
the Conference. 
‘In Our Own Right 
R. George V. Alien, Head of the 
M United States delegation, took 
the view that Unesco should 
work more closely with the United Na- 
tions. «Unesco exists», he said «to 
strengthen the system of the United 
Nations. How can Unesco best serve the 
United Nations? I hope that this 
question w.ll be thoughtfully considered 
by every delegate who proposes a pro- 
ject to be undertaken by Unesco, or 
who votes a budget item during this 
conference ». 
M. Georges Bidault, Head of the 
Fr:nch deiegation, speaking a few 
hours later, took the opposite view and 
asked that Unesco should preserve a 
 
 
has decided to bring before the general public 
an important international debate touching on 
one of the great problems of our times: the 
duties of the State in the modern world. 
debate the very conception of the role of the State 
will be examined, and with it the role of man and 
his rights as a member of society. 
S PART of its Paris Conference this year, Unesco 
It is this close relation between huma 
the duties of the State, and the need ing. - 
States’ duties so as to safeguard mallsa very, En iY. , 
rights, which has led Unesco to under zr 
debate which will be open to the public in Borie ond [EERE 
which will be heard by radio listeners 
the world through specially prepared re an 
Each evening from September 27 to 29, three erin 8 
  
In this 
rights ~<A. 
e the groaf 
  
{sorts off Mina Pa 
a. er 
= 
 


### 74120: The Duties of the State in regard to education, science and culture

THE DUTIES 
oF THE STATE 
2, 
In regard to 
Education 
Science 
} 
| 
and 
Culture 
AN 
* * 
    
INTERNATIONAL DEBATE ON 
ONE OF THE FUNDAMENTAL 
PROBLEMS OF THE PRESENT AGE 
SPEAKERS INCLUDE  
Georges BIDAULT (France) 
Reinho.d NIEBUHR (U.S.A) 
Bertrand RUSSELL (C.K.) 
Jean PIAGET (Switzerland) 
F. HERCIK 1Czechoslovakia) 
Alf Sa | A (Norway) 
nienic CASTRO LEAL {Mexico)- 
Tara CHAND (India) of the themes. 
ent world personalities will present their points of 
view on the following question: « What are the duties 
of the State in regard to education, science and culture 
for the purpose of ensuring a better understanding 
between peoples, and what practical steps should be 
taken in order to discharge those duties? » 
After the three speakers, five or six « debaters » 
from different countries, particularly representative 
of their culture, will take part in a prolonged discussion   
degree of independence : « ..Let us 
op:rate », he said « in our own right, 
in accordance with the essential prin- 
ciples we share with the United Na- 
tions, as one of its Agencies, closely 
connected to it, out as an organiza- 
tion which nevertheless has its own 
life, its own goals, its own intentions 
and desires and, be it added, its own 
duties ». 
Al speakers stressed the need for 
Unesco to « concentrate its pro- 
gramme ». Above all, stated M. Paulo 
Carneiro, head of the Brazilian de.e- 
gation, « so that the Secretariat can 
really give full thought to each pro- 
blem ». Other reasons were given by 
Mr Hardman, representative of the 
United Kingdom: « We here at this 
Conference », he said, « who are learn- 
ed and intelligent individual men and 
women have a special responsibility as 
representatives of our Commissions and 
governments. The responsibility is, I 
think, to see that thinking and publi- 
city become action. to ally thought 
with the doing of things. As it would 
Dr E. 
Bodet. Below, are NE 
delegation (left). and. 
Above, 
be expressed colloquially in parts of my 
coantry. « Cut the cackle to a mini- 
mum and get on with the job ». Turn- 
ing to certain of Unesco’s specific acti- 
vities. Mr Hardman went on : « When 
one thinks that some forty million pa- 
ges of cyclostyled memoranda and doc- 
uments- in a single year have ema- 
nated from the Organization, surely it 
is reasonable that we should ask our- 
salves, is all this really necessary ? 
Pursuing the same-iine of thought, he 
later said”: « ..the kind of questions 
this ‘business conference must ask it- 
s2if is this : « How many people have 
we taught to read for the first time in 
their lives, since the Beirut Confe- 
rence ? and not ' how many cyclostyl- 
ed pages of memoranda and luxury 
editions have we published? '» 
HESE detailed discussions of 
Unesco's activities have not meant 
that no delegates have tried to 
find solutions to the fundamental prob- 
lems facing mankind today. Thus, for 
example, Mr Mev Yi Chi, the delegate 
Some of the delegates to the Fourth General Conlerence. Above. left. 
Alsona (Philippines). 
5. Eisenhower (United States); Dr Walter H.C. Laves. Deputy Director- 
Geamal of Unescos TL Rages Seydoux (France) and M. jaime Torres 
Loe 
reading from 
roe left to right, Dr Millon 
bead of the Thailand 
Mr Hass Kjems 
Pia Maelakul 
left to right, 
{Secretary of the Danish National Commission), Miss Helga Pederson 
and Mr Paul de la Cour. three Danish delegates. 
 
of China, concuded his speech with 
these words: « For mutual understand- 
ing and appreciation between the East 
and the West, it seems that much of 
the best of the two cultures, in lite- 
rature, in art and in philosophy, should 
be broaght out as complementing fac- 
tors for what we hop: eventually to ar- 
rive at — the birth of a world culture. 
The West is making great strides in 
the advancz of modern civilization, but 
for an ultimate so.ution of the situa- 
tion arising from conflicting ideas and 
attitudes as we have to-day, we may 
need to search seriously into the phi- 
lesophies of the East and the West, 
pzrhaps more of the East. 
The Polish delegate, M. Putrament, 
voiced strong opposition to any Unesco 
activities in Germany, thereby differ- 
ing completely with M. E] Hashimi, 
the de.egate of Iraq, who had com- 
p.ained that Unesco was not douing 
enough there. 
At the close of the discussion, the 
Director-General ot Unesco replied to 
the various speakers. To those who had 
comp.ained that Unesco’s programme 
was too broad, M. Torres Bodet said : 
« Instead of asking for resources ap- 
propriate to secure the aims of the pro- 
gramme, the programme can be 
broagiit down to the lever of the re- 
sourcas. But I wou.d point out that the 
programme of which you compiain is 
not my programme ; I had it irom you 
in Beirut, stil warm with the enthu- 
siasm of your discussions. It is, there- 
fore, your own work that you want to 
reduce. You are certain.y entitied to do 
so, but, gentlemen, I bzg you to think 
carefully before you do it, and not to 
aliow yourselves to be guided sole.y by 
financial considerations. Do not let the 
curiency deva.uation which, in certain 
countries, has coincided with this Ses- 
sion of the Conference, be a sign of 
the deva:uation of Unesco ! » 
Holding out Hope 
letter which he had received 
fo.lowing his opening speech at 
the General Conterence. The letter 
had stated that it was not «boastful 
propaganda » to make Twentieth-Cen- 
tury man familiar with Unesco’s aims, 
but «a way of holding out hope». «Are 
we to be prevented from holding out 
hope », asked M. Torres Bodet. «Do 
we wish to hold up Unesco’s develop- 
ment in its fourth year of existence at 
the very moment when it is becoming 
firmly established, when it is beginning 
to give tangible signs of its resolve and 
of successful achievement, by deferring 
further progress to a later date? Or do 
we wish to push ahead with yet more 
energy and iarger resources? I do not 
hesitate to state my conviction that if 
we defer progress to later, it will be 
too late. We shall have foundered in 
apathies. Life is a constant effort. He 
who does not go forward drops back, 
he who drops back is lost. There can 
be no hesitation b2tween a great and 
a little Unesco, between a Unesco which 
stands still and a dynamic Unesco, es- 
pacially at this ear.y stage in its his- 
tory, this moment in the world's his- 
tory. Unesco must be a great force or 
nothing. Our Constitution commits us 
to greatness, Gentlemen, you no doubt 
rea.ize this as c.early as I do, and I 
hope in all earnestness that your dis- 
cussions will make this clear beyond a 
doubt ». 
M TORRES BODET then quoted a 
°

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 74121: Universal rights: UNESCO exhibition opens in Paris October - December 1949

UNIVERSAL RIGHTS gm 
Unesco Exhibition 
Opens in Paris 
October - December 1949 
ne Paris exhibition on Human Rights, which 
opens at the Musée Galliéra on October 1, is 
the most important achievement to date in 
Unesco’'s plan to publicize the story of’ 
mankind's age-old fight for freedom, so as to 
encourage modern man to respect and defend the rights 
on which it is founded. 
The largest public exhibition which Unesco has yet 
organized, it has required months of research and pre- 
paration, and, above all, close collaboration between the 
Unesco Secretariat in Paris and the Governments and 
National Commissions of Unesco’s Member States. 
Undoubtedly the most striking proof of this success- 
ful collaboration is that Unesco has been able lo 
assemble a remarkable collection of authentic histo- 
rical documents upon which are founded the laws and 
guarantees now enjoyed by citizens of different 
countries. 
Loaned by the governments of these countries for 
display at the exhibition, these original documents— 
charters, declarations and drafts—not only advanced 
the progress of human rights in their countries of 
origin, but were a source of inspiration to people in 
other lands also struggling to achieve freedom. 
Documents such as the French Constitution of 1791 
and Lincoln’s early draft of the Emancipation Procla- 
mation which freed the slaves in the United States, both 
of which are among those on display, illustrate the 
fight for human rights throughout the centuries and 
‘their acknowledgement across the world. 
uT, the niin purpose of the exhibition is not simply 
to present historic documentary evidence on the 
progressive recognition of human rights in different 
countries. Primarily, it aims to show the debt that 
mankind to-day owes to the “ fighters for freedom” of 
the past and that the task they began will only be 
complete when the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights has been converted into fact. 
Emphasizing the universal nature of the responsibi- 
lity for achieving and defending human rights and thus 
bringing out a “world task™ theme for the exhibition, 
the first exhibit at the Musée Galliéra is a planetarium. 
Through its window, visitors will see the earth turning 
in space — an earth whose political divisions have sym- 
ET bY ¢ ITOYRN | 
* r— —- — 
Es DROITS Re u HOM My: 
Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
   
  
 
One of the milestones in Man's struggle for Human Rights was the storming of the Bastille 
in 1789. Above. French workmen who helped construct Unesco’s Exhibition on Human 
Rights at the Musée Galliéra in Paris, study a panel reproducing text of Freach Declara- 
tion of Rights of Man and small model showing demolition of Bastille. 
Man conquering his Freedom 
STOP PRESS September 30. Today. the Exhibition on Human Rights, organized 
by Unesco in co-operation with the French authorities, wes inaugu- 
rated in Paris by M. Yvon Delbos, Minister of Education and personal representative of 
M. Vincent Auriol, President of the French Republic. 
The exhibition located at the Musée Calliera will be open to the public from October | to 
December 31 and as been prepared to coincide with Unesco’s General Conference now meeting 
in Paris. In the following pages. the Unesco Courier is presenting some of the aspects of Human 
Rights which are illustrated in detail at the Exhibition, 
_bolically been left unmarked. And, as lhey 
look into the window, they will hear a 
recorded voice repeating the texts of the first 
three articles of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. 
With this spoken prologue in their minds, 
they can next take a “ pocket tour” of man- 
kind’s history from prehistoric times down 
to the present day. Illustrated panels and 
panoramas show man’s slow emancipation 
and his gradual mastery of nature and him- 
self: the first tools, the first forms of cultiva- 
tion, the first affirmations of moral laws and 
the later conquest of civic and political rights 
itustrate the contributions of all peoples, 
nations and civilizations to the sum total of . 
Human Rights. 
HEN, having told the story of how many 
of the rights were achieved, the exhibi- 
tion shows in a series of illustrations 
how these rights were abused and violated by 
totalitarian states, a state of affairs which led 
to the Second World War. A fresh series of 
photographs shows the struggle of the deme- 
cracies to re-assert the rights and, the even- 
tual establishment of the United Nations to 
found a peace based on the principles laid 
down by President Roosevelt, in his famous 
“ Four Freedoms” message of January 6, 
1944. 
This pictorial * history book of the last 
two decades leads visitors into a second hall 
where 14 pillars illustrate episodes relating 
to one or more of the 30 articles of the Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human Rights adopted 
by the General Assembly of the United Na- | 
tions on December 10, 1948. 
One side of each pillar shows the periods 
in history when the rights concerned were 
respected and, lower down, when the rights 
were violated or ceased to exist. Illustra- 
tions on the other side of the pillar show 
steps in the fight for human rights and the 
results achieved in the struggle. 
It is hoped in this way to bring home the 
extent of the debt owed by humanity to those 
men and women whose efforts and sacrifices 
built up the existing heritage while at the 
same time making clear the practical impor- 
tance of their achievements. 
Having told the background story of the 
fight for Human Rights, the exhibition then 
shows some of the “ milestones ” on the road 
to their universal recognition — original 
historic documents from France, Belgium 
and the United States. 
The last part of the exhibition is devoted 
to the duties which each person must fulfil 
if Human Rights are to become and remain 
a reality for all, special emphasis being 
laid on the responsibility for creating a better 
world for children. 
To show the measure of responsibility for 
safeguarding the rights of future genera- 
tions, a number of ingenious devices have 
been used. One, showing the average number 
of children being born in the world during 
each minute is set at zero each morning, and, 
by the time the exhibition closes in the 
evening, something like 20,000 births will 
have been registered. 
T is very fitting that the words of Mahat- 
ma Gandhi, one of the greatest defenders 
of human rights who ever lived, should 
have been chosen as an “epilogue” for visi- 
tors to read as they leave the exhibition. 
In a letter which Gandhi wrote in 1947 to 
Dr Julian Huxley, at that time Director- 
General of Unesco, he said : “I learnt from 
my illiterate but wise mother that all rights 
to be deserved and preserved came from 
duty well done. Thus, the very right to live 
‘accrues to us only when we do the duty of 
citizenship of the world. From this one fun- 
+ damental statement, perhaps it is easy 
enough to define the duties of Man and 
Woman and correlate every right to some 
corresponding duty to be first performed. 
Every other right can be shown to be an usur- 
pation hardly worth fighting for” 
The Human Rights exhibition will be open 
to the general public from October 1 until 
December 31 and arrangements are being 
made for thousands of French school chil- 
dren to visit it. 
Unesco also hopes that it may be possible 
to provide Member States with materials for 
organizing in European capitals some sim- 
plified replica of the Paris Exhibition. It is 
also hoped that photographic reproductions 
and plans of the exhibition may be sent to 
countries far from Paris so that they {tno may 
be able to hold exhibitions iid give their 
people some idea of what has been ichieved.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 74122: The Rights of man through the ages

    
   
  
   
Black slavery continued to Hourish until almost the close of the 19th century. For years courageous men fought against this 
vicious exploitation of man by man which had begun in the 1€th century. An enlightened public opinion finally resulted in inter- 
national conventions putting a stop lo this inhuman. traffic (shown above) followed by total emancipation in one country after another, 
  
  
            
AN 
x 
  
DEMOCRATIC 
GOVERNMENT 
The British Parliament. shown in the 
above print as it appeared exactly three 
centuries ago. has been @ i for 
perliamentary government in almost all 
Mm countries, 
The will of the people should be the 
basis of the authority of government. On 
left, cithens of! Korea cast their voles 
in the Sst elections to be held since 
the country gained its independance.   
  
HOMO HOMINI LUPUS. — Thus Plautus expressed his idea that man is a wolf to his fellow men. Seventeen 
centuries later, Hobbes voiced the same idea: in our times, it even became the principle of a criminal state 
policy. for which a new word « genocide » had to be coined. Does this mean that « the more it changes the 
more it’s the same thing ? » And yet'we have advanced far along the road since the « code » of King Ham- 
mourabi, of Babylon, who coldly condemned to death the son of the architect when a house collapsed 
and killed the landlord's son... since the disillusioned statement of Plautus... since the revolt caused by the 
quartering of Robert-Frangois Damiens (engraving upper left) for having struck King Louis XV with « pocket 
knife. It is this increasing struggle of the human conscience which will one day testify that « no one shall 
be subjected to torture. or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment ». 
In the « Deep South » an old « mammy » waves a handful 
ot cotton which for so many years was the material symbol 
of her people’s servitude. In abolishing slavery. the world 
was to learn how to ensure the triumph of human rights: 
by fulfiling a duty that was both national and international. 
tie RIGE 
RS. Eleanor Roosevelt, Chairman of the 
United Nations Human Rights Com- 
mission, following the adoption of the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, declared: 
«A great satisfaction should permeate the 
thoughts of all men, for the great documents 
declaring man’s inherent rights and freedoms 
which in the past have been written nationally, 
are now merged in an international universal 
declaration.” 
"To the right, some of the national Documents of 
Freedom which have marked. the fight for human 
rights during the past thousand years. 
We must never forget recent scenes such 
as these if we wish the Declaration of Human 
Rights to be anything but an expression of 
good intentions which could again pave the 
way to the hells of concentration camps.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

a -— - ro TT — ” rr vo - 
'MONTESQUIEU LINCOLN 
FIGHTERS — — 
From the author of the Champion of tresdom 
« Persian Letters » and from slavery. he gave 
«Spirit of the life for the victory 
or : be Laws». the French the common man 
; Revolution drew some victory he bad 
its noblest and struggled so ong and 
richest precticel prin ard to ochieve lor 
ciples of American people.  FREEDOM 
Six Leaders Among the PESTALOZZI Emmeline PAN KHURST 
  
Countless Thousands (1746-1827) (1858-1928) 
- Swiss educational In A traggle for 
who have devoted their Nrmar war daemon wonnty Sul thin 
laid the foundations of » English leader suliered 
requent imprisonment. modern slementary 
This right was won lor education, he devoted 
his lide to the educe 7 
tion of peor children. 
Lives to the Cause of 
Humanity.  
  
TS OF MA 
  
ruroucH tHE AGE 
GREAT BRITAIN 
{ MAGNA CARTA (1215) 
ONE of the outstanding European landmarks in 
the constant struggle for individual liberty, 
the Great Charter has been a source of inspiration 
10 many who, in later years, dedicated themselves 
:0 the cause of freedom. It defined the condi- 
i- tons under which taxes might be levied, forbade 
{legal imprisonment or seizure of property. 
MAGNUS 
LAGABOTERS LANDSLOV (1275) 
ROM early times, every free man could speak 
at the lawmaking councils of Norway and 
before the law all men were equal. The Landlov 
was a re-codification by King Magnus the 
Law-Mender of earlier provincial codes and 
defines the powers of government and the sanc- 
tity of man’s person. It expressly forbids trial 
without due process of law and assures liberty 
"of the tress and of trade. 
 
NEMINEM CAPTIVABIMUS ACT 
(1430) 
THIS charter which may be compared with 
the British Habeas Corpus Act, expressly 
forbids the imprisonment of any individual 
without fair trial and then only in accordance with 
the laws of the land. 
EQUALITY OF THE SEXES .— After a long 
¢ struggle, women in many parts of the world 
have won equality with men. Today, women are 
distinguishing tie¢mselves in business profes: 
sions, the arts, the sciences, medicine and 
public affairs. Research workers, doctors, am- 
bassadors or musicians, women are henceforth 
on ar equal footing with men. .- XN. Y. Times 
Shotc wl 
UNITED STATES 
THE DECLARATION = | 
OF INDEPENDENCE (1776) 
J ARGELY the composition of Thomas Fef- 
ferson, the Declaration set forth in powerful 
prose the rational 18th century concept of the 
« natural rights » of man. As its author pointed 
out, it was not intended to express any boldly novel 
thought but rather to crystallize the prevailing 
sentiment of the time. Its eloquence and force 
produced a profound impression on geoples of other 
nations. 


### 74122: The Rights of man through the ages

FRANCE 
DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS 
OF MAN (1789) 
URING the first summer of the French Re- 
volution, Frenchmen produced this state- 
ment of the liberties to which an individuals 
entitled. It maintains that men are born free 
and equal, proclaims frecdon: of speech, security 
and defense against vppression; it maintains that 
laws are the expression of the general will of the 
people, that no individual can exercise authority 
over his fellow men unless elected by the people 
and defines liberty as power 10 do anything that 
does not injure others. This document was one 
of the chief sources of inspiration to people in 
other lands also struggling to achieve freedom. 
INFERIOR BEING.. 
Slave c¢r goddess, {reated 
either as a simple child or as an animal, 
women for centuries have sought to win recognition 
of their own human worth and dignity. The law 
established the inequality of the sexes — and man 
remained the master. « Thy back shall feel the 
measure of my blows » says the French text of 
the engraving reproduced above. 
A 
o
a
 
  
  
p
a
n
e
 
C
a
t
 
s
i
e
n
 
   
E 
AR
 
D
Y

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 


### 74123: The Universal Declaration

The Universal WIT 
Declaration | 
Now therefore the General Assembly proclaims this Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all 
nations. to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this 
Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to 
promote respect for these rights and freedoms... 
ARTICLE I. — Right to equality. 
ARTICLE 2. — Freedom from discrimination. 
ARTICLE 3. — Right to life, liberty, personal security. 
ARTICLE 4. — Freedom from slavery. 
ARTICLE 5. — Freedom from torture, degrading treatment. 
ARTICLE 6. — Right to recognition as a person before the law. 
ARTICLE 7. — Right to equality before the law. 
ARTICLE 8. — Right to remedy by competent tribunal. 
ARTICLE 9. — Freedom from arbitrary arrest, exile. 
ARTICLE 10. — Right to fair public hearing. 
ARTICLE II. — Right to be considered innocent until proved guilty. 
ARTICLE 12. — Freedom from interference with privacy, family, home, correspondence. 
    
      
     
   
         
     
    
    
      
    
  
     
   
     
   
  
    
   
     
 
    
 
g 
14
 
i f or
 
MN -   
  
A
 
§ : 
    
  
  
He
n 
si
 
   
        
     
trary arrest 
and impri- id 
TILEY , gl RA + of 4    
     
without trial. - - 
lacidenis « The task is not finished. We should be less generous than prehistoric man if, 
such in our turn, we did not work to ensure for our children a more secure and 
one depicted better life than our own.» ) 
Anatole France. 
  
 — 2eoIn Briet 
TRAITE 
— Ri i f SUR LA ARTICLE 13. Right to free movement in and out of any country. 
ARTICLE 14. — Right to asylum in other countries from persecution. 
T 0 L E R A N C E, ARTICLE 15. — Right to a nationality and freedom to change it. 
AT, fon de ka de Jaan Cal ARTICLE 16. — Right to marriage and family. 
ARTICLE 17. — Right to own property. 
CHAPITRE PREMIER ARTICLE 18. — Freedom of belief and religion. 
ARTICLE 19. — Freedom of opinion and information. 
Hiftoire obregée de la mont de Jean ARTICLE 20. — Right to peaceful assembly and association. 
ARTICLE 2I. — Right to participate in government, ond in free 
elections. : 
ARTICLE 22, — Right to social security. 
1. meurtre de Calas, commis day Toulon 
fo oavee ke phalve de Ls Juice + one Mus 
1762. ff wn da plus Goguliers Svan man ARTICLE 23. — Right to desirable work and to join trode unions. 
go met tert attention de ndere dee, & & Ls ARTICLE 24. — Right to rest and leisure. 
pollens. Om oublie binedt cetze Soule de mrs i ivi 
Gui 3 pin dans des batailles fos nomber . on ARTICLE 25. — Right to adequate living standard. 
Sutn arc au Ct’ Ia’ Gaalicd intviesbio ARTICLE 26. — Right to education. 
ARTICLE 27. — Right to participate in the cultural life of community. 
ARTICLE 28. — Right to social order assuring human rights. 
ARTICLE 29. — Community duties essential. 
ARTICLE 30. — Freedom from State or personal interference in the 
above rights. 
  
« Everyone has the 
right to education. » 
Yet even to-day. 
two-thirds of the 
world’s children 
still lack the schools 
and the teachers to 
help them to play 
their rightful part 
in the community.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 74124: An Act of self-examination: past endeavours future action

AN ACT OF SELF- 
EXAMINA 
- 
Past Endeavours 
Future Action 110» 
  
months is a short time in the history of an organization, and often 
no more than an episode in a man’s life. But no period is short for one 
who must use every single moment for the maximum amount of 
action. : 
As I drafted the report you are about to discuss, I thought at every 
stage of the seriousness of this occasion; in which I meet the General 
Conference of Unesco face to face. And so this will be on my part an act 
of self-examination; Unesco would be but a mere bureaucratic mechanism 
if it did not also provide the opportunity for frank and fruitful exchange 
between those who have faith in its future. 
I is nine months since I took up my duties as Direclor-General. Nine 
UNESCO'S WEAKNESSES 
FRANKLY OUTLINED 
N September 19, the Director-General of Unesco 
addressed the full session of the General Confer- 
ence now meeting in Paris, introducing the dis- 
“tf 
Unseen Dividend 
will not here reiterate my report. You will, in looking through it, have 
become sufficiently aware of our endeavours and of our failures. 
I might dwell on the former, but feel it my task rather to stress the 
latter, so as to conceal nothing of the obstacles we have so far failed to 
overcome. This is, of course, scarcely the usual way for a managing 
director to give an account of his stewardship te his board; but Unesco 
is no commercial undertaking. Investments in this venture — the contri- 
butions of your peoples, the work of our Secretariat — have as their 
single purpose to assure to every man access to education, culture and 
science, to the end that every man may in this way reach true personal 
fultilment; thus understanding others better, and be enabled in more en- 
lightened fashion to serve the cause of human brotherhood. So 
Such benefits are not reckoned in francs or 
dollars or pounds; and yet, without this unseen 
dividend, how precarious is the significance of 
lhe others! These material attributes of peace, 
war can destroy at a stroke; even in peace they 
may be endangered should a mechanical inter- 
~ dependence of material forces prevail over a 
faith and a hope based upon the moral solida- 
rity of mankind and free co-operation of men’s 
minds. 
Facing these prospects, which Unesco may 
only ignore at lhe cost of seif-abdication, you 
will understand why I am less struck by results 
achieved than by obstacles not yet overcome. 
We must act quickly if we are not only to 
reach our nearest goals, but to strengthen the 
moral authority of our Organization. 
In the course of my various travels this year 
I met many who knew nothing of Unesco. They 
were forthright and honest men who would not 
wish to judge us with the elegant scepticism 
adopted by certain high priests of culture; they 
were modest, vulnerable men like ourselves; 
our brothers, for whom Unesco was created — 
and yet to whom our very purpose is unknown: 
men to whom we have not stretched out our 
hands to draw them to us, though they would 
be our most devoted and ardent helpers and 
friends, if they could only be made aware of 
our existence. 
This, gentlemen, is my real report to you. The 
document you have in your hands details our 
work in these past months (1); it is the Direc- 
tor-General’s account. But I am now adding my 
report to you as a man; and this I can do in a 
  
cussion of his report on the activities of the Secretariat 
handful of words : Unesco is still for the most 
part a blueprint, and to bring it to full and 
effective fruition we must redouble our efforts. 
Fach year in conference we trace anew on 
the blueprint the outlines of the building, 
we adjust some detail of the fabric or the 
plan, we debate the niceties of departmental 
functions, we sum up what the Secretariat has 
achieved and regret that it has been unable to 
“do more. But Unesco is not a Secretariat alone; 
il is an institution whose influence must extend 
over the whole world, the Secretariat being no 
more than as it were the nerve centre. Of 
course it has its own part to play; but first of 
all it should help the other participants, above 
all the Member States, to play their parts. Ils 
tasks are to receive and pass on the views of 
the National Commissions, to see to it that no 
requests and no replies go astray. We cannot 
conceive a nerve centre except in terms of the 
living organism whose cohesion and action it 
-ensures. Yet in our case it is often as though, 
Ly some strange physiological paradox, the ner- 
vous system were still in search of its physical 
organism. 
Blueprint and Fabrie 
FY HERE are already, it is true, a number of 
National Commissions. But how many 
of them meet regularly? How many have 
attempted to start local branches? How many 
answer our enquiries, or endeavour to carry 
out our programme? Observers may say that 
we are asking too much; that our question- 
naires are too numerous and end by becoming 
a burden. And there is no doubt that we must 
still improve the methods of work of the Se- 
cretariat. Our documents would gain by being 
more concise, and we should allow more time 
for answers to reach us. I will do my best to 
bring about these improvements. The Secre- 
tariat should keep in constant touch with those 
bodies which are the sources of its strength 
and authority. Where National Commissions 
are active and powerful, Unesco has begun to 
break down the blank wall of ggneral indiffe- 
rence. Where Commissions do not exist, or 
are out of touch with the realities, Unesco is 
no more than a token. 
The very nature of this Organization demands 
that the peoples of all its Member States make 
a similar effort — though graded to their. 
means — to participate in our work. Hence I 
feel it my duty at the outset of this Fourth 
Session of the General Conference to make an 
appeal to you. Your discussions will give me 
guidance and lines of policy. Your decisions 
on the most important items on the agenda, 
such as programme priorities — which govern 
the distribution of the budget — the total of 
the budget itself, the plan for technical assis- 
tance for the economic development of the less 
fortunate countries, will be of exceptional im- 
portance for our future. 
But the fundamental problem remains un- 
touched: how are we to breathe purposeful and 
varied life into these various national Uneseos 
in the several countries, whose steady partici- 
pation can alone enable the international Unes- 
co to develop? You are about to examine the 
duties which fall upon the State in regard to 
education, science and culture, for the purpose 
of ensuring a better understanding between 
peoples. May I here stress once again what I 
wrote at the end of the Report which is before 
(1) A summary of this report was published in the 
special 32-page Conference issue of the Courier last 
month. : : : 
during the past nine months. 
N his objective analysis, which was loudly applauded, 
M. Torres Bodet spoke « as a man » rather than as 
Director-General of the Organization. The text of 
his statement is reproduced on this and the following 
page. 
you, and say once again how much benelit 
Unesco may draw from your debates on this 
theme? =. «oa oe 
PE ~ 
Neo Laboratory of Illusions 
rr two truths I am convinced, and neither 
is complele witheut the other :. of the 
historic mission of Unesco, and of {he 
sincerity of the countries which have under- 
laken to carry out that mission. I hope there- 
fore that no one will misunderstand the 
frankness with which I underline weaknesses 
which are temporary and remediable. I trust 
rather that you will mark in this outline of 
niine, far from any pessimism which I would 
deny, my concern for objectiveness. 
I have a deep faith in Unesco, and that is 
why I will not have it regarded as a collection 
of symbols and a laboratory of illusions. The 
idealism expressed in our Constitution is not 
a smoke-screen, designed to conceal the hard 
facts of reality from the simple-minded. We 
are not merchants of day-dreams. The cam- 
paigns we have launched against the economic 
obstacles which impede the free circulation of 
printed material is not an abstract struggle 
waged with phrases and speeches, but a concrete 
undertaking employing concrete means, namely, 
international agreements submitted to govern- 
ments for signature. 
«Our Book Coupon Scheme, designed to enable 
soft-currency countries to obtain books and 
periodicals published in hard-currency coun- 
tries, is hardly a metaphysical speculation. Our 
educational missions to the Philippines and to 
Thailand have had -— just as the one now in 
Afghanistan — to get hold of the human truths 
underlying the problems they were sent to solve. 
Whether or what action will be taken as a 
result of their findings is not for us to deter- 
mine, But the eager and trustful welcome ac- 
corded to these missions in these countries 
which had asked for them encourage us, since 
it demonstrates that frontiers are not always 
impassable barriers to positive international 
action. 
Mere Symbolism 
HERE is nothing illusory, either, in the work 
T of our scientific cooperation offices. The 
requests for information and for advice 
which they receive, the facts they have provided, 
the contacts they have established, are all rea- 
listic and beneficial achievements. And what 
could be more practical than our efforts 
to increase the number of fellowships, 
than our surveys of technical needs of 
press, film and radio, than our endeavours 
to improve the techniques of fundamental edu- 
cation, or to mobilize private organizations on 
behalf of the rebuilding of devaslaled countries? 
Without claiming undue credit for such emer- 
gency help as we have ourselves been able to 
afford, I should like to remind you that this. 
very vear, thousands of Arab and Greek chil- 
dren have learnt to utter the name of Unesco 
with affection. 
Thus we do not work in the abstract. And 
vet we must acknowledge that, through inade- 
quacy of means, our action is sometimes so 
restricted as to appear merely symbolic. 
In an undertaking such as ours, worldwide 
in scope, quantity is often the pre-condi- 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page |0 


### 74124: An Act of self-examination: past endeavours future action

AN ACT OF SELF - EXAMINATION 
  
There is bere a living presence which governs all our 
tasks : Twentieth Century Man. His presence, though 
Unseen, 15 Our Spur. It Spurs us because 11 commits us, and 
committing us, 
(Continued from page 9) 
tion both of quality and of reality. Stated in 
another way, the question we face in our work 
is not so much that of taking initiatives, as of 
having the means -— means in terms of men. 
technicians and experts, in terms of finance. 
cash and materials. Without a concurrent and 
combined increase in all these means, what we 
call the concentration of our programme could 
not but lead to sheer surrender. To concen- 
irate is not to contract; even less is it to para- 
se. 
I should not forgive myself if I allowed the 
slightest doubt to exist as to my view of this 
matter. I am in favour of concentration cf our 
programme; we have been straining for months 
towards that end. Even if we should concen- 
trate all our projects into a single resolution 
— for example, for the provision of fundamen- 
tal education, which hundreds of millions of 
men and women still lack — Unesco's existence 
would still be justified. But it would no longer 
be justified if, having confined ourselves to this 
single field, we further limited ourselves, as 
we have far too often had to do in other parts 
of our work, to the drafting of memoranda, the 
despatch of prospectuses and bulletins, the 
sending Hither and thither of experts unprovi- 
J willl the eans lo carry ont the educalion- 
al campaigns draw up on paper. We need ond 
hus reduce the notion of concentration of 
ogramme to its absurd conelusion lo see how 
tal it is to give Uneseo's work firm roots, and 
'| believe in the future 
go to the heart of situntions which we have 
therlo done hardly more than eatalogue, 
There are still nol very many fundamental 
ucation specialists, some may object. Bul If 
aol for us to direct the necessary funda 
~education catopuigus on. the 
level. This requires a political authority which 
we do nol possess, and linanelal means to which 
we cannot aspire. What is expected of us on 
the international plane is that we should help 
in planning campaigns, in perfecting techniques 
and above all in increasing the number of spe- 
cialists. That is indeed our purpose. Before the 
Economic and Social Council’s resolution of 
4 March 1949, we had already devoted much 
time and a nol inconsiderable part of our re- 
sources to technical assistance tasks. Yet if we 
are to train qualified experts in sufficient num- 
bers to avoid a {ragic failure to meet the world’s 
needs, we must prepare for immense efforts, 
have the necessary tine, and be given increased 
financial resources. - 
The deeper we go into the problems which 
at first we had to be content merely to skim, 
the more clearly we realize that if Unesco is to 
serve the cause of peace, it must concentrate 
on mankind's concrete needs. It must be 
neither an academy preaching the virtues of 
theoretical pacifism without considering the 
ways of attaining peace, nor an institution 
which, in the name of the primacy of the in- 
tellect, regards culture a~ an end 1n itself, ar- 
titicially set apart from the economic and social 
factors which govern its growth. 
Our mission then is both militant and prac- 
tical. It rules out all « econformism ». There is 
nothing less conformist than the programme 
of our Organization. Is our aim to enable all 
men to read and write a conformist one? Or 
our effort to make the Rights of Man known 
in every teaching establishment? Or our cam- 
paign in favour of the free circulation of ideas? 
If there is such a thing as a cultural force of 
social change, then we are indeed the instru- 
ment of that force. If there is a bold courageous 
kind of peace — the antithesis of a peace of 
resignation — then it is indeed that heroic 
peace prescribed for all men in the Final Act 
signed in London in 1945; not a truce imposed 
by weariness, but a real peace, based on justice 
and understanding. a peace built on the sense 
of responsibility of each and all. ’ 
Let me dwell on this point. The concord 
which it is our duty to cement through cduca- 
tion, science and culture will be as nothing if 
the peoples of the world do not found it on 
freedom — freedom for all men. But can we 
imagine effective freedom unless all men are 
invested with genuine responsibility? Let 
others dangle before the unknowing the illusion 
of freedom uncarned, of rights without dutics, 
of waconditional happiness. We are incapable 
‘Jo (Concentrate is not to contract, 
 
will judge us’ 
of such deceit. For our duty of all duties is (« 
understand, and to make it understood, that all 
the problems of mankind merge into the onc 
problem of man's freedom; and that every free- 
dom implies, whether for the con munity or the 
individual. inescapable responsibilities. It cas 
in Paris under sicge that the aged Michelet 
repeated, with all the conviction of his youth, 
his famous utterance, that admirable profession 
of faith in the fertility of free will and self- 
decision: « 1 believe in the future, because 
1 make it ». 
But how can we inspire in every man the 
consciousness of his responsibilities, if we do 
not ourselves begin with a definition of those 
which fall to this our own Organization? 
All those assembled here know and feel how 
necessary Unesco is. More than ever before, the 
clauses of the Constitution acquire the strength 
of commandments. Neither politics nor ambition, 
nor even the thirst for knowledge nor love of 
the arts have brought us together. What binds 
us together is the belief that the peoples must 
understand and help one another. But it is vital 
that this belief should remain continually live 
within us and should inspire all our views and 
policies. 
Jinesco, which will one day become the 
living Republic of Minds, the organie bond be- 
{ween all men serving truth consciously, is 
us vot in many respects no mere than a piece 
of &ministrative machinery. We know the dan- 
ger that has always beset all administrations. 
hey all too easily degenerate into soulless 
fee Lanisnus, where life is stifled; where words 
san low up meaning, the letter destroy- the 
... because 
or! or 7 
a | make it 
Michelet   
 
spirit. other men’s faces fade into mere concepts, 
the most moving experience dissolves imo a 
speech, into vague and lifeless affirmations. 
Our tirst duty, in this mission which is assi- 
gned to us, is vigilance, We fight against the 
force of habit. The vigil on the eve of battle 
is doubtless often an occasion of austere gran- 
deur. but nobler still is the determination of 
those who are conscious, as we must all be 
conscious, of taking part in the’ night-wateh 
that precedes {rue peace. 
Not from 
CR eyes must remain wide open. Every 
item in the programme must remain 
living, a fraternal inspiration. It is 
in that spirit (hat the Uniled Nations adop- 
‘ted the Universal Declaration of the Rights 
of Man. The authors of that document 
did not sec themselves as historians, sub- 
mitting for the applause of specialists a 
survey of our legislative inheritance. They 
threw down a challenge; and in that challenge, 
though in thg language of lawyers, lives the 
ery of man, Every right is a basic demand of 
the individual, or of society; it is an act of 
defiance to the forces of injustice. These rights 
do not flow down from Olympus as mysterious 
gifts of benevolent lawgivers. They spring from 
the peoples’ needs. They voice the peoples’ 
deepex=t desires. 
When we enumerate man's rights, we are also 
enumerating duties to be accomplished. None 
touches us more nearly than the right to edu- 
cation. Who can remain unmoved on reading 
Article 26 of the Declaration: 
« Everyone has the right to education. ..Edu- 
cation shall be directed to the full development 
of the human personality and to the strengthen- 
ity of respect for human rights and funda- 
mental freedoms. It shall promote understand- 
ing. tolerance and friendship among all na- 
fons...» 
To these words, in our conscience others 
echo: two-thirds of all men are illiterate, two- 
thirds of the children alive today still await 
schools and teachers to help them to become 
responsible citizens, to make them free. They 
still await the time when the right to education, 
which now they are unable fo claim in writing, 
Olympus 
oven less to paralyze.’ 
  
  
COMTI oe OF DO LVISREY A 
PEAS ITLT ATE A. SORES A 
CULMBAL CSCS ™ 
  
reamble 5 | 
SF UNESCO 
CONSTITUTION eae
Phir a go ptm or 
a i mr 
por bog rp 
3 Li Goes 7 Sot Bt 
3 A Units = Bodl ff Ae 
Ave Nd 
    
BY a fax. » 
— wore loge ow dha wo Wl 1 
EY ER aye Re EEA A fq Swe Fane te Tia Conutitutrn J 
name of post sur be sud bedonay be bil and pr" 
Bove bn pate hr a — 
a IE EE 
- Be wee redhage o wee wd -~ 
RE Ab EU ARE 
- EE I ET —— Se ee 
————t———  - ty- 
pa oy ow mans hor fh 
hs A ee) -— 
aan a errlmig of 
    
  
 
Human Rights and education go hand in hand. The 
Preamble to Unesco’s Constitution proclaims that 
« wide diffusion of culture and the education of 
humanity for justice and liberty and peace are 
indispensable to the dignity of man ». 
ceases to be a phrase and becomes a reality. 
Perhaps they look to Unesco for just this. Only, 
it must be clearly understood that this Unesco 
to which the eyes of mankind are turned is not 
a house in the Avenue Kléber, nor a team of 
technicians, nor a gathering of learned people, 
nor an academy of thinkers: — it 1s, first and 
foremost fifty governments. 
What is {rue for education is similarly true 
for culture and science. 
« Everyone », states Article 27 of the Decla- 
ration, « has the right freely to participate in 
the cultural life of the community. to enjoy the 
arts and to share in scientific adeance nent and 
its benefits, » 
Culture and Bread 
EX need culture, in fact, as much as they 
M need hread. They want their share of 
mankind's spiritual inheritance, they de- 
<ire themselves to live ils change and growth, 
to altempt to enrich it. That must come to 
pass if they are to be, in the full sense, men, 
if the culture of their countries is to be some- 
thing living. The future historian may admire 
our poets, our painters, our musicians; but it 
i= to be feared that he will add: these great 
men were isolated individuals, living apart, 
unknown of the people — of the « masses » ax 
the saving was. Those « masses » were horn. 
worked and died withoul sharing in a culture 
for the sake of which they were nevertheless 
asked from time to lime to surrender their 
possessions and their lives. 
© As lu science, it is true that research has 
blossomed impressively in certain lands and 
brought them a plenitude of well-being and 
power. But it is far from having developed 
equally everywhere. There are other lands in 
whieh” all that is known of modern science is 
the havoc which its wrongful use can cause. 
The task is therefore in the first place to spread 
the benefits of science everywhere, and still 
more to foster the desire for science every- 
where, to nurture the scientific spirit, to build 
the foundations of science everywhere. To do 
this, it is not enough to distribute manufactures 
and to familiarize people with mere techniques. 
What matters is that all peoples should be 
able to equip their own laboratories and li- 
braries, train their own specialists, inspire their 
own research workers. Until these aims are 
achieved, there can be no talk of the equality 
of men before science. } 
What are vou going to do, gentlemen, to 
meet such great needs and such high duties? 
I can only listen to vour debates with tense 
expectancy. But this expectancy will be more 
than the natural concern felt by every inter- 
national official for the future of his organiza- 
tion: it will be the anxiety born of the faith 
which IT have placed in the will of the people 
and the respect I hold for the indomi- 
table hope that fills men’s hearts. There are 
doubtless hundreds of millions of men who 
know nothing of the aims of this Conference 
or of the very purposes of Unesco. But it is 
demanded of this Cbnference, as it is demanded 
of Unesco as a whole, not to answer these 
millions’ unknowingness by knowing them not. 
There is here a living presence which governs 
all our tasks: Twentieth-Century Man, for whom 
we must open the pat? of intellectual and 
moral solidarity, which our Constitution pro- 
claims as the essential foundation of world 
peace. His presence, though unseen, is our spur. 
It spurs us because it commits us; and com- 
mitting us, will judge us.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

    
COLD NIGHTS UNDER 
THE TENT. 
   
  
  
 
    
  
   


### 74125: Greek refugees must have aid before the winter

     
GREEK REFUGEES MUST HAVE AID 
(10 cents) and 115 grammes of 
bread per day. Only a miracle 
of moral and physical resistance 
has so far enabled these masses of 
human beings to survive in the condi- 
tions to which they have been subject- 
ed. Il the refugees are not re-settled 
by next winter, it is to be feared that 
under-nourishment will be followed by 
serious epidemics. 
The gravity of the refugee situation 
in Greece and the urgent need for 
relief measures on an international 
scale were brought home to Unesco’s 
Executive Board on September 15, by 
facts such as these, contained in a 
report on Greece made by Professor 
Paulo de Berredo Carneiro, of Brazil, 
following a special mission to the war- 
wracked country in July. 
After hearing the report, the Exec- 
utive Board submitted a resolution 
for the approval of Unesco’s General 
Conference, now meeting in Paris, 
recommending that a world appeal be 
made to raise the $47,500,000 required 
for Greek educational and cultural 
reconstruction. It also suggested the 
creation of a special fund, under 
Unesco’s administration, and into 
which contributions in response to 
Unesco's appeal would be paid. 
Professor Carneiro emphasized that 
any educational reconstruction pro- 
gramme would also require the solu- 
tion of the larger problem posed by 
the re-settlement of 700,000 refugees 
driven from their homes in Northern 
Greece. The Executive Board there- 
ACH member cf a Greek refugee 
Dic receives 1,000 drachmae 
  
- "a 
WHAT DOES THE FU. 
TURE HOLD FOR REFU- 
GEE CHILDREN LIKE 
LITTLE ELEFTERIA, WHOSE 
NAME, IRONICALLY, 
MEANS LIBERTY ? 
ol 
   
AS 
RU gh ee at 
ONE TENTH OF THE GREEK [EEE 
POPULATION HAS BEEN -» 
UPROOTED BY THE WAR. he 4 
» , 
\ 
ONLY A TINY Mi 
NORITY OF GREEK 
REFUGEE CHILDREN 
ARE BEING CARED 
FOR IN SPECIAL 
COLONIES SUCH 
THE 
SHOWN ABOVE. 
BAREFOOT 
A GREEK CHILD REACHES UP 
FOR A FOOD PACKAGE. 
   
     
    
        
  
 
  
  
- 
3 Lid 
- 
ONE 
_ 
IN THE SNOW, 
  
BEFORE THE WINTER 
« Nearly all these children are, 
together with their families, refugees 
in camps or communal dwellings », 
he says. « I have been able from my 
contacts with them and from further 
information... to gauge the fuli extent 
or their physical misery and moral 
distress, 
« Their only food consists of a 
small ration of milk in the morning 
and soup and bread during the day. 
Owing to the lack of space, they live 
in close quarters with the adults, in 
tents or rooms accommodating any- 
thing between 6 and 10 persons. 
« Their extreme emaciation, pale 
faces and terror-stricken lock create 
an extraordinary impression. From 
dawn till dusk, these 
dren wander hungrily around their 
camps barefoot, with their clothes in 
shreds, and their elders looking on 
compassionately buf powerlessly... 
« The little orphans and stray 
children are looked after by the Organ- 
ization that Her Majesty the Queen 
of Greece has set up to assist them. 
It is responsible for 18,000 children, 
who are accomodated in 52 colonies 
(Paidapolis). . 
« It is a moving thing to see the 
physical and mental transformation 
which the children admitted to these 
colonies undergo », adds Professor 
Carneiro. 
phantom chil-- 
EALING with the general problem of 
D refugees and its repercussions, Pro- 
fessor Carneiro stresses the extre- 
m2 difficulty of the economic con- 
ditions facing the Greek Government. 
« The total number of men, women 
and children who are refugees... 
amounts to somewhat over 700,000, or 
10 % cf the population, », he says. 
« The immediate result of their exodus 
was a deep economic depression... 
tmpoverishing about 1,000,000 inhabi- 
tants elsewhere. 
« In all, 3¢ % of the population 
today live on appropriations from the 
national budget... showing it 13 
impossible for Greece of itself to meet 
the claims on its financial resources. 
« The maintenance of these 700,000 
refugees has so far cost the Greek 
Government a sum equivalent to 
$85,000,000. If this state of things 
were to continue, there would be na 
hope of securing such international 
assistance as would save Greece from 
irreparable catastrophe. » 
« The political situation gives 
grounds for hope that the refugees 
will gradually be able to return to 
their fields and villages. This process, 
however, will be extremely costly. The 
refugees will be largely returning to 
a scorched earth area; they will have 
to be given new homes, cattle, farm ~ 
buildings, clothing and agricultural 
Ne A - a 3 - / 
Page 11 — UNESCO COURIER 
  
VARY » 
: \ oR 1 
   
    
implements. Until the next harvest 
the State will have to feed them, : 
« The total sum required to carry 
out the resettlement ts § 138,000,000. 
Such is the economic and financial 
problem that faces the Greek 
Government and that it must settle 
at an early date if worse is not to 
befall. A sum of $50,000,000 has been 
set aside from Marshall Plan funds ag 
a reserve for this purpose, but it 
remains to find $93,000,000. » i 
« It would be useless to try to 
improve present educational and cul< 
tural conditions in Greece before the 
material recovery of the country as a 
whole had been brought about », says 
Professor Carneiro. « If Unesco wants 
to accomplish anything useful, it 
must first obtain from the United 
Nations and its Specialized Agencies 
the necessary help for the technical 
re-equipment and resumption of 
Greece’s agricultural and industrial 
production. » 
HE Greek crisis, which is due to 
the international troubles that 
have tragically affected the 
country’s political and economic life 
since 1940, will only be sclved with the 
assistance of a world that is conscious 
of its duties. 
« It is in the name of culture that 
Unesco must issue its appeal to the 
whole world on behalf of Greek chil- 
dren ¥, concludes Professor Carneiro. 
« Unesco is a cultural organization 
and cou’d therefore find no better 
patrons for its enterprise than the 
tcwering shades of those illustrious 
Greeks who gave fresh impulse to art 
philosophy and science. 
fore suggested that Unesco should call 
on the United Nations to study the 
pessibility of providing international 
help for this re-settlement work, for 
which a- total of $93,000,000 is still 
required. 
« The Ulidtle Greek who for three 
years has been a refugee in a camp in 
Epirus or Macedonia is the descendant 
of this tine of leaders that ushered in 
a new era for mankind. 
« Unesco will remind the children 
of the world, who daily delight in the 
songs of Iliad and the Odyssey, 
contemplate the beauty of Greek 
statuary, take their first lessons in 
geometry or astronomy, or revive the 
debates of the Academy or the 
Lyceum, that this fount at which 
they quench their thirst has its source 
in the same Greece that asks of them, 
to-day, a gesture of gratitude and 
friendship. » 
a » 
LY], {NIN T bright red cover of &@ new Unesco megs 
gine, IMPETUS. greeted delegates on (he 
Brat day of Unesco's Fourth General Conte 
rence. Subtitled. « A Monthly Review of Reconstruction in Educetion. Science snd 
Culture ». IMPETUS replaces the old « Reconstruction Newsletter », The dual! purpose 
of the new periodical. published by Unesco's Reconstruction Department. is : 
To renew world-wide interest in the task of rebuilding schools. universities 
Libraries. museums, laboratories. eic, in wear-devasated countries ; to cover the 
impending story of technical amsistance to under-developed areas. 
The contents of the first lusue ranges from a work-camp picture-map of Europe 
to a prize-contest for the best letter to the editor, lllustrated feature stories are 
included irom Frence. China. italy. Caechoslovekia. Hungary and the Middle East. 
IMPETUS. to quote iis lead editorial, aims to serve as, « .. @ platiorm for presenting 
opinions and exchanging views... » 
The magazine is distributed free of charge to interested individuals and orga 
nizations all over the werld. It i printed in three language editions 1 Enghah 
IMPETUS ; French FLAN : Spanish IMPULSO, The next number will appear late In 
October. 
F the general situation in Greece is 
tragic that of the refugee children 
is particularty pitiful ; most have 
never known any other way of life 
than that of war and semi-starvation. 
Professor Carneiro reports that 338.000 
boys and girls, one third of them 
under six years of age, have emigrated 
from the Northern provinces.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

  
with national parks and reserves. 
and the preservation of animal 
and plant species threatened with extine- 
tion. But this is only a limited part of 
nature protection which is concerned 
with man’s entire natural environment, 
including the earth's renewable natu- 
ral resources. That these natural re- 
sources are not inexhaustible is no long- 
er in doubt. The problem is how to 
utilize nature's resources for man's 
benefit and at the same time maintain a 
balance between human demands and 
the earth's productivity. 
EOPLE often think of « protection 
of nature » as concerned only 
This is the problem which brought 
together at Lake Success for three 
weeks in August and September more 
than six hundred scientists, engineers 
and technologists from nearly sixty dif- 
ferent countries and a score of interna- 
tional organizations. They were attend- 
ing the United Nations Scientific Confer- 
ence on the Conservation and Utilization 
of Resources (UNSCCUR) and the Inter- 
national Technical Conference on the 
Protection of Nature. The second confer- 
ence was convened jointly hy UNESCO 
and the International Union for the 
Protection of Nature. As Mr. Fairfield 
Osborn, President of the Conservation 
Foundation, said in one of {he meet- 
ings, the earth's resources are unim- 
portant in themselves: man is depen- 
dent on them, and it is his business to 
see how they are used and how they 
are distributed. But utilization in itself 
creates other far-reaching problems. 
HUS, while the economists and techi- 
T nicians of UNSCCUR were ex- 
changing information on new 
techniques for wresting more wealth 
from the earth's resources, the biolo- 
gists and other scientists attending the 
Nalure Protection Conference deliber- 
ated .over the possible consequences lo 
the balance of nature, that is to suy 
nature’s natural state, of the exploil- 
ation of formerly undeveloped regions. 
They devoted three of their eleven spe- 
clalized meetings to discussing the best 
techniques to be used in educating child- 
ren and adults alike to a greater appre- 
ciation of nature, and to awareness of 
their responsibility to future generations 
for safeguarding nature’s resources. 
To exploit a natural resource in order 
to get the highest economic yie'7d with- 
out considering the total biological 
effect on the regions concerned and 
perhaps eventually on the world, is 
irresponsible and shortsighted. That is 
why question as to the effects of «plan- 
ned enterprises» on the balance of 
nature, the possible consequences on 
natural associations of the generalized 
use of anti-parasilic products (DDT 
etc.), and of the uncontrolled introduc- 
tion of exotic species, were given spe- 
cial attention. Several of the Resolutions 
which the conference passed dealt with 
the basic problem of keeping the ba- 
lance of nature where interference by 
man has also brought about destruction, 
and protecting rare species from be- 
coming extinet. This is one reason why 
it is essential to maintain as wide a 
variely as possible of representative 
natural cominunities and environments. 
They are a means of helping us to un- 
derstand how to manage animal and 
plant life, and how to apply scientific 
knowledge in our social economic and 
industrial life. 
Fire destroys thousands of acres of forest each year. 
thus depriving mon of one of his most important 
natural resources. Photo shows latest « Man.-from- 
in the 
combating large-scale conflagrations. 
Mars » equipement developed 


### 74128: Cartoons and films in China

    
CARTOONS 
IN 
CHINA 
TEACHING techniyue which has 
proved its value in education is 
the use of audio-visual mate- 
rials such as films, filmstrips, radio 
and charts. Such materials, capable 
of conveying basic ideas and know- 
ledge without the use of written words. 
are of special use in fundamental 
education. 
There is, however, a great shortage 
of materials suitable for this branch 
of education and it was this need that 
prompted Unesco, towards the end of 
1948, to launch « project for the pre- 
paration of sample audio-visual ma. 
terials for fundamental education. 
In view of the promising work 
already carried out in this field by 
China, Unesco asked Mr Hugh Hub- 
bard, its regional representative there, 
to discuss the project with the Chinese 
authorities. 
‘The original plan was to make the 
experiment a joint enterprise between 
Unesco and three Chinese agencies — 
the Chinese Mass Education Move- 
ment, the Kiangsu Provincial College 
at Wusih and the Audio-Visual Centre 
of Nanking University. } 
ARLY this year, however. commu- 
nications between Eastern and 
Western China became extremely dif- 
ficult owing to the war in China and 
it was decided to carry out the project 
in the experimental “field” of the 
Mass Education Movement at Pehpei, 
about 25 miles north of Chungking. 
Here, in West China, virtually cut 
off from the coast where most of the 
technical facilities are situated, the 
project team is forced to work with 
very limited equipment and facilities. 
The purpose of the project was to 
prepare sets of filmstrips and posters, 
slides, cards. plays or other dramatic 


### 74126: Saving our resources

   
SAVING = 
OUR 
RESOURCES ** | 
HE different aspects of nature pro- 
tection are so varied — educa- 
tionally, scientifically, aesthetical- 
1y, — that they clearly enter within the 
interests of other United Nations Specia- 
lized .\gencies, such as WHO and FAO. 
besides UNESCO. Thus one resolution 
of the Conference calls on WHO, FAO 
and UNESCO to investigate the esta- 
blishment of a Permanent Joint Com- 
mission on Pesticides to deal with the 
effective regulation of the use of insect 
and other pest killeTs. 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
[a — - 
USA for 
(UN. Photo) 
  
  
  
Jj 
. 
Eleen 
  
      NY 
. The significance of these {wo confer- 
ences. from the human point of view, 
was illustrated by M. Antoine Golding, 
U.N. Deputy .\ssistani-Secretaryv-Gene- 
ral for Economic Affairs, who sfressed 
their importance for the United Nations 
programme of technical assistance. 
« I am afraid », he said, « that we shall 
come up against failures and serious 
difficulties if the human aspect of this 
great programme is not examined with 
care. I am sure that the results of 
vour work will be of great use to me. » 
Mr Norman Mc Laren. of Canada’s National Film Board. recently arnved in 
China to join Unesco's Audio-Visual Project team. Above. he applies his 
original technique of drawing cartoons directly on film. 
media with human or puppet actors, 
recordings for broadcasts and a short 
16 mm. animated cartoon film. 
As one of China’s greatest needs is 
“education for - health”, the topic 
chosen for the project's productions 
was “A Healthy Village” so as to illus- 
trate, simply but vividly, to the Chi- 
nese peasants the rules of hygiene and 
means of protection against disease. 
Later, it was decided to prepare 
materials on such subjects as smallpox 
and vaccination, trachoma, safe drink- 
ing water and food, the use of D.T.T., 
health habits and tetanus. 
Y the end of May, the team had 
produced three hand coloured 
filmstrips; four wall posters, hand- 
(UNFB Fhotoj. 
bills and a connected picture on vac- 
cination; five sets of drawings for film 
strips, posters, handbills and a picture 
story on trachoma. Work is now 
being done on the subject of safe 
drinking water and food. 
In August, Mr Norman McLaren, 
head of the Animation Department of 
the National Film Board of Canada. 
flew to China as a special technical 
adviser to the project staff, which 
includes six Chinese artists. During 
his four months’ assignment, Mr Mc- 
Laren will train the artists in anima- 
tion techniques for the eventual pre- 
paration of a cartoon film. 
The first practical application of the 
materials already prepared was made 
at Huang Ke Chen where a campaign 
for vaccination, without the use of 
visual aids, was launched by the Mass 
Education Movement a few weeks be- 
fore the experiment. As a result of 
the use of audio-visual aids, many 
more people came in and asked to be 
vaccinated. 
To test the effectiveness of the new 
materials, two local areas, Shih Tze 
Hsiang and Kuang Ke Chen have 
been chosen, each having a popula- 
tion of about 11,000 people. The 
surveys in these areas will be carried 
out by the sociology department of the 
College of Rural Reconstruction at 
Pehpei, which co-operates closely with 
the project activities. 
Although the material limitations 
mean hardship for the staff, the value 
of the project gains by the fact that 
the experience obtained will be useful 
in the future, for technical facilities 
are likely at best to be rudimentary 
in most “fundamental education” 
areas. 
The audio-visual project will pro- 
bably be completed by the end of 1949, 
after which a report on the work will 
be published and samples of the mate- 
rials produced made available to the 
governments of Unesco’s Member 
States. 
 
Courier 
EDITORIAL OFFICES 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19 Ave. Kisber, PARIS. 14 
  
Owector : C a PRATO 
Edgor : 5 MM KOFFLER 
Avvstant Editor: RS FENTON 
  
All reproductions authorized 
RGES LANG rue | 
“ey LP at mn 45     

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074116engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

UNIVERSAL DECLARA! 
INS sah All human beings are born free 
and equal in dignily and rights. 
They are endowed with reason and conscience 
and should act towards one another in a spirit 
ol brotherhood. 
INS lol | loveryone is entitled Lo all the 
rights and freedoms set forth in 
this Declaration, without distinction of any 
Kind, such us race, colour, sex, language, reli- 
gion, political or other opinion, national or so- 
cial origin, property, birt or other slatas, 
2. lrurthermore, no distinction shall be made 
one the basis ol the political, jurisdictional 
or international status of the country or terri- 
lory to which a person belongs, whether it be 
independent, trust, non=sell-governing or under 
any other limitation of sovereignty. 
INS sank] [cveryone has the right to life, 
liberly and securily of person. 
No one shall be held in slavery 
or servitude; slavery and the 
sluve trade shall be prohibited in all their 
Forms. 
ARTICLE 4 
No one shall be subjected to tor- 
ture or to cruel, inhuman or 
degradimyg treatmtnl or punishment. 
ARTICLE 5 
loveryone has the right lo recog- 
nition everywhere as a person 
before the law. 
ARTICLE 6 
All are equal before the law and 
are entitled without any discri- 
mination to equal protection of the law. All 
are entitled to equal protection against any dis- 
crimination in violation of this Declaration and 
against any incitement to such discrimination. 
ARTICLE 7 
Ne J veryone has the right to an 
elfeclive remedy by the compe- 
fenl national tribunals for acls violaling the 
fundamental rights granted him by Lhe constitu- 
lion or by law. : 
INS leh No one shall be subjected to ar- 
bilrary arrest, detention or exile. 
INS =r) lveryone is entitled | in full 
equality to a fair and public 
hearing by an independent and impartial tribu- 
nal, in Lhe delermination of his rights and 
nbligatious and of any criminal charge against 
tin. 
INSslen-1] |. ILveryone charged with a pe- 
nal offence has the right to be 
presuined innocent until proved guilty accor- 
ding to law in a public trial at which he has 
had all the guarantees necessary tor his ae- 
fence. ; 
2. No one shall be held guilty of any penal 
offence on account of any act or omission which 
did not constilule a penal offence, under national 
or inlernational law at the time when it was 
    
ou 


### 74129: Universal Declaration of Human Rights: text adopted on December 10, 1948 by the General Assembly of the United Nations

iO 
| 
7 
COMPLETE TEXT ADOPTED ON 10 DECEMBER 1948, BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF UNITED NATIONS 
| AT THE PALAIS DEE CHAILLOT, PARIS 
PREAMBLE 
WHEREAS recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and 
inalienab.e rights of ali memb ra of the human family is the foundation 
ol freedom, justice and peace in the world, 
WHEREAS disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted 
in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and 
the adyent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom ol 
speech and belief and freedom from (ear and want has been proclaimed 
As Lhe highest aspiration of the common people, 
WHEREAS it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have 
recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, 
that homan rights should be protected by the rule of law, 
WHEREAS it is essential to promote the development of friendly 
relations between nations, 
WHEREAS the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter 
reatirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and 
worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women 
and bave determined (0 promote social progress and belter standards 
of tle in larger freedom, 
WHEREAS Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, In 
cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect 
for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
WHEREAS a common understanding of these rights and freedoms 
is of the greatest importance lor the full realization of this pledge, 
NOW, THEREFORE, 
INE GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
PROCLAIMS this Universal Declaration of Human Righis as a com 
mon standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end 
that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration 
constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote 
respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive ‘measures, 
national and international, to secure their universal and etieclive 1ecog- 
milion and observance, both among the pwoples of Member States 
themselves and among the peoples of territories under their jurisdiction. 
commilled. Nor shall a heavier penally be impo- 
sed than the one that was applicable at the 
Lime the penal offence was committed. 
| ARTICLE 12 [AN one shall be subjected to ar- 
M hilrary interference with his pri- 
vacy, lamily, home or correspondence, nor to 
altacks upon his honour and reputation. Every- 
one has the right to the protection of the 
law against such interference or attacks. 
INS RIMER |- Liveryone has the right to 
‘ [reedom of movement and resi- 
dence within the borders of each State, 
2. Everyone has the right to leave any coun- 
(ry, Including his own, and lo relurn to his 
country. 
1. Everyone has {he right to 
seek and to enjoy in other coun- 
tries asylum from persecution. 
2. This right may not be invoked in the case 
of prosecutions genuinely arising from non- 
political crimes or from acts contrary to the 
purposes and principles of the United Nations. 
IN Silo LE !- Everyone has the right to a 
nationality. 
2. Nu one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his 
nalionalily nor denied the right to change his 
nationality. 
1. Men and women of full age, 
without any limitation due to 
ace, nallonalily or religion, have the right to 
marry and to found a family. ‘They are entitled 
lo equal rights as to marriage, during marriage 
and at its dissolution. ) 
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with 
the free and full consent of the intending 
spouses. 
3. The family is the natural and fundamental 
group uni{ of society and is entitled to protec- 
tion by society and Lhe State. 
IN RIBERA |. Everyone has the right to own 
property alone as well as in as- 
sociation with others. 
2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his 
property. 
Everyone has the right to free- 
dom of thought, conscience and 
religion; this right includes freedom to change 
his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone 
or in community with others and in public or 
private, to manifest his religion or belief in 
reaching, practice, worship and observance. 
IN-33 on 3L) liveryone has the right to free- 
dom of opinion and expression; 
this right includes freedom to hold opinions 
withoul interference and to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas through any me- 
dia and regardless of frontiers. 
{. Everyone has the right to 
| ARTICLE 20 [ERG of peaceful assembly 
and association, 
2. No one may be compelled to belong to an 
association. 
1. Everyone has the right to take 
part in the government of his 
country, directly or through freely chosen rep- 
resentatives, : 
  
2. Kveryone has the right of cqual access to. 
public service in his country. 
3. The will of the people shall be the basis 
of the authority of government; this will shall 
be expressed in periodic and genuine elections 
which shall be by universal and equal suffrage 
and shall be held by secrel vote or by equivalent 
free voting procedures. 
IN Siler] liveryone, as a member of socie- 
ly, has the right to social secu- 
rity and is enlitled to realization, through na- 
lional effort and international co-operation and 
in acgordance with the organization and re- 
sources ol each State, of the economic, social 
and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity 
and the free development ol his personality. 
INSil« REN | Everyone has the right to 
work, to free choice of employ- 
menl, to just and favourable condilions of work 
and to protection against unemployment. 
2. Kveryone, without any discrimination, has 
the right to equal pay for equal work. 
3. Everyone who works has the right to just 
and favourable remuneration ensuring for him- 
self and his family an existence worthy of hu- 
man dignily, and supplemented, if necessary, by 
other means of social protection. 
4. Everyone has the right to form and to 
join trade unions for the protection of his 
anterests. 
Kveryone has the right to resl 
and leisure, including reasonable 
limitation of working hours and periodic holi- 
days wilh pay. EE 
oN 
I. Everyone has the right lo a ARTICLE 25 Lo o 
| ARTICLE 25 [Ne of living adequate for 
the health and well-being of himself and of 
/ 
“unemploynient, 
N OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
his lamily, including food, clothing, housing 
and medical care and necessary social services, 
and the right lo security in Lhe event of 
sickness, disability. widow- 
hood, old age or other lack of livelihood in 
cireutnslances beyond his control. 
2. Motherhood and childhood are entitled to 
special care and assistance. All children, 
wnether born in or oul of wedlock, shall enjoy 
[he same social protection, 
has the right (o IN sah rl | Lveryone ) 
L ARTICLE 26 education. IBducalion shall be 
free, al least in Lhe elementary and Tunda- 
mental stages. llementary educalion shall be 
compulsory. Technical and professional educa- 
Lion shall be made generally available and higher 
education shall be equally accessible to all on 
tire basis of merit, 
2, liducation shall be direcled to the full 
development of the human personality and to 
Lhe strengthening ol respect for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms, IL shall promote 
understanding, tolerance and {friendship among 
all nations, racial or religious groups, and shall 
further the activities of the United Nations for 
Lhe maintenance of peace. 
3. Parents have a prior righl to choose the 
kind of education that shall be given to (heir 
children, 
I. liveryone has the right freely 
to participate in the cultural 
tife of the conununily, to enjoy Lhe arts and 
lo share in scientitic advancement and its 
benelils. } 
2. Kveryone has the right to the protection 
of the moral and material interests resulling 
[rom any scientiflie, literary or artistic produc- 
tion of which he is the author. 
Fiveryone is entitled lo a social 
ARTICLE 28 and international order in which 
(he rights and Ireedoms sel forth in this 
Declaration can be fully realized. : 
I. Kveryone has duties lo the 
ARTICLE 29 comununity in which alone the 
Iree and Tull development of his personality is 
possible. 
2. In Lhe exercise of his rights and freedoms, 
swveryone shall be subject only lo such limita- 
tions as are delermined by law solely for the 
purpose ol securing due recognition and respect 
tor the rights and freedoms of others and of 
meeting tne just requirements of moralily, 
public order and (he general welfare in a demo- 
cratic sociely. | 
3. These rights and freedoms may in no case 
Le exercised contrary to the purposes and 
principles of the United Nalions. 
Nothing in this Declaration may 
ARTICLE 30 be interpreted as implying for 
any Slate, group or person any right Lo engage 
in any activity or lo perform any act aimed al 
the destruction of any of Lhe rights and 
freedoms set forth herein,