# [063808](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
aYh 2) [Q) 1r $ Sid 
Price: 1/-stg. WK, 2 - 30 cents (U.S.) - 0.70 NF. Pwr 
  
HOW THE CINEMA 
AFFECTS CHILDREN 
7o1%4 
Bg | 
  
  
REBIRTH OF A ("SHATTERED ay 
x lp re |

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  a 
il inl 
AL ul 
is 
    as 1961 
See page 4 3 \ 
y # EP NAAN 
Eee oo eT   

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

MARCH 1961 
NESE @m(Courier ea —
 
Contents 
No. 3 
Page 
4 REBIRTH OF A SHATTERED CITY 
By Jerzy Hryniewiecki 
8 CANALETTO, THE PAINTER OF WARSAW 
His works helped to restore a city 
14 THE WORLD OF PREHISTORIC MAN 
By Nino Frank 
I7 HOMO SAPIENS IS TEN MINUTES OLD 
18 NEW HORIZONS FOR ASIA’S MOSLEM WOMEN 
By Anne-Marie Hussein 
23 WEDDING IN SUMATRA 
24 HOW THE CINEMA AFFECTS CHILDREN 
By Gordon Mirams 
29 A MARINER’s MYTH 
The curse of the albatross 
By David Gunston. 
  
COVER PHOTO 
 33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
Miles of pages have been 
about he effects of the. ein. 
oma on chiidren. An analy- 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
sis of the major conclusions 
sented on page 24. basse on 
new bibliographic. study 35 UNESCO COURIER CONTENTS 1960 
Just published by Unesco. 
© Karen Juliane, Copenhagen 
Published monthly by THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly {except In July and August when 
The United Natio Ed t | Scientifi and Cultural it is bi-monthly) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German and Arabic. In the 
ns ucational, oclentific United States of America itis distributed by the UNESCO Publications Center. 
Organization U.S.A. 801 Third Avenue, New York 22, N.Y., Plaza 1-3860. Second—<lass mail 
. . privileges authorized at NewYork, N.Y, (M.C, 61.1156 A). 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
Editor-in-Chief of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
Sandy Koff printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
andy Koitier unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
Assi Edi articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
osistant itor the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
ordon oenrens 
. . he U Courier is indexed in The Readers’ Guid Peri Associate Editors ue Th hesco dexed monthly in The Readers’ e to Perio- 
nglis ition : Ronald Fenton . ' French Edition : Célia Bertin Annual subscription rates: § 3.00 : | 01-508. 7.00 New 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey Us: oD =qu vane ingle coples 1/-stg. cents 
Russian Edition : Venlamin Matchavariani (Moscow) (U.S); 0. ew Francs. 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Amin Chaker (Cairo) Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7° 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.     

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

REBIRTH OF A 
oR many of the world’s largest cities, the past fifteen 
years have been, more or less, a normal period in 
the continuous process of urban development. Out- 
wardly for them, not much has changed. True 
enough, some old buildings have been torn down to make 
In 1 0 4 5 Wa r S aw room for lean and graceful modern towers in the hope of 
’ relieving that universal city bugbear, the ever growing 
traffic problem. 
* Other cities have had a face-lifting. There have been 
was simply Qa hame the scars of war to erase, both by modernizing and 
rebuilding old sections, and by raising great complexes of 
modern buildings which are virtually cities in themselves. 
h ki A few cities have literally been born overnight during 
on T e map mar ing the past fifteen years owing to the vision of some 
statesman or architect. At least one or two have sprung 
up from the bare ground providing their designers with 
a rare freedom to make of them the very last word in 
a wa ste a n d of ru I n S modern city planning. 
The story of Warsaw is different. 
There are few examples in history of the tragic fate 
which befell this city. 
It is a story which begins in 1945 when virtually nothing 
but ruins remained of the city, yet which today has risen 
from the ashes and rubble and has amazingly regained 
its pre-war population of over a million inhabitants. 
Warsaw offers a lesson on the workings of an urban 
society which is astonishing. It would seem to prove that 
neither the complete destruction of a people, nor their 
WARSAW 1945 © Central Photographic Agency, Warsaw 
a — ———_—“_ Pr.” 6 
  
o
t
 
% 
m
=
 
a 
    
   
] 
2d
 
=
 
| 
~
~
 
fw
. 
A 
» r
w
,
 
» 
» 
E
a
 
) 
r
e
l
e
 
B
S
 
-
—
 
(P
ar
 
- —
 
   
» 
4 3 8 
    
   
  
oN 
. oi in Y po Ch , 
ty MES RN RS 
“ay p= ERE ETE RTI SA 
ITI ee adie, 
. >» - - dnl ~ .

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

SHATTERED CITY 
property can ring down the curtain of history on the 
life of a great city. 
A visitor to Warsaw today will find it hard to believe 
that this thriving, bustling metropolis was a wasteland of 
ruins in January 1945 when the first of the citizens began T d b il d 
to trickle back. Where the proud and historic city had oO ay / re ul 1 an 
once stood, they found nothing but a vague outline visible 
here and there among ruins and rubble. It was a vast 
cemetery for hundreds of thousands. Here and there a d : d * h 
pock-marked building which had escaped total destruc- mo ernize / 1t as 
tion rose up like a lonely sentinel, and on the right bank 
of the Vistula, a whole quarter—the poorest in the city— 
where ten per cent of Warsaw's population once lived, 
alone escaped the holocaust. grown to SIX times 
For all practical purposes, however, Warsaw existed only 
because of its geographical position—and its name. 
Even though Warsaw was an empty shell, a city without if S P re-wa I S I Ze 
life, half of its people were still alive, scattered throughout 
the world in many places but bereft of all their 
possessions. They had suffered much from the war, but 
with them they carried memories of the Warsaw they 
had known, its traditions, its life and its people. The 
barbarous order which had reduced Warsaw to rubble, 
could not obliterate this city from the hearts and the 
minds of her people no matter where they might be. 
As the citizenry returned in ever greater numbers, 
Warsaw's future became the main topic of discussion. LL. . 
Some were all for turning the entire area into a giant by Jerzy Hryniewiecki 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
WARSAW 1961 
Polish Information Office, Paris 
 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Shimmering ribbons 
of light on the Vistula 
reflect Poland's reborn 
capital of 1,200,000 people 
construction camp, off limits to the public, in order to 
carry out a rush rebuilding programme. Others were 
inclined to pick a new site and rebuild the capital city 
elsewhere, 
There were Utopian visions of a futuristic city, many 
very attractive but often not too practical because of the 
lack of economic and technical resources available just 
after the war to carry out such far-sighted, and, 
unfortunately, enormously expensive plans. While some 
wanted to rebulld upon the old city, restoring and re- 
creating the best of the past, others talked about a 
clean break with the old—sweeping away all the past 
shortcomings of an unplanned city which just “grew” 
from mediaeval village times, and in its stead creating an 
absolutely new city based on the most modern and up- 
to-the-minute ideas and tastes. 
And, of course, there were the “Brave New World” 
variety of planners who attacked the problem statistically 
and proposed a project in which the inhabitants would 
be classified according to profession and allotted precisely 
fixed areas of living space on the basis of the density of 
population. 
But real life did not wait for plans, theories and long 
discussions. Within hours and days after Liberation, 
thousands of former citizens were flooding back to the 
deserted ruins. The new government decided to set up 
its capital there, not because conditions were ideal for 
an administrative centre, but because the name Warsaw 
still meant so much, not only to its own people, but 
throughout the world. In no time at all, the rows of 
ruined houses and buildings took on the appearance of 
ant hills as the people themselves set busily about the 
task of rebuilding their capital with their own hands 
and with whatever materials they could salvage among 
the rubble. 
construction of the city, all Poland seemed to be on 
the move. Not only were former citizens of Warsaw 
constantly swelling the population, but large numbers of 
other people too, drawn by the reviving economic system, 
added to their numbers. There was also a flood of people 
uprooted from territories no longer a part of Poland who 
headed for the city, as well as many peasants from over- 
populated rural areas. As Warsaw’s industries were re- 
constructed and expanded, a far greater labour force 
was required than before the war, a fact which also drew 
more people to the city. 
With this phenomenon of an old population and a new 
population in an old city being rebuilt, Warsaw became 
a crucible In which not only the people, but sweeping 
changes in the social and professional structure created a 
é 
D URING this first period of heroic, but primitive re- 
  
Polish Information Office, Paris 
situation of extraordinary dynamism. Within fifteen 
years this great force has moulded a uniform society 
out of the most disparate elements. This has been 
surprising to all but old inhabitants of Warsaw who are 
well aware of their city’s long tradition of assimilating 
all that comes within its gates. 
In the new Warsaw, almost all former inhabitants have 
changed their residences. Many are doing jobs they 
never dreamed of before the war. More recent arrivals 
from generations of country folk have become city- 
dwellers in a very short space of time which has made 
profound changes in their habits and way of life. 
It is difficult for us to realize just how all these popula- 
tion movements have affected the life of the people of 
Warsaw. It is only by meeting and talking to someone 
who knew Warsaw before the war and who can compare 
the old order with the new that we can begin to 
appreciate the kind of metamorphosis that has taken 
place in so short a time. 
E might compare it to compressing into a brief 
span of fifteen years all the things that in other 
countries have taken hundred of years to achieve. 
We have seen with our own eyes mediaeval squares and 
18th century house rising out of the ruins. Yet behind 
the facades are dwellings with every modern convenience. 
We have watched the reconstruction of the Gothic 
cathedral with the same stones with which the original 
was built, and we have seen the splendid 17th and 18th 
century palaces of noblemen painstakingly restored in 
every detail to become cultural and administrative 
centres. 
The restored classical facade of the Opera House, built 
at the beginning of the last century, has been faithfully 
copied, but behind it is a modern concert and operatic 
theatre which is technically one of the best-equipped in 
Europe. New and broader bridges have been constructed 
on the piles of the old ones. New homes have risen on 
the foundations and rubble of those destroyed. The new 
city of Warsaw draws its character from this harmonious 
blending of the vestiges of the past with the techniques 
and living needs of modern life, 
Is it then a kind of 20th century anachronism in which 
museum-like facades spring up artificially to shield the 
comforts of modern life which lie behind ? Certainly not, 
if we consider the people of Warsaw themselves. This 
recreation of the past has taken into full account the 
needs, nostalgia, and feelings of a people whose past was 
all but torn away from them. This reconstruction has 
been a labour of love, and one cannot find a single false 
note. 
The task of reconstructing the old demanded tre- 
mendous effort from specialists who had to work with 
CONT'D ON PAGE 12 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — March 1961 
The people of Warsaw 
have retraced 
the cavalcade of centuries   in 15 years of toil 
© Zygmunt Srarek, Warsaw 
  
_ 
EN . aa 
-~  

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 63809: Canaletto: the painter of Warsaw

AR 
> 
  
Vo , 
oft - 
Ry ert 
H 
» 
. 
d A. ‘a . 
wh wll y oh, 3 " Ay 4 
E : : " TI ATE ey 
L 
‘ > he 
h
a
d
 
b
o
n
e
 
TLR) 
Lr. 
GIERERER TV on rr 
in Eipaian a 1 | 
. Ls ] y , 
on, , Fe be il IC 
Wn fox LA “ 
vay . 
a mA AR A SE 
Ye ETN : 
  MVSIVM JO 
jsed sy jo Ajneaq ayy NILNIVd FHL | 
ainjderal mesiepA padisy 
Ajijepy peypiewun jo 114 i VY N VY i 
1ajuied Ainjuad yig| uy 
 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 63809: Canaletto: the painter of Warsaw

a mer ZN | 
  
is 
LL 5
be 
vrs 
[L* 
FF
 
     
. 
Se = ITN, 
  
T
E
 
T
T
T
 
S
T
 
S
R
 
. 
= 
m
h
 
% | ae ‘ 
S as al FERC TREE aN RL TRAN FILME   
0 Zygmunt Szarek, Warsaw 
; From *“Canaletto" published 1959, Warsaw 
® To the people of Poland the 
name Canaletto evokes Warsaw 
not Venice. In 1767 Bernardo 
Bellotto, better known as Canaletto 
the Younger (not to be confused 
with his uncle, Antonio Canal—the 
famous Canaletto of Venice scenes) 
arrived in Warsaw. He immedia- 
tely fell in love with the city and 
remained there until his death in 
1780. When he died he left behind 
him a series of paintings of Poland's 
capital of unrivalled fidelity and 
exactness. His keen eye recorded 
an inexhaustible wealth of detail 
in living street scenes, details of 
Warsaw’s houses, churches and 
public buildings and grandiose 
panoramic views, When Warsaw's 
architects sought to rebuild the 
old town after wartime destruction, 
they turned to Canhaletto’s paint- 
ings to help them reconstitute the 
buildings of the past (see follow- 
ing pages). Skyline on the Vistula 
(top of page) with its recently re- 
constructed buildings reveals same 
forms which Canaletto painted 
(below and left) some 200 years ago. 
  
   
   
 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 63809: Canaletto: the painter of Warsaw

CANALETTO = HIS PAINTINGS HELPED 
TO RESTORE A CITY 
  
® Canalettc's pictures have been 
called “ a fascinating full-colour 
film of Warsaw's life in the 18th 
century ”. He never painted any 
building apart from its own surround- 
ings, but always showed it with 
adjoining buildings, its square or 
street with people and teams of 
horses and carriages, and all the 5 
traffic and life of the city swarming 
about it. Warsaw's architects made 
enormous enlargements of Cana- 
letto's paintings when they were 
rebuilding the old town, but they 
were often as fascinated by the 
people in his works as by his build- 
ings. Canaletto recorded the fea- 
tures of Warsaw at a time when it 
was becoming one of the most 
beautiful towns of northern Europe. 
The collection of twenty-five of his 
townscapes is now hanging in 
the National Museum, Warsaw. 
    a 
Law 
 
Photos © Janusz Smorgorzewski, Warsaw 
From *‘Canaletto’ published 1959, Warsaw 
  
 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63809: Canaletto: the painter of Warsaw

  
ed 
- A I TROP 
ho Be ' WY aro 4 4 
el lv a ac . Ir ’s : 
ETON carl Ay 
Cs by - LAN : 
HM Terai 
3 YE Fad v R ¢ Gh wpm 
  
® Left, Krakowskie Przedmiescie 
Street with the Holy Cross Church 
following its recent reconstruction. 
Above, the same street, already one 
of Warsaw's busy thoroughfares 
when Canaletto painted it nearly 200 
years ago. Top, opposite page, re- 
constructed New Town market 
place with the Holy Sacrament 
Sisters Church. Architects used 
Canaletto's painting (bottom, oppo- 
site page) to guide them in rebuild- 
ing the church and nearby houses. 
® Miecryslaw Kusma, the architect 
who rebuilt the Old Town in Warsaw. 
 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

REBIRTH OF A SHATTERED CITY (conte) 
WARSAW'S 
absolute precision on what we might term “scientific” 
rebullding of the rulns. The measure of their success is 
found In the fact that the results are not eclectic, nor 
has their work shown signs of being cold or impersonal. 
In fact, the earller stages of reconstruction were so 
fraught with difficulties and primitive technical resources 
that as a result often the working methods and materials 
were relatively the same as those employed in the original 
constructions. This perhaps, more than any other single 
factor, brings authenticity to restored Warsaw. 
Today it is a fact that most people of Warsaw 
instinctively try to live in “old-style” houses in preference 
to modern dwellings built with air, light and parks 
surrounding them. It may be that living in the “new- 
old” places they feel more like old established residents 
of the city. But, it is typical of the people of Warsaw 
to be strong individualists, and it may be they feel more 
at ease in the less ordered and more fanciful surround- 
ings than those offered by large modern blocks of flats. 
With the reconstruction of the city, its old shape has 
come to life again. The network of streets, established 
centuries ago, and which were recognizable as an odd 
geometric pattern in the ruined city, have become the 
framework for the new plan. Still, the monotonous criss- 
cross of 19th century streets have been made more 
functional in the new city. 
It was inevitable that the resumption of city life and 
the demands of town planning would lead to conflicts. 
In these, sometimes one side wins, and sometimes another. 
But as is often the case, lively Interest, however partisan, 
lends vigour to the cause. 
It is thus that a new school of town planning has 
emerged in Warsaw in which the emphasis is laid on 
actual execution of plans which have been shed of their 
more glowing and yet impractical aspects. The people of 
Warsaw themselves have learned that their opinions count 
in the plans of the municipal draughtsmen, and more 
than once they have caused changes in what they 
considered unduly abstract plans. 
the pre-war figure, but its area has Increased six- 
fold. Density of population in 1939 was appalling. It 
reached 5,000 inhabitants per acre in some parts of the 
city’s centre. Today the population is properly distributed 
and green spaces spread out, shaded with trees, where 
once stood some of the most wretched and densely packed 
tenements. Warsaw has changed too, from a labyrinth 
of dreary streets into a city of gardens and open areas. 
It is not only in relation to history that we citizens 
of Warsaw have spanned whole centuries in the space 
of a few years. The past fifteen years can be split into 
two separate parts, each representing a different phase 
of development. The first was a period of primitive, 
spontaneous reconstruction. Groups of bulldings based on 
new architectonic systems grew up within the framework 
of a city organically re-established on its old foundations, 
retaining the boundaries of its former buildings. Former 
unimportant areas thus have become prominent hubs of 
communication which draw life to the city’s centre. 
Difficulties created in trying to reconcile the old with 
the new encouraged the construction of new housing 
estates on the outskirts of the city where there is still 
free land which permits unrestricted development of 
T is true that Warsaw’s population has now reached 
12 
NEW LOOK 
modern buildings. There was something paradoxical 
about this great ring of modern buildings pushing 
skyward around the ruins of a provisionally re-established 
centre and there was bound to be criticism of the de- 
urbanization trend. 
The result was a move in favour of establishing re- 
sidential districts in the heart of the city, and eventually 
a number of relatively sparsely populated districts sprang 
up there. It produces, moreover, an eclectic tendency to 
repeat the faults, but also the rich ornamentation of 
architectural forms of the 19th century. But thanks to 
help from traditional craftsmanship and materials, this 
trend made it possible to build on a scale appropriate to 
a large city, even though only out-dated technical means 
were available. 
the centre of the city became alive again with in- 
habitants. The period ended with the building of 
the Palace of Culture and Science, 750 feet in height, 
which houses the Polish Academy of Science. Located in 
the very centre of the city, its traditional approach belongs 
to another age, yet, by its size and social significance, it 
marks the beginning of the construction of Warsaw's 
modern centre. 
Today Warsaw lives continually under pressure of an 
exploding population, and ever more crowded living space. 
We are compelled to build more and more modern apart- 
ment houses, schools, hospitals, and other buildings to 
meet the growing public needs. 
There is the beginning of a great push forward in the 
flelds of pre-fabrication and industrialization in building 
and in the use of new materials for construction. Against 
the impressive backdrop of the reconstructed old city of 
Warsaw, a new city is rising, equipped with all the mod- 
ern advantages and caring for all the needs of a rapidly 
expanding population. For, you may be sure, despite the 
tragedies of war, the uprooting, the destruction, Warsaw’s 
people are filled with life and vigour. 
From the shattered remains of the old city, from the 
miseries of the past, from the hopes and aspirations of 
its scattered inhabitants, from their sweat and toil, rises 
the new Warsaw. May the joy of living flourish here 
everafter. 
D uriNG this period of rebuilding certain sections of 
VISION OF THE FUTURE. To the Poles, 
architecture is a real passion. “Nobody should 
oppose its expansion,” one Polish architect 
recently wrote, “for it represents a victory of 
inventive thought, modern solutions and a new 
approach.” Many Polish designs have registered 
victories at international competitions and have 
turned into reality in various parts of the world 
from Brazil and the U.S. to India and the Middle 
East. Top, opposite page, a bold building project 
called “The East Wall” proposed for the heart 
of Warsaw by architect Marek Leyckham has caus- 
ed a sensation and much debate in Poland. Right, 
apartments in Warsaw. Note effort to balance 
“green spaces” and buildings in photo on left.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

P
e
 
a
N
 
Ww 
i 
g 
. . 
; ~ 
: = Jam 
2
9
1
1
 
A
!
  
 
o Ko 
 
 
  
 
 
A aT SE | 
KE 
   
11 
l
e
s
 
of 
: 
         
A——— 
From Poland Magazine «) I. Jarosincka, Warsaw                    
Na 
a 
     
5
 
p 
P
P
 
E
N
N
 
Co 
’ 
— 4 
RS as 
PEAT I Ee ME APNE TY 
Toda 
Wma 
aan AE 
   
FUELS 
a a BE 
a 
U
E
 
{
—
 
0 
1
 
JETER 
 
 
         
x
 < 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
SORE Sif SARA, fy 
© Zygmunt Szarek, Warsaw 
a 
EL OR 
e
t
 
o
h
 
 
 
. 
He 
=
r
 
u
l
 
3X 
wh 
| 
oe 
S
h
 
 

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 63811: The World of prehistoric man

THE WORLD OF 
PREHISTORIC 
      
by Nino Frank 
o think in terms, of geography 
is to think in terms of the 
universe, someone has said. 
In our day, when we are ever 
more oriented to thinking in 
world terms, the teaching of gecogra- 
phy has become a matter of major 
concern. It is not that scientific study 
and school teaching are to be con- 
fused, nor should we attempt to make 
every schoolchild into an infant geo- 
grapher. But geography, treated as 
a genuine study of the world, can be 
used more effectively than other 
subjects as a means of laying the 
foundations of international under- 
standing. 
A glance at the school curricula 
of most countries, however, shows 
that the subject of geography is 
almost invariably cut to the minimum 
and treated as an adjunct to his- 
tory. One hour a week is usually all 
the time allotted to it, and indeed in 
some schools (North America, Aus- 
tralia and Japan) it is often merely 
combined with social studies or the 
study of family and community life. 
ET, great new perspectives are 
now open to the student of geo- 
graphy through television and 
films. Aerial photographs taken 
from hellcopters and more recently 
from artificial satellites have brought 
“the whole world within reach”. 
Teachers of geography are now better 
equipped than ever before to bring 
thelr subject to life and to broaden 
the horizons of their pupils. 
Let us take only one area of new 
geographic knowledge, the study of 
prehistoric times. Now, as never 
before, it is possible to describe the 
life of prehistoric men who lived far 
back in the mists of time. Only a 
few years ago they were shadowy 
figures compounded of legend and 
guess work, but we now know so 
much about their lives, surroundings 
and migrations that we-are able to 
form a precise picture of them. 
Historians and geographers now 
have all kinds of research techniques 
at their disposal which give them 
reliable evidence on which to base 
their studies of prehistory. These 
are made up of a combination of 
facts about climatic cycles, the evo- 
lution of animal species and of man, 
as well as his cultural development. 
TRATIGRAPHY, or the study of soils, 
pollen analysis and palaeonto- 
logy are all used to reconstruct 
a plcture of the past. Dating 
has long been possible through the 
study of tree rings (dendrology to 
the specialist) such as the basic 
research work first carried out with 
the centuries-old Sequolas of Cali- 
fornia. Another method of dating 
is the time-scaling of the gradual 
retreat of the great Scandinavian ice 
sheet since the end of the last ice- 
age. But dating by these means has 
never been precise enough. 
During the last twelve years or so, 
it has been possible to devise a more 
accurate method by measuring the 
radio-activity of certain elements 
contained in the soil. This method is 
based on the properties of carbon-14, 
an isotope of carbon which develops 
in every living thing when exposed 
to the effects of cosmic rays and, on 
its death, enters on a cycle of disin- 
tegration. 
All that is needed in this process 
is to discover a site where well-pre- 
served carbon is in evidence (wood 
charcoal from a hearth, or carbonized 
bone) and the state of disintegration 
provides the clue to the precise age 
of the material. This has made it 
possible to reconsider the whole 
subject of prehistory and to revise 
estimates of the geographical areas 
inhabited by man in earliest times. 
A new branch of geography has 
 
  
  
Among the earliest traces of prehis- 
toric man are petroglyphs, or carvings 
in stone, like this “Face” from Brittany. 
only just come into being which 
estimates and describes the inhabited 
regions of prehistoric times. ‘Today, 
800,000 years and perhaps even a 
million years after early man first 
began to grope his way across the 
globe, science has found a way to 
reconstitute the geographical world 
our ancestors knew. 
ROFESSOR L.R. Nougier of the Uni- 
versity of Toulouse, and director 
of the French Institute of Pre- 
historic Art, has published what 
appears to be the first survey of Hu- 
man Geography in Prehistoric Times 
(1). The book, well-illustrated with 
maps and drawings, records the 
achievements of geographers and 
scientists in many fields, from which 
the author is able to date, list and 
describe the peoples and cultures of 
prehistoric times with more than a 
hypothetical degree of accuracy. 
His method is based on the num- 
ber, character and location of palae- 
ontological deposits, aerial surveys, 
the use of radio-activity for dating 
and other new scientific research 
methods. 
© 
Ka
rq
ue
l,
 
Au
ln
ay
-s
ou
s-
ba
is
 
(1) Géographie humaine préhistorique, Li- 
brairie Gallimard, Paris, 1939.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 63811: The World of prehistoric man

Ph
ot
o 
M
u
s
é
e
 
Pr
éh
is
to
ri
qu
e,
 
Ca
rn
ac
 
Using this approach, Professor Nou- 
gier presents a veritable geographical 
panorama of life in Western Europe 
(France, in particular) from Palaeoli- 
thic times down to the “Neolithic 
Revolution”. During the period of 
time he covers, the configuration of 
the continent remained virtually the 
same as we know it now. 
Professor Nougier takes us back to 
the first food gatherers who used 
chipped-stone axes and flake-tools 
and did not reach the peak of their 
development until the advent of 
hunting some forty thousand years 
ago. In the time of these earliest 
food gatherers, it is roughly estimated 
that there were not more than 
20,000 inhabitants in the whole of 
lower Palaeolithic Gaul. 
T was a time when the area around 
what is now Paris was the ha- 
bitat of rhinoceroses and elephas 
antiquus, where wild fig and Judas 
trees grew in abundance. Men used 
natural caves for shelter, and fed as 
they could on the meat of sick or 
wounded game. This was the ecu- 
mene of the last glacial period before 
the time of Neanderthal man. 
After the food gatherers came the 
 
Aerial photographs shed new light on the stud 
is a striking example, showing the alignment o 
  
of prehistoric times. Photo abovo 
huge stones, 982 in number, sect 
up by a megalithic civilization many thousands of years ago near Carnac, Franco. 
hunters of the carved and painted 
caves of the Upper Palaeolithic age. 
They invented a magic art of extra- 
ordinary poetic power, only to forget 
it later for a reason which remains 
one of the unsolved riddles of pre- 
history. Their period ranged from 
30,000 years to 8,500 years before the 
first Christian era. During that time 
the population of the whole of France 
was not more than 50,000 inhabitants 
according to Professor Nougier. 
HE nomadic tendency of early 
prehistoric men gradually gave 
way to settlement in fixed and 
densely populated areas. It was 
in that way that the prosperity of the 
valley of the Loing, an important 
route to the north, came about. 
Countless palaeontological remalns 
have been found there. The valley 
leads directly to the Paris region. 
Although Paris recently celebrated 
her two thousandth birthday, there 
is evidence that settlement of the 
region dates back centuries before 
that time. Traces of past cultures 
have been found in the region, parti- 
cularly at the confluence of the Seine 
and the Biévre where there was once 
a rocky spur, dating back to the mists 
of antiquity. 
Somewhere between ten and twen- 
ty thousand years B.C., the first of 
the new men arrived, bringing with 
them their marvellous sccrets—agri- 
culture, domesticated animals, per- 
haps even the knowledge of how to 
construct megalithic monuments. 
This period—a forerunner of the 
“Neolithic Revolution” —was first her- 
alded by the gatherers of shell fish 
and wild berries, and later by men 
who set out to conquer the mighty 
forests. 
Thus the earliest forest farming 
civilizations were born, developing 
their particular round huts and their 
herds of cattle somewhere about 
8,500 B.C,, and marking the dawn of 
the Neolithic age (this occurred 
much later in the West than in the 
Middle East and North Africa). 
ETWEEN 3,000 B.C. and 2,000 B.C., 
came the thousand-year era of 
the Neolithic—the great “Nco- 
lithic Explosion” which saw an 
amazing increase in human popula- 
tion not only in France but in all of 
the inhabited regions of the globe. 
From a mere 250,000 the population 
of the hexagon which was to be 
occupied by the Gauls in the third 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63811: The World of prehistoric man

THE WORLD OF PREHISTORIC MAN (Cont'd) 
millennium, increased in the course 
of ten centuries to five millions. 
This twentyfold Increase was made 
possible by man’s changed attitude 
towards nature, by abandoning his 
mere parasitic existence for the sys- 
tematic exploitation of the earth's 
resources. Professor Nougler esti- 
mates that, at this time, the total 
population of the Inhabited world 
was around 200 miillons. Such an 
amazing Increase was not to occur 
again for at least five or six thousand 
years, that Is, the beginning of the 
Industrial Revolution. 
Geography really began when 
prehistoric man first asked the ques- 
tlon “Where?” Where Is such and 
such a river. Where is the large 
uninhabited cave? Where Is the 
reindeer’s plateau? Thls need of 
some graphic representation of a 
place, however rudimentary, was the 
first step In developing geography. 
F course, primitive man’s know- 
ledge of geography was confined 
to a few rudimentary notions of 
topography and to an area of a 
few square miles. This was still the 
time of wandering peoples with thelr 
fabulous tales, and he could not yet 
know the Immenslty of the ferra in- 
cognita which his children would 
inherit. 
The earliest slgns of geographical 
Interest so far discovered are the 
petroglyphs, or rock carvings, found 
both in Brittany and in Scandinavia. 
They Indicate that even men of the 
Bronze age had been wondering about 
the particular region in which they 
lived. Neither the Sumerians nor the 
Hittites who came later left any 
evidence of geographical curiosity, 
but we do know that the Pharaohs 
of the Middle Kingdom had made a 
cadastral survey of all the lands and 
plots of land under their rule. 
It was Inevitable that having begun 
by placing things, man sooner or 
later would wonder just why things 
were as they were. So it was that 
having started to explore the earth, 
men began starting to explain it. 
In effect, the term “geographical” 
applies to any fact that answers the 
double question “Where?” and “Why 
there?” 
All geography from the time of the 
Ionians and Pythagoreans to that of 
Henry the Navigator, Mercator and 
Varenius, swings back and forth be- 
tween empirical investigation and 
learning confined to measuring and 
listing. It Is as If man was, and 
still were, the lord of a manor not 
yet well known, and in which he re- 
mained a stranger. 
It was not untill the eighteenth 
century, thanks to contributions made 
by such other sciences as botany, 
16 
zoology and geology that the geogra- 
pher’'s awareness broadened. Kant 
first regarded the relationship bet- 
ween man and nature as an essential 
part of geography. After him came 
Ritter and Humboldt who proclaimed 
the principle of the interdependence 
of all natural phenomena, of which 
man is merely one, 
This planet approach to geogra- 
phy, exemplified by the “human geo- 
graphy” of P. Vidal de La Blache and 
his followers, Involves constant refe- 
rence to other branches of science. 
“Geography, as the meeting-place of 
the physical sciences and the huma- 
nitles’, writes Professor R. Clozier, 
“calls into play a wide variety of 
concepts. These can be broken down 
into facts and if taken singly or in 
Isolation belong to other sclences. 
But geography puts them back into 
place in the natural scheme of 
things.” 
The question “Why there?” has 
become paramount. Its influence is 
particularly apparent in one of the 
most active flelds of geographical 
research, world monographs, and 
cross-sectional studies of some iso- 
lated factors such as “man and 
forest”, “honey cultures”, and the 
“geography of stock-breeding”. One 
geographer, Josué de Castro, has em- 
barked on a “Geography of Hunger” 
which a colleague describes as “even 
more important than a geography of 
shelter.” And what better name to 
give the detailed research on arid 
zones now being carried out at 
UNEsco’s instance than a contribution 
to the “geography of thirst”. 
NOTHER study of great importance 
today 1s oceanography. It is 
true that we know less about 
the seas than we do about the 
moon. With men of the future ever 
more In need of extra food supplies, 
food from the ocean depths (as well 
as zones no longer arid) will be in 
great need. But though one result of 
oceanographic research may provide 
much needed food for future genera- 
tions the geographers will be bound 
to reap the first benefits. 
A number of congresses on broad 
geographical themes were held last 
year in the Scandinavian countries 
at Copenhagen, Helsinki, and Stock- 
holm. These meetings, on the Ini- 
tiative of Unesco and the Interna- 
tional Geographical Union, discussed 
oceanographical, geodesic and geo- 
physical research. Useful results 
have been achieved. Special mention 
should be made of the work done by 
the Commission on Geography 
Teaching in Schools at the Geogra- 
phic Union Congress in Stockholm 
for improving the teaching of this 
subject as the basis for a new type 
of humanism. 
. The thousand million years or 
more which have passed in the 
history of our planet since the 
first forms of life made their 
appearance seem to us so astro- 
nomical and overwhelming that 
to distinguish eras and dates is 
almost impossible. We, who 
think in hours, days and months, 
need a convenient yardstick. 
Professor Louis-René Nougier in 
his book ‘Human Geography in 
Prehistoric Times" has provided 
one (below) by condensing the 
history of life into one year. THE 
UNESCO COURIER’s graphic re- 
presentation of this condensation 
is shown on the opposite page. 
“Man is a late arrival in the world's 
long biological development, though 
his existence extends over thou- 
sands of years. We can show this 
by a simple transposition of the 
scale of time. Let us suppose that 
the major events of the biological 
evolution on our planet were con- 
densed into a single calendar year 
and that January 1 represents the 
first appearance of life in the world. 
We must wait until the end of July 
to find the first marine vertebrates. 
The great reptiles and first mam- 
mals do not appear until the second 
half of October. December 13 marks 
the beginning of the Tertiary Age 
with the first ape-like creatures. 
Not until 2 p.m. on December 31 do 
we enter the Quaternary Age, the 
last of the vast geological periods in 
which man appears. At 5.30 p.m. 
the pre-hominids (Pithecanthropes 
and Sinanthropes) arrive, but the 
first vestiges of ‘* homo sapiens 
are still to come. Swanscombe Man 
and Fontéchevado Man enter the 
scene about 8 or 9 p.m., and the 
many traces of the Neanderthal 
Race appear about 11.40 p.m. 
“It is not until ten minutes to 
midnight that homo sapiens defi- 
nitely comes on to the stage... Now 
we must count only in seconds. 
The Neolithic Revolution explodes 
in the West at six minutes to twelve, 
15 seconds. The Bronze Age begins 
at one minute to twelve when record- 
ed history is barely a few seconds 
old, and somewhere in the Orient 
man has invented writing. At just 
fifteen seconds before midnight the 
Princess of Vix is buried at the foot 
of Mount Lassois with her enormous 
funeral chariot. At midnight our 
condensed year ends. And, in 2000 
A.D., forty years from now, we will 
have spent only one full minute of 
the new year on this reduced scale.” 
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63811: The World of prehistoric man

  
  
HOMO SAPIENS IS TEN MINUTES OLD 
1 128) 1813 
JANUARY | JULY | |OCTOBER| DECEMBER 
The first fish-like marine Great reptiles and first Tertiary Age begins with 
vertebrates appear more mammals appear more than first ape-like creatures more 
200 million years ago. than 50 million years ago. 
    
  
                  
First signs of unicellular 
life appear on earth over 
1,000 million years ago. than 450 million years ago. 
QUATERNARY AGE 
(one million years ago) 
THE YEAR 2000 A.D. 
  
      
CHRISTIAN ERA BEGINS 1 
: (850,000 years ago) 
1159 PM. 
15 sec | DECEMBER 
PRINCESS OF VIX 
(525 B.C.) 
       
 
    
| YA 
THE BRONZE AGE 
~~ (2,0008B.C) 
15 sec.   
HOMO SAPIENS ‘NEOLITHIC PERIOD 
(20,000 years ago) (8,500 B. C.) 
  
PITHECANTHROPUS 
SWANSCOMBE MAN 
(500,000 years ago) 
NEANDERTHAL MAN 
(40,000 years ago)

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 63814: New horizons for Asia's Moslem women

NEW HORIZONS FOR ASIA'S 
MOSLEM WOMEN 
By Anne-Marie Hussein 
    
PY TS TT 
| r : A ’ 
fe hs 5 wa. ¥. * } 2 
© The ST Non ME Ll : 
- $7 
A WOMAN'S PLACE in Moslem society has traditionally 
been strictly in the home. But a new wind of social change 
sweeping through Moslem countries is giving more women 
the chance to train for careers and professions. Right, a 
young woman sociologist in Pakistan studies model of pro- 
posed building for her country’s future capital, to be named 
Islamabad. Traditional work in tea field is shown in photo 
above of Moslem woman from Indonesia on Java plantation. 
Indonesian women have always had « large degree of free- 
dom and the veil of Purdah is practically unknown there.

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63814: New horizons for Asia's Moslem women

f° © © 7 BAT does the average westerner think of 
i ~~ when he hears the words “Moslem women 
of Asia?” More likely than not he conjures 
TY up a vision of princesses straight out of One 
“7 Thousand and One Nights, clad in dlapha- 
nous veils and spending their lives nibbling sweetmeats 
while confined in harems guarded by great silent eunuchs. 
How much truth is there in this legend? How much 
of it can survive In comparison with real life, say in 
Karachi or Djakarta, two great capital cities which, 
though far apart and different in many respects, are both 
Asian and Moslem. For, in these two Asian countries of 
Pakistan and Indonesia, live eighty million Moslem 
women. 
At the outset we should say that the fact that she 
may be Moslem is no handicap for a woman, paradoxical 
as that may seem to those nurtured on the legend of 
storybooks. On the contrary, there are few communities 
where women’s rights are so carefully protected, at least 
in theory, as they are among Moslems. 
“Paradise Is at your mother’s feet,” proclaims an old 
Islamic proverb. It sums up the position a woman occu- 
ples in Moslem society. She Is in the centre of her world, 
  
  
   
The Unesco Courler. «— Morch 1961 
and indeed, that Is her position according to the tra- 
ditional laws of Islam. 
Fourteen hundred years ago the Koran decreed that 
women's rights should be “the same as men's” and that 
they should “receive as much as they give.” What was 
the effect of the equality taught by the Prophet himself. 
It meant that as far back as the Middle Ages a Moslem 
woman was free to choose her own husband, and to 
govern the terms of her marriage contract. She could 
even reserve for herself the right to divorce! She could 
own property and therefore go into business and handle 
financial and legal matters without having to have 
authorization from her husband. 
She was also entitled to inherit half the share set aside 
for male descendants, and at her husband's death, she 
had the right to an eighth part of his property. If she 
were divorced, she had sole custody of all daughters of 
the marriage, and sons remained in her charge until the 
age of seven. 
The interests of married women were as well protected. 
Marriage was 2a civil contract, freely accepted by both 
parties and concluded in the presence of two witnesses. 
It is true that a man was entitled to have four wives at 
the same time, but only on condition that he obeyed the 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
© Paul Almasy, Pari 
 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63814: New horizons for Asia's Moslem women

MOSLEM WOMEN (Contd) 
Deprived of rights 
by a web of customs 
Prophet's explicit injunction to place them all on a 
footing of absolute equality, both in matters of affection 
and money. 
We are told that the Prophet introduced this provision 
in the Interest of women themselves, and supported it by 
his own example. In those days, when war was endemic, 
destitute widows were so numerous that to marry several 
al a time was one means of alleviating the problem. It 
must be admitted that the generous motives which 
prompted this custom degenerated over the years. 
But according to law, what was true fourteen hundred 
years ago remains so today. 
Too shy to stand for election 
oLiTicAL rights have been granted to Moslem women 
without a struggle. Falthful to the traditions of 
Islam, the modern states of Indonesia and Pakistan, 
from the moment they came into being, recognized the 
political Independence of their women. They also took 
steps to ensure that women should by law remain the 
equals of men in their working life. Pakistani and 
Indonesian women have the vote, and may stand as 
candidates in any kind of election. In Indonesia it is 
not unusual for women to be members of municipal and 
departmental councils, and there have been several 
women Cabinet Members. 
The Pakistan government has taken special steps to 
encourage women to enter Into public Ife and 
affairs, fearing perhaps that they might otherwise be 
prevented by shyness or inexperience from assuming thelr 
share in the direction of community affairs. In each of 
the local councils, only recently elected, the Government 
has reserved a number of seats which will automatically 
fall to women after the elections should they not be 
adequately represented. 
Although Pakistani women may be too shy to present 
themselves as candidates, they are by no means in- 
different to matters of public interest. In some provincial 
elections, for example, 12% more women went to the polls 
than did men. 
In theory the same equality holds true for working 
women. Nearly all civil service posts are open to them, 
and salaries must be exactly the same as for men, 
Married to an unknown suitor 
His rosy picture of women’s rights does not hold true, 
T however, for the condition in which the majority of 
the women of Indonesia and Pakistan found them- 
selves at the beginning of the century, and in which many 
of them still find themselves today. For we must always 
bear in mind that one of the chief consequences of coloniz- 
atlon was the moulding of the community in such a way 
as to arrest and paralyse its normal evolution. In such 
circumstances, the role of woman became insignificant, 
and a spiderweb of customs prevented her from exercising 
even the most trivial rights, which, theoretically, at least, 
were hers. 
Women were still respected as mothers, but childbearing 
was regarded as virtually their only function, and it 
occupied the greater part of thelr time and energy. 
Many women were uninterruptedly pregnant from 
the age of fourteen on, and It was not unusual for them 
to give birth to a score of children during their lifetime. 
That, however, was all a woman did. She had no part 
in the education of her sons, and as for daughters, she 
simply trained them for a life like her own. 
She took no part in activities outside the family circle, 
and even there, her situation was often precarious. She 
was married at a very young age, without being consult- 
ed, to an unknown suitor chosen for social or economic 
reasons. And during her married life she was in constant 
fear of being rejected by her husband or supplanted by 
 
20 CONT'D ON PAGE 22 
  
   
     
       
 I—
: 
- UL
 » 
r
y
e
 
L
R
 
I
E
 
LE 
EE 
EL 
“alae 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Pakistani women journalists, above, exa- 
mine their notes at a press conference in 
Karachi. Below, student nurses atop roof of 
Lahore clinic discuss anatomy lesson against 
backdrop of mosque cupolas and minarets. 
United Nations 
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63814: New horizons for Asia's Moslem women

— . =. 
Unesco-Pierre Pittet 
Cartier-Bresson © Magnum 
  
  
  
  
Above, Moslem girls and boys mix freely at Gadjah Mada 
University in Djakarta. Indonesia during break in class 
schedule. Below, Moslem women parade in the streets of 
Indonesia’s capital during a recently-held political rally.

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 63814: New horizons for Asia's Moslem women

MOSLEM WOMEN (cont'd) 
In Indonesia the veil is unknown 
another woman. Her fear was doubled if she failed to 
present her husband with a male heir. Possibly the worst 
feature of her life, however, was the utter seclusion in 
which she was forced to live, without the slightest 
opportunity for education. 
This was really her chief cause for complaint. A great 
deal has been said about Islam's indifference to the fate 
of its women. Divorce and polygamy are most frequently 
mentioned as evidence of that indifference. In actual 
fact, these practices were mostly confined to the wealthy 
and powerful. 
Polygamy ls not easy to practise in a community with 
a very low standard of living. It Is a luxury in which 
few men can afford to indulge. In recent years there has 
been a growing tendency to reject the custom of polygamy 
entirely, as evidenced by the criticism heard in both 
Indonesia and Pakistan a few years ago when two 
statesmen—President Soekarno of Indonesia and Mo- 
hammed Ali, the former Prime Minister of Pakistan—each 
decided to take a second wife. 
As for divorce, it is true that it is very easy for a man 
to reject his wife. He need only repeat the prescribed 
words three times. Still, census returns show that the 
number of divorces registered is negligible. This may be 
because there are very few divorces, or possibly because 
dlvorced couples are afraid to declare their new status. 
For, to be sure, divorce Is severely frowned upon. 
The custom of arranged marriages, still widely 
prevalent, undoubtedly contributes to stability of the 
union for It creates links between families which are gen- 
erally less vulnerable than those formed between two 
individuals. Most divorces occur today among those 
classes who have been thrown off balance by too rapid a 
social evolution. Traditional values have been undermin- 
ed and the Western concept of love and marriage has 
not yet been assimilated, although this concept has spread 
widely in both countries since the Second World War. 
The Koran and purdah 
HE situation of a woman today in both Indonesia and 
Pakistan depends largely on what class of the com- 
munity she belongs to. 
Peasant women in the villages cannot indulge in the 
luxury of a quiet, idle life. They work in the flelds side 
by side with the men. They go to market, sell their 
produce, and some of the very poorest of them work as 
servants in private homes or shops. Economic necessity, 
in their case, takes precedence over tradition. So it is 
that many peasant women enjoy greater freedom and 
more consideration than many of their women compatriots 
who are financially better off. 
One should bear in mind in this respect that both 
Indonesia and Pakistan are mainly agricultural countries, 
and farmers form the majority class. Woman's im- 
portance in a village family is singularly illustrated by a 
custom widespread among Indonesian peasants. When a 
young man cannot afford to pay the traditional bride- 
price, he enters the bride’s family and pays his debt by 
working for his in-laws (See “Wedding in Sumatra,” 
p. 23). 
It is the middle class which has the greatest difficulty 
adapting itself to a modern way of life. A mistaken 
Interpretation of the spirit of Islam leads some of its 
followers to believe that accepting any change in a 
woman's status is tantamount to disobedience to the laws 
and traditions of the Koran. 
There is no better example of this attitude than the 
survival in Pakistan of the custom of “purdah.” This 
term which has come to signify the complete segregation 
of women takes its name from the curtain which is hung 
between the women’s quarters and the rest of the house 
as an Impassable barrier. 
The world of Islam has often been reproached for this 
custom with all its many consequences, and yet its origin 
22 
cannot be traced to sacred texts. True enough, the Koran 
orders men to have “authority over woman,” Allah having 
made them her superior, and enjoins women to be modest; 
but there is no verse requiring women to wear the veil or 
to live in retirement. These practices are not based on 
any religious” teaching. 
““Purdah,” under various names, was common in pre- 
Islamic societies of the Orient as an essentially middle- 
class custom with nothing compulsory about it. If the 
Prophet lent it any authority, it was by not discouraging 
it. He even adopted the custom for his own wives. It 
thus became firmly established in the countries converted 
to Islam, and where it was already practised it grew into 
a regular institution. That is the case in Pakistan. 
Looking like a walking tent 
womaN is not allowed to show herself unveiled 
except to her husband. She may not go out unless 
she is hung from head to foot with a stiff drapery 
that makes her look like a walking tent. It has a slit at 
eye level so that she can find her way about, but even this 
small aperture is covered with crocheted mesh which 
conceals the lustre of her eyes. In this way she is barred 
from all social Iife, and she is taught nothing except a 
few domestic virtues, the most important of which is 
obedience. 
Some women of strong character have undoubtedly held 
great power, been feared and obeyed even from behind 
the veil. But “purdah” has engendered a kind of atrophy 
of isolation that cannot be cured overnight. It is difficult 
to shake off an apathy which has endured for centuries, 
and which men, themselves, have been reluctant to 
change. An Englishwoman travelling in Pakistan in 1954 
reported that in one village she saw a woman about to 
die in childbirth. Her husband adamantly refused to 
allow the local male doctor to attend her because no 
midwife was present. 
Such extreme cases are becoming increasingly rare, 
but even when women have set aside the veil and emerged 
from “purdah,” they seem to retain a certain mental 
attitude, a shyness and reserve, which set limits to their 
participation in life outside. 
Unfortunately there are no statistics to show the extent 
to which “purdah” still prevails in Pakistan and how 
much the position has altered since 1947. The fact that 
increasing numbers of girls are attending co-educational 
schools and universities Is evidence of a gradual change. 
Pioneers of women’s rights 
are most faithful to the old traditions, for they were 
the first to admit the liberal ideas. One result pro- 
duced In these rich familles a generation of daughters 
who scornfully refused to interest themselves in purely 
domestic subjects and embarked instead on more intellec~ 
tual studies. 
Their studies were seldom carried very far since 
marriage soon intervened. More often than not, they 
were neither good housewives, nor real intellectuals. And 
this situation lent some weight to the attacks of the old 
die-hards who were anxious to preserve traditions. 
Fortunately this was only a temporary phase, and in any 
case many pioneers of the feminist movement in 
Pakistan are found among these women. 
One factor sharply differentiates the Moslem women of 
Pakistan from those of Indonesia. It is the practice of 
“purdah.” In Indonesia it is virtually unknown. That 
is true in part because Mohammedanism is a relative 
newcomer to the country and it was long resisted by the 
Hindu courts of the various principalities. Thus it is that 
Moslem traditions as practised by the upper levels of Java 
society are less orthodox, even today, than those of the 
rest of the population, especially city dwellers such as 
I is not women belonging to the wealthier classes who 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 32 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 63814: New horizons for Asia's Moslem women

  
WEDDING 
IN SUMATRA 
  
Unesco. Marc Riboud 
  
  
The photos on this page 
show a traditional Moslem 
wedding in Sumatra, often 
a lavish affair lasting about 
six days. The bride wears 
an elaborate diadem (pho- 
to above), Great quantities 
of food are prepared and 
are set on brass trays piled 
high with plates of many- 
coloured cakes and sweets 
(left). These will be served 
at the bride's home where 
the couple will take up 
residence. The groom, or 
“borrowed man” as he is 
called, plays but a minor 
part at the ceremony 
which starts with a reli- 
gious service. In photo be- 
low the whole party takes 
a jungle path to the bride's 
house. Traditional dances 
are an important feature 
in this as in many other 
ceremonies in Indonesia. 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63818: How the cinema affects children

  
  
  
© Karen Juhane, Copenhagen 
24

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63818: How the cinema affects children

Les of pages and millions of words have been 
written in the past thirty years about the 
effects of the cinema on children. No one 
disputes the obvious fact that children flock 
eagerly to the cinema the world over. But 
from there on the arguments come thick and 
‘ast. A new bibliographic study just pub- 
Ished by Unesco (1) now helps us to an 
understanding of conclusions reached by the abundant 
research and studies into this subject which so actively 
interests parents and educators. 
Books and articles by some 400 writers from nearly 
30 countries are dealt with in this volume and on reading 
it, one fact quickly becomes clear: if one thing is known 
with certainty about children and the cinema, it is that 
very little is known with certainty—as one writer 
jokingly puts it. 
But once this note of caution has heen sounded, some 
broad, significant trends can be discerned. 
At various points in this world debate on the cinema’s 
influence it is possible, without taking a show of hands, 
to gauge “the feeling of the meeting”. 
Studies on the educational film—that is, on the use of 
the film strictly as a teaching aid—have been excluded 
from this bibliography in order to keep the publication 
within manageable proportions, but such action does not 
rule out the topic of film education or, as it is called in 
several countries, “film appreciation”. In point of fact, 
the growing interest in film education, allied with the 
development of ciné-clubs for the young, the production 
and distribution of special children’s entertainment 
films, and the presentation of special programmes, rep- 
resents the most noticeable of the trends which can 
be detected. 
about the cinema should not merely be encouraged 
but that it should be given formal recognition in 
the school curriculum. In several countries (e.g. -the 
U.S.8.R., and the United Kingdom) even before the period 
covered by this book, this attitude existed. Any attempt 
to classify a collection of data such as this Into positive 
and negative categorles would have been “unscientific”, 
yet, as against those viewpoints which are plainly anta- 
gonistic towards the cinema and its effects on the young, 
one cannot help being impressed by the volume of opinion 
in favour of the educational aspects and practical 
measures which are considered as positive influences of 
the film. 
The largest sections of the book, in fact, are those 
dealing with these topics, and even censorship, tradi- 
tionally regarded as essentially negative, is represented 
as capable of being a positive factor. For example, in 
a country such as New Zealand the Censor, who is a statu- 
tory official, is able, in effect, to certify not merely that 
a fllm is harmless for children to see but even that it is 
entertainment which they should particularly enjoy. 
The individual opinions expressed by writers are often 
sharply contradictory, but nowhere more so than in the 
fleld of “juvenile delinquency”. However, two or three 
assumptions can safely be made after an examination 
of material published on this tendentious and contro- 
versial subject. One is that, on the evidence so far 
available, it is extremely difficult—indeed, virtually im- 
possible—to establish that the cinema has a direct 
influence on juvenile delinquency. While a great deal of 
research has been carried out to decide whether or not 
films corrupt youth, what has been done is conflicting 
both as to methods and results. 
| “ae numbers of writers advocate that teaching 
(1) The Influence of the Cinema on Children and Adolescents ; an 
annotated international bibliography, Paris, Unesco, 1961. (Reports 
and Papers on Mass Communication Ne 31) Published in English and 
French; price: §1.50; 7/6d; 5.25 NF. A companion volume on the 
influence of television on children and adolescents is in preparation. 
The Unesco Courier. =— Morch 1961 
There are a number of psychiatric theories on the 
subject, but the evidence in support of them is incon- 
clusive. At the one extreme it is claimed that films acti- 
vely incite young people to delinquency; at the other 
that they are safety-valves which may help to prevent 
it: on the one hand, that they supply first-hand know- 
ledge of how to commit criminal acts; on the other that, 
by keeping children off the streets, they prevent juvenile 
misbehaviour and crime. A “half-way” attitude 1s that 
the influence of films on young people cannot be isolated 
from other social factors and that criminal and amoral 
behaviour is to be imputed to deeper and more subtle 
influences than the film alone; although much that is 
shown on the screen is unsuitable for children. 
for his pet theory will find It somewhere in this 
survey. There is no doubt that a good many hobby- 
horses are ridden through its pages. Nevertheless, while 
there is no unanimity about the direct influence of the 
cinema, a majority of authors do speak of indirect and 
unconscious Influences. The consensus of their opinion 
Is that such Influences are rarely the product of a single 
film or even of several, but are much more likely to be the 
outcome of a succession of movies with similar themes 
and tendencies, causing by repetition a new state of mind 
or change of outlook in the young spectator. 
To put it another way, it is widely argued that the 
repeated presentation of certain themes and behaviour 
patterns on the screen Is much more likely to produce 
a long-term indirect effect than the immediate, overt 
influence of any individual film, however specific Its 
message. The broad generalization which might be made 
Is that the fllm has mainly a provocative effect but is 
rarely a basic cause of delinquent acts. 
It would seem to be accepted now as almost beyond 
doubt that boys and girls get ideas from the movies on 
such superficial and generally harmless matters as dress, 
hair-styles, speech, recreations and games. So far as 
harmful Influences are concerned, the factors most fre- 
quently cited as responsible are over-emphasis and dis- 
torted presentation of crime, cruelty and horror, and of 
those elements which may be put under the generic label 
of “sex”. 
However, as the evidence of the bibliographical entries 
reveals, considerable concern is also felt among parents 
and educators about the effects of a number of rather 
less obvious elements In cinema entertainment. There 
is a prevailing objection to the artificial conception of 
life in the world of the cinema (where what Is extreme 
is presented as normal) which is sald to endanger the 
sense of values of the immature. 
Brey It will be said that anybody who wants support 
are: the recurrent portrayal of luxury and of the 
“easy lfe”; the “glorification” of revenge as a 
motive; the unrealistic solutions put forward when 
difficulties arise; and the artificial patterns of the “boy- 
meets-girl” situation. Several writers draw attention to 
the stereotyped images which the screen creates both of 
characters (e.g. the cowboy and the gangster) and of 
modes of behaviour; and the question is ralsed whether this 
stereotyping may give a wrong conception of national life 
and customs to young audiences in other countries. There 
Is some evidence that in the case of raclal attitudes or 
prejudices, these can be Influenced—in one direction or 
the other—by a few striking films only. 
It might have been expected that the entries in the 
section of the bibliography headed “juvenile delinquency” 
would all be of comparatively recent vintage. But this 
is not so. There are studies on the subject dating back 
to 1933 and 1929; and the opinion of one writer is quoted 
to the effect that study In this fleld began soon after 
A MONG aspects In thls category that draw critical fire 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63818: How the cinema affects children

CHILDREN AND THE CINEMA (Cont'd) 
DO YOU KNOW THEIR 
FOUR CINEMA AGES? 
1910—in other words practically as soon as the cinema 
started to make an impact on the general public. 
Furthermore, writers and theorists appear to have been 
divided from the outset as to whether the film has any 
direct Influence on the young—and if so, why. Even the 
increased avallability and use of scientific research 
techniques has not noticeably clarified the situation in 
this branch of the subject. In this context it is justi- 
flable to draw attention to the wish expressed by one 
writer that there should be closer co-operation between 
the different investigators in the field of film and youth. 
In other sections of the Unesco survey the issues are 
rather more clearcut than they are in those devoted to 
juvenile delinquency and other of the cinema after-effects. 
For Instance, in the sections on cinema attendance and 
film preferences, several trends emerge fairly clearly. . 
Some of these trends may seem obvious: nevertheless 
it is useful to find confirmation, from many quarters, of 
the view that children in general go to the cinema more 
often than their parents and that as they grow older 
they go less and less in parental company; that boys 
tend to go more often than girls; and that the children 
who are most frequent attenders are (to generalize) those 
who are unhappy or lonely, those who want “to escape 
from daily life” and therefore are seeking distraction, 
and those who have least interest in other activities. 
Rather more specifically, there is evidence to show 
that attendance is affected by standards of income, intel- 
ligence and education, with children at the lower levels 
in these three aspects going to the movies more fre- 
quently than children who are well off, of high intelli- 
gence, and carefully educated. 
In very many works on the influence of the cinema, 
the age of the audience under review assumes first-rank 
importance, because of its bearing on their habits and 
behaviour as fillmgoers, on their understanding of the 
medium and the effects it has upon them, on measures 
of censorship and legislation, and on the production and 
selection of what are regarded as suitable programmes. 
From a perusal of the items in this bibliography, four 
significant stages or periods in the development of young 
people’s filmgoing can be distinguished reasonably clearly, 
even though it will be realized that one should not be 
arbitrary about age-grouping and that one phase will 
merge into another. 
so-called, “fairy-tale age” in which children live in 
an imaginary world. It may be noted here that a 
substantial body of .opinion inclines to the view that the 
movie theatre is no place for infants and therefore, in 
general, that children should not start picture going 
before the age of 7, and certainly not without the 
company of a parent or some other responsible adult. 
The second age-group covers the period between 7 and 
12. This is what is known as “the Robinson age”, when 
experience of realism comes more and more to the fore 
and children are mostly interested in adventure and 
action. But it is also noticeable that théy can already 
adopt an objective attitude, and can follow the main 
lines of action in a story. 
This period merges into the third stage, that of the 
age of puberty, between 12 and 16, when the child's 
personality is markedly developing and tensions are 
rising. By this time the average child is strongly 
attracted towards the cinema, although aware of its 
fictitious nature. He can not only comprehend the film 
26 
T* first stage is that up to the age of 7 years, the 
FILMS BOYS P 
Re ow 2 
WESTERNS 
REFE 
7 
  
  
 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63818: How the cinema affects children

- 
4 
FILMS GIRLS PREFER 
  
LOVE STORIES 
td" 
Wort 
v 10. 
EVERYDAY LIFE 
  
The Unesco Courler. — March 1961 
as a whole, but can also form some interpretation of the 
screenplay’s internal structure and meaning. 
This view is supported by those writers who claim that 
“film language” cannot be understood by children before 
the age of puberty. A variation of this is the theory that 
two phases can be distinguished in the development of 
the child's understanding of the cinema, a-mental level 
of 10 years being necessary to keep pace with sequences 
and with the various techniques of film expression, while 
a proper grasp of a film's real significance demands a 
mental age of at least 12 years. 
Most writers consider that the fourth stage in Alm 
comprehension starts at about 18 or 17 which, in a num- 
ber of countries, is the age when young filmgoers are 
legally regarded as having reached adult status and are 
therefore no longer subject to censorship restrictions. 
Their interest In the cinema is largely influenced by the 
desire to penetrate the mysteries of the adult world 
which they themselves are now entering. 
crucial dividing-line. The problem of the filin 
begins at 12 years, it is sald, and among the writers 
on the subject whose works are represented in the 
UNEsco bibliography it ts fairly generally agreed that the 
reactions of adolescents at the cinema are noticeably 
different from those of children, the onset of puberty 
producing not only a new outlook on films and a better 
understanding of what films are saying, but also sharper 
Impressions and stronger cffects on imagination and 
sentiments, with the consequent appearance of new 
problems. It is, for example, in adolescence that the cult 
of “star worship” becomes most evident. 
So far as preferences In screen entertainment are 
concerned, it is a commonplace to say that tastes in films 
mature as the individual himself matures. However, it 
may safely be adduced from the evidence available here 
that boys prefer films of adventure, action and violence, 
while girls like those concerned with love, private life, 
and “glamour”. 
These categories may be broken down a little further,’ 
as follows: for boys—Westerns, war films, comedles, ani- 
mal films, mustcals, detective and crime thrillers, sports 
stories; for girls—musicals, nature and animal films, 
comedies, stories about love, everyday life and human 
relations. 
One may sum up these particular trends by saying 
that in addition to levels of education, intelligence, age 
and Income, the social milieu and conditions at home 
exert an Influence on the frequency of children’s visits 
to the cinema and on their preferences, tastes, and re- 
actions to films. But it would be hazardous to make a 
more precise statement than I have here attempted. 
It seems to be generally agreed that there is such a 
thing as “film language” and that educators must take 
account of its existence, for the reason that films cannot 
be properly understood and appreciated without some 
knowledge of this visual language and {ts “grammar”, 
Similarly, as regards production, there appears to be 
little doubt that simplicity is a prerequisite in the making 
of films for children, particularly young children, who 
have difficulty In following “film language” (camera 
movement, time symbols, etc.) which involves a different 
process from that required for reading and understanding 
a book. 
Those writers—and there are many—who favour en- 
couragement of “film-teaching”, especially through 
ciné~clubs and film discussions (either at the club or in 
the classroom itself), have a generally consistent idea 
about the broad lines along which such activities should 
be conducted. Again, there is virtual unanimity that it 
is highly desirable for films to be made and distributed 
specially for children, just as there are few divergences 
of opinion about the pitfalls which will be encountered 
if this valuable task is attempted or the ways in which 
difficulties might be avoided. 
BR it is the age of 12 or 13 which Is seen as the 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 63818: How the cinema affects children

WORLD'S 
YOUNGEST 
CINEMAGOERS 
m Small children will watch the shooting down of scores 
of Indians in a Western film with perfect equanimity, 
but the sight of a sick horse or bird in a film immediately 
upsets them, This is one of the findings from a special 
study carried out over a period of ten years by Danish 
educators on the effects of films on kindergarten chil- 
dren aged 3to 7. The study was carried out with govern- 
ment support and Denmark is one of the few countries 
in which kindergarten children visit government granted 
film performances regularly. Here they are supervised 
by Mrs. Ellen Siersted, a child psychologist attached to 
the Danish Government Film Office (above right). Some 
of the findings: Contrary to common belief many car- 
toons and Tarzanlike films frighten very young children ; 
some cried and tried to leave the cinema, others had 
nausea, and parents later reported cases of bedwetting 
and nightmares. Yet the same children said they thought 
the films funny and at first, refused to admit they were 
scared. Child audiences get particularly upset when 
they see small animals or children get lost. They become 
frightened and cry and ask if the animals or children 
will get back to mother again. Equally significant are 
the positive impressions revealed in the classroom 
where children recapture the images with pencil and 
brush. Drawing (below right) was made by a five- 
year-old girl to explain a film she had seen about a little 
ship and its crew. (Photos eon this page, on front 
cover and page 26 were taken during the Danish study.) 
Photos © Karen Juliane, Copenhagen 
28 
  
  
   
   

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  x” Tiel ss A | a 
Wustration by Gustave Doré 
or long ago the British cargo liner Calpean 
Star arrived at Liverpool from South Georgia 
carrying in addition to its usual cargo a 
consignment of live penguins and other local 
fauna secured by a professional animal- 
collector and destined for a German zoo. Among the 
other specimens was an albatross, said to be a wandering 
albatross, the largest of the known species and the 
biggest of all sea-birds. At the time this was claimed, 
probably correctly, to be the only live albatross in Europe 
or in captivity anywhere. 
Soon after the ship docked the albatross died in its 
cage, allegedly through being given a sausage-roll to eat 
by a well-meaning but misguided sailor, but more probably 
because of the impossibility of keeping a large oceanic 
bird in confinement for more than a brief period. 
At once, a cloud hung over the Calpean Star. Her 
crew blamed various misfortunes of the voyage just 
ended on the bird’s presence on board, and rather than 
man the ship for the return trip they went on strike. 
This attracted a good deal of attention, and in subsequent 
press and TV interviews various members of the crew 
and the captain all professed their belief that the hapless 
albatross was a creature of ill-omen, responsible for their 
troubles, that never ought to have been shipped. 
T HE master himself admitted that the bird had been 
taken on board against his better judgment, and 
that he had regretted its very presence on his ship, 
vowing never to repeat the mistake. Some of the crew 
swore never to sail the ship again, and on every hand 
there was firm proof of the power of the ancient legend 
of the albatross. 
Public interest in this odd case was centred not only 
upon yet another strange reason for a strike in a strike- 
torn land, but also upon the indisputable fact that here 
were tough, grown men so afraid of the consequences of 
a sea-bird's death that they refused to return to thelr 
ship. Now sailors are by long tradition superstitious folk, 
but this seemed to be carrying things rather too far. 
All through, there was much mention of The Rime of 
the Ancient Mariner, and how that famous character in 
English literature had killed an albatross and lived to 
regret it. Even the cynical few who felt that not all 
merchant seamen read poetry, belleved that these other- 
wise normal men were simply responding to a deep- 
seated, age-old belief that to kill one of these noble birds 
meant bad weather at sea, mounting misfortune, and 
worse. 
Yet the odd thing is that such a familiar legend is in 
fact suspect. There Is hardly any evidence whatever for 
including it among the superstitions of the sea. On the 
contrary, sallors generally have never had the slightest 
The Unesco Courler. — March 1961 


### 63821: A Mariner's myth; the curse of the albatross

The curse of the Albatross 
A MARINER’ 
MYTH 
by David Gunston 
compunction in destroying albatrosses. Could It be that 
twentleth-century mariners were superstitious—and to 
such lengths—about a plece of elghteenth-century liter- 
ary invention? Let us examine the facts. 
Many sea-fowl, notably gulls, petrels and gannets, have 
for centuries been belleved by seamen to be creatures of 
{ll-omen, chiefly because they were thought to be the 
doomed souls of dead sallors transmigrated Into lonely, 
restless denizens of the sea. Few mariners, even to this 
day, would willingly kill a storm-petrel, devil-bird, or 
“Mother Carey’s Chicken” for this reason. But careful 
research among accounts of nautical credulities and 
superstitions over several centuries falls to reveal any 
mention of albatrosses. 
I fact, whatever the period of history, albatrosses were 
regarded as just another creature met with at sea, to 
be killed, if need be, without turning a halr. During 
Drake's circumnavigation of the globe, 1577-9, large num- 
bers were encountered and eaten as food. The stomachs 
of the first Ellzabethans were clearly stronger than those 
of today, but even In this century albatross flesh has 
been eaten in South Georgia, particularly from the young 
birds taken from their nests. 
Dr. L. Harrison Matthews, Director of the London Zoo, 
writing in 1951 of earlier experience In these far southern 
albatross breeding-grounds, sald: 
Albatrosses, llke all sea-birds, must be skinned soon 
after they are killed If they are to be worth eating... it Is 
the fat under the skin and round the intestines that 
taints the meat with a fishy flavour. 
And his first-hand accounts of the butchery by Nor- 
weglan whalemen of nesting albatrosses, to say nothing 
of the large-scale thefts of the birds’ single gigantic eggs 
(each fllls a large frylng-pan) during the 1930s, dispel 
any lingering bellef in the traditional superstition. 
(@ Enis sallors often had great sport “fishing” for 
albatrosses, especially when becalmed in those 
lonely waters. After Drake's day, albatross flesh was 
less commonly eaten, though another great voyager, Cap- 
tain Cook, writing in 1775, described how : “a few alba- 
trosses and petrels were shot as a necessary treat for our 
table.” 
A mariner of his experience and wisdom would never 
have allowed such a thing if there had been any deep- 
seated feeling amongst his men agalnst it. Most of the 
birds were captured and killed for sheer wanton sport. 
They are absurdly easy to secure with a large hook baited 
with salt pork, or with a brass triangle baited with meat 
and proffered at the end of a cod-line. On grasping the 
 
CONT'D ON PAGE 31 

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63821: A Mariner's myth; the curse of the albatross

A MARINER'S MYTH (Cont'd) 
‘I shot the albatross 
hg 
Ha 
' 
h 
When in 1798 the English poet and philosopher Samuel Coleridge wrote ‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’’, a long poem in 
ballad form, he little guessed the extraordinary repercussions it would have. By telling the story of a sailor who killed an 
albatross and thus brought down misfortune on his ship and its crew, he created the legend of the albatross as a bird of ill 
fate and the strong superstition of mariners against killing albatrosses. When Coleridge wrote the poem he was collaborating 
with William Wordsworth on a joint volume in which Coleridge was to treat supernatural subjects. It was Wordsworth who 
suggested the idea for the poem after having read an English navigator's account of the killing of an albatross in the South 
Seas, and later Coleridge admitted his Rime to be '‘a work of pure imagination'’. Since then dictionaries and encyclopaedias 
have further perpetuated the fallacious fable of the sea, quoting Coleridge's poem as following the legend, not creating it. 
Above, how Gustave Doré, depicted the shooting of the albatross in one of the first French translations of the poem. 
NA 
a Ld 

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63821: A Mariner's myth; the curse of the albatross

The Unesco Courler. — Morch 1961 
This was no bird of ill omen 
meat, the bird refuses to let go and is readily pulled down 
on the deck—though some accounts speak of two men 
being needed to haul in the larger species. 
Once on hoard, the line may be released, for the huge 
almost entirely aerial creature cannot rise again easily, 
even after dropping the bait and “lightening ship” by 
bringing up the oily contents of its stomach. This is a 
natural reaction of many sea-birds when they require 
increased manceuvrability in the face of danger or 
difficulty, and not a symptom of albatross sea-sickness as 
was formerly believed. 
Anyway, most sallors were ready for such sport, 
laughing at the helpless bird's inability either to walk 
properly or to take off again, and captured albatrosses 
were put to a number of ingenious uses. The oily vomit 
was saved and used to waterproof sea-boots, but the 
feathers and feet were most in demand. The downy 
breasts made handsome muffs, surpassing in beauty the 
once-fashionable grebe muffs, while two or three sewn 
together made a very beautiful cape that was sure to 
meet with feminine favour at home. 
S KINS of the birds also made excellent feather-rugs 
(hence perhaps the nickname “Cape Sheep” for alba- - 
trosses), and sometimes the complete head, neck 
and beak were preserved as trophies. The webbing from 
the large feet was always in demand for making tobacco- 
pouches: it seems that the slight oiliness of the skin kept 
the tobacco agreeably moist. The wing-bones, cleaned 
and blown hollow, made excellent, unbreakable pipe- 
stems, much enjoyed for cool smoking. In South Georgia 
to this day, albatross wings, cut off at the elbow, are used 
as sweeping-brushes. 
Nevertheless, during the nineteenth century in 
particular, even after the Ancient Mariner's debut, there 
was much wanton shooting of albatrosses from the in- 
creasing number of ships that were sailing the oceans. 
Passengers having little else to do would often take pot 
shots at the trusting birds that followed their ships. 
According to the famous scientific explorer William Sco- 
resby, voyaging in 1856, this was “a prevalent usage in 
many ships travelling to Australia,” while another 
observer of 1862 spoke of what he called the “murder 
of the innocents.” 
How, then, did the albatross legend arise? The man 
chiefly responsible seems to be the English poet, Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834), solely through his most 
famous poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, first 
published in 1798. 
The genesis of the story in the poet’s mind is of 
relevant interest. In the autumn of 1797 he set off on 
a walking tour in Somerset with his friend the poet 
Wordsworth, and his sister Dorothy. Each poet decided 
to write a poem to meet the expenses of the trip, and 
Coleridge planned his narrative of what he afterwards 
called his “old navigator,” partly from a dream 
experienced by another friend. 
C OLERIDGE discussed this idea with Wordsworth who at 
once delighted in it and suggested additions. Re- 
counting to a friend in later years, Wordsworth revealed: 
“Much the greater part of the story was Mr. Coleridge's 
invention; but certain parts I myself suggested... I had 
been reading in Shelvocke’s Voyages, a day or two before, 
that, while doubling Cape Horn, they frequently saw 
albatrosses in that latitude... “Suppose,” said I, “you 
represent him as having killed one of these birds on . 
entering the South Sea, and that the tutelary spirits of 
these regions take upon them to revenge the crime?” 
This appealed to Coleridge's strong sense of the su- 
pernatural, and with his own extensive reading of the old 
voyagers, his powerful gift of words, and his individual 
dream-fantasies (doubtless partly due to his addiction to 
opium), he at once created in the lengthy Rime a 
masterplece of English literature, little guessing the 
extraordinary results it was to have. 
T HE book that started off Wordsworth’s thought-trails 
towards the subject of albatrosses was in fact Cap- 
tain George Shelvocke's A Voyage Round the World 
by Way of the Great South Sea, published In London In 
1757, and In it the author describes the seals, penguins, 
petrels and albatrosses his ship encounters in those 
southerly latitudes. He goes on to tell how, one day in 
October 1719, his vessel, the little Speedwell, was subjected 
“to continuous squalls of sleet, snow and rain” for days 
on end, with the heavens overcast and not a single fish'or 
sea-bird to be seen: 
Excepting a disconsolate black Albltross (sic), who 
accompanied us for several days, and hovered about us 
as if he had lost himself, till Hatley (my second captain) 
concluding, in a gloomy fit, that the company of this 
melancholy bird brought us ill luck, resolved to destroy 
him in the hopes we might then have better weather, 
and more favourable winds... 
Hatley did in fact shoot the bird, but Shelvocke 
mentions no particular result either way, and the 
Speedwell continued her voyage as before. 
It Is strange that whercas Shelvocke's albatross was 
considered to be a creature of 111 omen, that killed by the 
Ancient Mariner was a bird of good omen. In fact, 
there is strong evidence that Coleridge intended his poem 
to be a strong parable, not only teaching a love of animals 
as Is usually supposed, but inculcating a love of God. Ilis 
use of the albatross was symbollc—a messenger of God— 
and the Mariner's crime the very real one of blasphemy. 
When later in the story, the Anclent Mariner; his penance 
done, repents in prayer, the dead bird falls from his neck 
“like lead Into the sea,” never to trouble him again. 
WW RITING a few years before his death, Coleridge 
admitted his Rime to be “a work of pure imagi- 
nation”, but it Is almost Incredible how such a work, 
dreamed up on holiday by two enthusiastic young poets, 
should have created a fallaclous fable of the sea. 
Yet the legend of the albatross is deeply engrained. 
Almost every dlctlonary and reference book includes 
under “Albatross” some such remark as: “It is a su- 
perstition among sailors that it is disastrous to shoot 
one,” while the world’s great encyclopaedias further 
perpetuate the misconception. For example, the En- 
cyclopaedia Britannica: “Sailors are fond of them and 
have a strong superstition against killing them; and the 
Americana: Sallors’ superstition about killing them was 
used in Coleridge's Rime of the Anclent Mariner. 
In every case, Coleridge’s poem is quoted as following 
the legend, not creating it. Of course, the albatross is 
particularly suited to such a legend—the largest of sea- 
birds, gliding for miles over ships’ sterns with scarcely 
a wing-flap. 
So whether the crew of the Calpean Star ever read 
Coleridge and his Ancient Marlner is irrelevant. The 
legend he created is now, after over 150 years, so deep- 
rooted that they, and doubtless others as well, believe in 
it so strongly that they are prepared to go on strike over 
“it. Here, surely, is the strangest of all the many strange 
superstitions of the sea. 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63814: New horizons for Asia's Moslem women

MOSLEM WOMEN (Cont'd from page 22) 
A startling goal: back to the Middle Ages 
tradespeople and government employees, whose numbers 
are constantly increasing. 
Notwithstanding this, the seclusion of women (by no 
means the exclusive prerogative of Islam as so many 
people think) was also practised in aristocratic circles of 
Indonesia although not with the same austerity found 
in other Islamic countries. This is evident from the long 
struggle that Adjeng Kartini, the pioneer of Indonesia’s 
emancipation movement, had to wage early in the 
century. A vivid account of her struggle is given In her 
Letters which will soon be published in French and 
English translations in Unesco’s Collection of Representa- 
tive Works (Indonesia Series). Her example has inspired 
many upper class Indonesian women to follow in her 
footsteps and these women are now among the leaders 
of thelr country’s emancipation movement. 
With the great mass of Indonesia’s women, however, the 
problem is less acute, for they have remained more or 
less free, despite the fact that there is a good deal of 
traditionalism found in most villages. On the whole, 
however, one can say that Indonesia has not known the 
strictness and severity that Islamism assumed In the . 
Middle East. It is not at all unusual, for example, to 
see a woman in Indonesia seated by the roadside pub- 
licly breast-feeding her child. 
We have seen how Important divorce, polygamy and 
purdah have been as retarding factors in the lives of 
Moslem women, but these pale almost to insignificance 
when compared to the Isolation which the women of both 
Indonesia and Pakistan have suffered as a result of 
ignorance and total lack of education. 
Education unfeminine ? 
recently, most fathers considered education superflu- 
ous and even harmful for their daughters. A good 
marriage, they said, was the only suitable career, and they 
feared that education would make them less feminine. 
Nowadays, education for women may be accepted, but it 
Is still often regarded as a mere ornament, a plus-factor 
that sends a girl’s stock up on the marriage market. Few 
girls advance beyond secondary schools. Those who do 
are often tempted into continuing by the Domestic Science 
course offered as bait for future housewives. 
We should not jump to the conclusion from this that 
Indonesian and Pakistani women never train for a 
profession. They do, but their choice is sharply limited 
because of a still prevalent feeling that women should 
have no contact with the masculine world. The favourite 
profession for women is teaching. Next in popularity is 
medicine, but all her patients must be women. When 
a young lady enters such professions, neither her father or 
her husband feels that he is losing prestige, and these 
are not considered big money-making positions. So far 
there is little competition between the two sexes. Like 
their European brothers a few years ago, Moslem men 
have long frowned upon the emergence of women into 
their own workaday world. 
T situation affects even the well-to-do. Until very 
Art careers still taboo 
ur today things are changing. The Moslem woman 
B now has a status which, though still modest, affords 
her ever expanding opportunities. Indonesia has 
already had a woman Minister of Labour. Pakistan has 
a woman ambassador. And more and more Moslem 
women from both countries are now studying science in 
Europe on fellowships. 
At the same time, office work and secretarial employ- 
ment still attract large numbers of women. “Air Pa- 
kistan™ is extremely proud of its alr hostesses, and their 
attractive and picturesque uniforms, green tunics over 
ample white trousers, are symbolic of the present transi- 
32 
tional period. There is still one profession, however, 
which remains taboo even today. Anything concerned 
with art Is still kept squarely within the male domain. 
We might say that middle class people seem to be 
following the same line of development as one has found 
in Europe, but among the poorer classes the situation is 
markedly different. 
In 1940, 90% of the population of Indonesia was 
illiterate. According to official figures, that high propor- 
tion has been reduced to 57%. In Pakistan in 1951, 
official figures indicated that 25% of the men could read, 
but only 11.4% of the women. School attendance among 
the poorer. inhabitants of both countries is still far too 
low despite efforts made by governments and women’s 
groups. There is still a great shortage of schools for girls, 
but there is much improvement over the situation 60 
years ago when neither country had any such institution. 
No gossiping matrons 
FFORTS already made in this field have been consider- 
E able. But the effort still required is tremendous. 
Take for example the statistics from the State of 
Punjab in Pakistan which are fairly typical although 
overall figures are lacking. In 1949, with a population of 
19,000,000, the number of girls attending school was a 
bare 6,145. By 1953 this number had risen to 102,369 and 
today it has doubled. 
But despite the improvement, girls from poor families 
have very little prospect of continuing their education 
beyond primary school which they leave at the age of 
ten. Taking again the Punjab figures, there were 
1,845 primary schools as against only 145 secondary 
schools, 
Progress in the education of women has been slow, re- 
tarded by the indifference of the wealthy, the timidity of 
the middle class and the extreme poverty of the humble 
people. Yet the improvement has been sufficient to en- 
courage those who have tackled this gigantic task— 
principally government departments, aided and abetted by 
a number of courageous voluntary organizations. 
The latter are worth our attention. Most of them are 
women’s organizations, but they should not be confused 
with elther frivolous social meetings of gossiping ma- 
trons, or suffragette groups stridently proclaiming their 
rights. They devote themselves with great energy and 
efficiency to social welfare work. 
Age-old rights of Islam 
oME of the chief alms of the Federation of Indonesian 
Women founded in 1928 are to improve the social 
status of women, particularly those who are married; 
to eradicate prostitution; to prohibit child marriages, and 
most important of all, to open schools and establish 
funds for education. The All Pakistan Women's Associa- 
tion has similar aims. Under its sponsorship teaching 
centres have been established where mothers are taught 
to read and write, and social centres have been formed 
where they can obtain free medical and legal advice. 
In simple fact, the work being done by these associa- 
tions is really rehabilitation, for most of the rights for 
which Western women waged such a long struggle, have 
always been part of the traditional heritage of Moslem 
women, 
These associations are battling to restore the age-old 
rights of the Islamic woman. They are determined to 
ensure that in this twentieth century, she will be worthy 
of all the rights enjoyed by her elghth century predecess- 
or. They strive, above all, to make her capable of exercls- 
ing these rights. They are revealing to her the ever 
broadening horizons now open to Asia’s Moslem women.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco 
Letters to the Editor... 
THE RACISM ISSUE 
Sir, 
My felicitations on the October 
“Racism” issue, I have a certain 
proprietary interest in it, since the 
famous inside-cover picture of the 
terrified little boy in the Warsaw 
ghetto was first discovered by me. 
This happened in 1945 when 1 was a 
T/Sgt. with the International Military 
Tribunal. Mr. Justice Jackson asked 
me to screen tons of Reichssicher- 
heitshauptamt files to find documents 
of probative value for the indictment. 
In the course of several twenty-hour 
days, one document I came across 
was a photograph-adorned report to 
Himmler which bore the matter-of- 
fact title: “Das Warschauer Juden- 
viertel besteht nicht mehr” (The 
Jewish quarter in Warsaw no longer 
exists) and had been written by SS 
General Jiirgen Stroop. 
Paul W. Freedman 
Casahlanca, Morocco 
Sir, 
Just a brief note of appreciation 
for your recent issue on Racism. 
A. Gargantilla Rodriguez 
Madrid, Spain 
Sir, 
The October issue of THE UNESCO 
Courier has special meaning for 
South Africa, and it is only a pity 
that the people who could most 
benefit from it will not even see it. 
I write to thank you for this excellent 
issue on what you call “Racism” 
and we call “Racialism”, and to 
give you a recent example of what 
racialism means in action to human 
beings. 
It is the case of a little boy, called 
by the newspapers “George X”. He 
had a white skin, blue eyes and fair 
hair, and he lived in the country 
with an old African couple whom 
he regarded as his grandparents, and 
who had adopted him. 
Inevitably, his “white” appearance 
attracted attention, newspapers took 
up the story, and he was summarily 
removed from his home while efforts 
were made to trace his parents. At 
first the newspapers thought he was 
the son of a white woman who had 
abandoned her baby eight years 
previously. After investigation it 
was found that the couple with whom 
he had been living were actually his 
grand parents, and the little boy was 
what we call “Coloured”—child of 
a mixed marriage between his African 
mother and a white man. Being 
Coloured, and of light skin, the 
authorities could not permit him to 
go on living with Africans. He is 
now in a Children’s Home. The 
parting from the couple who cared 
for him was so moving, the news- 
papers told us, that even the officials 
who effected it had tears in their 
eyes. Warm-hearted people! A 
second result of the newspapers 
chasing this story was that they also 
“discovered” the little white boy who 
had been abandoned by his mother. 
He was living with an Indian couple 
who had adopted him and brought 
him up as their son. He was removed 
from them. 
It is not necessary to comment. 
These are the less spectacular results 
of racialism in South Africa. The 
poison twists and maims not only 
those against whom it is directed, but 
the white racialists who propagate it. 
Hilda Bernstein 
Johanneshurg, South Africa 
Sir, 
Congratulations on your power- 
fully reasoned issue on Racism. It 
was one of the best numbers I have 
seen and one worthy of being banned 
anywhere where the four-million 
lessons of Auschwitz have not been 
learnt. 
James Corbett 
London, England 
THE WORLD'S HUMOUR 
Sir, 
Humour and comedy are inter- 
national in scope and content, but 
it is difficult to find material except in 
books and magazines in English, pub- 
lished in the United Kingdom or in 
the United States of America. I am 
collecting humorous books and maga- 
zines and am beginning a study of 
Humour, National and International. 
I would be pleased to hear from 
any reader with similar interests, par- 
ticularly those in Asian, Scandinavian 
and South American countries. Refe- 
rences to any published studies of the 
humour of particular countries would 
be very valuable to me. 
Although I am primarily interested 
in written material, I include film, 
theatre, television and radio comedy 
too; my study is concerned with the 
psychological and philosophical aspects 
of humour, with its associated artis- 
tic and literary interest. 
Eric G. Linfield 
233 Shephall Way 
Half Hyde, Stevenage, England 
DELIGHTS OF HAIKU 
 
Sir, 
In the teaching of creative writing 
to children, ages 10-12, the delights 
of Haiku were introduced to them 
last year. This form of Japanese 
poetry, at once so limiting and at 
the same time so challenging and 
free, seems to be virtually unheard 
of in our country. In one of the 
few recent books on Haiku, I read 
where there are some fifty or more 
magazines published in Japan devoted 
exclusively to this form of poetry. 
Perhaps a feature article in the 
near future would bring this noble 
art form within reach of poets every- 
where. I would also be interested 
in hearing from Japanese classroom 
teachers who devote a part of their 
teaching to this area of Japanese 
descriptive writing. 
Lloyd V. Rogers 
O’Connor School, Elliott 
Drive, Menlo Park 
California, US.A. 
THE MEANING OF LAUGHTER 
Sir, 
Just one particular comment I 
should like to make: the article, “I 
weep, therefore I am” (March 1960) 
was very interesting but there are 
three points on which I found I 
differed with the author: 
First, concerning laughter—laughter 
is not always a “harsh” sound. 
Many of us know persons whose 
laughter is delightfully melodic or 
pleasingly resonant. Then, humour is 
not always derived from “our own 
or somebody else’s discomfiture”. 
Has no one laughed at a cute baby 
blissfully sucking its toe, at fluffy 
kittens or woolly lambs enjoying a 
game, at a cavorting comedian or at 
exciting good news? And, thirdly, we 
are not the only creatures who laugh, 
as anyone will know who has ever 
seen a dog anticipating a good frolic. 
Moreover, how does the psychologist 
know a hyena isn't enjoying himself 
sometimes, when he *laughs”? 
It seems to me our psychologists— 
some of them at any rate—are far 
too ready to attribute all actions and 
emotions to baser instincts. 
A. Freda Davles 
Victoria, B.C. Canada 
NO APPEAL IN MASS APPEAL 
Sir, 
Much as we approve the general 
purposes of UNEsco, we feel your 
magazine rarely covers any of its 
subjects adequately... Perhaps your 
attempt at mass appeal through use 
of a popular format just does not 
appeal to us. Your similarity to such 
publications as “Life” Magazine is 
obvious, but not seemly, we think, for 
an institution stressing education, 
science and culture ! 
Mrs. Robert Clark 
Bristol, Great Britain 
Courler. =— March 1961 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Ne 
  
THE UNESCO 
PHILATELIC SERVICE 
UNITED NATIONS 
Af 
    
A
M
H
H
A
H
U
E
A
9
I
9
0
 
INTERNATIONAL | 
COURT OF JUSTICE 
NATIONS UNIES 
N
A
C
I
O
N
E
S
 
U
N
I
D
A
S
 
Eo
 
&
 
H
U
I
I
V
H
 
The first United Nations comm- 
emorative stamp for 1961 (above) 
honours the International Court 
of Justice, the judicial arm of the 
United Nations. The Court, with 
its permanent seat at The Hague, 
Netherlands, Is composed of I5 
judges, and adjudicates, in accor- 
dance with International law, all 
disputes submitted to it by states. 
The stamp commemorating its work 
was issued on February 13 in 
two denominations of 4c. (brown, 
black and yellow) and 8c. (green, 
black and yellow), the motif being 
a detail from Raphael's “Stanze”. 
It can be obtained from the Unesco 
Philatelic Service which has stamps 
and first day covers issued by many 
member states to commemorate 
important events in the history of 
Unesco and the United Nations. 
As the agent in France of the U.N. 
Postal Administration, Unesco’s 
Philatelic Service stocks all the 
United Nations stamps currently 
on sale. Information on Items avail- 
able, their price and methods of 
payment, wlil be sent on request 
by the Unesco Philatelic Service, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris (74).     
Ww ORK CAMP LEADERS FOR A 
CONTINENT: Youth leaders from all 
parts of Latin America have recently been 
attending a special regional training 
course for work camp leaders—the first 
of its kind to be held in this continent— 
in Paraguay. Organized by the Interna- 
tional Voluntary Work Camp movement, 
its aim has been to encourage youth in 
Latin American countries to help in 
constructive social and community work. 
Unesco has been aiding this leader's 
training project through its Gift Coupon 
programme. Donor groups participating 
in the scheme have been purchasing UNESCO 
34 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Gift Coupons which are being used to pay 
travel expenses for youth leaders who 
have to travel long distances, and also 
to provide books, audio-visual aids and 
other teaching materials for the training 
course. . 
mH WESTERN MUSIC GOES EAST: 
Can classical Western music be 
understood and appreciated by Asian 
listeners accustomed to entirely diffe- 
rent musical traditions? The answer is 
yes, according to one Pakistani music- 
lover, Ershad Ali Bokhari, who is 
planning with a group of friends to 
establish an Academy of Western 
Music at Karachi—probably the first 
of its kind in Asia. The Academy will 
have a double goal: to train young mu- 
sicians and to develop an already 
growing taste for Western music in 
Pakistan. 
§ UNCOAT FOR A LAKE: To 
combat natural evaporation which is 
causing the level of Lake Sevan in the 
mountains of the Armenian Soviet Soc- 
ialist Republic to drop excessively, 
scientists are to cover the lake’s surface 
with a film of chemical liquid. The 
composition of the film is harmless to 
fish and other animal life, lets through 
the rain, but blocks the scorching rays of 
the sun. After tests in inlets, the whole 
of Lake Sevan will be covered and this 
should reduce evaporation by a thousand 
million cubic metres of water yearly. 
m PHYSICS AT UPPSALA: The Uni- 
versity of Uppsala, Sweden, is or- 
ganizing an International Seminar for 
Research and Education in Physics 
this year. Co-sponsored by the Inter- 
national Atomic Energy Agency, 
UNEsco and the Central Committee for 
Swedish Technical Assistance, it is 
open to foreign students, mainly from 
developing countries, who will be able 
to take part in experimental research 
work in one of the various fields of 
physics. They will also learn about 
methods of organizing research pro- 
jects, physical laboratories and teaching 
of graduate and undergraduate stu- 
dents. Applications for attending the 
1961-62 course (Sept 1 - July 1) should 
be sent to International Seminar, Ins- 
titute of Physics, University of Uppsala, 
Sweden, and should arrive not later 
than April 15, 1961. 
LL ertERS ABROAD: To further 
international understanding through the 
exchange of letters between people of 
Asia, Europe, Africa and Latin America 
with the people of the United States is 
the aim of Letters Abroad, Inc., a clearing 
house for International Correspondence. 
The only U.S. organization which spe- 
cializes in serving adults. Letters Abroad 
| 
is mow particularly seeking to contact 
Americans in the 18-25 age group to 
meet the large number of requests it 
receives from young people in other lands, 
and also to hear from older men and 
women (aged over 25) in other countries. 
  
Correspondence is in English and prospec- 
tive correspondents should write to Letters 
Abroad Inc., 45 East 65th St.,, New York 
21, N.Y., US.A. 
HW KEEPING LITERATES LITE- 
RATE :The literacy rate in Ceylon— 
68 per cent in 1953—is one of the 
highest in Asia, but a literate population 
does not necessarily mean a large read- 
ing public. To keep literate people 
literate is one of the aims of the Na- 
tional Book Trust of Ceylon, set up 
just over a year ago as part of the 
Academy of Letters in Colombo, with 
UNESCO's assistance. In addition to 
providing reading materials for new 
literates, its aim is also to encourage 
the reading habit among people in gene- 
ral. It has organized art festivals, 
exhibitions of books and public lectures 
and it now intends to make a six-month 
survey on the reading interests of out- 
of-school readers, results of which will 
guide authors, publishers, librarians and 
booksellers in the production and dis- 
tribution of suitable reading materials. 
Cup WELFARE IN ISRAEL: An 
- Afro-Asian Seminar on Social Services for 
Children is being organized in Israel this 
year by the International Union for Child 
Welfare, 1, rue de Varembé, Geneva 
(Switzerland). Israel was chosen as the 
setting for this 3-months’ seminar, which 
begins on March 15, because of its 
remarkable community development pro- 
gramme. Here, those taking part in the 
seminar will have plenty of opportunities 
to observe and join in the work being 
done with children in the field. 
fi A BOOST FOR M.E. SCIENCE: 
Middle Eastern countries have been 
urged to set up central science councils 
and to devote at least 1 per cent of 
their national incomes to scientific 
research, by a regional conference held 
recently in Cairo under the sponsorship 
of UNEsco and the Science Council of 
the United Arab Republic. Delegates, 
who represented eight countries, also 
suggested that Middle East lands 
should establish national scientific 
documentation centres. 
Ska LIFE IN PARIS: Exotic sea 
creatures from all over the world are on 
view at the Museum of the Sea, which 
opened its doors recently in Paris. Among 
the 1,000 specimens in the Museum's 
collection are octopus, spiny dog-fish, 
Chinese paradise fish, neon fish from 
Brazil and Indian Danios. 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

CONTENTS OF THE UNESCO COURIER 1960 
January 
ANTON CHEKHOV. The life and work of Anton Chekhov — Pata- 
gonia, paradox of desolation and prosperity — The story of modern elec- 
tronic computers — A library comes to a Greek village — Laboratory 
for desert living, 
February 
SAVE THE TREASURES OF NUBIA. UNESCO launches world 
appeal — The drama of Nubia — The legacy of Nubia — The temples of 
Rameses If at Abu Simbel — The saga of the discovery of Abu Simbel 
— Colour map of the Nile valley — The marriage of Rameses Il carved 
in stone — Philae, the sacred isle — Graeco-Roman Nubia — Cairo Docu- 
mentation Centre on Ancient Egypt — The modern pyramid of Aswan 
— Sudanese Nubia, “Terra incognita” of archaeologists, 
March 
MAGIC ART OF CZECH GLASS. The Sound Hunters, a new 
international family — A baby chick is born — No schools for one child 
in two — The purpose of tears, yawns and laughter — UNESCO Colour 
Art Slides — The life and works of Sholem Aleichem — World's farming 
census begins. 
April 
WORLD MOBILIZATION AGAINST MALARIA. 1,000 million 
lives in danger — Was ancient Greece vanquished by malaria? — New 
drugs join battle — The conquest of space — The story of place 
* names — Nature's oldest-living creatures. 
May 
BUDDHIST PAINTINGS OF ANCIENT JAPAN. UNEscO's 
Nubian campaign is launched — Appeal by Director-General of UNESCO 
— Aklavik, the moving of a city — 1,000 schools for Poland's [,000th 
birthday. 
June 
NEW PATHWAYS FOR THEBLIND. Whenisa person considered 
blind I — Four-fifth's of world's sightless in rural areas — The unifica- 
tion of Braille — Stamps for the blind — Psychology and behaviour of the 
blind — The blind in the U.S.S.R. — Do's and Don'ts for the sighted, 
July - August 
THE OCEAN'S SECRETS. Laboratory of the universe — Stations In 
the sea — Ringside view of underwater life — Taking the sea's pulse — 
Green pastures of tomorrow — Glant vacuum cleaners to mine the sea 
floor — UNESCO vessel to sail the seas — Expedition to the Indian Ocean 
— Exploring the world's deepest trenches — The wreck of the Wasa 
— From acqualung to bathyscaph — Ballet of the Ophurians — Danger | 
500 mph tidal wave approaching — The wave mystery of D-Day 1944 
— From tropical waters to Islands of ice — Weather and the seas — 
Wanted: better oceangoing research ships — Neptune's tiny jewels 
— Fish, the great food potential — Atoms overboard! 
September 
BOUBA AND JACQUES. Pitoa, pilot school In a Cameroon village 
— France builds world's first “ecotron” — Ricefields reaching up to the 
sky — Fine arts on postage stamps — A century of “black gold" — Air. 
plane and spade uncover treasures of the Sudan, 
October 
RACISM. The social cancer of our time — Race, prejudice and educa- 
tion — A look at modern anti-semitism — Meln Kampf — The raclal 
landscape of Latin America — X-ray of the racist mind — Race preju. 
dice in India — The cinema says no ! to racism. 
November 
A NEW MAGNA CARTA FOR CHILDREN. 3 Rs for 130 million 
Asian children — 15 nations plan a school revolution — The mentally 
handicapped — UNICEF greeting cards — Jane Addams, crusader for peace 
and youth — Masterpieces of an ancient treasure trove. 
December 
VELAZQUEZ. Special colour Issue. 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country. (See list below 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) 
Payment is made in the national 
currency ; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. ~— Panuzai, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Ministry of 
Education, Kabul, 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. 1, Victoria. (A. [5/-). 
AUSTRIA. = Verlag Georg Fromme 
& Ce, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (Sch. 
50.4} 
BELGIUM. — for The Unesco Courier: 
Louis de Lannoy, 22, Place De Brouckére, 
Brussels, C.C.P, 338.000. (fr. b. 100.) 
Cther publications: Office de Publicité, 
I 6, rue Marcq, Bruxelles, C.C.P. 285.98; 
N.V. Standaard-Boekhandel, Belgiélei 151, 
Antwerp. 
BURMA. — Burma Translation Society 
529-531 Merchant Street, Rangoon, 
CANADA, — Queen's Printer, Ottawa 
Onc. (8 3.00). 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, Lake House Bookshop, 
IG0 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
CHINA, — World Book Co, Led, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section [, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA. — Libreria Economica, Pte Zayas 
505-7, Apartado 113, Havana. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. — Artia Ltd., 30 
Ve Smeckich, Prague 2, 
DENMARK. — Ejnar Munksgaard Ltd, 
6 Norregade, Copenhagen K. (D.kr. 12). 
ETHIOPIA. — International Press Agen- 
cy, P.O. Box [20, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (F.mk. 540). 
FRANCE, — Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris, 7°. C.C.P, 12598-48. 
(7 NF.). 
GERMANY. — R., Oldenbourg K.G., 
Unésco-Vertrieb fur Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerstrasse 145, Munich 8. (DM. 8). 
GREAT BRITAIN, — See United Kingdom. 
GREECE, — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, 
rue du Stade, Athens, 
HONG-KONG. — Swindon Book Co., 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
HUNGARY. — Kultura, P.O. Box 149, 
Budapest, 62. 
INDIA, — Orient Longmans Private Ltd. 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay I: 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyde- 
rabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2: 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O, 
Box 386, New Delhi, |; Sub-Depots: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 Park 
Street Calcutta 16, Scindia House, 
New Delhi. (Rs. 6.70). 
INDONESIA. — Bappit Pusat "*Permata®™, 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Dijakarta. 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
IRELAND. — The National Press, 2, Wel- 
lington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin. (10/-}. 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein’s Bookstores Led. 
35, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja- 
min Street, Tel-Aviv (I£ 4.-). 
JAMAICA. — Sangster’s Book Room, 91 
Harbour Street, Kingston. 
Knox Educational Services. Spaldings.(10/-) 
JAPAN. — Maruzen Co, Ltd, 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. (Yen 500). 
JORDAN. — Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, 
Amman. 
KOREA, — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. 
LIBERIA. — ). Momolu Kamara, 69, Front 
and Gurley Streets, Monrovia, 
LUXEMBOURG, — Librairie Paul Bruck, 
33, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. — Federal Publications 
Led., Times House, River Valley Rd., 
Singapore, 
MALTA. — Sapienza's Library, 26 Kings- 
way, Valetta. {10/-}. 
MAURITIUS, — Nalanda Company Lid, 
30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. 
MONACO. — British Library, 30 Bld des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF). 
NETHERLANDS, — N.Y. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl §} 
NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. — 
G.C.T. Yan Dorp & C* (Ned Ant) N.V, 
Willemstad, Curacao. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Chriust- 
church, (10/-). 
NIGERIA, — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. (10/-). 
NORWAY. — AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Gren- 
sen,7, Oslo. (N. kr. 13.20). 
PAKISTAN. — The West-Pak Publishing 
Co, Ltd., Unesco Publications House, 
P.O. Box 374, 56-N Gulberg Industrial 
Colony, Lahore. 
PANAMA. — Cultural Panamena, Avenida 
72, No. TI-49, Apartado de Correos 2018, 
Panama, D.F, (Balboas 3.-). 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippins Education Co. 
Inc., 1104 Castillejor, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620, Manila, 
POLAND. ~ ""RUCH" ul. Wilora Nr. 46, 
Warsaw, 10 (ZI. 50), 
PORTUGAL. = Dias & Andrads Lda, 
Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, 
Lisbon, 
RHODESIA & NYASALAND., — Ths 
Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, 
Southern-Rhodesia. 
SWEDEN, For Ths Unesco Couriar: Svene 
ska Unescoridet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stocks 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); othsf publications 
A/B C.E. Fritezes, Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, 
SWITZERLAND, — Europa Verlag, § 
Rimistrasse, Zurich, 
Payot, 40, ru du Marché, Geneva, C.C.P, 
1-236. 
Courier” only: Georges Losmaz, 1, rus 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P, 
1-4811 (Fr. §. 8). 
THAILAND. = Suksapan Panit, Manion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
TURKEY, — Librairis Hachette, 469 Isti- 
klal Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA. — Van 
Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri Building, Church’ 
Street, Pretoria. {10/-). 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). — 
La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo. 
UNITED KINGDOM. — H.M. Stationery 
Clfice, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.1{10/-}. 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, B01 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y. ($ 3.00.) and (except periodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. 
U.5.5.R, = Mezhdunarodnija 
Moscow, G-200, 
YUGOSLAVIA, — Jugoslovenska Knjiga, 
Terazijm 27/11. Belgrade, 
Kniga,

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/063808engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

        
ISCOvV=- 
 
 
F
Y
,
 
: 
- 
S
e
 
b
o
 
LF 
¥ 
7
 
Fahy 
. 
D
F
 
           
 
 
y are d 
T
W
 
R
E
 
bea 
p
r
e
 
 
 
 
    
F
i
 
d
n
 
I 
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
 LF 
T
I
 
. 
~
 
. 
a
 
—
 
T
R
 
. 
i
 
an 
p
h
 
v 
F
e
 
A
S
 
= 
S
a
 
ants 
5 
: 
=
 
£7 
S
E
 
X 
= 
And 
O 
       
 
 
. 
- 
3 
-
 
=
 
> 
i
p
.
 
A
 
a
 
4 
: 
n 
; 
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
 
—
 
—
 
I
I
I
T
L
 
J 
. 
| 
. 
—
 
| 
p
—
 
: 
—
 
y
a
 
: 
>
 
" 
| 
oF 
2
 
x
 
J
o
 bi 
pod 
be 
a
a
 
(
i
A
 
P
T
 
T
L
L
 
L
L
L
 
L
I
L
L
I
E
S
 
3 
. 
l
l
 
. 
%
 
*
 
LE 
S
h
a
l
i
t
 
A
 
p
e
d
r
o
 
‘ 
s
e
s
s
)
 
E
e
r
s
t
e
 
r
h
e
a
 
c
e
e
n
s
a
n
r
a
e
b
e
e
 
E
E
L
 
s
o
d
a
 
     