# [080991](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
  
 
 
Im 
—
 
w
n
 
C
N
 
n 
: 
it
 
F’ 
gH
 
SE
 
/
.
 
A
n
d
i
 
L
l
 
u
d
 
EA
 
3 
inn
e f
o
i
l
 
W
A
 
C
a
 
Df 
Ey
 
LP
 
. 
d 
| 
A
L
E
 
A
N
 
: 
¥ 
. 
. 
- 
: 
p 
Cu
l 
5 
i 
» 
a a [C28 p
p
 
oO
 
o
O
 
Er
 
The Cc 
 
 
ourier 
h
m
 
bh
 
D
T
 
g
t
r

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

       
   
In May 1987, one hundredand : gd hai 
sixteen years after it was first performed, FL phat $y 
the Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi's 
famous opera Aida was staged amid the 
ruins of ancient Thebes, the city in which i : 
partsof it are set. In the magnificent oy =n 
setting of Luxor temple, below, an : 
international audience enjoyed a 
production that brought onto thestagea 
glittering cast of 1,500 singers, dancers ~~ 
and extras, as well as a small herd of horses 
and even a lion. Offi cials of the Egyptian 
monuments would not be damaged by the J 
technical crews and their equipment. 
Aida isbased on anideaby the French 
Egyptologist Auguste Mariette. The story 
turnson the rivalry betweenthe ~~ 
Pharaoh’s daughter, Amnéris, who is in 
love with the young general Radamés, 
Aida, taken captive after her father,the 
king of Ethiopia, is defeated by Radamés. 
Condemned for treason because of his lov ¢ 
for Aida, Radarulsj is entombed ina ike = 
a wo w a  ———— ed | 
ba
l 
“
l
q
 
A
E
 
e
w
 
a
 
e
a
 
o
l
 
  
) we
 
T
E
 
  
  
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
G.
 
G
i
a
n
s
a
n
t
i
 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
September 1988 
4 
  
Time and the river 
The Nile and ancient Egypt 
by John Baines 
8 
The riddle of the Rosetta Stone 
by Jean Vercoutter 
12 
Colossal feats of engineering 
by Rainer Stadelmann 
17 
The Egyptian world-picture 
by Jean Yoyotte 
26 
Daily life in the land of the Pharaohs 
by Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt 
30 
Egypt and the Mediterranean world 
by Gaballa Aly Gaballa 
33 
Pharaonicart 
and the modern imagination 
by Richard A. Fazzini 
36 
Unesco 
and the ancient Egyptian heritage 
From the Nubian campaign 
to the Library of Alexandria 
by Gamal Mokhtar 
39 
Map 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Cover: Wall painting from the tomb of Pashedu at 
Thebes (19th Dynasty, c. 1307-1196 BC) shows 
the deceased drinking from a lake in the shade of a 
palm tree. 
Photo ©) G. Dagli Oru, Paris 
Back cover: burial chamber of Merneptah 
(c. 1224-1214 BC), thirteenth son and successor 
of Ramesses I1. 
Photo B. Brake © Rapho, Paris 
The Courier IIL 
A window open on the world 41st year 
Published monthly in 35 languages English 
French Spanish Russian German 
Arabic Japanese Italian Hindi 
Tamil Hebrew Persian Dutch 
Portuguese Turkish Urdu Catalan 
Malaysian Korean Swahili Croato- 
Serb Macedonian Serbo-Croat 
Slovene Chinese Bulgarian Greek 
Sinhala Finnish Swedish Basque 
Thai Vietnamese Pashto Hausa 
[ 
lo
ri
a 
l 
ed
 
Long ago, the scholars and travellers of Antiquity 
were fascinated by the Egypt of the Pharaohs. 
Today, almost 200 years after modern 
archaeological study of ancient Egypt began, that 
fascination is still as potent as ever. Egyptology isa 
constantly expanding field of study in which 
specialists patiently try to reconstruct arich and 
still in many ways baffling civilization from 
records remarkably preserved in the dry air and 
desert sands. The record-breaking crowds which 
flock to international exhibitions of ancient 
Egyptian art show that a vast non-specialist public 
is today eager to know more about ancient 
Egyptian culture. Meanwhile, the giant pyramids 
and lavishly decorated tombs and temples of the 
Nile Valley, the messages of hieroglyphs carved in 
stone or written on papyrus, have also created a 
vision (not always historically accurate) of ancient 
Egypt which has stimulated the imagination of 
artists, architects, writers and musicians down the 
centuries. 
This issue of the Unesco Courier retraces some 
of the steps in the rediscovery of Pharaonic Egypt 
in modern times and evokes some of the grandiose 
achievements of ancient Egyptian architecture and 
engineering. Butabove all it seeks, in the light of 
the latest findings by Egyptologists, to show 
through the more homely and intimate aspects of 
their lives how the ancient Egyptians saw 
themselves and their world; the pattern of daily 
life and work; the rhythm of the seasons 
dominated by the annual inundation of the Nile; 
the strange, complex and ubiquitous figures of the 
Egyptian pantheon; attitudes to the afterlife. The 
picture that emerges is one of a society in which 
the sacred and the sublime were totally integrated 
into the tissue of everyday life, a civilization in 
which the earthly, the ephemeral, and the eternal 
were uniquely blended. This harmony is perhaps 
most clearly seen in ancient Egyptian art which, 
with its minute attention to detail, its gift for 
conveying the most subtle nuances of expression 
and movement, provides a vivid panorama of a 
people, time and place in which all aspects of 
earthly experience—farming, family life, the 
enjoyment of transient pleasures—were sacred 
activities forming part of cosmic processes. 
This issue comprises 40 pages and a 4-page advertising insert between pages 2-3 and 38-39.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
  
  
  
— 
w—— BY JOHN BAINES 
i... 
— 
ITHOUT the Nile, which flows 
\ X / north from the Ethiopian high- 
lands and Central Africa to the 
Mediterranean, Egypt with its negligible 
rainfall would have been almost completely 
inhospitable. Because of the river, it was the 
largest and most prosperous East Mediterra- 
nean State from 3000 BC until the Roman 
conquest in 30 BC. It regained this pre-emi- 
nence in the Middle Ages, and remains the 
most important and populous country in the 
Near East. There is true continuity over this 
enormous penod, because Egypt’s boundaries 
have changed little. 
Throughout Antiquity, the country’s 
standing relied on its agricultural wealth and 
hence on the Nile; yet agriculture was not 
the original basis of subsistence, but evolved 
mmm with the land in prehistory. As well as gov- 
LL ~ -. 
i fo | Zp 
$ - 
: ey 
£ wes 
 
  
  
the river— 
— 
— 
— 


### 80981: Time and the river: life in ancient Egypt was geared to the annual Nile flood

; Life in ancient Egypt 
erning material potential, the Nile and other 
geographical features affected political de- 
velopments and played a part in Egyptian 
ideas. 
In the Pleistocene era, which ended 
around 10,000 BC, Egypt was part of the 
eastern Sahara, which was inhabited by 
nomadic hunter-gatherers. The region was 
rather less arid than at present and supported 
people in areas now without resources or 
population. The Nile, whose Valley and 
Delta were largely swamp, was privileged as 
a reliable water source, attracting game and 
people, and being exploited for its plants and 
fish. By 12,000 BC people also gathered wild 
grasses, presumably for their cereal grains, 
which needed more processing than other 
foods they consumed. This suggests that 
pressure on food resources was increasing. 
EE — 
was geared 
~ ~~athe-annual Nite-flo 
In succeeding millennia the Sahara slowly 
dried, becoming by 2000 BC almost as arid 
as it is now. From 10,000 to 5000 BC, late 
Stone-Age people gathered where there was 
water, exploiting resources ever more inten- 
sively, both in the desert and near the Nile. 
The culture of the region was uniform, un- 
like that of later small-scale peasant societies. 
The transition to crop-growing occurred 
either near water in the desert or in the Nile 
Valley and Delta. Dates of 7000-5000 BC 
have been suggested for both, much later 
than in Western Asia. Because the Nile 
Valley preserves little evidence for farming, 
it may have been present earlier than can be 
documented. 
The Nile Valley and Delta were opened up 
gradually for agriculture and population in- 
creased. By 4000 BC there were only two 
L
N

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 80981: Time and the river: life in ancient Egypt was geared to the annual Nile flood

  
Photos © Almasy, Paris 
principal cultures in Egypt, the older 
Merimda culture in the Delta and the 
Badarian, centred on Asyut in Upper Egypt. 
Before 3100 BC the single Egyptian State 
had formed-—the first large nation State. 
Egypt continued to develop and popula- 
tion increased until Roman times. Important 
factors in this process were unity and politic- 
al stability, and the possibility of cultivating 
ever more fertile land. In this internal expan- 
sion the harnessing of the Nile was crucial. 
Crops could be planted after the annual in- 
undation, which covered the Valley and 
Delta from late July to September; they 
needed minimal watering and ripened 
from March to May. Some management of 
the inundation to improve its coverage of the 
land and to regulate the period of flooding 
increased yields, while drainage and the 
The Nile in flood. The annual inundation 
transformed the Nile Valley into a green ribbon 
of cultivation bordered by deserts. 
Pink-veined breccia statuette of a bearded man, p> 
50 cm high, was fashioned in the Nile Valley by a 
craftsman of the Naqada I culture which 
developed in Predynastic Egypt in the 
4th millennium of the pre-Christian era. 
river’s slow deposition of silt extended the 
fields. Vegetables grown in small plots 
needed irrigating all year from water carried 
by hand in pots; not until 1500 BC was any 
aruficial water-lifting device introduced. 
Some plants, such as date palms, whose 
crops ripened in the late summer, drew their 
water from the subsoil and needed no other 
watering. 
It is uncertain how early and how far this 
regulation of the inundation and small-scale 
watering shifted toward full-scale irrigation. 
By the Middle Kingdom (c. 2040-1640 BC) 
basin irrigation, in which large sections of 
the floodplain were treated as single units, 
was well established, but it may not have 
been present in the Old Kingdom (third 
millennium BC), when the great pyramids 
were built. 
Egyptian texts say little about irrigation 
and provision of water, making it difficult to 
establish when techniques were introduced. 
Exceptions are autobiographies of local lead- 
ers of the troubled First Intermediate Period 
(c. 2134-2040 BC), who claimed that they 
built canals and supplied water to their peo- 
ple when others had none. In more prosper- 
ous times such matters may have been taken 
for granted or not thought prestigious 
enough to be described in public texts. The 
only area where there was major irrigation 
work before Graeco-Roman times was the 
Faiyum, a lakeside oasis to the west of the 
yh 
4% 
AR 
Jha - 
le 
a hve 
a 
al 
hao A 
te 
vr 
 
Nile south of the Delta apex. Here Middle 
Kingdom kings reclaimed land by controll 
ing the water flow down a side river channel 
and directing it away from the lake to low- 
lying land. Their constructions did not last. 
The Nile’s annual inundation was quite 
reliable, and the floodplain and Delta were 
uniquely fertile, making Egyptian’ agricul 
ture the most secure and productive in the 
region, while stability allowed storage 
against scarcity. This situation was, 
however, only relatively favourable. Crop 
failure due to poor floods, population loss 
through disease, and other hazards, res- 
tricted the pace of growth and—unlike mod- 
ern Egypt—only one main crop was grown 
per year. High floods could be very 
destructive. 
The principal crops were cereals, emmer 
wheat for bread, and barley for beer. These 
made up the staple diet and were easily 
stored. Other vital plants were flax, which 
was used for products from rope to the finest 
cloth and was also exported, and papyrus, a 
swamp plant which may have been culti- 
vated or gathered wild. Papyrus roots could 
be eaten, and the stems were used for making 
anything from boats and mats to the charac- 
teristic Egyptian writing material with the 
same name as the plant; this too was ex- 
ported. In addition, a wide range of fruit and 
vegetables was cultivated. Meat from live- 
stock was relatively unimportant in the diet, 
i*
ho
to
 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Mu
sé
e 
Gu
im
et
 
d'
Hi
st
oi
re
 
Na
tu
re
ll
e,
 
L
y
o
n
s

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 80981: Time and the river: life in ancient Egypt was geared to the annual Nile flood

but birds were hunted in the marshes and the 
Nile produced much fish, which was the 
main animal protein for most people. 
Apart from making agriculture possible, 
the Nile was the chief means of communica- 
tion. In the Egyptian script words for 
travelling are written with signs of ships. 
Heavy loads were taken by river and the ease 
of water transport helped the country’s in- 
tegration, while the complex geography of 
against failures, so that they took upon 
themselves much that is achieved through 
co-operation in small societies. The central 
organization that grew in the third millen- 
nium BC created a disciplined labour force 
which was used to build vast royal monu- 
ments and élite tombs, for the fortifications 
and pyramids of the Middle Kingdom, for 
the imperial expansion, temples and private 
tombs of the New Kingdom 
=A 
CX CK 
ES SARE AE 
     
    
  
HHI 
ne 
  
Ph
ot
o 
Br
ia
n 
B
r
a
k
e
 ©)
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
the Delta and its mouths were obstacles to 
invasion. Travel into the desert or to Asia 
was incomparably more difficult than move- 
ment within Egypt. The river could also 
separate people. The image of a poor man 
was someone who had no boat, whom the 
more fortunate should ferry across. Dying 
was “coming in to land” on the “other side”, 
and the passage into the next world was a 
“crossing”. 
The compactness of Egypt, centred on the 
Nile, favoured political unity, which 
brought both potential for exploiting the 
land’s fertility and obligations on rulers. 
- Rulers controlled agricultural resources 
through ownership of land, taxation of its 
produce, administrative measures to ensure 
that it was cultivated, and compulsory 
labour. In return for control, they were re- 
mmm sponsible for storage and for provision 
PODHODD HDD 
MURS BL i 
- 
i 
WHIT UTI [ITIL 
FANNIN RB gL = 
HN 
896 5 WO TPT X Oy Ek] 
WDDvanBAID 
A tH LA Ui \ i] re oy Y ffm 
a Wi =F 
- =m ma 
 
   
    
   
  
h
s
 
—
 
—
 
he
 
a
 
As
 
m
w
 
) 
I
 
Ta
} 
A
y
 
y| e
e
d
 
a
E
 
- £3 |!
 
4 
PE
AR
Y 
: 
3 I
m
 
J 
l=
 
0]
 
fix
: 
Il
e 
SE
K)
 
EE 
il 
f=
 
A 5 
Fa
tt
).
 
[2
h 
ID
—~
dz
 
P
I
R
 
N
T
 
7 
po
d 
- 
S
e
 
- 
   I) 
~1
 -
       
3k
 = 
   h 
  
2]
 
       
X¥
 
A
 
(c. 1550-1070 BC), and for building and 
other activities of the Graeco-Roman 
period. 
Organization and the productivity of in- 
undation agriculture made all this possible, 
temporarily releasing many from the land 
during the slack summer months in the 
fields, or permanently freeing people to fol- 
low specialized and élite occupations. When 
central control collapsed, chiefly in the three 
Intermediate Periods, few monuments were 
constructed and there was little political ex- 
pansion, but the agricultural basis of power 
and prosperity was not destroyed; after 
reunification monumental projects and 
general culture revived. One should not, 
however, forget that for most people this use 
of labour made available by productivity 
was not a personal benefit, but served the 
rulers and the élite, Were it not for political  
Detail from scene in relief on the limestone p> 
ceremonial mace head of King “Scorpion” (so 
called from the sign of a scorpion near his face). 
The king is shown digging the first trench ata 
temple-founding ceremony. Late Predynastic 
Period (c. 3000 BC). 
«The god Osiris, ruler of the netherworld, is 
depicted in this painting from the tomb of 
Sennedjem at Thebes, The crook and flail he is 
holding allude to the god’s ancient links with 
the kingship and with pastoralism. The tomb 
dates from the reign of Sethos I (c. 1306-1290 
BC). (See also photo page 24.) 
Carving of the ram-headed god Khnum, from 
the Small Temple of Abu Simbel. Patron of the 
First Cataract with its mythical caverns which 
were considered to be the sources of the Nile 
inundation, Khnum was worshipped chiefly in 
the area around Elephantine in Upper Egypt. 
  
  
    
    
  
Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Ca
ir
o 
Do
cu
me
nt
at
io
n 
Ce
nt
re

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 80981: Time and the river: life in ancient Egypt was geared to the annual Nile flood

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
As
hm
ol
ea
n 
Mu
se
um
, 
Ox
fo
rd
 
& 
A
T
R
 
ho 
instability, the lot of many could have been 
as good or better in the Intermediate Periods 
(c. 2134-2040 BC, 1640-1532 BC, 1070-712 
BC), but here beliefs about king and country 
may have affected their outlook. 
The Nile, which was so fundamental to 
the country’s life, was surprisingly unimpor- 
tant in religion. The Egyptians took their 
environment for granted as the centre of the 
world. There was no special name for the 
Nile, which was simply the “river”; the 
word “Nile” may not be Egyptian in origin. 
The bringer of water and fertility was not the 
static river but its inundation, called Hapy, 
who became a god. Hapy was an essential 
image of abundance, but he was not a major 
god. Both kings and local potentates likened 
themselves to Hapy in their prosperity and 
provision for their subjects. A hymn to 
Hapy dwells on the inundation’s bountiful 
nature but does not relate him to the rest of 
the gods, as was done in the praise of other 
deities. He was not depicted as a god but as a 
fat figure bringing the produce of abundance 
to the gods. He had no temple, but was 
worshipped annually at the start of the inun- 
dation with sacrifices and hymns at Gebel 
el-Silsila, which was probably a prehistoric 
frontier, where the hills come close to the 
river north of Aswan. 
In some other respects the Nile and the 
inundation were central to the Egyptian 
world view. Unlike most peoples, the 
Egyptians oriented themselves to the south, 
from which the river came, so that the west 
was on their right—with the result that it was 
the “good” side for passage into the next 
world. The year and calendar were deter- 
mined by the Nile and by the stars. New 
Year was in mid July, when the river began 
to rise for the inundation; this coincided 
with the reappearance of the star Sirius, 
Egyptian Sothis, in the sky after seventy 
days’ invisibility. The river defined three 
seasons of four months, “Inundation”, 
“Emergence” (November-March) when the 
land reappeared and could be cultivated, and 
“Heat”. or “Harvest”, when crops were 
gathered and the water was lowest. 
The major god most closely connected 
with the Nile was Osiris. In myth Osiris was 
a king of Egypt who was killed by his 
brother Seth on the banks of the river and 
cast into it in a coffin. His corpse was cut 
into many pieces. Later, his sister and widow 
Isis'succeeded in reassembling his body and 
reviving it to conceive a posthumous son, 
Horus. Osiris, however, did not return to 
this world but became king of the under- 
world. His death and revival were linked to 
the land’s fertility. In a festival celebrated 
during the inundation, damp clay models of 
Osiris were planted with barley, whose ger- 
mination stood for the revival of the land 
brought by the flood, so that Osiris, the river 
and the land were drawn into a complex of 
ideas about fertility and rebirth. 
Another important god linked to the river 
was Khnum the “Lord of the Cataract”, the 
ram god of Elephantine at the southern fron- 
tier. Khnum was a creator god and the pat- 
ron of the point where the inundation en- 
tered Egypt. This connection was, however, 
secondary, supplementing an ancient local 
cult of the goddess Satis, whose temple cele- 
brated the conjunction between Sothis and 
the inundation; despite the later arrival of the 
inundation in more populous areas further 
north, the conjunction was observed and 
recorded at Elephantine. 
The Nile’s fundamental importance may 
be more evident to us than to the ancient 
Egyptians, who were so accustomed to it 
that they termed rain in other countries an 
“inundation in the sky”. In order to appreci- 
ate its position in Antiquity, one must see it 
through ancient eyes with ancient distinc- 
tions between sacred and secular, divine and 
human. The Egyptians had a matter-of-fact 
attitude to the river, whose inundation could 
be destructive but was a beneficent moral 
force in their lives; most gods were more 
complex beings whose abode was outside the 
normal world. It was left to the Greeks and 
Romans to make the Nile a god like the other 
rivers of their world. [| 
JOHN BAINES, of the United Kingdom, has 
been Professor of Egyptology at the University of 
Oxford since 1976. He is the author with Jaromir 
Malek of the Atlas of Ancient Egypt (1980), which 
has been translated into many languages, of 
Fecundity Figures (1985), which includes a study 
of the personification of the inundation of the Nile, 
Hapy, and of articles on Egyptian religion, king- 
ship and other subjects. He has lectured on ancient 
Egypt in Africa, Europe, and the United States.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

P
h
o
t
o
 © 
Ar
te
ph
ot
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Br
id
ge
ma
n,
 
Lo
nd
on
. 
Br
it
is
h 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 


### 80982: The Riddle of the Rosetta Stone: scholars and adventurers who rediscovered a forgotten civilization

The riddle of the Rosetta 
Scholars and adventurers who 
BY JEAN VERCOUTTER . . iq. . 
rediscovered a forgotten civilization 
N 27 September 1822, the French However, in the fourth century AD, 
scholar Jean-Frangois Christianity became the religion of the 
Champollion read out to the Roman Empire and, in 391, Theodosius I 
members of his country’s Académie des In- closed all pagan temples. The Egyptian 
scriptions et Belles-Lettres his celebrated Let- riests, who were the only teachers of 
tre a M. Dacier, relative a lalphabet des hieroglyphic writing, gradually died out, 
hiéroglyphes phonétiques employés par les and with them died all knowledge of the art. 
Egyptiens, a text which marked a turning- By the sixth century, no one could read the 
point in the rediscovery of ancient Egypt. texts inscribed on monuments or written on 
The civilization of the Pharaohs, with its ~~ papyrus. 
grandiose monuments and the exotic facets It was not until the seventeenth, and more 
of its religion, has always inspired curiosity particularly, the eighteenth century that in- 
and wonder. The writings of Herodotus, of ~~ quisitive travellers reawakened interest in 
Diodorus of Sicily, of Strabo and of Petrarch 
were rich in detail of the way of life and the 
  
  
  
  
       
    
    
          
  
  
  
religious practices of the ancient Egyptians. fn k 
Te 2 RTE NS “3 
REA FTE BR i 
ETSI LH FR TRS 3 
IL TAGIR 2 ’ ISU AGES 4 kt 
He Us FFL RL A A Ws am LAS 2 
PIES ENEYR Aw 5 
aM LY - 2 » Fond Eee : | 
WEIR A [EARL 2 2 437 : & 
CANNES] z A=] Ve Bid ; / 3 
- Ro) A Te ASEAN TR Dot 22 A WT SB emee HAR | \ £ 
3D : v: L322 [IED Frown LH 2H Fi EAE = 
ANULTRLEAE > EEE Er Ad ter. LATTE S) 
a = S 
Ard SMe £ 
(FIRES hd i : 
y pr gt. 
pois an oF hy ~e Lo Sth A SRE gedit - LE Discovered near the mouth of the 
e ho IR Tr ~ Cp ‘ ro Re: Nile by an officer of Napoleon’s 
Ra pre oa .P Joh 2 SS ihe . : 35 ay army in 1799, the Rosetta Stone, 
Lr pheniabid : at 2 : Ay ey left, was the key to understanding 
PAIS to ply Erp pu Pr \ > v3 . Mit the long-forgotten language of 
Er PLY : 8.54 AT : ; ancient Egypt. It bears the text of 
rin wo yht PICT : asf nl ball am de 19-3, a decree by Egyptian priests to 
AN pb => Inte war b ad SX : whan commemorate the crowning of 
AA ae | 7 + begs 0 : Ptolemy V Epiphanes, King of 
Prag Ba A LR a i St Egypt from 205 to 180 BC, 
Hy A bghnebdy BA > Hyp 2 written in three different scripts: 
Vk AW Ppa Sraidewd hieroglyphic at the top, demotic 
TW rp dv. re A fia , (the popular language of Egypt at 
ra AL oun» if : >. TAS uray that time) in the middle, Greek at 
J u the bottom. One of the pioneers of 
: par! TR ha bets Coe tL SK the decipherment of the 
i ih FR FEAT Lied ren hieroglyphic script was the 
Sn st en EM ty HARRI French scholar Jean-Francois 
Samim sie pei i RS ro AL 3 5 fy Champollion (1790-1832), shown 
- roy TT fo above in an anonymous 19th- 
TPS Fl LR AE RA rrr ; a) et Blt i century portrait. He was the first to 
as nt . Aa establish an entire list of 
he rv : hieroglyphs and their Greek 
wo equivalents, providing a basis for 
nt a ers a thy Hee 2 : TA the translation of all Egyptian 
i A an? 230 od nh 8 te RA Al hieroglyphic texts, 
ts ~ : " 
rc Tea ve os w 
Fa 4 3 di 1 \ 
5 1 a *:

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 80982: The Riddle of the Rosetta Stone: scholars and adventurers who rediscovered a forgotten civilization

Stone 
  
8 
   “RCAYNATTN 
Napoleon's Egyptian expedition of 1798-1799 was 
accompanied by a team of scholars whose mission was to, 
study and record all aspects of Egypt, ancient and modern. 
The team produced a multi-volume work, the Description 
de Egypte (1809-1830), which contributed to Europe’s 
growing interest in Egypt. Illustrations from the 
Description, below, are views of the temple complex at 
Dendara in Upper Egypt drawn by the French engraver 
Vivant Denon (1747-1825), who accompanied the 
Egyptian expedition. 
w 
AR 
Egypt, its monuments and its mysterious 
writing. The works of Benoit de Maillet and 
Claude Sicard, and Constantin Frangois de 
Volney’s Voyage en Syrie et Egypte (1787; 
“Travels Through Syria and Egypt”), fur- 
nished details of the geography of the coun- 
try and of its great temples, while Vivant 
Denon’s sketches made the face of Egypt 
known to Europeans. 
Denon was an attractive personality who 
lived a very full life. After serving as a gentle- 
man-in-waiting to Louis XV and then as 
embassy secretary at St. Petersburg and 
Naples under Louis XVI, he persuaded 
Napoleon to allow him to join his expedition 
to Egypt in 1798, “despite his age” (he was 
then fifty!). Appointed Director of 
Museums by Na leon on his return from 
Egypt, he created the Musée Napoléon, now 
the Louvre Museum. 
Vivant Denon’s Voyage dans la Basse et la 
Haute Egypte (“Travels Through Upper and 
Lower Egypt”) marked the beginning of a 
rebirth of interest in ancient Egypt. Pub- 
lished in Paris in 1802, it was a runaway 
success throughout Europe. It ran to forty 
successive editions and was translated into 
English and German. 
Denon had accompanied General Desaix’s 
detachment to Upper Egypt where, often at 
risk of his life and sometimes bearing arms 
himself, he sketched all the Pharaonic monu- 
ments he came across. The charm of his 
evocative drawings fuelled the “Egyptoma- 
nia” that was rife both among the educated 
élite and the general public. Egyptian-style 
furniture and knick-knacks proliferated 
and—an unexpected consequence this—the 
theft of antiquities soared. 
Vivant Denon’s book was followed short- 
ly afterwards by Description de I’Egypte, a 
massive work consisting of nine volumes of 
text and eleven large tomes of maps and 
lustrations. This was the work of the 
150 scholars who accompanied Napoleon to 
Egypt; it was published between 1809 
and 1830. In 1822, however, the riddle of the 
hieroglyphs with which the walls of many 
Egyptian monuments were covered re- 
mained unsolved and the real story of Egypt 
of the Pharaohs remained shrouded in 
mystery. 
In August 1799, during the preparation of 
earthworks near Rosetta (Rashid), to the east 
of Alexandria, an officer of Napoleon's 
army noticed a stone of black basalt covered 
with inscriptions. His superior, General 
Menou, had. the stone taken to Alexandria 
and showed it to the scholars accompanying 
the expedition. The stone was inscribed with 
three texts. The one at the top was in hiero- 
glyphic characters, the middle one in charac- 
ters that looked somewhat like Arabic wri- 
ting, and the one at the bottom in Greek 
characters. Since several of the scholars knew 
Greek, they were immediately able to read 
the bottom text, a decree dating 
from 196 BC, during the reign of 
Prolemy V. Deducing, correctly, that these 
were three versions of the same text, they 
realized that they had in their hands a poten- 
tial key to hieroglyphic writing. 
The scholars took rubbings and made 
several copies of the inscriptions. This was 
fortunate, since, on the surrender of the 
French forces, the British seized the 
“Rosetta Stone” as war booty. It is today in 
the British Museum, London. 
News of the discovery of the Rosetta 
Stone spread quickly throughout Europe, 
and there began a fiercely competitive race to 
be the first to decipher the mysterious 
writing. 
Jean-Francois Champollion was the most 
fervent, and also the youngest, of these com- 
petitors. Born at Figeac in southwest France 
in 1790, he grew up in a milieu in which 
Egypt was a consuming passion. His 
brother, Jacques-Joseph Champollion, who 
had been unable to take part in the expedi- 
tion to Egypt, was secretary to the mathema- 
tician, Egyptologist and Prefect of the Isére 
département, Joseph Fourier. Fourier had 
been among the scholars who had accompa- 
nied the Egyptian expedition and on his 
return to France he wrote the lengthy histor- 
ical preface to the Description de Egypte. 
Brought up in contact with two such men, 
Jean-Francois himself became passionately 
interested in Egypt. On seeing a copy of the 
Rosetta Stone inscriptions he vowed that he 
would be the first to decipher the hiero- 
glyphs. At the age of thirteen, with this 
objective in mind, he not only learned Latin 
and Greek but also Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac 
and Aramaic. In addition, at the age of seven- 
teen, he also acquired Persian and Coptic, 
for he had become convinced that Coptic 
was, in fact, ancient Egyptian transcribed in 
Greek characters. 
In 1821, after some misadventures result- 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Je
an
-L
ou
p 
Ch
ar
me
t,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Bi
bl
io
th
éq
ue
 
de
s 
Ar
ts
 
Di
éc
or
at
if
s 
lo

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 80982: The Riddle of the Rosetta Stone: scholars and adventurers who rediscovered a forgotten civilization

‘succeeded 1n deciphering t 
P
h
o
t
o
 @ 
Br
it
is
h 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
Pu
bl
ic
at
io
ns
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
ing from dabbling in politics, Champollion 
settled in Paris near Bis brother who was 
now secretary to Bon Joseph Dacier, a Hel- 
lenist. and Perpetual Secretary of the 
Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres. - 
He devoted himself wholly to his research 
whilst keeping an anxious eye on the pro- 
gress of his rivals, the English physicist 
Thomas Young, his compatriot Sylvestre de 
Sacy and the Swede Johan David Akerblad, 
all of whom were attempting to unravel the 
secret of Egyptian wring. 
Like Champollion himself, they were all 
faced with the same conundrum. Was 
Egyptian writing ideographic or phonetic? 
In other words, did each character represent 
an idea or a sound? On 14 September 1832, 
Champollion had the sudden intuition that 
Egyptian was both ideographic and 
phonetic. With the help of the Rosetta Stone 
and copies of inscriptions from other monu- 
ments sent to him from Egypt by friends, he 
succeeded in deciphering the names of 
Greek and Roman rulers: Alexander, 
Cleopatra, Arsinoe, Augustus, Nero, and so 
on. With these names as a starting point he 
e basic 
alphabetical characters; and from the names 
ot the Caesars and the Prolemies he went on 
to unravel those of the Egyptian 
Pharachs—the Ramesses and the Tuthmosis 
Dynasties. Gradually increasing the number 
of hieroglyphic characters he could recog- 
nize at exch stage of his research, he ended up 
by being able to read them all. By working at 
ever longer texts he finally mastered the - 
Egyptian language. 
Despite the jealousy that his discoveries 
aroused, his achievement gradually gained 
recognition. With the backing of some high- 
ranking members of the court, he was 
This granite bust of Ramesses II (c. 1290-1224 
BC) is the sole remaining part of a great colossus 
of the king from his vast mortuary temple, the 
Ramesseum, on the west bank of the Nile at 
Thebes. Drawing of the sculpture being dragged 
to the river was made in 1816 by the Italian 
gatherer of antiquities Giambattista Belzoni, 
who had been commissioned to organize its 
removal to the British Museum. 
v 
  
nominated Curator of the Egyptian collec- 
tions at the Louvre Museum. In 1827 he 
achieved the ambition of his life when he was 
entrusted with a mission of exploration in 
Egypt. Setting out in 1828, accompanied by 
a number of excellent artists, such as Nestor 
Lote, and a team of Italians led by his 
pupil and friend Rossellini, he spent fifteen 
months scouring the valley of the Nile from 
Alexandria to Aswan, stopping for a time at 
Abu Simbel and going as far as the Second 
Cataract. He was able to write with pride to 
his patron Dacier: “I can now inform you 
that no changes will be necessary in our 
Lettre sur PAlphabet des Hiéroglyphes 
(“Paper on the Hieroglyphic Alphabet” ; 
our alphabet is correct and holds equally 
good (...) for the inscriptions on all the tem- 
ples, palaces and tombs of the Pharaonic 
epochs.” 
Whilst Champollion and his rivals were 
hard at work deciphering the hieroglyphics, 
the first effect of the “Egyptomania” which 
had become the rage with the publication of 
Vivant Denon’s book and the Description de 
I'Egypte was to arouse the covetousness of 
collentors, and in particular of the great 
European museums, all of which wanted 
their own collection of Egyptian antiquities. 
Furthermore, scores of adventurers were 
attracted to Egypt in the hope of making a 
quick fortune. 
Egypt was, in theory, under the 
sovereignty of the Sultan of Constantinople, 
but, in Free the Viceroy, Mehemet Ali, ruled 
the country as an absolute monarch. 
Mehemet Ali wanted to modernize the 
country and had little interest in antiquities. 
As a result, taking advantage of their pri- 
vileged diplomatic status, the foreign consuls 
obtained from him the necessary permits to 
carry out archaeological excavations and 
take away ancient monuments. They re- 
cruited agents amongst adventurers, whom 
they engaged to carry out excavations in 
their name and to bring back the antiquities 
discovered or bought. It was in this manner 
that a number of important collections were 
constituted. 
The Italian diplomat and collector 
Bernardino Droverti, who was French Con- 
sul General in Egypt between 1810 
and 1829, took advantage of his long tenure 
to indulge in some profitable trafficking in 
(TLS BULAS 
{ »et 
The French Egyptologist Auguste Mariette 
(1821-1881) made his name with the excavation 
of the Serapeum, a temple at Saqqara (Memphis) 
which was originally the necropolis of the Apis 
bulls, sacred animals of the god Ptah. The 
subterranean chambers of the temple, which 
Mariette entered in 1851, yielded the mummies 
of 64 Apis bulls. This engraving madein 1858 
shows a newly excavated gate of the Serapeum. 
antiquities, at times directing the search for 
them himself. His agents pillaged sites un- 
scrupulously, especially in the area of 
Thebes. He offered a first collection to 
Louis XVIII, but the French monarch found 
the price too high. It was acquired by the . 
king of Piedmont and the Museum of Turin 
thus became the owner of the first Egyptian 
collection of high quality. 
Encouraged by this, Drover put to- 
gether a second collection which, on 
Champollion’s advice, Louis XVIII’s suc- 
cessor Charles X bought for the Louvre 
Museum. He then built up a third collection 
which was bought by the king of Prussia 
in 1836. Not so large as the other two, it was 
nevertheless very fine. 
Appointed British consul in 1816, the 
artist Henry Salt followed Drovetti’s exam- 
ple. He t00 assembled three successive col- 
ections. The first was bought by the British 
Museum, except for its finest piece—the ala- 
baster sarcophagus of Sethos I—which was 
sold to a private collector for the same price 
as all the rest of the collection. The second 
and much more important collection was 
acquired by Charles X in 1824. Thanks to 
the combined collections of Salt and 
Drovetti, the Egyptian department of the 
Louvre became the equal of that of the 
Museum of Turin. Salt’s third collection was 
sold after his death, the major part of it going 
to the British Museum. 
These outstanding collections could never 
have been put together without the untiring 
efforts of the consuls’ agents, notably the 
Frenchman Jean-Jacques Rifaud, who 
worked for Droverti, a Greek named 
Giovanni d’Athanasi, and above all the ex- 
traordinary Italian Giambattista Belzom, 
who acted for Salt. Born in Padua, Belzoni 
had considered becoming a monk when he 
was twenty, but instead he went to England 
where, as a circus entertainer, he astonished 
the public with his incredible feats of 
strength. Later he turned up in Portugal, in 
Spain, in Malta and finally in Egypt. There 
"he perfected a hydraulic pump of his own 
invention for use in irrigation, but the ven- 
ture was not a success as Mehemet Ali re- 
fused to buy it. Penniless, he was recom- 
mended to Salt who took him into his ser- 
vice. Evidence of his astuteness and prodi- 
gious strength abounds in the narrative he 
left of his Travels in Egypt and Nubia, dur- 
ing which he gathered antiquities for Salt. 
Champollion’s discoveries, and the pub- 
lications to which they gave rise, were to 
form the basis of the training of the first 
Egyptologists, among whom were some 
outstanding figures. 
Karl Lepsius, who studied at the Collége 
de France, learned to read hieroglyphs from 
posthumously published works by 
Champollion. From 1842 to 1845 he headed 
a great expedition to Egypt organized by the 
king of Prussia. Appointed to a profes-

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 80982: The Riddle of the Rosetta Stone: scholars and adventurers who rediscovered a forgotten civilization

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Je
an
-L
ou
p 
Ch
ar
me
r,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Bi
bl
io
th
eq
ue
 
de
s 
Ar
ts
 
Dé
co
ra
ti
fs
 
sorship at the University of Berlin, he was 
the Father of German Egyptology. His major 
work, Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und 
Aethiopien (“Monuments of Egypt and 
Ethiopia”) describes all the monuments of 
the Nile Valley from the Fourth Cataract to 
the Mediterranean. 
John Wilkinson can, perhaps, be consi- 
dered the father of British Egyptology. 
Abandoning a military career, he settled in 
Egypt where he undertook archaeological 
digs for more than ten years. In his Manners 
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, he 
was the first to describe the daily life of the 
craftsmen and peasants of Pharaonic times as 
depicted in tomb paintings. 
After studying engineering and archi- 
tecture, the Frenchman Prisse d’Avennes had 
an adventurous life as a young man. He 
fought against the Turks in the Peloponnese 
and then became secretary to the Governor 
General of India before settling in Egypt 
where he devoted himself to archaeology. 
He gave the Louvre the “Royal Chamber”, 
or “Hall of the Ancestors”, removed from 
the temple of Karnak just before Lepsius 
arrived to take possession of it. He donated 
to France the “Prisse Papyrus”, a long and 
precious document which dates from 
2000 BC and has been described as the oldest 
book in the world. 
Finally, Auguste Mariette ensured the 
future of the burgeoning discipline of 
Egyptian archaeology by putting a stop to 
the traffic in antiquines which hat involved 
quantities of objects, monuments and papyri 
taken from Egypt either under cover of offi. 
  
  
cial permits or as booty from clandestine 
excavations. 
A secondary school teacher at Boulogne- 
sur-Mer, Mariette was irresistibly drawn to 
Egypt after seeing the drawings of Nestor 
L’Hote. Using Champollion’s Grammaire 
he taught himself to read hieroglyphs. Then, 
after obtaining a modest post at the Louvre 
Museum, he was sent in 1850 on a mission to 
Egypt to buy Coptic manuscripts. While 
waiting for the permits necessary to make 
these purchases he made a visit to Saqqara. 
Thesight of a few sphinxes, half buried in the 
sand, reminded him of a text of Strabo which 
mentioned an avenue lined with sphinxes 
which led up to the Serapeum, the tombs of 
the Apis bulls. Abandoning the Coptic 
manuscripts, he decided to excavate. Un- 
covering sphinx after sphinx, he traced out 
the avenue he had discovered and found that 
it did indeed lead to the Serapeum, where he 
dug out the enormous sarcophagi of the 
sacred bulls and everything around them. 
This discovery caused a great sensation 
and earned Mariette an international repu- 
tation. But above all, having tasted the joys 
of working in the field and experiencing the 
heady intoxication of discovery during the 
months of feverish exploration, he could no 
longer do without them. Through the good 
offices of Ferdinand de Lesseps, the viceroy 
of Egypt, Said Pasha, entrusted Mariette 
with he task of protecting the antiquities of 
Egypt. In 1858 he appointed Mariette to the 
post of Director of Works for the 
Antiquities of Egypt and gave him all the 
resources needed for action. Mariette then 
Rr Gs Ey 
    
ol JP Jes 
began archaeological excavations at Giza, 
Saqqara, Abydos, ‘Thebes and Elephantine 
and assembled all his finds in Cairo. 
Anxious to protect all the objects and 
monuments of ancient Egypt, Mariette had 
the very greatest difficulty in ensuring the 
application of the necessary measures, 
Nevertheless, from that time, thanks to his 
efforts, the foundations of the Egyptian 
Antiquities Service and of the Cairo 
Museum were laid. After his death, in 1881, 
his work was continued by his successor, 
Gaston Maspero. The way ahead was traced 
out and was to lead to the great discoveries 
which would lead to a deeper understanding 
of Pharaonic Egypt—the secret hiding-place 
of the royal mummies at Deir el-Bahr, the 
tomb of Tutankhamun and the royal tombs 
of Tanis. 
 
JEAN VERCOUTTER is a French Egyptologist 
who was formerly director of the French Institute 
of Oriental Archaeology in Cairo and of the Sudan 
Antiquities Service, and professor of Egyptology at 
the University of Lille, France. He is the author of 
numerous works on ancient Egypt, including 
Textes biographiques du Sérapeum de Memphis 
(1962; “Biographical Texts from the Serapeum of 
Memphis”) and A larecherche de 'Egypte oubliée 
(1986; “In Search of Forgotten Egypt”). 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

Colossal £ 
Kl 
= 
fn 
[=¥ 
or 
© 
= 
S 
‘3 
0 
pa 
= 
= 
Be 
c 
© 
oF 
— 
o = 
o 
= 
on 


### 80983: Colossal feats of engineering

  
eats of engineering 
BY RAINER STADELMANN 
The imposing Hypostyle Hall in the Great 
Temple of Amun, Karnak, begun by Sethos I 
and completed by his son Ramesses II 
(c. 1290-1224 BC). The monumental columns, 
their papyriform capitals supporting colossal 
architraves at a height of 24 m, show a perfect 
mastery of construction techniques. 
v 
NYONE who has ever gazed at the 
A pyramids, if only once in a lifetime, 
is bound to have wondered how 
these extraordinary and massive structures 
were built, how the huge stones were trans- 
ported, what technical and mathematical 
knowledge the ancient Egyptians possessed 
and what tools or machinery they used. 
The same questions spring to mind when 
contemplating the obelisks of Luxor, the 
Hypostyle Hall at Karnak, and especially the 
colossi of Memnon, monoliths hewn out of 
the quarries north-east of Cairo and trans- 
ported to the city of Thebes 700 kilometres 
away. 
For the ancient Egyptians, technical and 
scientific knowledge was not a specialized 
discipline, but formed part of the training 
and the career of a competent scribe, a man 
employed in the service of his province or his 
King. The scribe’s education began when he 
learned the difficult arts of reading and 
writing, achieved with the help of literary 
texts but undoubtedly also by means of 
mathematical and technical works written 
on papyrus, fewer examples of which have 
come down to us than works of literature. 
A number of common trades were prob- 
ably organized in family guilds from very 
early times. There is evidence of specialized 
crafts in Egypt in Predynastic times in the 
form of finely crafted pottery and stone 
tools, stoneware vessels, and metalwork. 
The goldmines of the Eastern Desert and the 
copper deposits of Sinai may have been ex- 
ploited in prehistoric times, and precious 
stones prospected in the desert valleys of the 
south-east. In historical times, deposits of 
rare hard stone were quarried, often at a 
considerable distance from the Nile Valley. 
During the Old Kingdom (third millen- 
nium BC), the technique of stoneworking 
was perfected in sculpture, both in low relief 
and in the round, and culminated in the - 
earliest colossal statues such as the Great 
Sphinx of Giza or the royal effigies of the 
Fifth Dynasty (c. 2465-2323 BC). 
The soil of Egypt, deposited along the 
banks of the Nile by the annual inundation 
so that fields continually had to be marked 
out afresh, encouraged the development of 
surveying and hence of mathematical calcu- 
lations. The rise of the Nile waters and the 
annual height of the flood were calculated 
and recorded by means of Nilometers—in 
the south, on Elephantine island, and in the 
north, near Memphis—for the height of the

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 80983: Colossal feats of engineering

waters determined the levying of taxes on the 
income from different categories of cultiv- 
able land, particularly plantations on raised 
plots. Observation of the relatively regular 
inundation and its connection with astrono- 
mical phenomena led to the invention of an 
annual calendar geared to the natural rhythm 
of the seasons, which was a great improve- 
ment on the old lunar calendar. Knowledge 
obtained from agrarian organization and 
observation of the heavens and the stars laid 
the theoretical foundations of the future 
monumental constructions of the Old 
Kingdom. 
The river was also the country’s main 
artery. People travelled up or down the Nile 
in boats or barges, and in the Delta the 
branches of the river were used as channels 
of communication. These waterways were 
interconnected by canals, and a canal net- 
work also linked the settlements bordering 
the Nile Valley. Even deliveries of goods 
from one temple to another were carried out 
by water. Lighter loads, such as sacks of 
grain, were carried on donkeys over the 
fields, and from the fields to canal or river. 
Wheels, which came into current use only 
under the New Kingdom (c. 1550-1070 BC), 
were confined to war or hunting chariots. 
Although these vehicles were used for excur- 
stons by the upper classes, they were never 
strictly speaking a mode of transport. In the 
Old Kingdom, high dignitaries used litters 
for short overland journeys, but for longer 
journeys boats were always the answer. 
A royal boat approximately 44 metres 
long has been excavated to the south of the 
Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops) at Giza. 
Equipped with five pairs of oars and another 
huge pair of oars in lieu of a rudder, the boat 
bore signs of wear and tear indicating that it 
had actually sailed. It was probably used 
only to link the royal residence with the 
neighbouring towns of the Delta, for the 
craft which plied along the Nile were usually 
equipped with collapsible masts. When they 
travelled south, the north wind carried them 
along, but on journeys north the mast was 
lowered and the oars were used. There is 
evidence of navigation on the open sea to the 
cities of the Phoenician coast from the First 
Dynasty onwards (c. 3000 BC). Representa- 
tions of single-masted vessels bearing mer- 
chandise from Syria are common in the Fifth 
Dynasty. Heavy loads were transported on 
special barges. 
The transport by barge of palmiform col- 
 
umns lashed on to sledges is depicted on the 
southern wall of the entrance to the funerary 
temple of Unas {c. 2356-2323 BC), the last 
king of the Fifth Dynasty. The obelisks of 
Queen Hatshepsut (c. 1503-1482 BC) are 
shown being carried by barge in the southern 
portico of the lower terrace of her temple at 
Deir el-Bahri. The two obelisks lie side by 
side, the pointed end of one towards the 
prow of the barge and that of the other 
towards the stern, held in place by ropes. A 
fleet of twenty-seven boats tows the barge, 
which is accompanied by a pilot vessel. 
For the transport of the northern colossus 
of Memnon, weighing some 800 tons, an 
architect of genius, Amenhotpe son of 
Hapu, overseer of the Temple of Luxor and 
of the funerary temple of Amenophis III 
near Thebes, built a special boat in approx- 
imatcly 1350 BC which he named the “Boat 
of Eight”, a name which seems to signify that 
it was cight times larger than a normal barge. 
However, the biggest technical problem 
must have arisen when the megalith was 
being loaded on to the barge, and later when 
it was unloaded at Thebes. We know that 
One of the boats which formed part of the 
funerary equipment of the Pharaoh Khufu 
(Cheops, c. 2551-2528 BC) and may have been 
intended to enable him to voyage in the next 
world. The cedar craft, over 40 m long, has been 
reassembled from dismantled sections 
unearthed in 1954 close to the Great Pyramid. 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
/A
. 
Kh
al
il

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 80983: Colossal feats of engineering

Rg a 2rd ATRL rei 
- - 
©" 
o 
o 
f= 
3 
9 = 
| 
££ 
0 
< 
N 
Q . 
= 
° of 
g 
= 8 = 
when obelisks were transported they were 
hauled down ramps as far as a canal dug 
specially to connect the quarry to the Nile. A 
similar process was probably used for the 
transport of the colossal statue of Memnon. 
Laden with ballast of stone or brick, the 
barge would wait, low in the water of the 
canal. The obelisk or colossus would be 
heaved on board and lashed horizontally on 
a sledge, then the ballast would be unloaded, 
whereupon the barge would rise to the sur- 
face and could be towed along. 
Over short distances it was possible to 
haul aload of some 60 tons along a smoothed 
out track, as is shown by the famous repre- 
sentation of the transport by sledge of a 
colossal statue of the nomarch! Djehuti- 
hotpe in his tomb at Deir el-Bersha. The 
alabaster colossus, 13 cubits high according 
to the inscriptions, must have weighed as 
much as this. Wedged in place on an enor- 
mous wooden sledge and held down with 
ropes, it is being dragged along by 172 men, 
four abreast. Holding a pitcher, a workman 
perched on the feet of the colossus is pouring 
water in front of the sledge to make it slide 
more easily along the clay-coated track. 
Obelisks, guided by strong ropes, were 
probably slid down a ramp built of unfired 
bricks and sand towards a quadrangular 
shaft filled with sand. While the obelisk, 
leaning at an angle, was still held by the 
ropes, workmen emptied the sand out of the 
shaft, or the sand was allowed to run out 
 
A 
The Step Pyramid at Saqqara, last resting place 
of King Djoser (c. 2630-2611 BC). This six- 
stepped white limestone monument, 60 min 
sheight, is the earliest stone structure of its size 
known to the world. 
through slots in the walls of the shaft. When, 
with much careful manoeuvring, the obelisk 
was set upright on its base, there was a risk of 
damaging its edges. Above all, its enormous 
mass might wobble on its plinth and settle 
off-centre, so that the edges of its base were 
not parallel] to the edges of the plinth. An 
accident of this kind must have happened to 
the obelisk of Tuthmosis III at Karnak, 
although the error of alignment with the 
plinth was minute and is scarcely visible. 
However, the most extraordinary feats 
were those of monumental construction. As 
early as the Second Dynasty (c. 2770-2649 
BC), Egyptian architects were familiar with 
vaulting, and used it in the superstructure of 
tombs and doubtless also in dwellings which 
have not survived. During the same dynasty, 
facing stone was increasingly used in brick 
funerary monuments, and dressed stone 
blocks were introduced. The crowning in- 
novation, however, took place under King 
Djoser, towards the beginning of the Third 
Dynasty (c. 2649 BC) in Saqqara, part of the 
necropolis of the ancient city of Memphis, 
with the first stone monumental construc- 
tion, the Step Pyramid, which took some 
thirty years to build. The various stages in its 
construction show how Egyptian architects, 
in a single generation, gained mastery over 
the new building material. 
During the first construction phase of the 
original step mastaba?, stone seems to have 
been used exactly as if it were brick. Blocks 
of stone, designed like large bricks, were 
arranged in horizontal layers and cemented 
with crude clay mortar. A different tech- 
nique emerged in the second phase, marking 
the change from step mastaba to step pyra- 
mid. The mass of the dressed stone blocks 
was far greater. Each one weighed half a ton. 
They were arranged with the lie of the stone 
sloping inwards towards the heart of the 
edifice at an angle of 18°, so that their outer 
surface already had the angle of incline of 
72° to be found in its final phase in the 
enlarged pyramid. 
The use of large blocks and the sloping 
arrangement of the rows were brilliant in- 
novations which led to a considerable saving 
in time and the labour of stonecutting, since 
it was no longer necessary to chamfer the 
outer surface of the facing blocks, and the 
desired angle of incline was more easily 
obtained. This technique would not be aban- 
doned until the final form of the pyramid” 
was attained during the following dynasty. 
A steeper inclination of 45° to 54° lent itself 
to the use of horizontal layers and again 
made it necessary to chamfer the outer sur- 
face of the facing blocks. 
The building of a pyramid confronted the 
State with great technical and administrative 
problems. The organization of large num- 
1. Nomarch: governor of a nome, or province. 
2. Mastaba: a rectangular tomb with vertical or sloping 
sides and a flat roof. Editor

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 80983: Colossal feats of engineering

The type of level which might have been used to 
achieve the horizontal alignment of the Great 
Pyramid. 
  
  
  
  
 
bers of workers, prospection for quarries 
and the extraction of stone, the regular trans- 
port of blocks of stone to the stonemasons’ 
yards and their storage, the training of 
stonecutters, building workers, transport 
specialists, architects and foremen—all these 
achievements testify to the impressive ad- 
ministrative system of ancient Egypt. 
From the construction of the Step 
Pyramid of King Djoser to that of the Great 
Pyramid at Giza (c. 2550 BC), which was 
numbered among the seven wonders of the 
world, considerable advances were made in 
technical and geometrical expertise. Ancient 
Egyptian funerary monuments are always 
oriented with extraordinary precision. The 
orientation of the Step Pyramid shows an 
average deviation of 3v, but the deviation of 
the Great Pyramid is no more than 3'6”. A 
perfect orientation was obtained on pre- 
levelled ground by observing the polar stars 
from a fixed point at the northern corner of 
the future pyramid. The instruments used 
were the merkbhet, a horizontal bar equipped 
with a plumbline, and the bay, a wooden rod 
with a sighting notch in its upper end. On the 
arc of a circle, the positions of the rising and 
setting of a north star were marked. To find 
true north the Egyptians halved the angle 
formed by the position of a polar star when it 
rose, the position of the observer, and the 
position of the same star when it set. Once 
true north had been found, a string connect- 
ing various fixed points on the north-south 
  
A method of finding the north by bisecting the p> 
angle between the rising and setting positions of 
a north star. 
“The hypothesis that a single ramp, 
perpendicular to one of the faces of the pyramid, 
could have been used to transport the building 
blocks to the top of the pyramid and position 
them has now been superseded. ... The use of a 
spiralling ramp is difficult to imagine from a 
technical point of view. ... It is more likely that a 
number of small ramps (Fig. 1) were built 
around the pyramid right at the start, so that 
blocks could be hauled up them to a height of 25 
or 30m. ... Then a larger lateral ramp (Fig. 2), 
resting against one of the faces, could have 
been used...” 
 
  
  
  
  [lustrations © Rainer Stadclmann  
  
    
   
       
A 
Two drawings showing a technique which may 
have been used for the erection of obelisks in 
ancient Egypt. Supported by strong ropes, the 
obelisk was slid down a ramp of unfired bricks 
and sand towards a quadrangular shaft filled 
with sand. The sand was then gradually emptied 
out of the shaft and the obelisk manoeuvred 
upright until it stood on its plinth. 
Unfinished obelisk in a granite quarry near p> 
Aswan, Its estimated length and weight are 42 m 
and 1,200 tons respectively. 
P
h
o
t
o
 
©
 
H
a
n
s
 
Pa
tz
el
t,
 
P
h
o
t
o
 
Sc
ha
ja
, 
M
i
i
n
i
c
h

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 80983: Colossal feats of engineering

axis made it possible to determine one side of 
the pyramid. With the aid of measuring rods, 
the desired length was marked out. A right 
angle was obtained by means of a set of 
protractors. If Pythagoras’ theorem on the 
relationship between the sides of a triangle 
had not yet been formulated, it was certainly 
applied In practice. 
The precision of the right angles of the 
Great Pyramid, with an average deviation of 
only 2’ 48”, is still, today, worthy of admir- 
ation, as is the horizontal alignment of its 
four corners, with a fractional divergence 
of 2.1 centimetres. The alignment must have 
been achieved by means of a level in the form 
of a large wooden setsquare equipped with a 
plumbline which hung between its two equal 
arms joined at a right angle (see drawings 
p. 15). Connecting these two arms was a 
horizontal crossbar with a median notch 
into which the string of the weight fitted 
when the level was held perfectly horizontal. 
All other theories, such as that of filling an 
artificial lake around the pyramid, must be 
rejected. 
There are no ancient descriptions of build- 
ing methods as such. The reports of 
«{ Bronze statuette of Imhotep, chief minister and 
architect to King Djoser. Imhotep designed the 
king’s tomb as a monumental stairway towards 
the sky. It was built entirely of stone to last until 
eternity (see photo page 14). Sage and thinker as 
well as architect, Imhotep is thought to have 
written the earliest collections of the maxims or 
didactic “wisdom texts” which constitute one of 
the richest genres of ancient Egyptian writing. 
Inthe Late Dynastic Period (c. 713-332 BC), 
some 2,000 years after his death, he was deified 
asthe patron of scribes and as a healer, The 
Greeks identified him with their god of 
medicine, Asclepius. 
  
Ph
ot
o:
 
CR
 
Bu
ll
nz
, 
Pa
ri
s 
A scribe and his assistants measure a field of 
wheat to determine the taxes to be levied. 
Painting from the Theban tomb of Menna, a 
surveyor during the New Kingdom 
(18th Dynasty). 
v 
a NEE tear LT TTP HTT) Hin Ei i, 
»     
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
E. 
Th
ie
m,
 
Lo
to
s 
Fi
lm
, 
Ka
ul
be
ur
en
 
Herodotus on this subject are based on in- 
formation supplied by his contemporaries 
who, 2,000 years after the building of the 
pyramids, probably knew no more than we 
do. Near the pyramids of Maidum and 
Dahshur, the remains of the ramps used to 
transport the stone building materials can 
still be seen today. The hypothesis that a 
single ramp, perpendicular to one of the 
faces of the pyramid, could have been used to 
transport the building blocks to the top of 
the pyramid and position them has now been 
superseded. For the Great Pyramid, such a 
ramp would have been 3.3 kilometres long 
and its mass would have been 3.5 times grea- 
ter than that of the pyramid itself. The use of 
a spiralling ramp is difficult to imagine from 
a technical point of view, since it would have 
concealed the four faces of the pyramid and 
its four corners, making it impossible to 
control the angles and the slope of the faces. 
It is more likely that a number of small 
ramps were built around the pyramid night at 
the start, so that blocks could be hauled up 
them to a height of 25 or 30 metres. By this 
stage, 50 per cent of the mass was already in 
place. Then a larger lateral ramp, resting 
against one of the faces, could have been used 
to transport stones up to a point near the top 
of the pyramid. Such a ramp could dispense 
with half the mass of a free-standing ramp 
and would also be more stable. In the case of 
the Great Pyramid, for example, which is 
146.6 metres high, 96 per cent of the mass 
would be in place at a height of 100 metres. 
The last 20 or 30 metres probably called for 
a stepped construction. The pyramidion, or 
capstone, could only have been put in posi- 
tion by means of scaffolding, which indi- 
cates that the Egyptians were familiar with 
pulleys, even if no depiction of this system 
has survived. The use of simpler leverage 
devices and sledges has been recorded. Illus- 
trations of irrigation work depict the shaduf, 
a hand-operated weight-arm for raising 
water. This system may well have been used 
to lift building materials. 
It is remarkable that the greatest scientific, 
technical and artistic breakthroughs, not 
only for the history of Egyptian civilization 
but for the history of humanity as a whole, 
from the discovery of writing to advances in 
medicine, evidently took place in the first 
half of the third millennium BC. The follow- 
ing centuries only built on and perfected this 
knowledge. No innovations werc made to 
broaden the scientific and technical horizons 
until the advent of the Greek philosophers in 
the seventh and sixth centuries BC. | 
  
RAINER STADELMANN, of the Federal Re- 
public of Germany, is director of the German 
Institute of Archaeology in Cairo and of the ex- 
cavations being carried out by the Institute at the 
Temple of Sethos I, Qurna (Thebes), and at the 
Pyramid of Snofru, Dhashur. His published works 
include Syrisch-Palistinensische Gottheiten in 
Agypten (“Syrian-Palestinian Divinities in 
Egypt”) and Die Agyptischen Pyramiden (71986; 
“The Pyramids of Egypt”), as well as a number of 
articles in specialized journals.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

      
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
o
Y
 
r
a
w
 
1
 
-
 
» 
a
 
1,
 
T
E
R
E
A
R
a
I
I
N
 
O
e
 
R
d
 
S
e
 
a
l
e
 


### 80984: The Egyptian world-picture

The Egyptian world-picture 
BY JEAN YOYOTTE 
T HE huge temples and enormous funer- 
ary monuments of ancient Egypt 
with their profusion of hieroglyphs 
are a source of amazement to the modern 
mind, which cannot easily grasp their useful- 
ness or significance. The ancient Greeks, so 
much closer in time to them, considered the 
Pyramids of Giza to be an absurd and 
oppressive show of royal pride. However, 
these monuments retain their majesty and 
cease to tower quite so disturbingly over us 
once we see them as an expression of the 
conceptions that the Egyptians had formed 
of their universe and of the answers that 
those conceptions provided to the problems 
of their society, reflecting ways of thinking 
and of acting that are at once strange and 
familiar. 
That which is larger than life cannot be 
brought down to human proportions by 
means of a linear approach. Several different 
images, several different sacred accounts, 
taken together may help us to understand the 
same processes or phenomena. The im- 
penetrable sky is an ocean, a roof, a cow, a 
woman’s body. Any image rooted in tradi- 
tion is relevant, despite its apparently con- 
tradictory features, and serves as a means of 
apprehending, coming to terms with, the 
world of the gods. 
These differing approaches are often ex- 
pressed through a dualistic way of thinking 
in which the whole may be reduced to the 
opposition and association of two qualities, 
exemplified by the twofold characteristic of 
the monarchy—twofold on two accounts— 
by the black earth and the desert, and by 
Upper and Lower Egypt. In addition, lan- 
guage, writing and images are not to be 
confused with conventional symbols. Be- 
Temple relief depicting, at right, Tuthmosis III 
(c. 1479-1425 BC) wearing the red crown of 
Lower Egypt, with the god Amun, creator and 
sustainer of the world. Amun holds the ankh, 
the ancient Egyptian symbol for life, and wears 
the two-plumed headdress with which heis 
usually represented. 
tween that which 1s named and drawn and 
the object, an affinity exists. Words thus 
create things—hence the importance of 
wordplay in creation stories—and speech 
commands things. These are the two princi- 
ples of “magical” thinking. 
The vehicle of the words of the gods, the 
hieroglyphic system explains reality; com- 
posed of images drawn from Nature, it came 
into being at the same time as the Egyptian 
graphic arts. The representation of a living 
Ph
ot
o 
Ge
or
g 
Ge
rs
te
r © 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
17 
being, duly accompanied by the person’s mmm

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 80984: The Egyptian world-picture

18 
Ph
ot
a 
J.
J.
 
L
a
n
g
u
e
p
i
n
 ©)
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
  
[=
 
Detail of a pink granite relief carving of Nut, the 
sky-goddess and protector of the deceased. The 
carving, inscribed with stars, adorned the inside 
face of the sarcophaguslid in the tomb of King 
Psusennes I (1040-992 BC) at San el-Hagar 
(Greek Tanis) in the Nile Delta. Now preserved 
in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, the hoard of 
funeral furniture found in Psusennes’ tomb is 
comparable in richness with the treasure of 
Tutankhamun. 
name, is a duplication of that person. An 
almost maniacal passion for giving lasting 
verbal and graphic expression to reality in 
order to shore it up by means of a supreme 
form of magic is a hallmark of Pharaonic 
culture and accounts for its extraordinary 
monuments and inscriptions. 
The horizon of the Egyptians stretches 
from the narrow strip of black earth (kemet, 
from which derives Kemi, the Coptic name 
for Egypt) constituted by the flat alluvial 
valley of the Nile, to the red earth (desheret) 
of the tmmense Sahara all around, with its 
arid hills. “The Black Land” is the home of 
human beings, a place for the growing of 
crops, familiar and rcassuring. “The Red 
Land” is terrible and strange. Aggressive 
bands of backward people are its denizens 
and from that arca invaders come, whether 
from afar or from nearby. But in addition, 
the desert offers no escape, with its horizons 
where the sun is born and dies; its unchang- 
ing rocks and pure sands are welcoming to 
the dead and arc the scene of invisible re- 
births. An infinite liquid mass surrounds the 
solid universe, appearing on the face of the 
Earth in the form of the seas. This water 
constitutes the cclestial vault where the stars 
follow their courses. It flows into the under- 
ground river, where the sun sails from west 
to east during the night, and each year it 
produces a new tidal flow in the form of the 
flood waters of the Nile. 
Peopled with mysterious, somnolent 
beings, this ocean and the world of darkness 
filled the whole of space until the day when 
the sun, Re-Atum, rose up, pushing back the 
mmm dense gloom to the periphery. A mound 
emerged from which the god gave shape to 
the present world, breathing air, light and 
life into it, while at the same time having to 
combat the forces of the void. He then cre- 
ated gods and men, animals and plants. This 
was to be but the “first occasion”. Every 
evening, the sun god grows old, and every 
morning, rejuvenated and purified in the 
waters, he recreates the universe and joins 
battle; every day the dragon Apopis 
threatens the sun in his course. A rebellion 
on the part of mankind caused Re to take 
flight into the skies, but he continues to sce 
to the maintenance of order, Maat, which he 
established and which is his life. Living 
beings are destined to grow old and become 
young again here on Earth, in accordance 
with a perpetual time cycle (nebeh), like the 
sun, until the day when, touched by the 
finger of death, they enter a static eternity 
(djet) like Osirts. When Atum returns to his 
original state of passivity, both space and 
time will cease to exist. 
Several different myths and doctrines, re- 
flecting the diversity of approaches and 
claims from one locality to another, recount 
in their own ways the work of the one and 
only demiurge. According to the predomi- 
nant doctrine, originating in Heliopolis, it 
was Re-Atum who set things in their places, 
but the priests of Memphis believed that it 
was Ptah, the Earth, who was the first to 
appear and who then placed the sky on high 
and brought forth the sun. The scholars 
maintained that God conceived the universe 
in his heart (i.e. in his mind) and brought it 
into being through his mouth (i.e. his 
creative word). 
In Pharaonic times sexual duality was con- 
sidered to be an inherent part of the process 
of life, long before the hymns of the New 
Kingdom praised God as the father and 
mother. Two myths, that of Kamutef and 
that of the “Eye of Re”, reveal the place of 
woman. Each major god is flanked by a 
female companion who is at once his daught- 
er, his wife and his mother. He is brought 
into the world by this goddess and he makes 
her pregnant, being his own son and the 
  
COLOURPAGES 
Colour page right 
The lavishly decorated tomb of Sennefer at 
Sheikh Abd el-Qurna is known as the “tomb of 
the vines” because of the vine leaf motifs which 
adorn its ceiling. Sennefer, mayor of Thebes 
during the reign of Amenophis II (c. 1427-1401 
BC), is shown on each pillar, sometimes 
accompanied by one of his three wives. 
Photo B. Brake, © Rapho, Paris 
Centre pages 
Above left: the god Osiris is depicted on this 
pectoral from the tomb of Tutankhamun (c. 
1333-1323 BC), Valley of the Kings at Thebes. 
The vast array of treasures making up the 
young king’s funerary equipment, discovered in 
1922 by the English Egyptologist Howard 
Carter, are preserved in the Egyptian Museum, 
Cairo. 
Photo © G. Dagli Ori, Paris 
“Ishall never be far away from you while my hand 
is in your band, and I shall stroll with you in every 
favourite place.” 
Extractfrom a poem written on papyrus and 
dating from the time of Ramesses II. 
Below left, detail from a painting in the tomb of 
the first wife of Ramesses II, Queen Nefertari 
(c. 1290-1224 BC). See also photo page 22. 
Photo B. Brake © Rapho, Paris 
Above right: elongated head of an 18th Dynasty 
princess sculpted during the reign of Akhenaten 
(c. 1353-1335 BC) in the highly original 
Amarnastyle. Akhenaten’s court artists 
depicted all the members of the royal household 
with the king’s own physical imperfections, 
notably his egg-shaped skull. 
Photo ©]. Vertu, Paris 
Below right: the boat was the most important 
means of transport in ancient Egypt, and 
wooden models of boats have been found in 
many tombs. This example, dating from the 
Middle Kingdom (c.2040-1640 BC), is equipped 
with two massive oars at the stern which acted 
as rudders. Northerly winds, favourable to 
sailing up-river, prevailed in the Nile Valley, but 
when travelling downstream the mast was 
lowered and the oars were used. 
Photo © G. Dagli Ori, Paris 
 
Further reading 
The Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead (1985), 
translated by Raymond O. Faulkner, edited by 
Carol Andrews. 
An Introduction to Ancient Egypt (1979) and 
Ancient Egypt: The Land and its Legacy (1988), 
both by T.G.H. James. 
Reading the Past: Linear B and Related Scripts 
(1987) by John Chadwick. 
All published by British Museum Publications 
Ltd., London.

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

Sh = 
1 252 9 S84 ~ 
JE. f- a 
ator de BV 
TT a lh A " Ty vo ET a0 A ~ ae 
® A" 
Wy 
\iadaa MALTS uy as: ¥ IY 0 Prosbetegivson hf A hei) op k 4 "i La 5, Lae pA “iy () 
RE . va SEG 2 haat -—e or a 
wk 3 RN 
dvi lm 
  
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

   

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
  

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

“Bull of his Mother” (Kamutef). This female 
companion is also his eye, the source of 
flames and light, who went away from him in 
anger and whom he had to pacify. An image 
of the ambivalence of the sacred, she is the 
good Hathor, desire and joy, and the danger- 
ous Sakhmet, a leonine agent of calamity and 
a cobra who may strike against enemies and 
sinners. 
Two divine couples born of the demiurge 
represent the ordering of the physical uni- 
verse: air and light-fire; and earth and sky. 
The following generation, nearing man’s 
estaté, had to contend with human dramasin 
the shape of power struggles and death. 
Osiris, slain by Seth, found new life through 
Isis and Nephthys, and gained sovereignty 
over death and the dead. His posthumous 
son Horus assumed rule of the Earth by 
defeating his uncle Seth. The latter, a 
troublemaker who was not to be scen as a 
supreme satanic force until later periods, is 
an ambiguous figure, His divine violence is 
an inescapable fact, causing life to open onto 
eternity and serving to help Re and the 
Pharaoh to vanquish foreigners and the dra- 
gon of the void, thus giving rise to conflict- 
ing legends. For instance, power is said to be 
shared between Horus, the master of the 
black earth, and Seth, the master of the red 
earth; or Scth is described as the king of the 
South and Horus as the king of the North, 
forming together an indissoluble confeder- 
ation; or again, and most frequently, Horus 
is depicted as expelling Seth and ruling alone 
over the organized world. 
This entanglement of ideas and images 
underpinned a political theology that 
Colour page left 
One of the most beautiful tombs in the Valley of 
the Queensat Thebes is that of Nefertari. A 
striking feature of the tomb is this wall painting 
in which the morning manifestation of the sun 
god, Khepry, is depicted at left with a scarab for 
ahead. On the other side of the doorway sit the 
goddess of the west (Hathor), with the sign for 
“west” above her head, and Re-Harakhty, or 
“Horus of the Horizon”, the daytime form of 
the sun god, depicted with a hawk’s head 
surmounted by a sun disk. 
Photo © E. Thiem, Lotus Film, Kaufbeuren 
Painted limestone stela from el-Amarna, with p> 
King Akhenaten (c. 1353-1335 BC) on the left, 
his wife Nefertiti and three of their daughters. 
The intimate family scene, typical of royal 
iconography during Akhenaten’s reign, is 
blessed by the life-giving rays of the Aten, the 
sun god, represented by a solar disk. For 12 years 
orso,el-Amarna was Egypt’s capital and centre 
of the new State religion introduced by the king, 
in which only the sun god was worshipped. 
Atenism was as close as the ancient Egyptian 
world ever came to monotheism. 
marked Egyptian history and culture so 
strongly at that time that they are legitimate- 
ly designated by historians as Pharaonic, the 
word “Pharaoh”, transmitted to us by the 
Bible, being a specific term for the king of 
Egypt. The king was the representative of 
the divine order and epitomized in himself 
alone the forces of economic, social and 
political life. The incarnation of Horus since 
the earliest times, the son of Re since the 
period of the great pyramids, the “perfect 
god” fulfilled the role of gods whose image, 
heir and servant he was. In him Horus and 
Seth were united. His coming marked the 
coming of Horus and at the same time the 
reappearance of the sun and the beginning of 
anew cra. He maintained Maat among man- 
kind and ensured security by driving back 
the barbarians and imposing Egyptian rule 
beyond the Nile Valley. He was the sole 
repository of that supernatural force which 
ensured victory and political wisdom. He 
alone issued decrees and was responsible for 
appointments to every single post. Initiated 
into the mysterics and highly cultivated, he 
kept the gods alive through the arts and 
through ritual. 
  = 
<! 1 
AIRE 
LIIEE 
=! 1% 
|e 
: i Th   
  
   
  
1 
1 
ey 
»e 
a » * 
r 4 
Sy 
  
    
The doctrinal foundations for the legi- 
timacy of kings lay not in heredity but in 
immediate predestination, a choice made by 
God, illustrated by the fiction of his procrea- 
tion by the god himself (myth of theogamy). 
Once he had taken possession of the crowns 
and affixed the cobra on his forehead, the 
new Horus took up his place among the 
gods. He would pass into cternity as a super- 
natural being. His tomb, along with the cere- 
monies accompanying his burial, reflected 
this difference that existed between him and 
the rest of humanity, exemplified by the 
pyramids of the Old and New Kingdoms 
with their vast royal temples, and the rock- 
cut tombs of the Valley of the Kings and the 
“Million-Year Castles” of the New 
Kingdom. One of the few social conquests 
achieved by ordinary people throughout the 
course of Egyptian history was the democra- 
tization of funerary privileges, which were 
extended to common mortals during each of 
the Intermediate Periods, when the central 
authority weakened. But each Kingdom that 
restored the unity of the monarchy invented 
further differentiations. 
Ancient Egypt had no practical or theore- 
    
    
        
    
   
     
   
T .. 
MLE 
§ 
y 
WL 
i x 
- 
L\ 
| 
FH = 
Wi 
a 
a    
     
O71] ¢ : fotos 
(35) ai R 
Sel Lit AN 
y gp ( 
N 3 “a 
-_ _ : 
For A 
SOAR FS 
  
      
| 
- 
  
  
     
  
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Da
gl
i 
Or
ti
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

24 
   
  
   
«{ Detail of a wooden panel from a niche in the 
tomb of Hezyre, Chief Scribe and Chief of 
Dentists and Physicians of the 3rd Dynasty (c. 
2649-2575 BC), at Saqqara. Hezyre carries the 
tools of a scribe over his shoulder—reed pen, 
water pot or bag, and a palette with cakes of 
pigment for making ink, all tied together. 
Painting from the tomb of Sennedjem, a 
high-ranking official during the reign of Sethos 
: I, shows Sennedjem and his wife Iyneferti 
worshipping a group of deities. (See also photo 
page 6, left.) Ph
ot
o 
R
o
s
s
 © 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Da
gl
i 
Or
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
       
   
tical understanding of democracy. It ele- 
vated to the highest degree, and integrated 
into its cosmology, a system whereby all 
human authority was delegated to a chief. 
Not very inclined towards abstraction, the 
“prephilosophical” Egyptian had no word 
for State or for Nation, but invested the 
person of the sun king with all the attributes 
of the State. The various terms used to desig- 
nate the king did not apply to foreign 
sovereigns and, in speaking of Pharaoh, the 
early Egyptians internalized their national 
feeling, although the storytellers were well 
aware that Pharaoh as god shared the physic- 
al and moral weaknesses of our species. 
Scribes and priests cultivated a spirit of 
loyalty towards the monarchy and finally 
attributed an ecumenical dimension to it 
mmm which made it easier to accept foreign mas- 
  
ae LIL APE Lh
“v PLE Paden ple] - 
r 
Bf rd Ka hn 3 ¢ Se = 
: Sate 3 SUF MS Vr 
  
   
     
ters representing a universal empire: the 
Persians Cambyses and Darius, Alexander 
the Great, and the Roman Augustus. 
This unified society whose sacred poems 
sang of the unity of creation and the mystery 
of the creator was at the same time radically 
polytheistic and stubbornly idolatrous. The 
Egyptian nation recognized all the gods re- 
vealed by the immemorial traditions of the 
different localities. Each had its own names, 
legends, major attributes and set images, 
making it unique of its kind. Each city god 
was revered by the local people whose lord 
he was and whose happiness he ensured. 
However, all the gods and goddesses were 
simultaneously recognized as the father or 
mother of the Pharaoh who kept them all 
alive and expected to be protected by them. 
With time, a form of logic came to be 
introduced into this extensive pantheon 
through the establishment of a hierarchy and 
correspondences. The principal god of any 
province was thus seen as a manifestation of 
the sun, reflected in such names as 
Amon-Re, Montu-Re and Sobek-Re. Ulti- 
mately, all the gods came to represent in 
theory the manifestations or offspring of a 
single, remote god, while their personalities 
served on the occasion of State rituals and 
local devotions as a medium for approaching 
the divinity in its place of being, through its 
manifestations. The enlightened reform of 
the renowned Pharaoh Akhenaten, impos- 
ing the exclusive cult of the visible sun (the 
Aten) could not have any lasting success, 
especially since polytheism had profoundly 
modelled not only the tolerant spirituality of 
the Egypuans but also the economic and 
social structures of the country. 
What then was the place of men and 
women in this universe where the whole of 
collective life seemed to be understood and 
managed in terms of communication be- 
tween a single flesh-and-blood being—the 
king—and the multiplicity of gods? In com- 
parison with other Near Eastern peoples in 
ancient times, Egypt was singularly modern. 
Human beings were equal before the creator 
and, as a general rule, owed their advance- 
ment purely to the judicious choice of the 
Pharaoh. There existed neither statutory 
aristocracy nor intermediate authority be- 
tween the State and the individual. A man 
defined himself by the name of his parents 
and by his title in the administrative appar- 
atus. The legal status of women was equal to 
that of men, although marriage was patriloc- 
al and the activity of wives centred on the 
proud role that each one played as “Mistress 
of the House”. The pleasure taken in the joys 
of the home are prettily expressed in tomb 
drawings and inscriptions and in literature. 
Children were desired and cared for, not in 
order to perpetuate a line but because of the 
happiness they brought and in order to en- 
able their parents to live again through the 
funerary rites. In each village there was a 
strong sense of community. 
The “haves” were required by the precepts 
of Maat to assist the “have-nots” and, as 
carly as the third millennium BC, the “wis- 
dom writings” of officials spoke of charity 
and alms-giving in terms that foreshadow 
Abrahamic religions. These wisdom writ- 
ings preach good manners, reserve, absence 
of gesticulation, an entire discipline which is 
typified in Pharaonic drawings and statuary. 
The omnipresent mediation of the king by 
no means ruled out direct relations between 
individuals and the gods. Admittedly, ordin- 
ary people, unless performing the functions 
of priests, did not enter the precincts of the 
major temples, which were so to speak fac- 
tories for maintaining the energy of the uni- 
verse, but at the door of the sacred precincts, 
in village oratories and in their inmost being 
they prayed to the gods of their choice and 
consulted their oracles in an effort to solve 
their health and career problems. Moreover, 
theories as to the power of names, writings 
and images offered a magical means of

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
E.
 
Th
ie
m,
 
Lo
to
s 
Fi
lm
, 
Ka
uf
be
ur
en
 
Da
gl
i 
Or
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
  
Wall painting in the oval-shaped sarcophagus 
chamber of Tuthmosis ITI. It depicts a scene and 
texts from the Book of Amdiat (“that which is 
in the netherworld™), a religious composition 
which describes the sun god’s daily death and 
rebirth and is often found in royal tombs of the 
early New Kingdom. In this scene the sun god’s 
© bark has reached the 12th hour of the night, 
when the god and his retinue enter into the 
. body of a giant snake which they will leave 
rejuvenated as “young children”. 
The judgment after death, a detail from one of 
the many funerary papyri placed in New 
Kingdom tombs, which are today known as the 
Book of the Dead. In this scene Anubis, the god 
responsible for embalming and the lord of the 
necropolis, weighs the deceased’s heartina 
balance against Maat, correct conduct in life. To 
his right, the moon god Thoth, symbol of 
wisdom and justice, records the result. If the 
heart and Maat are in equilibrium, the test is 
successful, and the deceased is presented to 
Osiris in triumph. 
obtaining the favour of a god in one’s life- 
time. A statue or stele set in a holy place 
transformed the person who had erected 1t 
into a regular companion of the god con- 
cerned and enabled an indirect benefit to be 
gained from the offerings made to that god 
by the king, thereby ensuring prosperity, 
long life and the promise of a good burial. 
For this was the one area in which the 
Pharaonic world view gave men and women 
the possibility of asserting themselves, avail- 
ing themselves of all the magical powers of 
art, writing and ritual to ensure everlasting 
life for their mummified remains, their 
name, their mobile soul (ba) and their life 
force (ka). They were offered eternal life, 
and a truly royal life since cach person was 
transformed into Osiris; also, a truly divine 
life since cach became a companion of the 
sun. From the time of the Middle Kingdom 
onwards, this survival depended in each case 
on the individual’s morality. In the temples   
  
« 
ks 
i | A bon 3 
= iat. --_—-_- AEN 
    
Pharaoh alone may have represented and 
spoken for humanity, but all Egypuans 
could, according to their resources and 
merits, express themselves through their 
tombs. 
The sons of Re reached their first zenith in 
the third millennium BC. The Pharaonic 
world view was given tangible expression in 
the cities of pyramids, scattered through the 
region of Memphis, at the junction of Upper 
and Lower Egypt. During each successive 
reign, a new crop-growing area was estab- 
lished in the valley, while a royal city was 
built at the cdge of the desert. This city 
served a temple where the ruling king, the 
incarnation of Horus, worshipped the gods. 
The holy of holies of the temple was the 
pyramid, representing the primordial 
mound and the course of the sun in which 
the new Osiris would be reborn. In the 
surrounding area, filled with images of 
everyday life, the tombs of the princes and 
ministers, followed by those of the priests 
and the keepers of the pyramids, formed a 
city of the dead, above the city of the living. 
A record of the conquest of the land, the 
chain of pyramids was a reflection of the 
ordering of the Egyptian cosmos before 
being the illustrious, disconcerting collec- 
tion of mausoleums that we admire so much 
today. | 
  
JEAN YOYOTTE, of France, specializes in the 
history of Egypt of the late Pharaonic period. He is 
director of studies at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes 
Etudes, Paris, and until 1985 led the French team 
excavating Tanis. His published works include Les 
trésors des pharaons (1968; “Treasures of the 
Pharaohs”) and, in association with P. Vernus, a 
“Dictionary of the Pharaohs” (1988). 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Bu
ll
oz
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Lo
uv
re
 
Mu
se
um
, 
Pa
ri
s 
o ® o VEN the uninitiated traveller along the 
a1 1 Cc 1n t C an E banks of the Nile, studded as they 
are with superb vestiges of 


### 80986: Daily life in the land of the Pharaohs

of the Pharaohs 
 
BY CHRISTIANE DESROCHES-NOBLECOURT 
  
Pharaonic times, is immediately impressed 
by the essential features of the luminous 
civilization of ancient Egypt—a profound 
religious feeling that found expression in 
immense temples and tombs, and an intense 
and ardent love of life, endlessly recorded in 
the painted or sculpted images that adorn the 
inner walls of funerary monuments. 
Study of these sources reveals that 
Egyptian temples were never destined to 
receive believers gathered to offer prayers to 
an evocation of God. They were sanctuaries 
designed primarily to maintain the cosmic 
machinery through the meticulous atten- 
tions of the Pharaoh, who was the earthly 
representative of divine power and purpose, 
the supreme pontiff surrounded by a hierar- 
chy of priests. Ordinary people were dented 
access to these sacred edifices. Imbued with 
the divine, like “all that lives on land, in the 
air, under the water” (the plant and mineral 
worlds included), they recognized and wor- 
shipped their creator in all the manifesta- 
tions of Nature, without frequenting tem- 
ples. For them death was simply a threshold 
which took them closer to god, and in their 
funerary trappings they portrayed them- 
selves in the presence of the deities of the 
underworld with which they would be in 
direct contact until their complete incor- 
poration in eternity. 
We should also take care not to misinter- 
pret what we see in the tombs. The captivat- 
ing scenes from daily life that adorn the walls 
of burial chambers and some of the ritual 
objects preserved in them should be seenin a 
mystical light as symbolic images of the 
“everyday” challenges and vicissitudes of 
the journey through the Osirian underworld 
from which the dead person would surely 
emerge in triumph, winning access to 
eternity. 
These images are inspired by scenes from 
everyday life on the banks of the Nile. A 
funerary banquet incites the deceased to di- 
vine inebriation. A clump of papyrus reeds 
recalls the primeval marshland in which he 
must undergo gradual “gestation” as he 
moves towards apotheosis. A depiction of 
hunting the hippopotamus or trapping wild 
ducks is meant to paralyse demons that may 
block his path. Nets are set to catch the 
mystic fish, the symbol of his destiny. Grain 
is harvested and grapes are picked to make 
offerings of bread and wine for Osiris. The 
presence of a small calf symbolizes the sun’s 
renewal. 
Through this lively and colourful panor- 
ama, designed for otherworldly purposes, it 
«| Limestone head of a young girl in the Amarna 
style. The short-lived Amarna period during the 
reign of Akhenaten (New Kingdom, ¢. 1353- 
1335 BC), who left Thebes to found a new capital 
city near the present el-Amarna, left a legacy of 
naturalistic statuary which broke with 
traditional conventions of representation.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 80986: Daily life in the land of the Pharaohs

. P
h
o
t
o
 © 
Me
tr
op
ol
it
an
 
Mu
se
um
 
of
 A
rt
, 
Ne
w 
Yo
rk
 
   
NE 
“- 
      
A 
Wall painting from the tomb of the Vizier 
Rekhmire (18th Dynasty), at Thebes, shows the 
deceased sailing in a papyrus skiff pulled by 
haulers. The stretch of water, within a closed 
garden, is surrounded by rows of sycamores and 
date palms. Nature is widely represented in New 
Kingdom art, whose practitioners enjoyed 
greater liberty than their predecessors in choice 
of subject, especially in the decoration of tombs. 
    
   
  
  
  
 
     
  
Vu ~l 
RR Ks Eas, SS 
i 
- 
S oe oy ~ al As yd ‘ OG REA _— 
   
~ - 
PENA, SE 
“rR RNS 
TE A 
  
  
  
is possible to grasp in broad outline the 
context in which “the herd of god”, as the 
ancient Egyptians saw themselves, lived 
their lives. 
It 1s an almost entirely agrarian setting, 
governed by what Julius Caesar (who 
adopted it and imposed it on the Roman 
world) termed “the greatest and most intelli- 
gent of calendars”. This calendar was deter- 
mined by the inundation of the Nile, which 
occurred every 365 4 days to cover and fer- 
tilize the drought-parched lands of Egypt 
(which had no other watercourse and vir- 
tually no rainfall). 
The regularity of the annual flood had 
determined since the earliest times the calen- 
dar of three four-month seasons, instilling in 
the Egyptians, who were infinitely sensitive 
to their environment, a profound and un- 
shakeable faith in the principle of eternal 
renewal. 
Relations between men and women were 
modelled on those which were deemed to 
have governed the divine couples of “the 
earliest times”, and were characterized by 
complete equality. Unlike women in many 
of the societies of classical Antiquity, the 
women of ancient Egypt enjoyed full legal 
powers. Even a married woman could man- 
age her own fortune, share part of her hus- 
band’s wealth and freely dispose of her own 
property among her children. The married 
woman was “Mistress of the House”. She 
  
  
advised her husband and contributed largely 
to the prosperity of the household she man- 
aged. Cherished by her husband and re- 
spected by what she hoped would be a 
numerous offspring, she was happy to feel 
herself the pivot of the household and the 
family circle. Parents accorded their atten- 
tion equitably to sons and daughters, not all 
of whom (especially girls) seem to have re- 
ceived much formal schooling. Some girls 
must, however, have undergone fairly 
advanced instruction, since women were ad- 
mitted to certain posts in administration, in 
commerce and even in the scientific profes- 
sions. The first woman doctor known to 
history, Lady Pesechet, was in practice in 
Memphis at the time of the pyramids, during 
the third millennium BC. 
Profoundly patriotic, the Egyptian was by 
no means xenophobic. In early times prison- 
ers were taken during conflicts caused by the 
need to defend the frontiers of “The Black 
Land” (Kemi, as ancient Egypt was called), 
but the Egyptians were fundamentally paci- 
fic people, for whom “war is a day of misfor- 
tune”. Prisoners were humanely treated. 
While they were often consigned to the sol- 
diers or officers who had captured them, 
they could be set free and even permitted to 
marry into the family of their captor. They 
were free to worship their own gods. 
As was still to some extent the case on the 
banks of the Nile at the beginning of this

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 80986: Daily life in the land of the Pharaohs

century, marriage was sanctioned neither by 
a religious ceremony nor by an administra- 
tive act. An agreement made before a witness 
by a man-and a woman wishing to start a 
family was a commitment of great moral 
significance. On occasion, a deed might be 
drawn up to specify the personal property of 
cach partner. The purpose of this was pri- 
marily to preserve the rights of the wife in 
the event of divorce, which could be re- 
quested by either of the parties. Since di- 
vorce entailed forfeiture by the husband of 
the wife's contribution (or of whatever he 
had acknowledged to be her contribution) to 
their joint fortune, it could prove a costly, if 
not ruinous, process for him! All these con- 
ditions, with the help of an admixture of 
common sense, helped to maintain the sta- 
bility of marriage. - 
The simplest dwellings always comprised 
an enclosed courtyard leading to a commun- 
al living-room. Outbuildings were situated 
behind the house. A staircase led from the 
courtyard to a terrace, which was particular- 
ly appreciated as a place where the family 
could spend the hot summer nights and en- 
joy a breath of cool air. 
Remains of the residences of very wealthy 
Egyptians have revealed a logical ground 
plan that remained unchanged for thousands 
of years. Like all other buildings except reli- 
gious monuments, which were constructed 
in stone, a noble and durable material, such 
dwellings were built in unbaked brick, made 
of Nile mud mixed with straw and ash. Large 
country mansions in vast estates comprised 
The sarcophagus of a royal lady named Kawit, 
in the precincts of the mortuary temple of 
Mentuhotpe (c. 2061-2010 BC), Deir el-Bahri, is 
decorated with reliefs evoking the daily life of 
the deceased princess and perpetuating itin the 
next world. Below right, the princess is seated 
on a high backed chair, mirror in hand, while an 
attendant arranges the curls of her wig. She is 
holding to her lips a cup of milk poured out for 
lier by a steward. Below, the cow which gave the 
milk, with a calf still attached to its leg. 
three parts, corresponding to the require- 
ments of everyday life. A large entrance-hall 
led to a central chamber whose high ceiling 
was supported by one or by four columns. 
Small windows high in the walls were fitted 
with bars. Here were held the receptions and 
festivities which the ancient Egyptians so 
enjoyed. Side rooms served as stores, offices 
or lodgings for secretaries or housekeepers. 
A staircase led to a loggia running the length 
of the entrance-hall. 
The third part of the house was reserved 
for family life, and included a central, more 
intimate, communal living room, rooms 
where the children worked and played dur- 
ing the cold days of winter and bedrooms. 
An entire wing reserved for ablutions (inc- 
luding showers), anointings and personal 
toilet and hygiene, was equipped with a sys- 
tem of drains. 
These country estates, which functioned 
as small, closed economies, were completed 
by outbuildings housing kitchens, grain 
silos, a bakery, butchery, brewery, and va- 
rious workshops, including one for weaving, 
which was the major household activity of 
women in all classes of society. Other 
domestic activities, notably cooking (except 
for making bread) were usually carried out 
by the men. Asses were kept in the stables, 
and so were horses, which were introduced 
into Egypt during the New Kingdom and 
were mainly used to pull the light chariots 
that also originated in the Near East. 
A garden planted with sycamores, weep- 
ing willows, tamarisks and palms, patch- 
worked with flowerbeds and further deco- 
rated with trellised vines and a refreshing 
pool of water, was the dream of every 
Egyptian. In the towns, where space was 
limited, gardens were smaller, surrounding 
buildings of several storeys containing the 
areas that occupied a single storey in the 
country. The weavers’ workshop was lo- 
cated in the cellar, which doubtless also pro- 
vided cold storage for foodstuffs and drink. 
  
  
   
Vv 
kg \. - | 2 —— : | — p ‘oN or ———— ' s — 
I > (2) Rd lt) oN ~q NYO dmalsslm ad = LLL 
mm 
  
  
  E
R
E
I
N
O
I
E
L
L
 
E
a
 
  
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Da
gl
i 
Or
i,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 80986: Daily life in the land of the Pharaohs

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Da
gl
i 
Or
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
J. 
Ve
ru
wt
, 
Pa
ri
s 
       
Jef ji TI 
  
  
   
 
   
    
  
   
 
r 
=
]
 
—
 
Above left, portrait of two children on a wall of 
the tomb of Vizier Ramose, governor of Thebes 
during the reign of Amenophis III and 
Amenophis IV (Akhenaten), c. 1391-1335 BC. 
The delicately modelled features of these 
limestone reliefs are typical of the polished style 
of the 18th Dynasty Amarna period. Above, 
procession bringing the funerary equipment to 
the tomb. 
Agricultural scenes are depicted in the tomb of 
the Theban surveyor Menna (18th Dynasty). 
Below, threshing with cattle. 
v 
   
    
  
  
Kitchens and grain silos were situated on the 
terrace level, 
Boys, whether of humble or noble birth, 
attended the temple school. One inscription 
tells us of a poor boy who had been able to 
“reach the feet of the Pharaoh thanks to his 
writing tablet”. Each day, the mothers took 
thé master payment in the form of food. 
Particularly promising pupils spent several 
years within the temple precincts. Fami- 
liarization with the many hieroglyphic signs, 
study of the written language and literature 
and of arithmetic, geometry and geography, 
all figured in secondary studies, at the con- 
clusion of which successful pupils carned the 
title of “scribe who has obtained the tablet”. 
Appointment to an administrative post 
followed. Particularly gifted students might 
go on to higher studies in a “House of Life” 
within the precincts of a temple, which prop- 
agated the teachings of great architects, sci- 
entists (medicine, pharmacology, chemistry, 
astronomy or geometry) and men of letters, 
  
  
    
  
abl 11 SA | & i a fms lia | grr rd 
A ede EAE Ee dS HS PTS Pro Ie Hor Cori a XI 
a i eal - 
 
R
e
 
I)
 
yA
 
g
 
K
o
 
_
&
 
B=   
as well as philosophy and the pursuit of 
wisdom. Lessons were generally accompa- 
nied by practical exercises and laboratory 
work. 
At holiday time the whole population was 
free to celebrate the great seasonal festivals 
during which symbols of divinities were 
brought from their sanctuaries and borne 
through the crowds in sacred barks, amid the 
excitement of processions and theatrical 
performances. 
The most important of these occasions 
was, of course, the New Year, when the Nile 
inundation covered the cultivable land and 
freed the farmers from their work in the 
fields. On this great day, and during the 
weeks that followed, the people travelled 
from village to village, visiting friends and 
relations to pay together their respects to 
revered ancestors and to the creator re- 
sponsible for the divine and providential 
phenomenon that had occurred once again 
to enrich the soil of Egypt. [| 
  
CHRISTIANE DESROCHES-NOBLE- 
COURT is inspector general and honorary chief 
curator of the Museums of France. She was Unesco 
consultant to the Documentation Centre for 
Ancient Egypt in Cairo, which she helped to estab- 
lish, and participated from its inception in the 
International Campaign to Save the Monuments 
of Nubia. A founder member of the Franco- 
Egyptian Centre at Karnak, she is currently direct- 
ing restoration work in the Valley of the Queens at 
Luxor. Her many published articles and books on 
Egyptology include Life and Death of a Pharaoh, 
published by Rainbird, London, and the New 
York Graphic Society.   
Ph
ot
o 
© 
E.
 
Th
ie
m,
 
Lo
to
s 
Fi
lm
, 
Ka
uf
be
ur
en
 
I3
 ®

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 80987: Egypt and the Mediterranean world

E SYP t an d BY GABALLA ALY GABALLA 
the Mediterranean world 
ISTORIC Egypt emerged as a unified 
H country, with its own system of 
writing, towards the end of the 
fourth millennium BC. It rapidly became 
the seat of a brilliant civilization in which 
flourished philosophy and literature, 
architecture and art, science and medicine, 
administration and social organization. 
From ancient times, thanks to the country’s 
situation on the Mediterranean coast, the 
Egyptians made increasingly numerous con- 
tacts with Europe. The contribution made 
by Egypt to Western culture enriched civi- 
lization as a whole. 
Around the same time, the Minoan civi- 
lization (named after Minos, the legendary 
king), came into being on the shores of the 
Aegean, centred on the island of Crete. 
Although the Mediterranean was no 
obstacle between Egypt and the Aegean, 
contacts between Egyptian and Aegean trad- 
ers and emissaries were made first of all in the 
Phoenician coastal ports, Byblos in particu- 
lar. Egyptian trading vessels no doubt set sail 
from these ports to Crete, and called at 
Cyprus, Rhodes, Karpathos and Kasos be- 
fore returning directly to Egypt (some 
270 nautical miles from Crete), carried along 
by the north winds that blow in summer. 
The voyage then took three days and 
two nights. 
There is no lack of archaeological evidence 
for relations between the two peoples. Many 
Egyptian cylindrical stone jars have been 
found in Crete and eventually the Cretans 
adopted the Egyptian technique of manufac- 
turing these jars. On the island of Kithira, an 
alabaster vase has been found bearing the 
name of an Egyptian king of the Fifth 
Dynasty (c. 2465-2323 BC). From the 
twenty-second century BC, Egyptian writ- 
ings began to mention Kaftiou, an Egyptian 
adaptation of the Semitic name for Crete, 
Caphtor, which also appears in the Bible. 
At the beginning of the second millen- 
nium BC, there was a thriving trade between 
Middle Kingdom Egyptians and Cretans of 
the period known as Middle Minoan. Many 
Egyptian objects from that era, including 
everyday utensils, scarabs used as seals and a 
diorite statuette, have been found in Crete, 
while Minoan pottery in the Kamares style, 
and silver vases showing an Aegean in- 
fluence, have been discovered in a temple 
30 near Luxor. 
mmmm Around 1500 BC, Egypt cast off the yoke 
  
 
  
P
h
o
t
o
 © 
E.
 T
hi
em
, 
Lo
to
s 
Fi
lm
, 
Ka
uf
be
ur
en

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 80987: Egypt and the Mediterranean world

  
¥ 
- 
: 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ha
ss
ia
/T
el
ec
ol
or
, 
Va
nv
es
 
i 
a 
a
 
2
 
Ee
 
  
a 
T
T
 
* 
L 
S
 
E
-
 
«{ Minoan terracotta figurine with an Egyptian 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ha
ss
ia
/T
el
ec
al
or
, 
Va
nv
es
 
< 
 
hairstyle (14th or 13th century BC) 
A 
y 
S
A
T
E
 
This votive object from the New Kingdom 
representing an Egyptian woman was found in 
acaveat Tzouzoura, Crete. 
of the Hyksos' and emerged from its tradi- 
tional isolationism to become an interna- 
tional power, strengthened by a series of 
military victories. Phoenicia and Syria fell 
under its sway, and the Egyptian fleet con- 
trolled the Phoenician ports, probably ex- 
tending its influence as far as Cyprus. This 
Egyptian presence created a new situation in 
the eastern Mediterranean basin. The 
Aegeans of the Late Minoan period and the 
Mycenaeans of Hellas? had thereafter to deal 
directly with the Egyptians if their merchant 
ships were to have access to the traditional 
markets of Palestine and Syria. In all prob- 
ability, the Cretans and the Mycenaeans 
came to an agreement with the powerful 
Pharaoh Tuthmosis III (c. 1479-1425 BC). 
The tomb of his vizier Rekhmire, at the 
necropolis of Thebes, depicts Cretan emis- 
saries bearing tribute from their island. The 
Egyptian inscription describes the scene: 
“The arrival of the princes from Kaftiou and 
Relief from the tomb of Puiemre, one of the high 
priests of Amun during the reign of Tuthmosis 
III (c. 1479-1425 BC), depicts foreigners 
bringing “tributes” to the Temple of Amun at 
Karnak. Between two Syrians, a Cretan is 
shown with characteristic shoulder-length hair. 
the islands in the midst of the sea, submissive 
and with bowed heads before the might of 
His Majesty Tuthmosts III”, There is every 
reason to believe that these “islands in the 
midst of the sea” were those of the eastern 
Mediterranean and the city of Mycenae in 
the Peloponnese. 
Brown-skinned Aegeans, wearing bright- 
ly coloured loincloths and with thick manes 
of hair hanging to their shoulders or worn in 
one or more plaits bound around their fore- 
heads, became a familiar sight to the 
Egyptians as they threaded through the 
streets of Thebes to bear their gifts, called 
“tribute” by the Egyptians, to Pharaoh: 
large, ornate goblets with handles shaped 
like animals, or elongated vases with small 
handles, decorated with floral motifs or 
horizontal polychrome lines. 
Towards the middle of the fifteenth cen- 
tury BC, the Cretan civilization foundered, 
probably as a result of internal power strug- 
gles. Small wonder, then, that the name of 
Kaftiou should have disappeared from 
Egyptian sources after the end of that cen- 
tury. However the expression “islands in the 
midst of the sea” continues to occur fre- 
quently in these writings, before dis- 
appearing, in its turn, in the twelfth 
century BC, when successive waves of the 
barbarians known to the Egyptians as the 
“sea peoples” were surging into the 
Peloponnese peninsula and wreaking havoc. 
These hordes crossed Anatolia (where they 
annihilated the Hittites) and Greece, and 
advanced on Egypt overland across Syria 
and by sea via the Mediterranean islands. But 
they were repelled by such powerful 
Pharaohs as Ramesses II, Merneptah and 
Ramesses III, who saved Egypt from des- 
truction on a massive scale. 
The Greek presence in Egypt made itself 
felt in the early seventh century BC through 
mercenaries serving in the Egyptian armies 
and merchants who set up trading posts in 
various towns of the Delta. Greek philo- 
sophers, historians and geographers fol- 
lowed them, dazzled by Egyptian civiliza- 
tion with its gigantic monuments, its beliefs 
and its wealth of knowledge.’ 
The Greek astronomer, philosopher and 
mathematician, Thales of Miletus, is said to 
1. Asiatic invaders of northern Egypt who ruled as the 
Fifteenth Dynasty (c. 1640-1532 BC). 
2. Greeks of the classical period called their country 
Hellas and themselves Hellenes.

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 80987: Egypt and the Mediterranean world

32 
have brought back the 365-day solar calen- 
dar from Egypt at the end of the seventh 
century BC. The Athenian statesman Solon 
(c. 640-560 BC) visited Egypt at the time 
when, according to Herodotus, the Six- 
teenth-Dynasty king Amasis II prom- 
ulgated a law under which each Egyptian 
was obliged to make an annual declaration of 
income and return it to the governor of the 
province. Any person guilty of illicit gains 
was condemned to death. Solon had an iden- 
tical law adopted in Athens. Another Greek 
historian, Diodorus of Sicily, recounts that 
Lycurgus (legendary king of Sparta) drew 
inspiration from Egyptian legislation, as did 
Plato. 
Egypt's influence on early Greek art is 
evident, too. The kouros figure of a young 
man, characteristic of archaic statuary, has 
an Egyptian air about it. The tall, slim youth 
stands with his left leg forward, his arms held 
straight by his sides and his hands clenched. 
This type of statue not only imitates the 
attitudes of Egyptian figures, but also abides 
by the traditional rules governing Egyptian 
art, in particular the “rule of proportion” 
that its creators had been applying for over 
2,000 years. The human body was originally 
divided into 18 equal squares, and into 21 
from the Saite’ period (seventh century BC), 
when the unit of measurement of length, the 
cubit, was modified. Diodorus of Sicily re- 
lates that in the sixth century BC Telekles 
and Theodorus, two famous Greek sculp- 
tors, drew on that tradition for a statue of 
Apollo by dividing the body into 
21 Y, squares. 
Over the centuries, the Greeks became 
increasingly involved in the history of 
Egypt. In 332 BC, the country was con- 
quered by Alexander the Great, and a 
Macedonian Dynasty was founded which 
governed the country for some three centur- 
ies. Egypt became part of the Hellenistic 
world encompassing the eastern basin of the 
Mediterranean. Alexandria, the new 
Egyptian capital founded by the Greeks, 
brought fresh prestige to Hellenism through 
its writers, geographers, historians, archi- 
tects and astronomers. 
When the Roman general Marcus 
Antonius, ally of Cleopatra VII, lost the 
battle of Actium in 31 BC, Egypt became a 
Roman province. As the granary of Rome it 
helped to supply the Roman army during its 
major conquests. 
As regards religion, the cult of Isis and 
Osiris (Serapis, in its Ptolemaic form), and of 
their son Horus-Harpocrates, was widely 
adopted in the Gracco-Roman world. The 
legend of Osiris, based on belief in the after- 
life of the soul in a better world, has strong 
popular appeal, since it promises salvation to 
all, a concept lacking in the official worship 
of the Greek and Roman divinities. To the 
Greeks, Isis was the incarnation of destiny, 
since she succeeded in freeing herself from 
the control of the gods and thereby acquired 
absolute power. The Isis cult in Rome com- 
  
3. Named after the Twenty-Sixth Dynasty (664-525 BC) 
EEN capital city, Sais, in the Nile Delta. Editor. 
Ph
ot
o 
Ma
ri
o 
Ca
rr
ie
ri
 
€
 
Me
ni
l 
Fo
un
da
ti
on
, 
Ho
us
to
n 
Ph
ot
o 
Ro
ss
 
©
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
» 
$i 
i 
Black basalt Roman statue of the Egyptian 
goddess Isis, whose cult was widespread in the 
Graeco-Roman world. 
The hand of Seshat, goddess of writing and of 
learning, and the protector of royal chronicles. 
Together with Thoth, patron of scribes and the 
art of writing, she recorded each king’s name 
and the dates of his reign on the leaves of the tree 
of life, asin this relief on the throne of 
Ramesses II (c. 1290-1224 BC) at Luxor. 
        
  
fg  
peted with the Roman religion and emperor- 
worship. Moreover, the Osirian triad fore- 
shadowed the Christian trinity. Before the 
advent of Christianity, Isis-worship in 
Europe became as prevalent as the later cult 
of the Virgin Mary. 
The world also owes the invention of the 
calendar and the alphabet to the ancient 
Egyptians. 
Like other peoples, the Egyptians first 
devised a dating system which divided time 
into lunar years of 354 days. But before long 
they realized that it was not sufficiently 
accurate and was unsuited to the organiza- 
tion of their complex bureaucratic system, so 
it fell into disuse except for the celebration of 
certain religious events. Around 3000 BC 
they invented a solar calendar of 365 days 
divided into twelve months of thirty days 
each, to which at the end of the year were 
added five extra, or “epagomenal”, days. The 
Egyptians knew that their year was six hours 
shorter than the solar year (365 Y, days), but 
for a long time they did nothing to remedy 
this discrepancy. Only under Greek rule did 
they begin to add one day to the official year 
every four years, to bring it into alignment 
with the solar year. That calendar was 
adopted by Julius Caesar and imposed in 
Rome from 45 BC. The Julian calendar was 
used in Europe and the West until, at the end 
of the sixteenth century, it was refined by 
Pope Gregory XIII and, as the Gregorian 
calendar, became known throughout the 
world. 
Towards the end of the fourth millennium 
BC, the Egyptians invented a system of writ- 
ing which used hieroglyphic signs, i.e. pic- 
tures, rather than letters. These pictures were 
chosen, not for their meaning, but for the 
sounds that they represented. 
It 1s true that the modern European 
alphabet is derived from the Graeco-Roman 
alphabet, which is directly based on the 
Phoenician alphabet. But what system of 
writing influenced the Phoenicians? The 
oldest Semitic texts known to us date back to 
the fifteenth century BC. They were disco- 
vered in the Sinai desert, and contain Semitic 
terms transcribed with signs that resemble 
hieroglyphs. Itis very likely that this Semitic 
writing was based on hieroglyphs, using a 
system of pictured sounds, and that it de- 
veloped over several centuries into the 
Phoenician alphabet, in which each sound is 
represented by a single letter. It seems prob- 
able, therefore, that the alphabet, one of the 
greatest achievements of the human mind, is 
of Egyptian origin. [| 
  
GABALLA ALY GABALLA, of Egypt, is Profes- 
sor of Egyptology at Cairo University. He was 
formerly wisiting Professor at the Mohamed V 
University (Morocco), at the University of Central 
Florida (USA), and at the University of Kuwait. 
He is the author of two books published in English, 
Narrative in Egyptian Art, (1976) and. The 
Memphite Tomb—Chapel of Mose (1977), and of 
many articles. P
h
o
t
o
 © 
De
re
k 
Ri
gg
s-
Ir
on
 
Ma
id
en
 
(H
ol
di
ng
s)
, 
Lt
d.
, 
N
e
w
 
Y
o
r
k

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 80988: Pharaonic art and the modern imagination

Pharaonic art 
and the modern 
imagination 
  
BY RICHARD A. FAZZINI 
  
CTNENTYTTYYY 
ArraT aay 
h prem —— 
; 
MAREE ™~ 
a NT 
—, 
_- “dud 
   
  
2
4
 
=, | _.   
  
  
     
Sau 
a 
T sense of identity underlying 
Egypt’s nationalist movement was 
enhanced by the archaeological re- 
discovery of ancient Egypt, a fact reflected in 
such works as Cairo’s partially pharaoniciz- 
ing sculpture The Awakening of Egypt by 
Mahmoud Mokhtar (1891-1934), and in the 
use of ancient Egyptian history in the early 
allegorical novels of the modern writer Najib 
Mahfaz. 
These uses of elements of ancient 
Egyptian history and art might have seemed 
familiar to the Pharaohs of the early New 
Kingdom (sixteenth century BC) who ex- 
pelled the Hyksos—the so-called “shepherd 
kings from the East”—and rcunited the 
country. Viewing themselves as heirs to the 
kings of the carly Middle Kingdom (late 
twenty-first to carly twentieth century BC) 
when Egypt was reunited after the collapse 
of the Old Kingdom, they established close 
religious and archaizing arustic links be- 
tween themselves and their early Middle 
Kingdom “ancestors”. In fact, ancient 
Egyptian civilization, while sufficiently evo- 
lutionary to permit incredible artistic 
change, was also sufficiently resistant to 
change to ensure amazing artistic continuity, 
and encompassed concepts that could allow 
the past to be a viable model for the present, 
This also helps to explain how Egyptian 
art of the fourth century BC and later, which 
included the native Twenty-ninth and Thir- 
ticth Dynasties (399-343 BC), was a blend of 
the traditional and the innovative. Among 
the features of that era’s art was a greater 
fullness in figural style, a greater penchant 
for animal figures, a plethora of figures of 
gods and of religious symbols, and more 
complex forms and decoration in general. It 
was this later Egyptian art especially that 
spread throughout the Hellenistic and 
Roman world, via the diffusion of Egyptian 
cults. In Italy and Rome in particular, ob- 
jects imported fromm Egypt were sup- 
plemented by new Egyptianizing works 
made to serve cults that also partook of 
non-Egyptian elements, to reflect imperial 
glory, or simply to decorate houses and 
gardens. 
With the fall of Rome and the rise of 
Christianity and Islam, ancient Egypt en- 
tered the realm of the unknown, mysterious 
and fabulous. It remained there even when 
Egypt's rediscovery was begun in the Re- 
naissance, because the rediscoverers were 
concerned, for example, with ideas of links 
between Christian doctrine and the wisdom 
or magic of ancient Egypt. Further, the Re- 
naissance’s main sources for the study of 
ancient Egypt were the Egypuan and 
Egyptianizing objects from Italy and Rome. 
The former were hardly representative of 
ancient Egypt in general, and the later 
varied greatly in the degree of adherence to 
Egyptian norms. 
«4 Poster advertising a record album by a modern 
pop music group is a fantastic and theatrical mix 
of popular images of ancient Egypt. 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 80988: Pharaonic art and the modern imagination

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Fa
zz
in
i,
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
 
One especially important discovery was 
the Roman Period Mensa Isiaca, so called 
because it resembles the top of a table (mensa 
in Italian) and because its iconography re- 
lates it to the cult of Isis. Made of bronze and 
silver, it is decorated with images of 
Egyptian deities and symbols, as well as 
hieroglyphs which are imperfectly under- 
stood. Like sculptures similar to the second 
century AD Egypto-classical figure of the 
Emperor Hadrian’s favourite, Antinous, 
found at Tivoli in 1740, the Mensa Isiaca 
became a source for Egyptianizing elements 
in the art of the Renaissance. In part because 
they went on being presented as fine sources 
for such endeavours, they and other 
Egyptian and Roman Egyptianizing works 
continued to play a role in Egyptian studies 
and Egyptianizing art in the Western world, 
despite increased interest in, and firsthand 
knowledge of, Egypt in the seventeenth and, 
especially, in the eighteenth centuries. 
Nevertheless, in the eighteenth century 
several non-scientific developments also led 
to greater interest in ancient Egypt, and also 
increased its influence on Western arts. 
These developments included the growing 
importance of Freemasonry, the concept of 
the Sublime (the ability of art and 
architecture to induce emotional reactions 
such as amazement and dread) and emerging 
Neoclassicism’s concern for grandeur, sim- 
plicity and massiveness. 
Such concepts informed the reconstruc- 
tions of Egyptian temples by the French 
painter and designer Louis Frangois Cassas, 
published in 1799, and the schemes for vast 
Egyptianizing monuments by architects 
such as Etienne-Louis Boullée (1728-1799), 
also of France. Equally significant, but in a 
very different vein, are the drawings of extra- 
vagantly Egyptianizing rooms and fireplaces 
Above, the Grande Pyramide, an engraving by the French artist Louis-Frangois 
  
Cassas (1756-1827). The entire composition is a Romantic fantasy combining an 
Old Kingdom pyramid with a temple of much later date, and an approach lined 
with very un-Egyptian sphinxes. In the background is an equally un-Egyptian 
mountain landscape. Above right, a glass and steel pyramid has been erected above 
the main entrance and reception area of the Louvre Museum, Paris, as part of a 
modernization programme. The structure, designed by the American architect 
by the Italian printmaker and architect 
Giambattista Piranesi, published in 1769. 
Based to no small extent on late Egyptian 
and Roman Egyptianizing art, they consti- 
tute a major attempt to create an 
Egyptianizing style instead of using indi- 
vidual motifs. Indeed, Piranesi was among 
the first to appreciate Egyptian art for its 
decorative beauty as opposed to its majesty 
or mystery. Europe was thus already in- 
volved with ancient Egypt when the 
Napoleonic Expedition to Egypt of 1798- 
1801 ushered in the first and largest of what 
would be many Egyptian revivals, between 
which interest in Egypt has never really 
vanished. 
The Napoleonic Expedition also initiated 
Egypt's archaeological rediscovery, which 
led to scholars’ growing ability to recon- 
struct Egypt's history and civilization more 
accurately, and to understand and appreciate 
the art of all its ages. It also made possible 
more accurate Egypuianizing in literature, 
art, architecture, stage sets and the like. 
Nevertheless, this did not happen all at once, 
as evidenced, for example, by the figure in 
the 1808 Egyptianizing fountain in the rue 
de Sévres, Paris, that is based on the statue of 
Antinous discovered in 1740. If newly dis- 
covered, older Egyptian models appeared 
alongside long-familiar later ones, they did 
[.M. Pei, was completed in 1988. 
 
Ku
ns
t,
 
Mu
ni
ch
 
Ph
ot
o 
(©)
 S
ta
at
li
ch
e 
Sa
mm
lu
ng
 
Ag
yp
us
ch
er

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 80988: Pharaonic art and the modern imagination

Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
Co
ur
ie
r 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
Co
ur
ie
r 
  
Below left, a 2nd-century-AD Roman statue of 
Antinous, favourite of the Emperor Hadrian. 
Antinous, deified by the Emperor after 
drowning in the Nile, is depicted as the Egyptian 
god Osiris. This type of statue served as the 
model for the fountain constructed in 1808 in 
the rue de Sevres, Paris (below), 
 
RE TE Ey ET 4 : 
re Zen AY is Ep 
not supplant them: it is the business of scho- 
lars, not artists, to attempt to recreate ancient 
civilizations totally and accurately. 
In the twentieth century a number of fac- 
tors, not all new, fostered a greater know- 
ledge and appreciation of ancient Egypt and 
its art: archaeological discoveries (especially 
Tutankhamun’s tomb); exhibitions of 
Egyptian art, some of which, like the 
Tutankhamun finds, have inspired Egyptian 
revivals in various areas; increased tourism 
to Egypt; more mass education; and an en- 
hanced Western respect for non-Western 
art. As in the nineteenth century, Egyptian 
art continues to influence serious architects, 
artists and designers in manners other than 
slavish imitation. 
However, other aspects of ancient Egypt’s 
culture, real or imagined, continue to fascin- 
ate and influence the West. In fact, even 
before the great age of commercial motion 
pictures, plays, operas (especially Aida), his- 
torical novels, and fantasy and horror novels 
(Egyptian themes startin the nineteenth cen- 
tury, well before the “curse” of Tutankha- 
mun’s tomb was world news) gave some 
version of the culture to the public. Adver- 
tising and packaging for a variety of pro- 
ducts, particularly cigarettes and beauty pro- 
ducts, also have had their influence. 
Both symptom and cause of interest in 
ancient Egypt, Hollywood and its allies 
have, from the beginning, used spectacles 
based on Egyptian themes to attract a wider 
audience, once again with varying degrees of 
historical or artistic accuracy. Other impor- 
tant influences on popular conceptions or 
misconceptions of ancient Egypt and its art 
are television, American comic books (not 
always aimed solely at children), and their 
more sophisticated French counterparts. A 
number of the latter dealing with Egypt 
  
combine impressively accurate drawings of 
modern Egypt and its ancient monuments 
with equally impressive Egyptianizing 
fantasies. 
The mass media, heirs not only to carly 
Hollywood but also to the works of the 
cighteenth and nineteenth centuries, per- 
petuate old and new myths about ancient 
Egypt such as its descent from Atlantis, the 
influence of beings from outer space, and 
“pyramid power”. 
An impressive recent example of 
Egyptianizing in popular media are the post- 
er and cover for the record album Power- 
slave by the group Iron Maiden. Its design 
would have been impossible without the 
temples of Abu Simbel, widely publicized by 
Unesco’s campaign to save the monuments 
of Nubia. The image, however, is not really 
Abu Simbel, but rather a theatrical 
Egyptianizing fantasy evocative of many 
popular associations of Egypt in the modern 
mind. 
One thing seems certain: ancient Egypt 
and its art may come to be better understood 
and appreciated, but the land of the 
Pharaohs, of which the ancient Greck histo- 
rian Herodotus said “more monuments 
which beggar description are to be found 
here than anywhere else in the world”, will 
continue to be a source of many wonders and 
fantasies only somewhat reflective of ancient 
reality. [| 
 
RICHARD A. FAZZINI, of the United States of 
America, is curator of Egyptian, Classical, and 
Ancient Middle Eastern Art at The Brooklyn 
Museum. An Egyptologist specializing in ancient 
Egyptian art, be is also an archaeologist and directs 
The Brooklyn Museum's excavations in the temple 
precinct of the goddess Mut at South Karnak. 
35

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

36 
Ph
ot
os
 
Un
es
co
/ 
Al
ex
is
 
Vo
re
nt
zo
ff
 


### 80990: UNESCO and the ancient Egyptian heritage: from the Nubian campaign to the Library of Alexandria

 
From the Nubian campaign to the Library of Alexandria 
Unesco and the ancient 
Egyptian heritage 
HE Campaign to Save the Monuments 
of Nubia was the most spectacular 
demonstration of Unesco’s concern 
for the legacy of ancient Egypt, and its suc- 
cess was the most striking example of inter- 
national understanding and world solidarity 
in the ficld of cultural co-operation and the 
preservation of the heritage. 
When the Egyptian Government began to 
study a project for building a High Dam to 
the south of the city of Aswan in order to 
develop and modernize the country’s cco- 
nomy and decided to execute the project 
in 1954, it became apparent that Egypt and 
the Sudan had a major cultural problem on 
their hands: dozens of temples and 
archacological sites and areas in Nubia were 
in danger of being submerged by the waters 
of the vast artificial lake that would be 
The project to dismantle the two rock temples of Pp 
Abu Simbel and to re-erect them at a new site 
with the same orientation as before, but 64 m 
higher and 180 m further inland, was one of the 
most spectacular achievements of the 
Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia 
launched by Unesco in 1960. Artist’s conception 
of the salvage operation (right) shows the Great 
Temple with its seated colossi and the Small 
Temple beyond it, both protected from the 
waters of the Nile by a cofferdam (foreground). 
The rock has been excavated above and behind 
the Great Temple to enable dismantling of the 
temple rooms. Far right, the temples re-erected 
at the new site, out of reach of the water, Two 
great concrete domes with overlying rock 
recreate the original appearance of the 
mmm surrounding area, Work was completed in 1968. Du
st
ra
ti
on
 
© 
Ho
ch
ri
cf
, 
Es
se
n,
 
Fe
d.
 
Re
p.
 
of
 
Ge
rm
an
y 
BY GAMAL MOKHTAR 
formed behind the High Dam. The lake, 
which would be 25 kilometres wide in some 
areas, would extend over 300 kilometres up 
the Nile Valley in Egyptian Nubia and some 
200 kilometres into Sudanese Nubia. 
Two examples indicate the scale of the 
problem. The first concerns the two temples 
of Abu Simbel, 270 kilometres south of 
Aswan. The base of the larger temple stood 
124 metres and that of the smaller temple 
122 metres above sea level. The temples lay 
upstream of the old Aswan Dam, which had 
been constructed around the turn of the 
century, but as the water level of the reser- 
voir created by this dam never exceeded 
121 metres, no part of the two temples was 
ever submerged by its waters. After the con- 
struction of the High Dam, however, the 
water level would rise to 182 metres, exceed- 
 
ing the highest level reached by the waters of 
the old Aswan Dam by 62 metres and sub- 
merging the two temples completely. 
The second example is that of the temples 
which stood on the island of Philae, 
104 metres above sea level to the south of the 
old Aswan Dam and to the north of the High 
Dam. The Philae temples were submerged 
almost toully by the waters of the old 
Aswan Dam most days of the year. 
However, after the construction of the High 
Dam (whose waters would not directly 
affect these temples, as they were located 
downstream) the water level of the old reser- 
voir would drop and fluctuate daily 
between 102 and 110 metres in the process 
of generating electricity. In other words, the 
water would only partially inundate the tem- 
ple walls, but the fluctuating water level 
 

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### 80990: UNESCO and the ancient Egyptian heritage: from the Nubian campaign to the Library of Alexandria

would pose a more serious threat to the 
stonework of the temples than their total and 
permanent submersion. 
The High Dam project thus confronted 
the two governments with a major responsi- 
bility to the land of Nubia, which had had 
strong links with Egypt throughout its his- 
tory, especially during the Pharaonic period. 
It had therefore been the scene of major 
architectural activity, particularly the con- 
struction of temples, fortifications and cas- 
tles for the protection of trade routes and the 
maintenance of peace. Cities, cemeteries and 
tombs were built in various periods, and 
innumerable quantities of rock stelae, carv- 
ings and inscriptions had survived, not to 
mention all the records of the past that sull 
lay buried. 
The Egyptian Government therefore 
approached Unesco on 6 April 1959, re- 
questing its active material, technical and 
scientific assistance in the design and execu- 
tion of projects to save the monuments of 
Nubia. Such a step was warranted by the 
scale and costliness of the task and also by 
the fact that the monuments were part of the 
universal human heritage and hence a matter 
of concern to the world as a whole. 
Moreover, it was felt that Unesco had a 
major responsibility for preserving and safe- 
guarding the world heritage and was the only 
international organization capable of raising 
the financial support and rallying the special- 
ists and technicians that were needed from all 
over the world. A few months later, the 
Sudanese Government submitted a similar 
request to Unesco. 
Unesco responded to these requests by 
launching two major appeals. A first general 
appeal was made by the Director-General of 
Unesco on 8 March 1960 and a second, con- 
cerned more specifically with the need to 
rescue the temples of Philae, was made 
on 6 November 1968. In both appeals, the 
Director-General called on governments, 
public and private bodies and all potential 
sources of aid to provide financial, technical 
and scientific assistance for the purpose of 
saving the monuments of Nubia. 
The Campaign to Save the Monuments of 
Nubia began with the following archaeolo- 
gical activities: 
1. Comprehensive recording of the monu- 
ments of Nubia: this was meuculously car- 
ried out by the Documentation and Study 
Centre for the History of the Art and Civi- 
lization of Ancient Egypt in Cairo, which 
had been established in 1955 as a result of a 
contract between Unesco and the Govern- 
ment of Egypt providing for co-operation in 
documenting Egyptian monuments with 
their inscriptions and carvings. The Centre 
was set up and financed by Egypt, with 
Unesco providing the experts and 
equipment. 
2. An archacological survey of Nubia to 
make an inventory of all the archaeological 
arcas and sites that would be inundated and 
to identify areas that had not yet been ex- 
cavated. Over seventy archaeological mis- 
sions from twenty-five countries then car- 
ried out excavations in those areas of 
Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia that were to 
be submerged. 
  Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
/D
om
in
iq
ue
 
Ro
ge
r 
The rescue of the temples which stood on the 
island of Philae was the final stage in the 
Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia 
threatened by the waters of the Aswan High 
Dam. The temples, dedicated to the cult of Isis, 
are shownsstill almost intact in the 19th-century 
engraving above left. They became endangered 
in the early years of this century, when the first 
Aswan Dam was built downstream from them. 
After 1934, when the dam was raised, the island 
and its temples were submerged for much of the 
year. Photo taken in 1972 (above centre) shows 
the Temple of Isis and the Graeco-Roman 
“Kiosk” of Trajan partly under water. In 1960, 
the construction of the High Dam threatened to 
submerge the temples permanently, and a 
decision was made to dismantle them and move 
them to the neighbouring island of Algikia, 
which was landscaped to resemble Philae. Work 
began in 1972 and was completed in 1979. 
Above, the monuments reconstituted on their 
new site. 
3. Rescue work on over twenty temples in 
Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia, including: 
The two temples of Abu Simbel, which 
had been hewn in the rock. Many proposals 
were submitted and extensive field studies 
were carried out. In the end it was decided to 
dismantle the two temples and rebuild them 
inside soaring artificial domes erected at the 
same site, but on ground 60 metres above the 
original location. The temples were inaugu- 
rated at their new location in 1967. 
The temples of Philae. Several proposals 
were submitted for this rescue operation and 
the project finally selected was carried out by 
Egyptian and Italian companies. It involved 
dismantling the temples and reassembling 
them on the neighbouring island of Agilkia 
after preparing and levelling the terrain. The 
completion of the project and the successful 
conclusion of the campaign to save the 
Nubian heritage were Packed with great 
celebrations in 1980. 
In addition, over twenty temples, many 
chapels, rock stelae and carvings also had to 
be dismantled, transported and reassembled 
on higher ground, safely above the waters of 
the new reservoir, Lake Nasser. This rescue 
work was carried out by the Egyptian De- 
partment of Antiquities, with the exception 
of the Temple of Kalabsha, which was res- 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ha
ns
 
Pa
tz
el
t,
 
Ph
ot
o 
Sc
ha
ja
, 
Mu
ni
ch
 
cued by the Federal Republic of Germany, a

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### IGNORE

       
-~ - » 
ll * -s 
and a section of the Temple of Amada, which 
was rescued by France. The latter was moved 
on rails to safe ground near its original site. 
The antiquities of a region that had impor- 
tant ties with Pharaonic Egypt were thus 
saved for posterity. For thousands of years 
they had stood as a magnificent symbol of 
human achievement in an isolated, barren 
and inhospitable land, and they now provide 
a unique example of what modern science 
and technology can do to save the heritage of 
our forebears. 
Saving the monuments of Nubia was a 
major landmark in the history of Unesco, for 
it involved the Organization in the most 
ambitious cultural and scientific operation 
ever attempted in human history. The un- 
qualified success of the campaign was the 
~ result of intensive co-operation among all 
the parties concerned over a period of almost 
twenty years. Victory was achieved through 
the firm determination of the Governments 
of Egypt and Sudan to save their cultural 
heritage, the generosity of Unesco’s Member 
States, and the enthusiasm and skill of all 
those who took part in the rescue operation 
itself, particularly the archaeologists, 
architects, engineers and experts who joined 
mmm forces under Unesco’s aegis. 
I Hele Sa Sriiida EW A rr 
be vl nr DRE “i rill = hk Ap ol LRA a 
pi nt il _ . ; Lo 
ple Sal 4 
’ y . . 
AFRIN . Phy v . : - Wl 
Lyre "— . RA “a a : : 
Unesco has contributed to the presenta- 
tion and enhancement of Egypt's ancient 
heritage in other fields, including: 
» the improvement of museum services, par- 
ticularly the Egyptian Museum of Pharaonic 
Antiquities in Cairo; 
* the conservation and restoration of ancient 
Egyptian and Islamic archaeological sites 
such as the Pyramids of Giza, Luxor and 
several Islamic sites in Cairo; 
e the inclusion of a number of Egyptian 
antiquities on the World Heritage List; 
* assistance 1n the publication of the Coptic 
manuscripts of Nag’ Hammadi, known as 
“The Gnostic Codices™; 
o the launching in 1982 of an International 
Campaign for the Establishment of the 
Nubia Museum in Aswan and the National 
Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Cairo 
and provision of all the financial, technical 
and Informational assistance needed to 
achieve the goals of the campaign. The pur- 
pose of the National Museum is to present 
the civilizations of Egypt from ore-history 
to the present day. The exhibits of the Nubia 
Museum will cover the geological, geog- 
raphic, ecological, ethnographic and artistic 
features of Nubia and every aspect of its 
history and archaeology. The Museum will 
he Great 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
/A
le
xi
s 
Vo
ro
nt
zo
ff
 
  
Sphinx 
threatened 
«4 With its human head and the body of a 
recumbent lion carved out of the rock 
beneath the Great Pyramids at Giza, 
the colossal great Sphinx is a portrait 
statue of the Pharaoh Khephren 
(c. 2520-2494 BC), whose tomb it 
guards. Today the Sphinx is 
threatened both by erosion due to the 
climate and by the rising level of 
extremely saline ground-water. In 
February 1988, a block of stone 
weighing almost 300 kg fell from the 


### 80990: UNESCO and the ancient Egyptian heritage: from the Nubian campaign to the Library of Alexandria

right shoulder of the monument and 
broke. The Egyptian Minister of 
Culture has appealed to Unesco for 
help in saving the Sphinx, which with 
the rest of the Giza site is inscribed on 
the World Heritage List of cultural 
properties of outstanding universal 
value. The Director-General of 
Unesco, who has recently visited the 
site and noted the extent of the 
damage, has expressed Unesco’s 
readiness to co-operate in the 
restoration of the Sphinx. 
also contain a research centre to study all 
matters related to Nubia and its ties with 
Africa, for it was a major passage-way for the 
transmission of cultural influences between 
the Mediterranean and Africa. 
* Support for the project to revive the 
ancient Library of Alexandria, a store of 
learning that served the scientists and philo- 
sophers of the Greek world at a time when 
Alexandria was a world centre of culture and 
science. Unesco has called for contributions 
to cover the building costs and for donations 
of basic equipment, and has offered help in 
planning this long-term project, which will 
ecompleted atthe end of the century.! HW 
1. The Library of Alexandria project will be the subject of 
an article in the November 1988 issue of the Unesco 
Courier. Editor. 
GAMAL MOKHTAR, Egyptian archaeologist, is 
a former Director of his country’s Service of Anti- 
quities. The author of many publications on the 
history of ancient Egypt, he was the editor of 
Ancient Civilizations of Africa (1981), Volume 11 
of Unesco’s General History of Africa. The Editors 
of the Unesco Courier would like to thank 
Dr. Mokhtar for his belp in the preparation of this 
issue.

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
The Courier II 
A window open on the world 
Main sites | . ) Published monthly in 35 languages by 
of ancient Egyptian monu ments Unesco, The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization 
A selection in braille is published quarterly 
in English, French, Spanish and Korean  
MEDITERRANEAN SEA 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
   
      
    
  
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda el Khazen 
Spanish edition: Francisco Fernandez-Santos, 
  
d N= 
SL 
"Rosetta (Rashi 
Lat     
pe ALEXANDRIA 
 
   
    
    
    
    
 
 
     
   
   
   
    
   
     
~ Miguel Labarca Ju ; 
Bubastls (Zsqaziq) firabie dition: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
LOWER EGYPT @ raille edition: 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Georges Servat 
Research: Violette Ringelstein 
Liaison with on-Hondunaerers editions: 
Solange Belin 
Sales and subscriptions: Henry Knobil 
Special projects: Peggy Julien 
Non-Headquarters editions 
Russian: Georgi Zelenin (Moscow) 
SINAI German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ram Babu Sharma (Delhi) 
Medinet el-Faiyum 
Herakleopolis 
El-Hiba 
Banarya Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
ass Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
yr, Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
w 2 Lo Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Vw 5 Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
wr ee, To KH] Turkish: Mefra Ji ast (Istanbul) 
wr Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
w¥ § Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Abdul Manaf Saad (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Lina Svenzén (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
El-Amarna 
UPPER EGYPT 
Akhmim (Panopolis) 
Thinis (Girga) @ 
   Dendara 
Kharga Abydos @ Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Dakhia Oasis ; Vietnamese: Dao Tung (Hanoi) 
Qasis > Nagada : Pashto: Nasir Seham (Kabul) 
ad ¥, Hausa: Habib Alhassan (Sokoto) 
K wi rT 
RA THEBES (Luxor als NA oe x0 (Luxor) Subscription rates 
Ee 1 year: 90 French francs. 
a Binder for a year’s issues: 62 FF 
aE - 
he Hierakonopolls (Nekhen) 4 , i 
Hy Edfu Individual articles 4nd plioeographs not copyrighted 
Mw may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
Ea “Reprinted from the Unesco Courier”, plus date of IEP 4 P : 
Fad issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor. 
w Signed articles reprinted must bear author’s name. 
Non-copyright photos will be supplied on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions 
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the 
opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of the 
Unesco Courter. Photo captions and headlines are 
written by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries 
on maps published in the magazine do notimply 
official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the 
United Nations. The Unesco Courier is produced in 
microform (microfilm and/or microfiche}by: (1) 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) 
University Microfilms (Xerox), Ann Arbor, 
Wad! el-Sebua Michigan 48100, U.S.A. ; (3) N.C.R. Microcard 
Derr Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, 
Qssr Iorim New York, U.S.A.; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old 
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
ELEPHANTINE gl® 
First Cataract == 
Kalabsha ® 
All correspondence should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-chief in Paris 
Imprimé en France (Printed in France) 
Dépor légal : C1 - Septembre 1988 
Photogravure-impression : Maury-Imprimeur S.A. 
Z.1. route d'Etampes, 45330 Malesherbes.     ISSN 0041-5278 
N°®9-1988 - OP1 - 88-1 - 460 A 

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/080991engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

 