# [074869](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf) 4

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
    THEY CALL US ©. 
iY ~. "HANDICAPPED"!    

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

    on TT VITR F 
  
The =. ® y LE a N\ 
ME ( i N 
HL_Oouricr THEY CALL US Wed) 
MARCH 1974 ‘HANDICAPPED" ! WORLD 
27TH YEAR 4 | POPULATION 
NA Ne RR SE 
PUBLISHED IN 15 LANGUAGES 
 4| OLYMPIC GAMES FOR THE PARALYZED 
Triumph of the handicapped thanks to one man’s vision 
  
 
English Arabic Hebrew 
French Japanese Persian ~~ 10 HOW | PERCEIVE THE WORLD AROUND ME 
Spanish [talian Dutch J The story of a woman writer, oa 
Russian Hindi Portuguese blind and deaf from the age of five 
German Tamil Turkish BY Olga Skorokhodova 
15| NEW VISTAS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION 
Published monthly by UNESCO And the right of the handicapped to a happy life 
The United Nations By John McKenna 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization | 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
19| ALL HANDS ON DECK 
New sign language for the deaf on playing cards 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Annual subscription rate 24 French francs 20| TOWARDS AN INTERNATIONAL LANGUAGE 
* OF GESTURES 
By Cesare Magarotto 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
ony For list of Giotbutors See intide back cover ues 2 22| THE MAN WHO REFUSED TO DIE 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from By Thomas Boswell 
the UNESCO COURIER," plus date of issue, and three 
  
  
  
voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 23 ABOLI SHING THE GH ETTOS 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
ome soorimanies toa, Ma uscripts cannot | FOR DISABLED CITIZENS 
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express the By Norman Acton 
Bon options. of UNESCO or those of ra adios of 
UNESCO COURIER. 25| HOW ABOUT US, MR. ARCHITECT ? 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- i Photo report 
film and/or microfiche) by : (1) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.: (2) N.C.R. ry 
Secon dort: USK ded en ®t | 27| THE THEATRE OF THE SILENT 
Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. Shakespeare, Schiller, Gogol, Aeschylus... R AEA d . | 
Roaders: Guide to Periodical Literature. published by : performed by deaf-mute actors 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- Fa 
tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 28 TH EY CALLED M E ‘APE MAN? 
* i By Henry Viscardi 
I. 
Editorial Office : © 31| UNESCO AND SPECIAL EDUCATION 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris - France FOR THE HANDICAPPED 
Fito I Chief | By Nils-Ivar Sundberg 
} 
Assistant Editor-in-Chief ~~ 34| FURTHER READING 
René Caloz | kb ABOUT THE HANDICAPPED 
Assistant to the Editor-in-Chief 
Olga Rédel 2| TREASURES OF WORLD ART   Managing Editors Flemish grace (Belgium) 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) | 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Fernandez-Santos (Paris) h 
Russian Edition : Georgi Stetsenko (Paris) / 2, 
German Edition : Werner Merkli (Berne) & 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) ff, f AA Arad” TH g 
Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) ¥ { ge 3 
italian ~~ Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) : F wr tas 
Hindi Edition : Ramesh Bakshi (Delhi) RAIS 
Tamil Edition : N.D. Sundaravadivelu (Madras) 8 ay 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Peli (Jerusalem) TA 
Persian Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) : 
Dutch Edition : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition : Mefra Telci (Istanbul) 
  
R Cover 
This one-legged skier, here competing 
in an exacting slalom contest in France, 
demonstrates what persons described 
as “handicapped” can do not only in 
sport but in all walks of life when 
encouraged and given half an oppor- 
tunity. “It is not what you have lost 
. but what you have left that counts”, 
says Sir Ludwig Guttmann, founder of 
8 the international Olympics of the Para- 
E lyzed (see article page 4). 
Assistant Editors 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Illustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard 
Research : Christiane Boucher 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
  
All correspondence should be addressed to 
the Editor-in-Chief in Paris Ne
 
3 
- 
19
74
 
MC
 
7
4
-
3
-
2
9
7

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 50227: Olympic games for the paralyzed; triumph of the handicapped thanks to one man's vision and determination

Twenty - five 
years ago a 
doctor dreamed 
a dream. And, 
in this dream, he 
saw thousands 
of severely para- 
lyzed people 
united in an 
Olympics of the Paralyzed, the like of 
which could hardly be believed in a 
world which at the time wrote off these 
unhappy victims of injury and disease 
as incurable cripples and outcasts. 
Today this is no longer a dream 
but a reality, and those same paralyzed 
men, women and children have ins- 
  
pired other disabled—amputees, blind, . 
cerebral palsy cases—to become 
sportsmen and sportswomen in their 
own right. 
Photos © Comet, Zurich, Switzerland 
  
  
The doctor whose ideas launched 
this world-wide movement of sports 
for the disabled is Sir Ludwig Gutt- - 
mann. During the Second World War, 
he first introduced sport at the Spinal 
Injuries Centre, Stoke Mandeville Hos- 
pital, in England, as part of the medical 
treatment of men and women with 
injuries of the spinal cord who were 
paralyzed from the waist or chest 
downwards. His reasons were two- 
fold: first to train the body, and second, 
to prevent the boredom of hospital life. 
Sport is of much greater significance 
for the severely disabled than for the 
able-bodied person. Serious physical 
handicap interferes to a greater or 
lesser degree with bodily function and 
co-ordination and leads to abnormal 
patterns of movement. These often 
induce psychological tensions that 
 
make social contact with the outside 
world difficult or even impossible. 
If the paralyzed person is continually 
stared at, he may develop an inferior- 
ity complex characterized by anxiety 
with loss of self-confidence and per- 
sonal dignity; the result is self-pity, 
self-centred isolation, and anti-social 
attitudes. Taking an active part in 
sporting activities restores his psycho- 
logical equilibrium and enables him to 
face up to life in spite of his physical 
disability. 
The final, and possibly the noblest, 
aim of sport for the disabled person 
is to help him regain his contact with 
the world around him. Sport develops 
mental attitudes that are essential for 
successful social re-integration and, 
in particular, for useful employment. 
These were the reasons which led to

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

  Ph
ot
os
 
© 
| 
S
.
M
.
G
.
 
C
o
m
m
i
t
t
e
e
,
 
Fr
an
kf
ur
t,
 
Fe
d.
 
Re
p 
of
 
G
e
r
m
a
n
y
 


### 50227: Olympic games for the paralyzed; triumph of the handicapped thanks to one man's vision and determination

OLYMPIC 
GAMES 
FOR THE 
PARALYZED 
thanks to one man’s 
vision and determination 
Left, woman javelin thrower in the 
finals of the Olympics of the Paralyzed, 
in Heidelberg (Fed. Rep. of Germany. 
1972): far left, putting the shot at the 
first Swiss National Contest for the 
Handicapped. at Kriens (1973). Oppo- 
site, emblem of the Olympics of the 
Handicapped. whose entwined wheels 
of a wheel-chair have been incorrectly 
interpreted by some to be an attempt 
to copy the five-ring symbol of the 
World Olympics. 
the founding of the Stoke Mandeville 
Games by Sir Ludwig in July 1948, 
when a small party of 16 paralyzed 
ex-servicemen and ex-servicewomen 
took part in archery competitions. In 
the ensuing years the Games grew 
and the number of events were in- 
creased to include, as well as archery, 
bowls, basketball, field events, fencing, 
track events, snooker, swimming, table 
tennis and weight lifting. 
Today these Games are an Interna- 
tional Sports Festival (the Olympics of 
the Paralyzed) which are held annually 
for three successive years at Stoke 
Mandeville Sports Stadium and every 
fourth year in close connexion with 
the Olympic Games. 
It was this outstanding sportsman- 
ship that prompted the International 
Olympic Committee, during the Olym- 
pic Games in Melbourne in 1956, to 
award the Fearnley Cup to the organ- 
ization of the Stoke Mandeville Games. 
This is an Olympic Award which any 
sports organization can win for out- 
standing achievements in the ideals 
of the Olympic movement. 
In 1960 the Games were held in 
Rome, in 1964 in Tokyo, in 1968 in 
Israel (as Mexico was not able to 
accommodate them as well as the 
Olympics) and in 1972 in Heidelberg. 
In Heidelberg, as in Munich, these 
Games were opened by the President 
of the Federal Republic of Germany, 
Dr. Gustav Heinemann, who, at the 
same time, bestowed on Sir Ludwig 
Guttmann, the founder of the Games, 
the Golden Star of the Grand Cross 
of the Order of Merit of the Federal 
Republic. 
  
Sir Ludwig Guttmann, 
founder of the Olympics of 
the Paralyzed. 
Who would have thought when the 
Stoke Mandeville Games started in 
1948 that one day paraplegics and 
even tetraplegics from all parts of the 
world would fly as sportsmen and 
sportswomen in their own right, just 
as do the able-bodied, ten thousand 
miles and more to represent their 
countries in international sports fes- 
tivals? 
The whole concept of the Games is 
embodied in a message written by Sir 
Ludwig in 1956: “The aim of the Stoke 
Mandeville Games is to unite paralyzed 
men and women from all parts of the 
world in an international sports move- 
ment, and your spirit of true sportsman- 
ship today will give hope and inspira- 
tion to thousands of paralyzed people.” 
In 1960, this dynamic man founded 
the British Sports Association for the 
CONTINUED PAGE 8

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 50227: Olympic games for the paralyzed; triumph of the handicapped thanks to one man's vision and determination

          
-
+
v
t
T
O
 
- 
-
 
u
w
 
} S
i 
a
l
e
.
 
iil
 
| 
5 
T
I
T
 
a
r
y
 
>
»
 
  
  
Photos © 1.S.M.G. Committee, Frankfurt, Fed. Rep. of Germany 
 
 
L
I
 
no
w 
os
 
E
E
  
 
_ parry in fencing. 
the 1972 Olympics of the Paralyzed duri 
berg University sports stadium. Left, thrust and 
Above, a team from one of the 41 countries at 
Right, basket-ball match. 
 
 
opening parade ceremonies held at the Heidel- 
ng the 
od
 
kK 
x
.
 
a
 
e
e
 
od
 
p
h
 
Ad
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Co
me
t,
 
Zu
ri
ch
, 
S
w
i
t
z
e
r
l
a
n
d

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 50227: Olympic games for the paralyzed; triumph of the handicapped thanks to one man's vision and determination

  
Ph
ot
c 
©
 
Co
me
t,
 
Zu
ri
ch
, 
Sw
it
ze
rl
an
d 
Left, Competitors on their marks for the 100 metre race in last year's Swiss Natio- FRET EOSREREN EL “i 
nal Contest at Kriens, Below, Jamaican team member in the final sprint before the i 
finish line at the Heidelberg Olympics. " WHO WOULD | 
i HAVE THOUGHT ? 
i Who would have thought that, 
as a result of the Olympics of 
the Paralyzed, held in Tokyo 
in 1964, and after seeing the 
performance of the handicapped 
in sports, the Japanese Govern- 
ment would set up within six 
~ months a factory specially desi- 
gned for employing paraple- 
gics? By 1968 Japan had 
~ opened three such factories for 
the disabled. This fact alone 
proves the immense effect which 
sport for the disabled has on 
society as a whole to give their 
paralyzed fellow-men a fair 
chance for their integration ’ 1 
into society. 
a apa SL Bol 58 ig    Ph
ot
o 
©
 
I1
.S
.M
.G
. 
C
o
m
m
i
t
t
e
e
,
 
Fr
an
kf
ur
t,
 
Fe
d.
 
Re
p.
 
of
 
G
e
r
m
a
n
y

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 50227: Olympic games for the paralyzed; triumph of the handicapped thanks to one man's vision and determination

OLYMPICS FOR THE PARALYZED 
(Continued) 
Disabled, which is an umbrella orga- 
nization for all types of disabled— 
amputees, blind, cerebral palsy cases 
and paraplegics. 
Towards the end of 1967 his dream 
of building a huge sports complex 
for all disabled began to take form, 
and in July 1969 the Stoke Mandeville 
Sports Stadium for the Paralyzed and 
other Disabled was opened by Queen 
Elizabeth. 
Four major Games are held at Stoke 
Mandeville annually: The Multi-disabled 
Children's Games, the National Stoke 
Mandeville Games, the International 
Stoke Mandeville Games and the Adult 
Multi-disabled Games. The stadium is 
also used by disabled sports clubs for 
week-end training, and by mentally and 
physically handicapped people during 
the week. 
It is due to the loyalty and devotion 
which Sir Ludwig inspires that this 
stadium was built by voluntary contri- 
butions (with a small government grant) 
from young schoolchildren and old age 
pensioners and people from all walks 
of life and the disabled themselves. 
This brain child of Sir Ludwig's is 
a monument to the devoted work he 
has done throughout the years for 
disabled persons all over the world so 
that, through the medium of sport, they 
may be reintegrated into the com- 
munity as equal and respected 
citizens. : | 
        
  
  
 
   
5 . 
Ca 
I 
oH 
. - - 8 
-. — . X - — " = » - 
— a -, - » 0 
A, a ~~ . : (a) 
> - je — - - ee 1] 
- -— a ~~ ° 
- RY - 
ee yA 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 50227: Olympic games for the paralyzed; triumph of the handicapped thanks to one man's vision and determination

  
| 1 : gr I 
<) -~ — - - 2-3   Ph
ot
o 
© 
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ns
 
All above skiers are blind. They are participating in a contest 
run by the French National Ski Federation. The skiers negotiate 
even difficult slopes with ease thanks to a code language based 
on the position of the hands on a clock called out to them by 
sighted guides. “Eleven o’clock” means turn a bit to the left; 
"one o'clock” turn a bit to the right. "Three o'clock” 45 degrees 
to the right, etc. Left, three one-legged skiers whiz down a 
mountain-side. Mini-skis on their ski poles aid balance. 
Opposite, bottom photo: Hockey on wheel-chairs and tricycles 
in a U.S. kindergarten for handicapped youngsters. 
Right, using his crutch for leverage a young rider swings up 
into the saddle. “It is ABILITY NOT DISABILITY that counts” 
reads the motto on the stable of this riding centre for the 
disabled in England. 
Photos below: Tony Willis, 18-year-old, one-legged British 
athlete clears 1 m. 83 in the high jump. On left, he approaches 
the bar in a series of powerful hops and right. jack-knifes over 
it. Tony is also an expert swimmer, football goal-keeper and 
basketball player. 
      
TF ERT RET FRE FRE BED RY PRN ERY 
«4 TU NRE WUT VRE RNY SBN ENN BNE 
© | TT ERS RET PUT TN SN BEN NN eee 
SERRA NTR ENA EEE 
“a : a = 
E———— AS — 
oo 
-3 
* 3 
4 
  
 
.
 
  
      
 
P
h
o
t
o
 © 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
  
 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 50228: How I perceive the world around me: the extraordinary story of a woman writer, blind and deaf from the age of five

  
HOW | PERCEIVE 
THE WORLD 
  
AROUND ME 
IN 1972 a book entitled 
“How | Perceive, Imagine and Understand the World 
Around Me" was published in Moscow. Its author, a 
poet and essayist named Olga Skorokhodova, is both 
blind and deaf. Hers is an extraordinary life story 
and a no less astounding achievement. She was born 
in 1914 in a village of Southern Ukraine. Before the 
age of five she contracted meningitis and completely 
lost first her sight and then her hearing, so that her 
- speech became impaired. At that time she lost both 
10 
her parents. 
AT the Odessa School 
for the Blind, where she was sent in 1922, the teachers 
could do nothing to bring her out of her isolation. 
In 1925 she entered the clinic for deaf, dumb and 
blind children set up in Kharkov two years earlier 
by Professor Ivan Sokolyansky. There her speech 
by Olga Skorokhodova 
wD 
was restored. With the help of special methods 
devised by Professor Sokolyansky and with Braille, 
she was taught regular school subjects and completed 
her secondary education. She is now a member of 
the Institute for the Handicapped of the U.S.S.R. 
Academy of Educational Sciences in Moscow and 
holds a Master's degree in educational psychology. 
She also teaches at a special deaf-blind school at 
Zagorsk, near Moscow whose pioneering work for 
the handicapped has won it a worldwide reputation. 
WITH her latest book, 
Olga Skorokhodova completes a trilogy describing 
how a person deprived of the most important senses 
—sight and hearing—perceives, imagines and com- 
prehends the world around. On the following pages 
we present salient passages from this moving and 
inspiring work. 
ad A " 
ol  ——_———a_° v LL ne PB. 
Text below © Copyright - Reproduction prohibited 
1. is not difficult to per- 
ceive, to “look at” an object with 
the hands; it is much more difficult 
to describe in words exactly how 
| perceive that object, to convey my 
mental image of it. When deaf, dumb 
and blind people describe their sens- 
ations, perceptions, and ideas in the 
language of those who can see, 
although they use the same words, 
they feel with different sense organs. 
‘When someone with normal sight 
sees a cow in the distance, he may 
say: “I'm looking at the cow; it is 
brown with white spots; it has big, 
beautiful eyes”, etc. 
A blind person, describing his own 
immediate sensations and perceptions, 
would say something like this: “I can 
feel the cow with my hands, it has 
a smooth, soft coat. 
legs and its head. 
found horns which 
to be very hard.” 
On its head | 
seem to me 
| have felt its. 
How could a deaf person describe 
someone playing a piano? The only 
thing he could say would be something 
like the following: “I put my hands on 
the top of the piano and | could feel 
the vibration of what those who can 
hear call sounds.” 
| have experienced many things, and 
the more contact | have had with peo- 
ple and the better | have got to know 
life and nature, the richer and more 
complex my. perceptions and Ideas 
about the external world have become. 
Consequently, it has become all the 
harder for me to find the necessary 
words for each separate fact of my 
experience. 
Year by year | have extended my 
knowledge and enriched my literary 
vocabulary. The reader may or may 
not believe me—that is up to him— 
when | say that | am indebted for my 
knowledge and for my literary language 
to reading, more reading, and yet more 
reading, particularly of works of liter- 
ature. 
Reading can be the salvation of the 
blind, the deaf and the dumb, and 
especially of those who combine all 
three handicaps. When those who are 
responsible for the education and up- 
bringing of the severely handicapped 
realize this, much greater progress will 
be made in that education than is now 
the case. 
 
‘Seeing’ with my hands 
My hands partly replace sight and 
hearing, but my feet also come in use- 
ful. When | am walking in the street 
or in a park, | can easily feel the 
slightest slope in the ground and for 
this reason | know when | am coming 
to the edge of the pavement, where 
| have to step down onto the roadway

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 50228: How I perceive the world around me: the extraordinary story of a woman writer, blind and deaf from the age of five

  
The 
extraordinary story 
of a woman writer, 
blind and deaf 
from the age of five 
Olga Skorokhodova 
and when | get to the other side where 
| have to step up onto the pavement 
again. Even indoors | can feel when 
the floor slopes slightly in any 
direction... ‘ 
When L.I. shakes hands with me | 
always know how she is feeling. | 
always notice, for instance, if she is 
upset about anything. | can feel this 
by the movement of her fingers, by the 
tension in her hand and by a slight 
trembling. 
If | ask her what is wrong, she often 
replies that nothing is wrong at all, but 
| know her hand and her movements so 
well that | don't believe her. | don't 
think that if | could see and study 
her face | would be any better able to 
judge her physical state and her mood 
from the expression of her face than 
from the subtle signs which are com- 
municated to me by touch... 
One day | remarked to Maria that 
her dress, which had been very short, 
had been lengthened. | felt to see how 
the dressmaker had done it and | 
noticed that the tacking had been left 
in. | called All. and asked her: “Why 
didn't they take the tacking out? It's 
hardly noticeable, but it should have 
been taken out...” 
| was once reading with C., when 
she was called away for a few minutes 
and | was left by myself. Next to me 
on the table was a heap of books. 
They were not books for the blind and 
| had no means of knowing what they 
were, but on the cover of one of them 
| felt a circle, in the middle of which 
was a portrait in relief. 
| ran my fingers over it and | iden- 
tified the face, and also easily located 
the eyes, nose, mouth, chin and ear. 
When C. came back | asked her: 
“What is this book?” She replied that 
it was Lamarck’s “Philosophy of Zoo- 
logy”. | asked if the head on the cover 
was a portrait of Lamarck, and she 
replied that it was... 
 Ph
ot
o 
V. 
Bre
l 
an
d 
K. 
Le
vi
ti
n 
© 
AP
N 
It is very difficult for people with 
normal hearing to appreciate what is 
meant by reading something “express- 
ively” with the fingers. | have often 
explained this to people who have been 
reading to me and demonstrated what 
| mean with my fingers, but it is difficult 
for those who can see to grasp, 
although | and the children we teach 
can feel this very clearly. 
B., for instance, when she is talking 
about things or people she likes, uses 
a gentle, as it were caressing move- 
ment of the fingers; if she does not like 
something or if she is displeased with 
somebody, she makes rapid, abrupt 
movements of the fingers, although she 
has never been taught to do so. What 
| call “expressive hands” are hands 
in which | can feel—to use the lan- 
guage of those who can see and hear, 
a “lively, mobile face” or “an intona- 
tion of voice”. 
Most blind people are completely 
reliant on those who can see when 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
1 
  
  
+ 
bat
 
L
A
 } 
  
J
o
d
i
.
 
i
e
 
N
Y
,

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 50228: How I perceive the world around me: the extraordinary story of a woman writer, blind and deaf from the age of five

12 
  
they want to thread a needle. The 
few blind people who can thread a 
needle for themselves usually do so 
by placing the eye of the needle 
against the tip of their tongue, so 
that when the end of the thread passes 
through they can fee! it with their 
tongue. 
My method is different: 1 take the 
needle between the thumb and middle 
finger of the left hand, holding it near 
to the eye, and the thread between 
the thumb and index finger of my right 
hand; | can then easily thread it 
straight away, as long as the needle is 
a good straight one and does not slip 
about in my fingers. 
In fact, not only am | independent in 
this respect of the help of colleagues 
who can see, but | am often able to 
help them when the light is poor. All 
has often asked me to help her in this 
way, and when | have asked her why 
she could not do it herself, she has 
explained that it was dark and that 
she could not see to thread the needle 
because it was a small one. For some 
reason, | find it easier to thread a fine 
needle than a larger one... 
Once when T.A. was reading to me, 
K. came in and began talking to her. 
| put my hands on the two speakers’ 
throats and “listened” to their voices, 
then | “looked at” their faces. “Are 
we beautiful?” asked T.A. jokingly. 
“Well, your face is better than K's", | 
replied. “No she has a fresher com- 
plexion than 1", said T.A. “That may 
be", 1 replied, "but you have finer 
features than her.” 
Later, in conversation with LI, | 
told her about this incident and asked 
her whether my judgement had been 
right, and she confirmed that it had. 
The sense of smell 
Sometime last year, | was reading 
the papers with U. When we had 
read all that were available, U. went 
off to see H. to get some more, but 
when she brought the new papers and 
gave me one | told her | had already 
read it. When she asked me how | 
knew, even before she had read it out 
to me, | replied that | recognized its 
smell and knew that | had read that 
particular newspaper with R.G. She 
then said that was quite impossible 
since H. would not have given her the 
HOW | PERCEIVE THE WORLD (Continued) 
paper if | had already read it. So 
| asked her to read out a headline 
from the paper, and | was able to 
convince her that | had indeed read 
the paper before with R.G. 
Although | can neither see nor hear, 
I am still very fond of nature. | can 
smell all the different perfumes, | can 
touch the petals of a flower, individual 
blades of grass, twigs and leaves. | 
can feel the baking heat of the sun, 
and | know how pleasantly refreshing 
shade and cold water are to the body 
after the heat. 
| love the seaside, and | have always 
been able to tell by the smell when 
we were getting near to the sea. Al- 
though | cannot see it or hear the 
murmur of its waves, it is a great 
pleasure to me to be near the sea and 
to breathe the bracing air. When [ have 
been by the sea, | have experienced 
a feeling of reverence and awe at its 
might and beauty, of which | have 
formed a mental picture... 
One day when E.A. came to see 
me, | could detect there was an odour 
of rubber. | asked her why there was 
this smell, and she replied that she 
had been working with some children 
on the word “ball” and had been 
holding a rubber ball in her hands. 
 
‘Hearing’ by vibrations 
| can detect and distinguish the 
various sorts of noise made by furni- 
ture being moved, just as easily as | 
can smell. | can pick up these move- 
ments by the vibrations of the floor. 
In the dining-room where 1 was 
working one day with G. there are 
two big wooden calendars which can 
be turned in any direction, especially 
made for our children. When the 
calendars are turned they make a tapp- 
ing noise. Sensing the noise, which 
was annoying me and stopping me 
from concentrating, | did not imme- 
diately realize that it came from one of 
the calendars and | asked G. who was 
tapping. She replied that she could 
not hear anything. 
This reply greatly surprised me. | 
was sure that if | could feel the noise 
through the vibration of the floor, then 
she should be able to hear it before | 
felt it. But the tapping noise continued 
and | could not concentrate on what 
G. was reading out to me. 
| waited a while, until the tapping 
was repeated several times, then asked 
her again if she heard anything. This 
time she replied that she could hear 
the noise and that it was the tapping 
of the calendar. She said that the 
noise had not disturbed her and she 
paid no attention to it. 
It occurred to me then that people 
who can see and hear are so used to 
various noises that they are quite con- 
vinced they are not hearing or seeing 
anything at all... ' 
When | enter an unfamiliar building, 
| immediately know what sort of floor 
or staircase it has. For instance, if 
“there is a wooden staircase, | can feel 
a sort of long vibration from my own 
footsteps, but if it is a concrete stair- 
case, the sensation is of a shorter 
vibration... 
| have several times taken a boat 
trip down the Dnieper. As these trips 
took place in the summer-time, | stayed 
the whole time on deck. | could feel 
the movement of the boat very clearly, 
and could feel the engines working 
away like the beating of a great heart 
somewhere below the decks... 
1 would think very few people who 
have all their faculties would believe 
that someone who is blind and deaf 
can “listen” to singing and music. In 
fact, a blind and deaf person can have 
a very clear sensation of the sound 
of a voice and of instrumental music, 
and can derive great pleasure from 
them. 
The difference is, of course, that he 
“listens” not with his ears, but with 
his hands. | am very fond of putting 
my hands on a piano or some other 
musical instrument when it is being 
played. 1 also like to place my hand 
on the throat of a person who is sing- 
ing or speaking. 
L.l. and C. were once talking in my 
presence. | had heard L.I's voice 
many times before and was very fond 
of it. | had never heard C.'s voice 
before and was therefore interested by 
it. | placed my hand on L.'s throat 
and then on Cs. | could feel C.'s 
voice was somewhat lower than L.L's 
and at the same time | could tell that 
C.'s voice had a pleasant timbre. | 
asked L.I if in fact C.'s voice was 
lower than hers and she replied that 
in her opinion it was not lower but C. 
was simply talking louder than usual. 
| nevertheless still had the impres- 
sion that C.'s voice was lower and |

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

decided to ask my friend N., who has 
a good musical ear. The next day | 
introduced N. to C. and asked her to 
pay attention to the voice. After talk- 
ing to C. for a while, N. told me that 
her voice was indeed somewhat lower 
than L.'s but that it had a com- 
pletely different timbre. It was there- 
fore not immediately obvious whose 
voice was the lower... 
As | can feel other people's voices 
by putting my hand on their throats, 
| often feel my own throat when | am 
speaking. | do this so that | can to 
some extent correct my voice and con- 
trol its pitch, volume and tone. 
This may seem strange or even ridi- 
culous to some, but in fact | can feel 
my own voice with my hand almost 
as well as | could hear it with my own 
ears. | think it would be a good 
thing for all deaf and dumb people to 
get into the habit of holding their 
throats while speaking. It would help 
them to speak in a much more pleasant 
way and much more clearly. When | 
am talking to someone new, | often 
use this method of controling my 
voice... 
If | am near a piano, | can feel 
the sounds very well even when | have 
not got my hands on the top of the 
instrument. This is not as strange as 
it may seem: the sound vibrations are 
transmitted through the instrument and 
across the floor, and | can feel them 
through my feet, especially loud 
chords. 
Once when | was at my friend N.’s 
house, | was lying on a settee while 
she played the piano, which stood 
next to it. At some point | began to 
doze, but was suddenly awakened by 
strong sound vibrations. N. was play- 
ing a piece in which there were a 
number of powerful chords and, lying 
on the settee, | had the impression that 
there was some piano-like musical ins- 
trument in the settee itself, so strongly 
were the sound vibrations transmitted... 
| had a friend who played the clarinet 
in an orchestra, and on one occasion | 
sat next to him while he was playing. 
| do not remember what the music was, 
but | remember that my friend held my 
hand and | beat time to the music. 
When the music was finished, | asked 
if | had been keeping time correctly 
and he replied that | had... 
ft would be a mistake to think that 
deaf people cannot distinguish one per- 
son's walk from another. Some people 
have a walk which annoys me. | often 
sit reading in the canteen. A.N. often 
walks through the canteen, and his 
walk greatly annoys me. | don’t know 
what sort of noise he makes when he 
walks, but to me, sensing the noise 
by other means, it seems as if AN. 
is walking on four legs rather than two, 
and making more noise with two of his 
feet than with the other two. Apparent- 
ly this is because he does not tie 
up his shoe-laces properly and makes 
a scuffling noise with his heels... 
| read recently in a magazine for the 
blind that a blind schoolboy had sug- 
gested there should be special tea- 
pots for the blind so that they would 
not spill the tea when pouring it into a 
cup. This would not be a bad idea 
but personally | do not feel any need 
for a special teapot. 
When | pour hot or cold water 
into a cup or glass, | do not hold the 
cup in the way most people do but 
put my fingers round it in such a way 
that | can feel the temperature of the 
water and where it comes up to in the 
cup. Only very rarely do | let the 
water spill over, and that is usually 
because | am thinking of something 
else and not paying attention to what 
I am doing. 
 
My many efforts 
to understand 
what colours are 
Many people have asked me whether 
| have any idea of colours. Some 
people have even asked me whether 
| can feel different colours. My reply 
to both these questions is “Of course 
not”, but as | speak the same language 
as people who can see, | talk about 
colours, using the same words as are 
normally used. 
| would very much like to have a 
mental picture of colours and when | 
was younger | often tried to get my 
friends and relations to explain colours 
to me. Once, for instance, | had a 
dress made and was told that 
it was coffee-coloured. | liked the 
cut of the dress very much and was 
therefore especially keen to know what 
this coffee colour was. My friends 
told me: “It is just the same as milky 
coffee. Do you understand?” 
Of course | had a mental image of 
a cup of hot coffee with milk, and | 
could even imagine the smell and the 
taste of the coffee, but not the colour 
—instead of the colour | thought of my 
dress, which | ran my fingers over 
very carefully, although | knew | was 
not able to “see” the coffee colour 
with my fingers. 
On another occasion | asked what 
colour my scarf was and was told 
that it was sandy coloured. 1 asked 
what a sandy colour was and someone 
again replied “Just like sand. Do you 
understand?” [ had a very clear image 
of the sand in our garden where the 
children used to play with their buckets 
and spades. | had another image of a 
river bank where there was lots of 
damp, cold sand. 
Another image which came to mind 
was that of a beach by the seaside 
which | knew well, where the sand was 
dry and hot to the feet. But none of 
this gave me any idea what a sandy 
colour might be. Friends also tried 
to explain green to me by comparing 
it with grass or the leaves of trees, 
and | thought of grass or leaves but of 
nothing else... 
My idea of a cloud may be of inte- 
rest. | imagine the warm rays of the 
sun after a storm, and somewhere to 
the side of the sun, floating in the air 
a dark (to use a word that people 
who can see use—Ii only imagine it as 
dark), rectangular mass, a lump of 
some dense substance. 
This object moves nearer and nearer 
to the sun and finally blots out the 
sun's heat. If | am walking along the 
street and a cloud covers the sun, | 
immediately feel the difference in the 
air temperature, and it is this change 
from warmth to coolness which gives 
me my idea of a cloud. 
| imagine a storm-cloud as a big 
circle in the sky (the sky itself a bound- 
less expanse of air), with zigzag lines 
‘of gleaming hot lightning around the 
edges. 
break away and move about in a 
disorderly fashion, colliding with each 
other and producing thunder. The 
colliding fragments then fly apart, 
breaking up into minute particles 
which fall to earth as cold raindrops... 
 


### 50228: How I perceive the world around me: the extraordinary story of a woman writer, blind and deaf from the age of five

How 1 image 
the Milky Way 
and the Moon 
| do not know what the Milky Way 
is really like, but my idea of it is 
quite different from what those who 
can see must have of it. When | 
read about the Milky Way, | imagine 
a long, rather narrow piece of the 
finest, lightest, softest muslin, some- 
thing like a veil, stretching across the 
sky far, far above the earth. 
| do not know how beautiful the 
Milky Way is, but it seems to me that 
if this muslin is light in colour and 
the sky beyond is dark blue, then it 
must be beautiful. | have heard people 
who can see talking about such a 
combination of colours. 
When | read in a book about the 
Milky Way gleaming, } first imagine 
milk, and feel its taste in my mouth. 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
Big chunks of the circle then. 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 50228: How I perceive the world around me: the extraordinary story of a woman writer, blind and deaf from the age of five

14 
  
| know that milk is white so | presume 
that the muslin of the Milky Way must 
also be white or very nearly white. 
Thus | repeat that | am constantly 
obliged to use the language of people 
who can see and hear, for there is no 
separate language for the blind and 
the deaf... 
People often talk about the moon 
and | have read about it in many books. 
In old books, the moon is described as 
a lamp hanging in the sky at night, 
and this is the image which some 
people who can see have of the moon. 
| have tried to imagine the moon in the 
same way, but | cannot visualize it as 
a lamp hanging by a chain. | remember 
when | was a little girl in the country 
we had a lamp, although | did not 
know what it was called or what pur- 
pose it served. Why do | not imagine 
the moon as a lamp? 
My mental image of the moon is of 
a big, hollow porcelain globe—l can 
somehow feel its smooth surface. That 
is how | imagine the full moon. | 
imagine the globe to be shining, not 
because | have any visual conception 
of light or darkness; | have no real idea 
of light or darkness, but | have the 
epidermal sensations of heat and cold 
which run into those of light and dark. 
But as those who can see the moon 
speak of the moon shining, | think of 
it as a shining globe. 
As | cannot feel moonlight, however, 
it does not appear to me to be as 
pleasant, as joyful and life-giving as 
sunlight." | often smile when | feel the 
faint rays of the winter or spring sun 
touch my face, but | never smile, 
indeed | feel complete indifference, 
when someone tells me how bright the 
moon is shining. The moon is not 
always full, however. ‘When | hear 
or read about the crescent moon, | 
imagine a thin, carefully cut slice of 
pumpkin with one of its sharply pointed 
ends uppermost. 
  
I can feel the music 
with my hand 
| was once invited to a concert in 
a club for the blind. | was somewhat 
at a loss at first, knowing that | would 
not be able to hear the singers, but’ 
everything went well. M.N. told me 
the words of the songs on one hand 
while S.A. held my other hand and 
HOW | PERCEIVE THE WORLD (Continued) 
made it beat in time to the rhythm of the 
music. Of course | could get no real 
idea of the tunes which were being 
sung, but the rhythm of the music cor- 
responded with the rhythm of the verse 
and this in itself gave me great 
pleasure. The day after the concert | 
moved around my room to the rhythm 
which | had felt through my hand. 
| sometimes go to the shows given 
for the deaf and dumb in the House 
of the Unions in Moscow. Usually 
these shows consist mainly of per- 
formances by clowns, acrobats, magi- 
cians and dancers. | cannot follow 
this sort of turn very well and so it is 
not of any great interest to me. 
Somebody usually tells me what is 
going on and if | can also follow the 
movements of the person who is 
“translating” for me, then | can ima- 
gine the things as they happen on the 
stage. It is even better when | sit in 
the front row, very near the stage, 
and can feel the tapping of the feet 
during the dancing. 
On one occasion, it was announced 
that a Caucasian dancer was to per- 
form in national costume. | had never 
seen such a costume, but when the 
performer began to dance and |, sitting 
in the front row, could feel the gay 
rhythm of his feet, it seemed as if | 
could almost see this dancing figure 
for myself. 
| imagined him as being of middle 
height (although no one had told me 
how tall he was), with a laughing face 
and rapid, confident movements. | 
could not visualize the upper part of 
the costume very clearly, but | could 
imagine wide, flapping sleeves and 
Turkish-style trousers. As | could feel 
the sounds of the piano and the 
drumming of his feet, | could imagine 
the speed and vigour with which he 
was dancing. 
The fire of his dancing seemed to 
communicate itself to me. | seemed 
to be electrified and | could have sworn 
that | could see the dancer, that | was 
running my hands over his body, over 
his tunic with the wide sleeves and 
his face heated by the dance, and it 
seemed to me that he was not at all 
tired but, on the contrary, was smiling 
broadly, showing big, well-shaped 
teeth. 
No one had said anything to me 
about any of this. This image of the 
dancer arose in my imagination only 
because | felt the vibration of the 
joyous music and the gay drumming of 
his feet. | derived great pleasure from 
that concert and returned home in the 
highest of spirits, 
 
How | visualize 
a painting 
When | go to a museum and the 
person accompanying me tries to des- 
cribe what is represented in a parti- 
cular painting, | listen with interest 
but | do not always imagine the paint- 
ing as it must really be. 
If the painting represents things 
with which | am already familiar such 
as people, trees, country paths, fami- 
liar birds and animals, | can gather a 
rough idea of it. 
If the painting represents, for ins- 
tance, a sunrise or a sunset, a land- 
scape or a stormy sea with a sinking 
ship, | imagine the completely smooth 
surface of the canvas, which | can 
touch with my hands, and the sun or 
the sea | imagine quite separately, 
quite independent of the painting and 
as | have perceived them in nature— 
the sun warming me with its rays, the 
sea splashing up to my feet and 
sending spray over me; | can even 
call to mind the special smell of the 
sea. 
When | leave the museum, | can 
remember the paintings as | perceive 
them, that is to say | remember their 
dimensions, | can remember the glass 
if the painting was under glass and 
the frame—smooth or carved—but not 
the pictures themselves, i.e. the things 
represented. 
| remember only the content, the 
subject, plus some other vague recol- 
lections. For this reason | prefer 
sculpture, which is completely acces- 
sible to my tactile “sight” and hence 
to my understanding. But as | use 
the language of those who see and 
hear and as | read books, | could 
quite well describe—probably no 
worse than anyone else in fact—some 
picture which | had never seen but 
the subject of which 1 knew. 
Someone reading what | wrote would 
probably find it hard to believe that | 
had never seen the picture, yet | write 
nothing but the truth and | would not 
wish to ascribe to myself familiarity 
with things which | have not seen or 
imagined. |

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 50231: New vistas in special education

  
Recent advances in 
“electronics LENT 
[o1oTe [VIOT-T I CAVITOT- TO 
AUET SL CING CFL IT 
dren and adults to 
overcome the added 
handicap of speech 
difficulties. Here 
students in a read- 
(LIC EEL SN I TO 
Roohi School for 
the Deaf in Teheran 
(LLC T) BETES TTT. [1 B
electronic  equip- 
ment to improve 
AUC CET ITT N 
M
A
L
 
Ba
 
« 
BN a
a
   Pa
ul
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
a
 
| 
x 
 
a
l
 
Phot
o 
. 
w
e
 
E.. year many children 
begin life with a handicap which 
’ could prevent them from making 
a useful contribution to society as 
adults. In the absence of special help, 
handicapped children can experience 
life as more difficult than it need be, 
and a sense of alienation can follow 
as a consequence. Every child needs 
help to adjust to life but some are so 
clearly deprived of the requirements 
for normal learning that their need for 
by John McKenna special help is clearly seen. Let us 
take a look at the principal categories 
of handicap which can prevent children 
from benefiting from ordinary edu- 
cation available to all. 
ams. » 1 tupuet The child who is   
Impaired blind from birth can 
JOHN McKENNA is Director of Psychology at the St. John of God Child ; have help from the 
Guidance Clinic, Dublin, Professor of Psychology at the Royal College ’ . start of life because 
of Surgeons in Ireland and lecturer at University College, Dublin. He is a Eyesight hi d for help is 
Fellow of the Irish and British Psychological Societies and is a member of iis mi (3 neeq lor Pp 
the Council of the International League of Societies for the Mentally recognized immedi- 1 B 
Handicapped. He has been a consultant to Unesco and is the author ately. Perhaps that is the chief reason 
of the Introduction and conclusions of "The Present Situation and for the surprising success of the blind 
Trends of Research in the Field of Special Education”, just published in so many high-level jobs. Early 
by Unesco (see inside back cover). ascertainment of the defect allows 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 50231: New vistas in special education

4 
SPECIAL EDUCATION (Continued) 
early appropriate treatment and the 
minimizing of unfavourable conse- 
quences and side-effects resulting 
from impaired vision, 
There is virtually no limit to the level 
of achievement to which the blind can 
aspire if appropriately trained teaching 
personnel and equipment are available 
for their education. For example, blind 
students can now do highly advanced 
laboratory work, hitherto impossible, in 
physics, chemistry and geography, 
thanks to research in the use of new 
apparatus. 
A reading machine has been devel- 
oped in the U.S.S.R. which identifies 
words and groups of words rather than 
letters, hence speeding the process of 
reading. In the U.S.A. at MILT, the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
in Boston, a centre specializing in 
apparatus for the blind has developed 
high-speed electric Braille writers and 
a means of converting Braille type- 
setting tapes to spoken words. 
The direct conversion of print to 
Braille Is a possibility now being ex- 
plored. Improved guidance devices 
have also been developed which help 
the blind to find their way about with 
less hazards than ever before. 
I : / A The education of the 
deaf child poses one 
: mpaire of the greatest chal- 
: ~ lenges to education- 
Hearing ~ alists. A serious 
. © hearing defect in 
early life can have a lasting effect on 
the personality and may be responsible 
for inhibiting the development of the 
brain itself, Pence affecting intellectual 
functioning. 
It is from listening to the adults who 
surround them that children learn their 
language. The ability to express one's 
thoughts in speech constitutes one of 
THE TONOSCOPE : 
MAKES THE EYES HEAR 
~ The “tonoscope” is a new instrument 
SET T 
box-shaped apparatus (photo far right) 
which makes sound visible. 
fitted with a speaking tube and covered 
by a flexible diaphragm. When a 
person speaks into the tube, grains of 
~ sand or coloured quartz on the dia- 
phragm form patterns corresponding 
~ to the sound vibrations (photo right). 
LELTENE TENE GLEE TG § EYER EH I 
ties for the deaf, to familiarize them- 
selves with visible patterns of normal 
~ speech and practise reproducing the ) 
EETUTIETITLTC RR {oT EN I TOR GT ELL To RV VE 
CENT LET BAR GTN EL EI LS FT EN ETT IV 
a Swiss scientist. His collaborator, 
~ Christiaan Stuten, is carrying on 
his studies in the new field of research 
on vibrations known as Cymatics, at 
AUCH ELE ET LR TE I ER LE A LT CE 
Dornach, in Switzerland (see “Unesco 
Courier”, Dec. 1969). 
the most important aspects of human 
intellectual development, and language 
is an essential prerequisite for reading 
and writing. That is why early diag- 
nosis of deafness is so important. 
Research and observation of young 
children indicate that language devel- 
opment goes through various stages 
requiring appropriate stimulation at 
each stage. Deprivation of sound, 
speech and language stimulation can 
lead to incomplete development of 
the mind. 
While there has been no dramatic 
breakthrough in the education of the 
deaf, the application of our increased 
knowledge of early childhood devel 
opment is beginning to show favour- 
able results. Improved technological 
approaches and transistorized hearing 
aids are being increasingly used 
around the world. These, in con- 
junction with more sophisticated 
teaching methods, make spoken 
language a greater possibility for many 
more deaf children, giving them a 
greater range of expression than 
dactyl speech—sign language with 
fingers. | 
For instance, special equipment for 
the visual presentation of spoken 
words helps the deaf to correct defects 
of speech. New electro-acoustic 
"devices have also been invented which 
supplement lip-reading. These so- 
called “tactile devices” pass vibrations 
to the perception through the touch. 
They permit the deaf to differentiate 
sounds on an acoustic basis which are 
indistinguishable to them when lip- 
reading. 
Experiments carried out in the 
U.S.S.R. in recent years show that 
almost all children with defective 
hearing can perceive musical rhythm, 
tempo, measure, vibration, reste and 
chords, A certain combination of 
chords and rests creates “music” for 
Photos © J.C. Stuten, Dornach, Switzerland 
them, allowing them to organize their 
movements. Even their peculiar 
singing gives deaf children great 
aesthetic pleasure. 
ee i     
  
y One group of handi- 
capped children 
otionally whose needs are 
difficult to meet are 
the emotionally dis- 
turbed. Reactions to 
unmet psychological needs show them- 
selves in many ways—stuttering, fears 
of school, nail-biting, thumb-sucking, 
temper tantrums, bed-wetting, stealing 
lying, cruelty and truancy. 
Possibly it is difficult to deal with 
such children because they do not 
form a homogeneous or readily iden- 
tifiable group. Some are mildly anxious 
or disturbed, others are severely 
disturbed, some are timid and with- 
drawn, others are aggressive and 
delinquent, some appear to improve 
without treatment, others deteriorate 
and become chronically disturbed. It 
is now becoming clear that there are 
not enough psychiatrists and psychol- 
ogists to determine which children will 
need treatment, or even to attend to 
those who do need treatment. 
Many emotionally disturbed children 
are under-achievers at school. Many 
have difficulty in expressing themselves 
and this probably makes it much harder 
to educate them socially and inculcate 
values and standards. There is a 
rowing conviction in many places that 
the teacher is in the best position to 
help such children to achieve scholas- 
tic proficiency and social competence. 
Some teacher-training programmes, 
especially those for teachers of the 
handicapped, are beginning to reflect 
this expanded role of the teacher in 
relation to emotionally disturbed pupils. 
By and large we are beginning to 
realize that mental health is influenced 
isturbed 
eres 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 50231: New vistas in special education

Photo Fred Mayer © Magnum, Paris 
by the sogiety in which one lives and 
that somb societies may be more 
beneficial for growth than others. A 
society which allows each member to 
develop physically, intellectually and 
emotionally, respecting at the same 
time the rights of others to do likewise; 
is likely to promote mental health. 
The school is the place where these 
ideals can best be exemplified and 
promoted. 
In the last decade 
~ there has beens a 
marked incréase of 
| research in speech, 
| in language and com- 
munication disorders, 
  
and in the role of. experience in the’ 
acquisition of language..Research has 
not only helped in more accurate 
diagnosis of different types of speech 
defect and suggested special methods 
to correct them, but has also indicated. 
the necessity for early treatment. 
In the U.S.S.R. stuttering, a universal 
problem, is treated, even before the 
child enters school, not as an in- 
dependent symptom, but in the general - 
context of psychological development. 
A special technique involving manual 
work with pre-school children is 
showing promising results in the 
elimination of stuttering. 
In the U.S.A. research on stuttering 
has also concentrated on general 
FINGERS THAT SEE 
Teaching blind children sculpture, model- 
ling and collages helps them to explore 
the world around them and discover its 
many forms. (See also “Sculpture by the 
Blind”, “Unesco Courier” May 1957). 
Left, a young Japanese girl at the Special 
School forthe Blind, in Kobe. Her teacher, 
Mr. Shiro Fukurai, encourages the chil- 
LCT RCP LETT TTL AVA LIS 4 TEATS {1-1 I 
Right, “Mother and Child”, a collage of 
papers of different texture, by a young 
Egyptian girl who was born blind. She 
produced this moving work at the “Light 
and Hope” School for Blind Children run 
by Mme Samira Abou Zayd in the Cairo. 
suburb of Heliopolis. 
personality factors, but many speech 
therapists are treating stuttering as a 
symptom. Practice and research on 
the speech-handicapped in the U.S.A. 
as in many other countries, however, 
does not appear to be well integrated 
in educational programming. This 
would suggest that speech pathology 
should occupy a more important place 
in the training of teachers, since we 
know that speech is a necessary 
basis for reading and writing. 
Follow-up studies on 
The Health children who have 
| spent some time in 
Im aired’ hospital show that 
p 2 separation from par- 
—— ents and home can 
have a damaging effect on the person- 
ality. The younger the child and the 
longer the period away from the per- 
sonal attention and affection of the 
family the greater the chance for 
personality disturbance and the more 
irreversible the consequences. 
With the increase of pediatric spe- 
cialists, hospitalization has changed 
very much in character. Steps are 
now taken to protect young children 
from the effects of being deprived of 
their mothers and of their affection. 
For those children where the basic 
foundations for healthy development 
have already been laid, illness and hos- 
pitalization need not necessarily entail 
special education, 
At the end of the 1960s in edu- 
cational reviews In the U.S.A, the cate- 
gory of “health impaired™ was repre- 
sented solely by learning disabilities. 
The labels they used for brain 
disorders and learning difficulties 
referred to those pupils who presented 
themselves as a special problem be- 
cause of their failure in one specific 
area, often reading, although they might 
be otherwise bright and intelligent. 
  
Photo © S. Abou Zayd, Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt 
Research will probably throw more 
light on the “late developer”, the 
supposed dullard at school who 
achieves remarkable success in more 
practical work after leaving school. It 
‘promises to throw more light on one 
of the great problems for teachers— 
those pupils who, otherwise bright, 
fail to achieve a mustery of reading. 
Mentaly ‘many ways men- 
tally handicapped 
children present the Mentally 
t tential 
a | Source “of Social 
problems in modern, 
complex, urbanized societies. There 
are different degrees of mental retard- 
ation and hence the needs of the 
handicapped vary considerably. 
Because of their lower levels of 
intelligence, work with the mentally 
handicapped presents many problems 
and difficulties not found in the other 
categories of handicapped. Despite | 
this, it is In the field of the mentally 
handicapped that the most progressive 
developments are taking place around 
the world. 
In Sweden, for example, the tradi- 
tional system of special classes for 
slow learners has been challenged 
since the 1960s. Doubts have been 
raised about the appropriateness of 
placing the handicapped in a secluded 
milieu. Swedish research projects 
appeared to confirm the main conclu- 
sions from American studies that the 
advantages of placing mentally handi- 
capped children in special classes 
were not evident for all categories. 
The research suggested that the spe- 
cial classes tended to lower the child- 
ren's self-esteem. Hence special educ- 
ation methods are being carefully re- 
assessed and new arrangements tried. 
For an increasing number of slow 
CONTINUED PAGE 33

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 50231: New vistas in special education

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 50231: New vistas in special education

  
    
    
TREE 
  
    
FLOWER 
  
        
  
    
  
 
  
        
 
ft 
          
Using a “natural language’ of gestures (almost identical all over the world), to 
which conventional signs have been added over the years, deaf persons have no 
trouble in understanding each other (see article next page). Here we show a 
selection of signs from this international language, published as a deck of playing 
cards by the U.S. National Association of the Deaf, and reproducing 26 word 
signs commonly used by deaf persons. The deck (52 cards and a joker) comprises 
26 pairs of cards: one card with a word sign and a picture of the object it repre- 
sents; the other with the same word sign, but with only the object's written 
name. In addition to gesture language, deaf and deaf-mute persons have an 
international hand alphabet in which special positions of the fingers and hands 
stand for letters or figures. The alphabet was first developed by the Abbé Charles 
de I'Epée, a famous French teacher of the deaf, in the 18th century and with slight 
modifications was later adapted for international use by the World Federation 
of the Deaf. The deaf quickly develop great facility and speed at finger spelling. 
al 
  
AEROPLANE 
  
      
  
  
BOOK           

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 50232: Towards an international language of gestures; the World Federation of the Deaf has been compiling since 1951 a dictionary of signs for universal use

TOWARDS 
AN INTERNATIONAL 
LANGUAGE 
OF GESTURES 
The World Federation of the Deaf 
has been compiling since 19561 
a dictionary of signs for universal use 
by Cesare Magarotto 
A repeated movement of the 
right hand towards oneself, palm 
upwards, means “come here’; the 
opposite movement, palm downwards, 
means "go away’. Putting one's hands 
over one's face indicates “shame”, 
whereas raising the right hand or plac- 
ing it on a sacred object signifies 
“taking an oath”. Pointing a thumb 
or index finger at oneself means "I", 
and pointing it at the person with 
whom one is talking means "You". 
These and hundreds of other gestures 
accompany the spoken languages 
. of all peoples and are universally un- 
20 
derstood, 
gestures, expressions of, the face, by 
slight contractions of the. facial mus- . 
cles, give value and meaning of varying 
intensity to what we wish to commu- 
 
CESARE MAGAROTTO has been Secretary- 
General of the World Federation of the Deaf - 
since its foundation in 1951. He is Director- 
General of the Italian National Association 
of the Deaf and Dumb, (ENS) and President 
of the State Technical Institute for the Deaf 
and Dumb in Rome.. He has published 
numerous studies on" deafness, 
“Problems of the Deaf”, Rome, ENS, 1955 
(also in [talian and French). "The Deaf and 
Professional Education™, Rome, ENS, 1961 
(also in Italian, French and Spanish), “Help 
for the Deaf After the Age of 13", ENS, 1969 
(also in French). 
Used, in conjunction with. 
including- 
nicate. The gesture for "come here”, 
for example, can equally well be 
expressed as an imperative command 
or as an affectionate invitation. 
Persons who can hear use gestures 
merely to emphasize spoken language 
and communicate shades and intensity 
of meaning through the tones and 
modulations of the voice. But the deaf 
express these feelings and nuances 
through appropriate facial expressions 
and by modulating the gestures. 
Gestures, like man's first vocal ex- 
pressions, date back to prehistoric 
times and formed a valid system of 
communication which could be easily 
understood by different peoples be- 
cause it always related to concrete 
things. 
Proof of the common origin of "na- 
tural gestures” lies in the fact that 
even today they are almost identical 
or so similar that deaf Europeans 
manage to communicate just as well 
with American Indians as with tribes 
of Africa and South America. 
Deaf people from anywhere in the 
world are able not only to understand 
each other, but can communicate effec- 
tively after a few hours’ "conversa 
tion”, used mainly to check the con- 
ventional signs which over many cen- 
turies have been added to natural 
ones. 
If we think for a moment how dif- 
ficult it is to reach mutual understand- 
ing among persons speaking different 
languages, thinking along different 
lines and often quibbling over trivia- 
lities, and if we consider what an 
impact this has had and is still having 
on international relations, we have to 
admire the deaf. Through the language 
of gestures, which they practise and 
keep alive, the deaf are able to estab- 
lish friendly relations across any 
frontier. 
In 1951, at the first Congress in 
Rome constituting the World Federa- 
tion of the Deaf, it was possible to 
observe that reality. The Congress 
was attended by the representatives 
of 25 countries with national associa- 
tions of the deaf, as well as specia- 
lists, doctors, educationalists, audio- 
logists and psychologists, 
There were lengthy debates but the 
quickest and most practical conclusions 
were drawn by the deaf. Using their 
own language, they were able to 
discuss and decide on the constitution 
of the World Federation which today 
covers 54 countries and numbers hun-- 
dreds of experts in various disciplines 
from every continent. No: political 
issues, no partisan views, no legal 
quibbles hampered their clear, precise 
argument. 
Deaf people (and here we mean 
those who cannot even hear with a 
hearing aid) can be taught to speak 
and to understand lip-reading. 
But this "art" involves considerable 
limitations and difficulties, added to 
the abysmally isolating effect of deaf- 
ness itself. Consequently the deaf 
make considerable efforts-and sacri- 
fices to adjust themselves to the world 
of sound (unnatural to them), and

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 50232: Towards an international language of gestures; the World Federation of the Deaf has been compiling since 1951 a dictionary of signs for universal use

to develop their personality, their cul- 
ture, their rehabilitation, and the use 
of leisure in their communities, aiming 
to offer society the fruits of their 
experience and abilities. 
In Italy, for example, thanks to the 
action of the National Association of 
the Deaf, a special programme for the 
deaf is televised every Tuesday even- 
ing with the announcer using lan- 
guage gestures. It features reports 
on the most important news of the 
week followed by variety and cultural 
items. The programme is much appre- 
ciated by the deaf, and in numerous 
other countries the deaf are asking 
for a similar television feature. 
At the same time Italy, like the 
U.S.A, the U.S.S.R., Denmark, Sweden 
and other countries, is organizing for 
its cultural centres of the deaf the 
circulation of video tapes with sub- 
titles and gesture-language to replace 
sound. 
The use of sign language among 
the deaf is lost in the mists of time 
and, as we see, there is a natural 
language” which is the same or similar 
all over the world and which enables 
the deaf to understand one another 
easily. 
  
Over the centuries conventional ges- 
tures have been added to this natural 
language. In 1951 the World Fed- 
eration of the Deaf decided to compile 
a "Dictionary of Gestures for Inter- 
national Conferences” in order to pro- 
vide for everyone the possibility of 
accurate and rational interpretation. 
The first instalment appeared in 1961 
after ten years spent in methodically 
collecting the conventional gestures 
most frequently used in international 
conferences and seminars. Thousands 
of gestures were recorded and care- 
fully screened. Lack of funds meant 
that it was possible to publish only 
a small volume of 339 photographs 
and an English and French glossary. 
In 1971 the second volume was 
published, containing a further 300 of 
the most important gestures used in 
international conferences. 
At the present time a committee 
of experts is engaged in compiling a 
new dictionary of over 1,500 words 
which is to be presented at the 
Seventh Congress of the World 
Federation of the Deaf to be held in 
Washington, in 1975. 
The work is particularly complex 
The deaf have evolved 
a shorthand language of 
hand signs and gestures 
for use In conferences 
and meetings. Photos 
show how the words 
United Nations and Unesco 
are formed. Far left, 
crossed hands signify “to 
unite”, “union”, or “United 
Nations”. If this sign 
is then followed by the 
gesture for “organization 
on a world scale”, top left, 
the words “United Nations 
Organization” are indicat- 
ed. If the first gesture Is 
followed by the sign for 
“education”, bottom left, 
the meaning is “Unesco”. 
Other U.N. agencies have 
“U.N.” plus another sign. 
Ph
ot
os
 
Wo
rl
d 
Fe
de
ra
ti
on
 
of 
th
e 
De
af
, 
Ro
me
 
as it consists in examining scores of 
publications from different countries, 
selecting the terms most frequently 
used in international conferences, 
picking out those which originated in 
natural gestures without reference to 
alphabetical signs, confirming exact 
rules which are already an integral 
part of the sign language and permit 
abstract discourse, and so on. 
We hope that as in the past this 
enterprising work of the deaf and their 
culture may be of service to the world 
community. It is worthwhile recalling 
that the international language of the 
deaf is the basis of the sign language 
used by underwater divers, crane op- 
erators, airline personnel and others 
who work in noisy surroundings or in 
conditions of complete silence, such 
as radio and TV studios. It is also 
the basis of the little glossaries of 
100 signs translated into 36 languages 
which airlines issue to their cabin staff 
and to passengers for communicating 
in an emergency. 
But the most urgent need of man- 
kind is peace and understanding among 
all peoples. The international sign 
language may perhaps make its own 
special contribution towards achieving 
this aspiration, [| 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 50235: The Man who refused to die

THE MAN 
REFUSED 
by Thomas Boswell 
22 
Copyright © Washington Post, 1974 
Reproduction prohibited  
F... the moment on 
a November day in 1966, when he was 
thrown to the mat during wrestling 
practice at St. Albans School in Wash- 
ington (U.S.A.), and heard his neck 
snap, he knew what had happened. 
“My body from the neck down was 
floating in space. Only my head was 
on the ground.” 
“The doctors”, said William's mother 
calmly, “told him right away, ‘Gene, we 
can’t establish a close personal rela- 
tionship with you. Ninety-seven per- 
cent of our spinal cord patients die.” “ 
While in traction for six weeks in the 
intensive care unit of a local hospital, 
Williams heard patients in adjoining 
beds enter, conscious or unconscious, 
and eventually die. 
One death was more important than 
others. Williams says it, in part, “ins- 
pired me.” 
A construction worker who had fallen 
five stories was brought in uncons- 
cious. “Il heard about the accident on 
the radio”, recalled Williams. “He 
never regained consciousness and | 
never saw him, but for five days | lis- 
tened to his breathing in the next bed.” 
At some deep level, Williams feels, he 
decided not to quit and die. And then 
he almost did die. Not once, but 
several times. 
With holes drilled in his skull for 
traction, he developed bursitis of the 
jaw, couldn’t eat and lost 75 pounds. 
Like all longterm bed patients, he was 
prey to infection. In February, a blad- 
der infection sent his fever over 
104 degrees F. 
“The doctors told me, 'See, Mrs 
Williams? We told you not to get 
your hopes up’ " said the mother. 
Desperate and furious, the mother 
cursed the specialists “who had almost 
killed Gene”, and followed the advice 
of “a great male practical nurse.” 
The two packed the emaciated boy 
 
Photo be- Gene Williams, now 24. 
hind shows him as a school football 
player (No. 52) before his accident. 
in ice and gave him alcohol baths for 
eight hours until the fever abated. 
In June, 1967, Mrs. Williams, looking 
almost as haggard as her son, wheeled 
the patient out of the hospital against 
doctors’ orders and off to the Rusk 
Institute in New York City. 
Williams entered Rusk “just skin and 
bones”, according to Dr. Donald Co- 
valt, associate director of the institute 
at New York University. 
His injury, a cervical fracture (bet- 
ween the fifth and sixth vertebrae), left 
Williams a “high-level quadriplegic”— 
that is, paralyzed in all four extremities. 
The long rehabilitation in which Wil- 
liams learned to use what arm, wrist 
and chest muscles he had left was, 
according to both Williams and his 
father, “one long athletic event. The 
simplest movement was a wrestling 
match.” . 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
W
a
s
h
i
n
g
t
o
n
 
Po
st
, 
US 
A 
Williams entered Rusk a near-invalid, 
but left driving a car. 
With limited use of arms and wrists, 
but none of the hands, Williams could 
wheel himself to his car, hoist himself 
into the front seat, haul his wheel- 
chair in and drive. “The car was a 
lifesaver for him", said his father. 
The story of Gene Williams, who is 
now 24, is “a mile or two beyond any- 
thing I've ever seen here before”, 
according to Dr. Covalt, The patient 
does not see it that way. 
“Once | decided not to die, a clear 
choice never presented itself”, he said. 
“You go with what you've got.” 
He went back to St. Albans to finish 
his senior year in 1968 and to help 
coach the football team. “He was a 
damn good coach”, said St. Albans 
athletic director Gary Gardiner, who 
remembers Williams's chair being 
carried down the cathedral steps at 
graduation by teammates. 
Refusing to give up the pleasures 
he could retain, Williams began going 
anywhere he pleased, becoming fier- 
cely independent. “Most wheelies’ 
call ahead everywhere to find out if 
there are accomodations for them. 
How high the curbs are. | show up 
at restaurants, movies, anywhere, and 
and then cope with what's there.” 
In 1970, with a huge supply of cran- 
berry juice to fight the bladder and 
kidney stones and infections that 
plague—and often kill—paraplegics, 
Williams went to Harvard. 
There his appetite ranged from musi- 
cology (his major) and political 
science, to psychosomatic medecine 
and neuroanatomy. 
During his Harvard years, he took 
two trips to Mexico alone. The inde- 
pendence of the Mexico trips, picking 
up hitchhikers, caring for himself, is 
to Dr. Covalt the most remarkable per- 
formance by a quadriplegic in his 
experience, illustrating why “this man 
will be a success in whatever he 
attempts.” 
Praise for his fortitude is one of 
Williams's principal irritations. “This 
idea of me attacking life is really stu- 
pid.” he said. Every attempt he makes 
to live normally is seen as another 
example of his abnormality. 
“1 would like to think | would have 
developed the same way | have, 
without the injury”, said Williams. He 
is not certain, nor ever can be. 
Would the original Gene Williams 
have become passionately interested 
in music and the healing arts? Would 
he have been in the march on the 
Pentagon in a wheelchair? ‘Would he 
now be a jazz percussionist with his 
own progressive group in Cambridge? 
“I like to think so. But really, | can't 
say whether I'm better off or worse off 
than if | hadn't been hurt.” 
Doctors predict a near-normal life 
expectancy for him. |

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
These young fishermen, 
in Thailand, are pupils 
of two special schools 
for deaf children set up 
in suburbs of Bang- 
kok in 1953 and 1961. 
The schools give nor- 
mal education and pre- 
vocational training to 
600 boys and girls, 
who also enjoy arts, 
crafts and sports, and 
are able to join in the 
life of the local com- 
munity like any other 
children. Unesco is | 
seeking aid for the | 
schools through its Gift 
Coupon Programme | 
(see article page 31). 
Photo Thailand National Commission for Unesco « 


### 50236: Abolishing the ghettos for disabled citizens; physical and social barriers still prevent the total integration of the handicapped in society

ABOLISHING 
THE GHETTOS FOR 
DISABLED CITIZENS 
  
Physical and social barriers 
still prevent the total integration 
of the handicapped in society 
by Norman Acton 
  
NORMAN ACTON is Secretary-General of 
Rehabilitation International, the world's 
largest federation of organizations providing 
services for the disabled. He is also chair- 
man of the Council of World Organizations 
Interested in the Handicapped, a co-ordinat- 
ing group of 37 major international non- 
governmental organizations. Founding Presi- 
dent of the International Sports Organization 
for the Disabled, he has been a consultant 
on problems of the handicapped to the U.N., 
Unesco and UNICEF. 
A. least one out of every 
ten children requires what is called 
special education. These are the 
children who are called “disabled” or 
“handicapped” or sometimes “excep- 
tional”. They need specialized guid- 
ance, technical aids, modified physical 
arrangements of the school and class- 
room and programmes designed 
specifically to enable them to achieve 
the goals of education, 
The Declaration of the Rights of the 
Child, adopted by the United Nations 
General Assembly in 1959, states that 
each child shall be given an education 
which will enable him to become a 
useful member of society. That goal 
is especially important for the handi- 
capped child and much more difficult 
to achieve. The difficulties are to 
varying degrees consequences of the 
individual disabilities, but also they are 
products of society's attitudes towards 
handicapped persons. 
Active involvement of the community 
in its special education programme is 
one of the key ingredients of the 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 50236: Abolishing the ghettos for disabled citizens; physical and social barriers still prevent the total integration of the handicapped in society

2% 
ABOLISHING THE GHETTOS 
FOR DISABLED CITIZENS (Continued) 
effort to overcome these difficulties. 
Let us look at some of the details 
on which the above generalizations 
are based. 
What do we mean by community 
involvement? ‘ 
The basic function of the community . 
in this field is, of course, to provide 
special education facilities; to finance 
them through taxation and other means; 
and to incorporate them in the general 
educational scheme. The methods and 
structure may vary, but there is wide 
international acceptance of the concept 
that the provision of special education 
is a public responsibility of the 
community and its government. 
Conclusions of the First International 
Conference on Legislation Concerning 
the Disabled, organized by Rehabili- 
tation International in Rome in 1971, 
were that “goverriments must accept 
major responsibility and play a main 
role in the development and provision 
of rehabilitation services for all persons 
with physical and mental disabilities,” 
and that “education should be provided 
without cost to the individual or the 
individual's family.” 
This is not to overlook the vital role 
played by voluntary organizations in 
starting and providing special edu- 
cation services. In many countries 
parents’ groups and other private 
bodies have been the first to be aware 
of the problems which exist when 
there are no special educational 
facilities. They have themselves 
provided the first services and have 
been instrumental in persuading their 
governments to either launch official 
programmes or support private efforts. 
A. interesting example of 
the progression from private initiative 
to governmental services is found in 
the experience of the Zurich School 
Programme for the Mentally Retarded. 
Despite a highly developed general 
educational system, Switzerland in the 
1930s had no public facilities for the 
education of the severely mentally 
retarded. They were either kept at 
home or placed in residential insti- 
tutions. In 1937, Dr. Maria Egg started 
with private support a day school for 
children who were not admitted to the 
regular schools because they were 
classified as “ineducable”. 
For ten years, Dr. Egg and her 
associates demonstrated that these 
children could be trained to have good 
habits and social behaviour, they could 
learn self-help and various manual 
skills, they could be taught to express 
themselves through speech, music and 
art, some could master simple scholas- 
tic skills, and all could be helped to 
a happier life. Living with their 
    
 
    
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
C
N
F
L
R
H
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
he gl br J. i 
a ] " 
families, their growth was as nearly 
normal as possible; living in the 
community, their progress was a public 
testimony to the success of Dr, Egg's 
initiative. 
After a decade of this remarkable 
work under private auspices, the 
Zurich Municipal Council recognized 
its value and incorporated the school 
in the public school system. Sub- 
sequently, inspired by the accomplish- 
ments in Zurich, more than 50 com- 
munities in Switzerland have opened 
similar day-care schools for the 
severely retarded. 
Community involvement should also 
mean that the population in general is 
informed of the need for and the value 
of special education facilities. Its 
support should be forthcoming not only 
through taxation and the general 
approval implied by public education 
of # : i 4 § . 
E 3 I . y | : . 
SR a © 
 
systems, but in much more specific 
understanding of the problem. Special 
education for a useful life must be 
given in the atmosphére of the com- 
munity, and can succeed only when 
the members of the community are 
informed enough to accept and deal 
with its handicapped members in a 
mature manner, 
This requires broad community 
education through all of the usual 
channels: the press, radio, television, 
public meetings, service club projects, 
adult education courses and others. 
Understanding is advanced by success- 
ful examples, as was the case in Zurich 
when Dr. Egg's pupils demonstrated 
to the public that their abilities could 
make them acceptable. 
Why is community involvement 
essential to the success of a special 
education programme? 
CONTINUED PAGE 26

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 50236: Abolishing the ghettos for disabled citizens; physical and social barriers still prevent the total integration of the handicapped in society

  
  
Signpost to special access for wheel- 
LETTE TERE TT I CT [EELS ETT ETT ER   
 
HOW 
Drawing, right, shows how far (in centi- 
metres) a wheel-chair user can reach out 
with back erect (inner semi-circles) or with 
body Inclined (outer semi-circles). With 
-such basic dimensions designers can plan 
  
 
   
     
              
    
    
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
ABOUT US, 
MR. ARCHITECT ? 
Designed for the use of the able-bodied, our 
cities and buildings are full of major and even 
insurmountable barriers for the disabled. Steep 
stairways, narrow doorways and corridors, high 
street kerbs are only a few of the obstacles that 
plague the physically handicapped. Today how- 
ever, at the urging of many public and private 
organizations which have been studying the pro- 
blem, architects and planners have begun to 
design buildings with the requirements of the 
handicapped in mind. Unesco, for instance, has 
foreseen such needs in the design of an additional 
building for its Paris H.Q. Photos on this page, 
illustrating some aspects of the problem, are taken 
from a special issue of “ Les Cahiers de la Vie 
Quotidienne * (April-June 1973) on housing and the 
handicapped. Published in Paris by the French 
National Liaison Committee for the Rehabilitation 
of the Handicapped, the issue presents an inter- 
national cross-section of projects for making life 
easier for the disabled. 
  
  
 
     
 
  
  
  
0: gy = 
————————— 
nd 
: So
e=———1 
ed 
      
  
  
for the needs of the handicapped.                   
   
8 
    
  
3 
& 
        
NS a 
+ 
— 
| & 
1 
$ 
ALL ! 
- —— 
A 
4 4 
- + 
— ! i 
> - 
od i. 
—g 4 
=e —         
  
  
      
  
  
      
  
    
  
   
Stairways need no longer be a hazard for the disabled. Stair treads 
should never have protruding edges (top right). Aids to safety are 
stair risers inclining outwards and anti-slip material on stair edges 
{bottom right). Hand rails, following the incline of the stairs, should 
be 85 cm. above them and 90 cm. above landings. 
Left, recently designed pe- 
destrian crossing that helps 
the handicapped to get down 
from the kerb ‘and cross the 
street safely. Easily identifi- 
ed paving material enables 
the blind to locate the cross- 
ing point and a non-slip sur- 
face helps the disabled to 
manceuvre wheel-chairs. The 
crossing has gently sloping 
ramps to the street and a 
clear passage through the 
traffic Island. 
  LQ 
    
\ 
1.30 
\ 
  
   
 
      
Above, passages in a building should be at least 1.20 m. wide and 
Below, 
slope of access ramp should not exceed 1 In 20 and the handrail 
should be no higher than 96 cm. above the ramp. 
1.30 m. at corners to allow wheel-chairs to manceuvre. 
  
     max 5°24 
75   
  
  
   

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=26) 2

### 50236: Abolishing the ghettos for disabled citizens; physical and social barriers still prevent the total integration of the handicapped in society

### 50238: The Theatre of the silent: Shakespeare, Schiller, Gogol, Aeschylus, performed by deaf-mute actors

26 
ABOLISHING THE GHETTOS 
FOR DISABLED CITIZENS 
{Continued from page 24) 
Special education facilities can 
succeed only: when they are used. It 
is a distressing fact that, even today, 
too many parents are reluctant to admit 
that they have a disabled or retarded 
child. Others are unaware of the 
existence of the means of help, or 
unconvinced of the merit of permitting 
their child to leave the shelter of the 
home or of an institution. 
Here, then, is a vital function for the 
community and its organizations. To 
locate such children and their families, 
to persuade them to take advantage of 
educational opportunities and to help 
them to do so. These functions can 
be performed much more easily in an 
atmosphere where the members of the 
community are giving and receiving 
helpful actions, where there is com- 
munity involvement. 
U NTIL recently in Latin Ame- 
rica, the problem of cerebral palsy was 
of unknown prevalence because so 
many afflicted children were hidden 
from public knowledge. Now, however, 
there is general recognition that the 
numbers suffering disability because of 
cerebral palsy are large and that 
effective rehabilitation programmes, in- 
cluding, particularly, special education, 
are essential if these people are to be 
able to live useful lives. The reason 
for this change is primarily the activity 
of groups of parents of cerebral palsied 
children in various countries in the 
region. 
Coming together first in an effort to 
solve their individual problems, these 
parents quickly realized the need for 
special educational and other facilities 
—and set about creating them. As 
word spread that something could be 
done to assist children seriously handi- 
capped from this cause, many more 
parents came forward with their 
children. As the numbers of recog- 
nized cases grew, it was possible 
to establish better schools and training 
centres, to attract experts in the 
needed fields and eventually to 
convince governments to assist or 
establish rehabilitation programmes, 
including special education for the 
cerebral palsied. 
Today, in Caracas, in Bogota, in 
Lima, in Buenos Aires, in Rio de Janeiro 
and elsewhere, it is possible to find 
active and effective services to assist 
children with cerebral palsy and, in 
every case, organizations such as 
parents’ groups have played a major 
role in the inception of the programme 
and continue to be active in the work. 
The challenge of spreading their 
attitudes, knowledge and methods to 
the rural areas and to the less 
developed countries remains. 
CONTINUED PAGE 34 
deaf-mute actors 
= TT wo A Fl a Se Rl ty 'tomime presented by the theatre 
~ group of the Evening School for Deaf Adolescents and Adults, in 
Santa Fe, Argentina. The work of this school and other theatre 
~ groups for the deaf and dumb shows that the teaching of mime 
i 
and its performance in public give confidence to the deaf, help by 
~ them to overcome any feelings of inferiority and, in the case of 
~ children, lead to progress in school. 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

THE THEATRE 
A. the theatre lights dim 
slowly, the clash of a gong announces 
that the performance is about to begin. 
Silence falls as the audience hears the 
sound. The actors perceive the sound 
waves as a physical sensation mounting 
through the soles of their feet and 
take their places on the stage. 
But the silence remains unbroken 
throughout the performance. Cos- 
tumes and scenery are unnecessary: 
body-hugging black tights and white- 
painted faces are all the props needed. 
Body and face become the focal point 
of Aspects of Man, a pantomime 
created by the theatre group of 
Special Evening School No. 2028 for 
Deaf Adolescents and Adults, in 
Santa Fe, Argentina. 
Here, the gestures usual in the 
normal child from the age of eight 
months, which constitute a sign, rep- 
resenting a situation or object, become 
the symbols of a more abstract 
language in the case of handicapped 
children. Loss of hearing is compen- 
sated by highly developed powers of 
observation and translation into terms 
of gesture which enable the performers 
to give expression, often in a very 
symbolic manner, to the realities of 
their universe. 
This theatre group, which is directed 
by a psycho-pedagogical specialist, 
Professor Néstor Didier, has not only 
given performances in Santa Fe and 
other Argentinian cities, but was the 
only deaf-mute group at the First Latin- 
American Mime Congress and Festival, 
held in Buenos Aires in August 1973. 
‘With the conviction that the theatre . 
can be used as a remedial aid, 
Professor Didier launched this type of 
activity five years ago in the Special 
School, producing pantomime with the 
participation of all the pupils, whose 
ages range from 15 to 35. The most 
gifted among them go on to join the 
theatre group. 
After a prolonged period of adap- 
tation and familiarization members 
work together in groups. The disci- 
pline includes individual and collective 
concentration upon given situations, 
with themes suggested by pupils, 
gradually progressing from the concrete 
—gimple imitation or representation of 
an object or a situation—to the 
abstract, involving concepts such as 
Science, Politics, Love, Friendship, 
God. Professor Didier considers that 
communication of this kind facilitates 
learning of the various subjects taught 
in school. 
The group's success at the First 
Latin-American Mime Festival led its 
organizers to request Professor Didier 
to give a series of short courses on 
the theatre for handicapped persons 
in general, in other words, not only 
for the deaf and dumb, but also for 
the blind—an unusual and fascinating 
experiment which merits the closest 
attention. 
At the 6th Congress of the World 
Federation of the Deaf, held at Unesco 
Headquarters in Paris in August 1971, 
the Director of the Santa Fe Special 
School stated that he had observed 
that the pupils’ drama activities en- 
abled each individual to acquire a 
deeper knowledge of his or her own 
personality. Drama was thus extremely 
effective in helping the handicapped to 
overcome their inhibitions, to establish 
closer relationships within the group 
and to improve their social contacts in 
general. 
During the same Congress, Pro- 
fessor V. Indjef of Bulgaria spoke of 
the role of pantomime in visual and 
movement co-ordination, in visual per- 
ception and in the enrichment of the 
sign language of the deaf. He stressed 
that this art above all others helped 
the deaf to overcome their feelings of 
inferiority, 
Italy's Professor N. Palazzotto went 
even further. After pointing out the 
widely recognized educational réle of 
the theatre in general as a stimulus to 
creativity and acquiring culture, he 
underlined the therapeutic value of 
pantomime for the deaf. 
Mime requires a continuous gym- 
nastic and respiratory preparation 
which is an extremely important factor 
in the process of speech rehabilitation 


### 50238: The Theatre of the silent: Shakespeare, Schiller, Gogol, Aeschylus, performed by deaf-mute actors

OF THE SILENT 
Shakespeare, Schiller, Gogol, Aeschylus... 
performed by deaf-mute actors 
of deaf children. In view of this, he 
strongly recommended the teaching of 
mime in all schools for the deaf, 
whatever the level or grade. 
Another aspect of this art is pre- 
sented by the Moscow Theatre of 
Mime and Gesture, a team of deaf 
and dumb actors directed by Victor 
S. Znamerovsky. Not only has 
Znamerovsky succeeded in making 
each actor discover his own “voice”, 
his personal “tone” in the gesture, 
the smile, in the sudden change of 
expression, but he has also managed 
to a certain extent to reconstruct the 
“text” of the works performed. 
The company's repertory includes 
Aeschylus’ Prometheus Bound; Sha- 
kespeare's Twelfth Night ; Intrigue and 
Love by Schiller; Marriage by Gogol, 
and a number of works by contempor- 
ary Soviet writers, such as That Time 
in Seville, a story by S. Aleshin about 
Don Juan, and The Enchanted Island by 
Y. laritonov. The group has performed 
with outstanding success outside the 
Soviet Union, notably in Sofia, Warsaw 
and Budapest. 
The same “fidelity” to the text is 
also characteristic of the Deutsches 
Gehorlosen Theater (The German 
Theatre of the Deaf) from Dortmund, 
Federal Republic of Germany, which 
performed Shakespeare's Romeo and 
Juliet and Biichner's Woyzeck in Paris 
during the 6th Congress of the World 
Federation of the Deaf. 
H.. one should certainly 
mention a curious experience common 
to both the Argentine and the Soviet 
troupes. In the pantomime Aspects of 
Man the voice of an invisible narrator 
sometimes supplements the gestures 
and links up the various sketches. 
‘When The Enchanted Island was filmed 
(the film won the Silver Dragon award 
at the Cracow international film festival 
in Poland), it had to be dubbed for 
persons with normal hearing. In other 
words, the language of the deaf, just 
like any other language in the world, 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=28) 2

### 50238: The Theatre of the silent: Shakespeare, Schiller, Gogol, Aeschylus, performed by deaf-mute actors

### 50263: They called me 'ape man'

THE THEATRE 
OF THE SILENT (Continued) >, 
needs to be translated or interpreted 
for those who are unfamiliar with it. 
A rather different case from these 
two is the National Theater of the Deaf 
in Connecticut, U.S.A. Founded and 
directed by David Hays, a well-known 
Broadway set-designer, this company ‘ 
toured North America, Europe and 
the Middle East, performing before 
audiences in which over 80 per cent of 
the spectators had normal hearing. 
This is" a troupe of professional 
actors, and is particularly distinguished 
for its liveliness. Since the entire 
performance is based on gestures, the 
members of the troupe are intensely 
observant and seem twice as alive as 
most other actors. As Hays points 
out, however, the Theater of the Deaf 
is not “help for the handicapped.” So 
the real aim is to educate the public, 
not the actors. 
“Our biggest problem”, says Hays, 
“is to break through uninformed atti- 
tudes concerning deaf people and 
obtain the feeling we want in terms of 
appreciating the theatre company for 
fully entertaining, fresh and beautiful 
performances.” 
The best summary of the group's 
objectives is that given by one of the 
actors—"We just want to be judged as 
performers.” Far from seeking any form Photo © Central Studie of Documentary Films, Moscow 
whatever of sympathy or paternalism, 
this attitude already takes for granted A : i : ; ; a | bove, using sign language, an interpreter transmits the director's 
full integration into “normal” society. Ml instructions to deaf and deaf-mute actors and actresses of the U.S.S.R. 
Theatre of Mime and Gesture in Moscow. Right, curtain call for players 
at the National Theater of the Deaf in Waterford (Connecticut, U.S.A.). 
The troupe, whose voices must be “seen” to be “heard” respond 
happily to audience applause, 
    
| 11:28 a) fe : by Henry Viscardi 
CALLED ME
‘, a or ul? A x Feil I... born without legs. 
Ti a ey nes | lived most of my early life without 
p : I 3 them, horribly deformed, an object of 
: pity and sometimes scorn. 1 was so 
different that other children called me 
“Ape Man". Something happened 
i over the years to change this. 
© HENRY VISCARDI Jnr. of the United States was born legless. Many years. have passed since my 
his way through university by refereeing basketball games from el- childhood as a crippled boy. £du- 
chair and working as a sports reporter. “Abilities Inc.”, a company he cation and rehabilitation were not 
g Jounded in 1952 ie demonstrate that Sisablag men a women S30 bee IW formalized then. They occurred in the 
\ ed workers, has since grown into a unique complex of educ a i i 
vocational training centres. He has written seven books on the rehabi- daily s truggle of life. If anyane helped 
litation of the disabled including an autobiography, “A Man's Stature” (John y to 
~ Day, New York, 1952), “Give Us the Tools" (1959), “The School” (1964) and Some people have a proven flair 
~ “The Abilities Story” (1967) all published by Paul S. Eriksson Inc., New York. for transmitting powerful invitations to 
others to regard life as pointless and 

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 50263: They called me 'ape man'

Photo © USIS, Paris 
  
hopeless. They seem to be gifted at 
getting others to give up, yield, give 
in. They kill the dream, paralyze the 
hope, cripple the joy. We all know 
people like that and we are undone in 
their presence. 
Helen Keller, although blind and 
deaf, was not one of these. She was 
one of those splendid unforgettable 
people who invite us to life. 
Thirty-five years ago when | was 27, 
| received my first set of artificial limbs 
in New York City where | was 
born. War started shortly afterwards. 
| became a field officer in the American 
Red Cross. As an experience it is 
one for which | can never give enough 
thanks. For one thing, starting a new 
life on artificial limbs where | stood 
straight and tall for the first time, | was 
born anew. It was a whole new life. 
I was like a child. 
After the war | turned to the world 
of work and was well on my way to a 
Vice-Presidency in a large national 
organization. | could not resist the 
urge to return to the world of the 
disabled and in 1952 “Abilities, Inc.” 
was founded as a workshop for the 
disabled. 
It supports itself out of earnings, 
pays prevailing wages, engages in 
complex electronic work, banking and 
clerical tasks and glass engraving of 
exquisite beauty. Since its beginning 
over 20 years ago, thousands of 
disabled persons have come to be 
trained, to work and, for many, to pass 
on to other rewarding careers in 
private industry. Many have remained, 
some for 15 or 20 years. 
All are covered by complete 
medical, surgical benefits, sick leave 
and vacation policies, life insurance 
and disability benefits for total and 
permanent disability and all are covered 
by a retirement plan which will allow 
retirement on 50 to 90 per cent of 
salary in addition to social security 
benefits of approximately $300 a month. 
Yet all were so disabled at the time 
of employment that they could not find 
a job. 
This remarkable record includes 
surpassing economic achievement 
over a period of less than 20 years. 
In that period of time these disabled 
workers manufactured goods valued at 
$48,000,000. They received salaries 
totalling $25,544,000 They as workers 
paid $5,749,000 in taxes. In insurance, 
rehabilitation, public education and 
benefit programmes a total of 
$21,280,000 was invested. 
If these same people had remained 
on welfare rolls or had been otherwise 
supported, it would have cost over 
$11,000,000. Add this to what they 
earned and produced and the total of 
new wealth which they returned to the 
community because they worked and 
produced would be $112,000,000 over 
a period of less than 20 years. | find 
it difficult to estimate what they brought 
to their lives in dignity and personal 
happiness through working and pro- 
ducing instead of being supported. 
In a recent study of the Human 
Resources Center, set up by “Abilities, 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 50263: They called me 'ape man'

THEY CALLED ME 'APE MAN’ (Continued) 
Inc.”, conducted in co-operation with 
industry, 138 physically disabled per- 
sons were placed in jobs after 
evaluation and training. Not sedentary, 
unrewarding jobs, but jobs of tomorrow 
related to data preparation and data 
analysis and to the new era of com- 
puter technology. These were jobs 
in which workers were needed and for 
which these handicapped persons had 
the necessary physical, mental and 
emotional capacities. 
It is interesting to recognize that 
both the worker and the work can be 
changed to adjust to each other. The 
worker can be better educated, 
rehabilitated, fitted with prosthetic 
devices to meet the capacities he 
needs for work. Likewise, the job can 
be modernized and simplified, its 
requirements modified to match the 
capacities of the worker. It is not a 
one-way street. Both are changeable; 
they can and should be changed to 
complement one another. 
There has been in the past a lack 
of career awareness in U.S. schools. 
For the disabled student and in fact 
for all students we must change the 
attitude in education that the non- 
academically inclined are considered 
second class citizens. 
In the Human Resources School a 
recent survey of 65 severely disabled 
students who graduated from our high 
school showed that 47 went on to 
further education. These were students 
who prior to coming to the school 
were so severely disabled that they 
were homebound “and received a 
minimal education from a visiting 
teacher. Eighteen of these graduates 
went on to four-year colleges and 
20 to two-year colleges. 
One alumnus has gone on to law 
school after college graduation. One 
is employed as a computer programmer 
and working for his master's degree. 
Another is attending graduate school 
and working for his master's degree. 
Education has made it possible to 
increase the level of independence of 
these disabled young people. Career 
awareness must begin in the early 
childhood grades of schooling. it 
prepares the disabled child for the 
competitive world of work and supplies 
the basic skills too for job maturity. 
Without career education, rehabilitation 
is meaningless. 
From its humble beginnings in 1952 
as a workshop for the disabled, Human 
Resources Center has now become a 
place where learning and growth are 
passwords to the future. Its Research 
and Training Institute conducts studies 
in psychology, special education, 
vocational rehabilitation, and bio- 
engineering. In its evaluation and 
training programmes over 250 persons 
each year are placed in jobs. Ten 
thousand persons each year attend 
its seminar and training programmes. 
Human Resources School with 
200 severely disabled students from 
preschool through high school is fully 
accredited and recognized by the State 
of New York. 
“Abilities, Inc.” with 185 workers is 
a living laboratory in which the belief 
in career education and rehabilitation 
provides the opportunity for inde- 
pendence and productive dignity. HN 
ULTRASONIC SPECTACLES   
Below, “radar” spectacles for the blind devised by a British 
scientist working at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand. 
A mini transmitter-receiver between the lenses emits an ultrasonic 
signal and picks up its echo, enabling the blind person to locate 
and avoid obstacles. 
Photo © Parimage, Paris 
  
Dr
aw
in
g 
© 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
of
 
Ut
ah
, 
U.
S.
A.
 
     
ELECTRONIC ‘SIGHT’ 
Researchers at the University of Utah (U.S.A.) and the University 
of Western Ontario (Canada) have successfully stimulated arti- 
ficial sight in the blind with an electronic system that bypasses the 
retina of the eye and the optic nerve. Sixty-four electrodes 
implanted in the visual cortex of the brain were connected to a 
computer and to TV cameras. Dots of light projected on the TV 
screen were transmitted to the brain via the computer. Two blind 
patients could see the dots and one of them could make out 
different patterns. Above, artist’s impression of how the system 
may ultimately help the blind to “see”. A minute TV camera in 
a glass eye would be placed in each eye socket and a mini- 
computer would be concealed in the spectacles’ frame. Signals 
would go to a tiny transmitter in the scalp and be passed into 
the brain via an implanted receiver and electrodes.

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 50275: UNESCO and special education for the handicapped

UNESCO and special education 
for the handicapped 
by 
Nils-Ivar Sundberg 
W.. the passage of years 
education of the handicapped has 
been taking an increasingly important 
place in the work of Unesco. The 
vastness of the problem and the need 
for international co-operation to get to 
grips with it have become progress- 
ively clearer with the publication of 
data on the number of handicapped in 
the world. 
It is now estimated that on earth 
there are about 400,000,000 handi- 
capped people, that is to say nearly 
the combined population of the United 
States and the U.S.S.R. Most of these 
handicapped people are uneducated 
and unskilled, but the work of Unesco 
to help educate them and improve their 
lives has been growing over the years. 
Unesco, with comparatively small 
funds at its disposal, is making a 
world-wide impact on the problem. 
One of its main objectives has been 
to convince the nations that education 
of the handicapped is not merely an 
ethical duty but that it pays. For 
instance, in the United States it is 
estimated that every dollar paid for 
rehabilitation gives a return of 35 dol- 
lars, The cost of rehabilitation is 
usually repaid by the taxes of the 
rehabilitated person within ten years 
(see article page 28.) 
In Central America disabled persons 
living in remote agricultural com- 
munities were brought to the capital 
and trained in such jobs as hair- 
dressing, tailoring, woodwork and 
radio-repairing. ‘When they returned 
to their villages they usually earned 
three or four times what they would 
have obtained had they been able- 
bodied agricultural workers. 
Unesco began shortly after it was 
aunded in 1946 to grapple with the 
problem of educating the millions of 
innocent victims of World War Il. It 
appreciated the need for special 
education not only for the blind, the 
deaf, the maimed and the mentally 
 
NILS-IVAR SUNDBERG, of Sweden, has di- 
rected Unesco’'s programme of Special Edu- 
cation for Handicapped Children and Young 
People since it started in 1968. Formerly 
Director for Special Education in Stockholm 
and lecturer at the Stockholm School of Edu- 
cation, he was for nine years Advisory 
Officer at the Swedish National Board of 
Education on questions of special education 
for the handicapped, including teacher train- 
ing and curriculum planning. 
retarded but also for the countless 
children whose nervous system had 
been shattered by the war. During 
those early years Unesco published 
a series of studies for the guidance of 
educators in all countries on the 
national and international measures 
needed to face the challenge. 
Unesco gave particular attention to 
international co-operation in teaching 
the blind. Shortly after its foundation 
it decided to promote a survey of 
problems aimed at establishing world 
Braille uniformity. It obtained the 
services as consultant of Sir Clutha 
Mackenzie, of New Zealand, an inde- 
fatigable worker for the blind who had 
lost his sight during World War |. 
His goal was to produce a univer- 
sally acceptable plan for the application 
of Braille to all languages, thus 
fulfilling the hopes of Louis Braille, the 
blind French professor, who in 1829 
invented his alphabet of raised dots 
for finger-reading. Louis Braille was 
convinced that his method could be 
applied to any language, but since 
there was no international body at that 
time to achieve world-wide uniformity, 
a chaos of dissimilar Braille prints 
developed in the various countries 
over the years. 
As a “Unesco Courier” article 
pointed out in March 1952, “almost 
from the start, enthusiasts of the 
Braille idea in many countries began 
juggling the dots around in different 
combinations. Soon the same patterns 
of six dots came to be used to express 
different letters not only in different 
languages but even in the same lang- 
uage. 
“In Great Britain, for example, the 
Bible had already been printed in no 
fewer than five systems by 1868, and 
that year the British and Foreign Blind 
Association (now the National Institute 
for the Blind) decided in favour of the 
original Braille. In the United States, 
three arrangements came into use. 
One group adopted French Braille, as 
Britain had done. Another modified 
many of the signs on the principle of 
the fewest dots to the most frequently 
recurring letters. A third group turned 
the axis of the Braille rectangle from 
the vertical to the horizontal. 
“Only in 1932 did an agreement 
between the United Kingdom and the 
United States fix “Standard English 
Braille” as the contracted or abbrevi- 
ated form for everyday use throughout 
the English-speaking world. 
“Similar divergent systems intro- 
duced in German, modern Greek and 
Hebrew Brailles also yielded in due 
time to a return to the original French. 
“But variations existed in Braille 
used in Spain and Portugal and the 
different Latin American countries. 
Because of the added factor of varied 
scripts and the absence of any 
recognized symbols for letter-sounds 
not used in the Latin alphabet, Asian 
and African language Braille systems 
were even more erratic in those parts 
of the world. 
“These were the circumstances 
which in 1949 led Unesco to take up 
the question of a single universal 
script for the blind.” 
In 1954 Unesco published in English, 
French and Spanish a standard work 
by Sir Clutha Mackenzie entitled 
“World Braille Usage”. It was a land- 
mark for the blind of the world. In the 
words of Helen Keller, the American 
deaf-blind heroine who wrote the pre- 
face, it “lifted Braille from a jungle 
of punctographic codes to a universal 
medium.” The possibility of producing 
a new work outlining the latest 
research and thinking on this sub- 
ject is now being studied. 
T.: wider aspects of Unes- 
co's work on the education of the 
handicapped began to take more 
concrete form as of 1966. The General 
Conference of Unesco that year unani- 
mously adopted a resolution which in 
a few clear sentences stressed the 
need to promote collaboration among 
educational research institutions in 
studying the special problems of the 
handicapped. 
It emphasized the necessity to 
exchange information internationally, 
to establish educational research insti- 
tutions and to continue to publish 
widely all information on educational 
systems for the handicapped. 
A special education programme was 
launched by Unesco in 1968. Since 
then, Unesco has been in liaison with 
other international and also national 
bodies working for the handicapped. 
It is carrying out a global programme 
for the publication of studies on the 
education of the blind, the deaf, the 
physically impaired and the mentally 
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE 
J1

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 50275: UNESCO and special education for the handicapped

32 
UNESCO AND SPECIAL EDUCATION (Continued) 
deficient. It is promoting co-operation 
among nations by sending out special- 
ists and advisers on the education of 
the handicapped, by granting fellow- 
ships for teacher-training and by acting 
as the channel through which much 
needed equipment for the handicapped 
is provided. Since 1968 some 
100 projects in special education have 
been launched in some 50 countries, 
often financed through voluntary 
contributions, 
For instance, the Danish Government 
organized in 1968 a Unesco training 
seminar for teachers of the handi- 
capped in African countries and in 
1969 it did the same for Arab teachers 
of the blind. A year later a Unesco 
six weeks’ course for teachers of the 
blind, financed partly by a gift of 
$10,000 from Denmark, and partly by 
Tanzania, took place at Tabora in 
western Tanzania. The participants 
learned the best methods of teaching 
Braille in Swahili and English. The 
funds also made it possible to pur- 
chase Braille frames, typewriters and 
other equipment, 
The Netherlands Government has 
given fellowships to four of the Tanza- 
nian teachers to study the education 
of the blind and of the deaf in the 
Netherlands. Travel costs were met 
from Unesco's Special Education 
Voluntary Contribution Fund. Similar 
fellowships have been granted to 
administrators and teachers of the 
handicapped in some other countries 
of Africa and of Asia. 
U coco Special Education 
Voluntary Contribution Fund, set up in 
1968, has so far received a total of 
$62,600. Support has come from the 
governments of Cambodia ($1,000), 
Denmark ($10,000), Finland ($10,000), 
Ghana ($500), India ($6,000), Iran 
($3,000), Israel ($1,000), Malta ($ 500), 
Morocco ($2,000), Norway ($10,000), 
Swedén ($10,000), Yugoslavia ($500), 
from Her Majesty the Empress of Iran 
($2,000), from the Sovereign Order of 
Malta ($6,000) and a smaller amount 
from Danish and French donators, 
Unesco has used this aid to sponsor 
projects in Costa Rica (seminar on 
education for the mentally retarded), 
Cuba (training course for teachers of 
the partially sighted), Arab Republic of 
Egypt (fellowship to study the pro- 
duction of educational equipment for 
the handicapped), Ethiopia (equipment 
for the blind), Ghana (fellowship in 
planning special education), Indonesia 
(fellowship in speech-correction), Iran 
(planning education of the mentally 
retarded), Iraq (training of teachers 
for the mentally retarded), Liberia 
(teaching equipment for the deaf), 
Sierra Leone (fellowship in education - 
of the physically handicapped), Tanza- 
nia (training course for teachers of the 
blind and fellowships in education of 
the blind and the deaf), and Venezuela 
(training of teachers for the mentally 
retarded). 
[n response to requests from its 
member countries, Unesco has sent 
out consultants to all parts of the 
world. For, example a consultant 
mission was sent to Guatemala for 
three months to advise on the develop- 
ment of special education in all 
Central American countries and Pana- 
ma. A consultant was sent to Syria 
to assist in organizing a training 
course for teachers of the deaf. A 
Swiss specialist went to Madagascar 
to direct a seminar for teachers of the 
deaf from that country, Reunion and 
Mauritius. His mission has resulted 
in continuous contact between the 
deaf communities in Madagascar and 
Geneva. 
At present contributions for helping 
the handicapped are also being 
channelled to some 20 developing 
countries through Unesco’s ingenious 
Gift Coupon Programme. Groups and 
institutiona in these countries are 
purchasing with the coupons, teaching 
equipment from hard currency nations. 
Gift coupons are a form of inter- 
national cheque or money order issued 
by Unesco. Donors purchase them 
from Unesco headquarters in Paris 
and send them to groups in other 
countries which use them for buying 
books and equipment for approved 
projects from suppliers in any part of 
the world. The suppliers send the 
coupons back to Unesco to have them 
converted into their own currency. 
One of the recent Unesco gift 
coupon campaigns was conducted by 
the World Association of Girl Guides: 
and Girl Scouts in an appeal to its 
members to support a school for dis- 
abled girls being set up by the Nige- 
rian Girl Guides Association in Lagos. 
Gift coupons are also being put to 
good use in Mexico City, contributing 
to the purchase of the most modern 
equipment by the Escuela Normal de 
Especializacién, which promotes train- 
ing of teachers for the deaf, the blind 
and the physically or mentally handi- 
capped. The teachers trained at the 
college will then train others to 
educate handicapped children through- 
out Latin America. In Ghana the cou- 
pons have enabled the director of the 
Training College for Teachers of the 
Deaf to buy group amplifiers and 
hearing aids from Europe and America. 
In 1972 Unesco set up a special 
“Books for the Blind” programme in 
co-operation with the World Council 
for the Welfare of the Blind. This led 
to one of the most successful fund- 
raising ventures for the handicapped. 
A gala performance jointly sponsored 
by Unesco and the United States Na- 
tional Commission for Unesco was 
given in Paris by the internationally 
famous American singer and enter- 
tainer, Sammy Davis Jr. The $35,000 
raised by the benefit performance went 
to provide Braille books and educa- 
tional material for the blind. Among 
‘the countries which have already be- 
nefited are Cyprus, Ghana, Iran, Mali, 
Mexico and the Syrian Arab Republic. 
THE RIGHTS 
OF THE 
MENTALLY RETARDED 
The United Nations General Assembly 
on December 20, 1971, proclaimed the 
rights of mentally retarded persons 
and called for national and internatio- 
nal action for the protection of these 
rights. 
The U.N. Declaration on the Rights 
of Mentally Retarded Persons affirms, 
in part : 
  
 
        
        
      
     1. The mentally retarded person has, to 
the maximum degree of feasibility, the 
same rights as other human beings. 
2. The mentally retarded person has a 
right to proper medical care and physical 
therapy and to such education, training, 
rehabilitation and guidance as will enable 
him to develop his ability and maximum 
potential. 
3. The mentally retarded person has a 
right to economic security and to a decent 
standard of living. He has a right to per- 
form productive work or to engage in 
any other meaningful occupation to the 
fullest possible extent of his capabilities. 
4. Whenever possible, the mentally re- 
tarded person should live with his own 
family or with foster parents and par- 
ticipate in different forms of community 
life. The family with which he lives 
should receive assisiance. If care in an 
institution becomes necessary, it should 
  
    
        
i 
i 
ip 
4 
L 
=
 
be provided in surroundings and other ’ 
circumstances as close as possible to 
those of normal life. 
| 5. The mentally retarded person has a 
: 
’ 
right to a qualified guardian when this is 
required to protect his personal well-being 
and interests. ’ 
6. The mentally retarded person has a 
right to protection from exploitation, abuse 
and degrading treatment. 
  
Education is mainly a national but 
also an international responsibility. 
This applies equally to special edu- 
cation for the handicapped. The 
serious situation of the world's handi- 
capped is best shown by quoting 
U Thant, then Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, when he spoke in New 
York on October 20, 1971: “While so 
much has been done, so much more 
needs be done to help those 300 mil- 
lion disabled persons in the develop- 
ing world in their struggle to overcome 
their handicaps and become active, 
useful members of society. If ‘we 
break down to a per capita figure the 
total sum being spent by the United 
Nations system on rehabilitation, and 
include all other international support, 
governmental and voluntary, the figure 
amounts to only one cent for each 
disabled person, or a total annual 
expenditure of $3 million on the 
disabled in the developing world.” 
Nils-lvar Sundberg

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 50231: New vistas in special education

NEW VISTAS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION 
(Continued from page 17) 
learners, remedial instruction is now 
given outside the class in additional’ 
or substitute courses, but the pupils 
remain in their ordinary classes. 
in the U.S.S.R., however, increasing 
emphasis is placed on the system of 
special schools and classes. Special 
programmes are carried out for each 
type and degree of handicap. 
Pre-school establishments for sev- 
erely handicapped children are show- 
ing very promising results. Before 
decisions about placing a child in a 
special school are taken each child 
is examined by a committee compris- 
ing the director of the special school, 
a school inspector, a pediatrician, a 
neurologist, a teacher from an ordinary 
school, and a teacher from a special 
school. Thus the rights of the child 
to appropriate educational measures 
are well safeguarded. 
In the U.S.A. a great amount of 
research has been carried out on the 
various ways of educating the han- 
dicapped. This has frequently resulted 
in conflicting findings. The discrepan- 
cies in themselves merely show the 
complexity of the subject and how 
much we still have to learn. Follow-up 
studies are likely to indicate the extent 
to which early remedial action can 
improve the intellectual growth in 
children who might otherwise have 
been mentally retarded. 
In Uruguay early identification of 
mental handicaps js regarded as of 
vital importance, but this is considered 
of little avail without immediate follow- 
up remedial measures. The Latin Amer- 
ican Perinatology and Human Devel- 
opment Centre (handling the problems 
of infants and children) therefore pro- 
vides courses for obstetricians, pedia- 
tricians, 
specialists. 
The outcome of these courses 
should offer a greater chance for early 
treatment of infants whose mental de- 
velopment appears doubtful, and for 
helping the mother and her new-born 
child. Doctors, nurses and teachers are 
alerted to physical factors, social con- 
ditions and family relationships which 
can have a good or bad influence on 
intellectual growth. 
An outstanding landmark was the 
adoption by the United Nations in 1971 
of the Declaration on the Rights of 
Mentally Retarded Persons which had 
been earlier proclaimed by the Inter- 
national League of Societies for the 
Mentally Handicapped. 
The Declaration is an unequivocal 
acceptance of the principle of integra- 
tion for the mentally handicapped. It is 
also a declaration of intent to ensure 
that the 1970s will see an end to the 
teachers and public-health 
policies of segregation or even the 
public neglect which characterized 
attitudes to the mentally handicapped 
in too many places. 
Mutiole Initial handicaps do 
: © not on their own 
; ultiple retard development. 
: . They are always re- 
Handicaps : inforced by other 
factors and by sec- 
ondary defects. Thus, a belief that 
the handicapped cannot learn leads to 
lack of stimulation and of opportunities 
for learning. A feeling of shame or 
the hostility of others can exclude the 
handicapped from normal opportunities 
for social development. But the term 
“multiple handicap” generally refers to 
a combination of two or more primary 
handicaps, for instance “blind and 
mentally handicapped” or “deaf and 
emotionally disturbed”. 
In the past, teachers have been 
trained to specialize in only one handi- 
cap, so it is difficult to find people who 
can meet all the needs of those suffer- 
ing from multiple handicaps. Since, in 
a certain sense, all handicapped per- 
sons suffer from multiple handicaps this 
has led many to reconsider not only 
the traditional special teacher-training 
programmes but also organization of 
services for the handicapped. 
Our inability to deal effectively with 
those who are worst off may lead to 
a clearer conception of what is best 
for all the handicapped. In fact the 
selection, training and professional 
qualifications of those who deal with 
the handicapped may become the 
major focus of research in this decade. 
One of the characteristic features 
of the past decade has been the exten- 
sion of scientific knowledge to the 
extent that a new science—the science 
of knowledge utilization—has devel- 
oped. This embraces the collection, 
analysis, dissemination and utilization 
of research findings. 
Studies of the effects of different 
types of early environments, of the 
development of language and of its 
effects on intelligence, and of the unin- 
tentional side-effects of many of our 
educational structures have neces- 
sitated reconsideration of the social 
processes through which handicapped 
children are obliged to pass and of 
the possibilities for growth in human 
intelligence. 
Some of the significant principles 
which have emerged and are effecting 
changes in educational practice are: 
WM The earlier we recognize handicaps 
and the sooner we start remedial 
action, the better the chances of 
influencing a child's future develop- 
ment. Pre-school programmes have 
been set up for all types of handicaps 
to compensate for initial defects and 
to prevent the growth of secondary 
defects. 
HB Intelligence levels are not now as- 
sumed to be as constant as many have 
hitherto supposed. Theories which 
maintain that a child's mental abilities 
cannot be improved have been called 
in question by recent research projects. 
These demonstrate how plastic and 
modifiable intelligence is and how 
much it depends on experiences parti- 
cularly in early life: ways of bringing 
up children, what parents expect of 
them, the frustrations or deprivations 
children may feel, how the children’s 
actions affect parents’ behaviour and 
vice-versa, as well as many other 
complex variables. 
BW The results of intelligence tests, 
especially with the young and handi- 
capped, have little value for predicting 
how a child will develop intellectually 
in the future. Hence the results of 
IQ tests are useful in determining a 
child's mental make-up at a given 
moment but should not be used to 
separate children into rigid, permanent 
mental categories. 
HM For the best development, handi- 
capped children need many educators. 
Parents, with guidance from special 
teachers, can become useful auxiliaries 
in the more formal aspects of early 
education. Perhaps the modification 
and changing of child-rearing practices 
and the attitudes of parents of the 
handicapped will become one of the 
most important objectives of special 
education in the next decade. 
BM Education is a community resource 
in part delegated to teachers. All 
members of the community can help 
in establishing satisfactory patterns of 
life for the handicapped. The setting 
in which learning takes place has a 
profound effect on the learner and if 
handicapped children are sent to iso- 
lated institutions it is no surprise that 
they become “institutionalized”. New 
arrangements are being tried to see 
how best “normalization” and “inte- 
gration” can be effected for the handi- 
capped. 
To accomplish the aims of special 
education the teacher must remain 
informed and keep an open mind. He 
must be prepared at all times to 
examine the efficacy of his teaching 
methods and to analyze those factors 
outside the classroom which can best 
enhance the lives and promote the 
development of his pupils. Hence a 
body of well-trained teachers is likely 
to become the most effective profes- 
sional instrument in helping many 
handicapped children towards a more 
joyous life. .H 
John McKenna 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 50236: Abolishing the ghettos for disabled citizens; physical and social barriers still prevent the total integration of the handicapped in society

34 
ABOLISHING THE GHETTOS 
FOR DISABLED CITIZENS 
Continued from page 26 
The importance of community in- 
volvement also emerges from the 
requirement that special education, 
even more than general education, 
should be designed to help prepare 
the handicapped child to live a useful 
life in his community and society, 
This means that the training must 
not be in isolation, but in an atmo- 
sphere of interaction between the 
people of the school, teachers, pupils 
and parents, and the other people of 
the community. [It means that the 
curriculum must be planned with the 
characteristics of the community in 
mind and with opportunities to observe 
and participate in its work and play. 
All of this can be accomplished only 
when the organizations and individuals 
of the community are effectively 
associated with the special education 
programme, 
In any discussion of the relationships 
between special education and the 
community a central issue is the 
respective functions of special schools 
for the handicapped and of provisions 
for participation of the handicapped 
in regular schools. There is a role for 
each, but greater emphasis can be 
placed on the integration of disabled 
students in general educational facili- 
ties. 
Dr. Herbert Goldstein, of Yeshiva 
University in New York, Chairman of 
the Rehabilitation International Edu- 
cation Commission, says, “The concept 
of normalization as it applies to the 
education of handicapped children 
underscores the role of the community 
as it never has before. Historically, 
it has been the practice to exclude the 
handicapped from the benefits of com- 
munity life and participation by sending 
them off to special schools or insti- 
tutions far from community life. 
“Explicitly, the rationale for thus 
segregating the handicapped by their 
handicaps, i.e., by building and activat- 
ing special schools for blind and for 
deaf children, was to provide an 
educational setting that would be 
advantageous for their living and edu- 
cation. It was felt that they could get 
along better and profit more from an 
environment designed to accommodate 
their handicapping condition... 
“Implicity, however, the motivation 
to segregate handicapped children 
was, and often still is, based on their 
‘differentness’; they sometimes don't 
look and act like ordinary children and 
Inquiry in 38 countries. 
Inquiry in 30 countries. 
organizations. 
The Efficacy of Special Education. 
Employment for the Handicapped. 
The School, by Henry Viscardi. 
Paul S. Eriksson, New York, 1964.   
FURTHER READING ABOUT THE HANDICAPPED 
The Present Situation and Trends of Research in the Field of Special Education 
Four Studies: Scandinavian countries; U.S.S.R.; U.S.A.; Uruguay. 
1973, 306 pp. (20 F). See inside back cover. 
Education for Handicapped Children? By Paquerette Villeneuve. 
Booklet explaining situation of the handicapped child. Unesco, Paris, 1970, 80 pp. 
A Study of the Present Situation of Special Education 
Unesco, Paris, 1970-1971, 168 pp. 
Study of the Legislation Concerning the Special Education 
of Handicapped Children and Young People 
Unesco, Paris, 1969, 74 pp. 
International Directories of Education: Special Education 
Listing government services and institutions in 65 countries, and international 
Unesco, Paris, 1969, 144 pp. (12.50 F). 
Bulletin of the International Bureau of Education. 
Selective Bibliography. Unesco, Geneva, No. 175-176, 1970 (6.50 F). 
A comparative study of classes for slow learners, by Olle Osterling. 
Scandinavian University Books, Uppsala, Sweden, 1967. 
Architectural Conception of Children's Communities, published by the Inter- 
national Federation of Children's Communities, with Unesco's aid, Paris, 1968 
A guide for the disabled, their families and their counsellors, by Julietta K. Arthur. 
Abingdon Press, Nashville, U.S.A, 1967. 
Unesco, Paris. 
Special Education 
  
thereby make for feelings of discomfort 
and anxiety in members of the com- 
munity (see article page 15). 
“Normalization in education does not 
mean providing handicapped children 
with exactly the same kind of education 
and educational facilities available to 
normal children; this would only make 
the handicapping condition more pro- 
minent. Instead, normalization in edu- 
cation means that educational pro- 
visions are such that the handicapped 
child is given the same opportunity to 
realize his potentialities as is given 
normal children. 
“In some instances, very minor 
changes in the school building ramps, 
so that they can get into the school 
building, for example, is all that some 
physically handicapped children need. 
Once in the building, they are compe- 
tent in all other ways so that they can 
capitalize on the school offerings. 
Other children require more complex 
adaptations in order to minimize the 
impact of their handicap on learning 
and social interactive conditions in the 
school.” 
An understanding of the educational, 
as well as of any of the other problems 
of physical or mental disability must be 
based on the knowledge that many of 
these problems are created or made 
more damaging by society and by its 
attitudes. 
Historically, we have stigmatized 
those who are different and excluded 
them from the so-called normal life of 
our communities. We have built our 
buildings and our cities in ways that 
exclude people with limited mobility. 
We have not yet learned to regard 
people in terms of their abilities, rather 
than of their disabilities when those 
exist in the stigmatized forms. We 
have created educational, vocational 
and social ghettos in which our dis- 
abled citizens are supposed to live and 
learn and work. 
Special education is designed to 
help handicapped individuals in making 
the fullest use of their capabilities, but 
it cannot succeed without the under- 
standing and the support of the com- 
runity in which it is placed. It cannot 
finally succeed until society has done 
its part in eliminating the physical and 
social barriers it erects in the paths of 
our disabled citizens. 
Norman Acton 
im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S.
 
— 
Dé
p8
t 
lé
ga
l 
C 
1 
— 
Ma
rs
 
19
74
 
— 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in 
Fr
an
ce
)

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
The present 
situation and 
in the field 
of 
  
trends of research 
  
Just published by Unesco 
future trends 
unesco   306 pages 20 F 
 
m A semi-technical study on special education for 
handicapped children and young people. 
m Presents informative accounts of progress achieved 
in this challenging field of education during recent 
years by educational, 
psychological research. 
medical, biological and 
m Shows what special education can do to reduce 
the effects of deafness, blindness, speech impair- 
ment and physical, emotional and mental disabili- 
ties among millions of the world's children. 
m Leading specialists describe current research and 
in special 
and other Scandinavian countries (Karl-Gustaf 
Stukat), U.S.S.R. (T.A. Vlasova and V.I. Lubovsky), 
U.S.A. (William P. Hurder), and Uruguay (E.G.E. de 
Lorenzo). With an introductory chapter and conclu- 
sion by John McKenna (see also his article on 
page 15 of this issue). 
education in Sweden 
Where to renew your subscription 
and order other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed, along with subscription rates in local 
currency, will be supplied on request.) 
— AUSTRALIA, Publications : Educational Supplies 
Pey. Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW Perio- 
dicals: Dominie Pty. Limited, Box 33, Post Office, 
Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations 
Association of Australia, Victorian Division 5th floor, 
134/136 Flinders St, Melbourne (Victoria), 3000. 
— AUSTRIA. Verlag Georg Fromme & C=. Arbeiter- 
gasse 1-7, 1051, Yienna.—BELGIUM., “Unesco Courier” 
Dutch edition only: N.V. Handelmaatschappij Keesing, 
Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen, French 
edition and general Unesco publications agent: Jean de 
Lannoy, 112, rue du Tr8ne, Brussels 5. CCP 3380.00. 
— BURMA, Trade Corporation N* (9), 550-552 Mer- 
chant Street, Rangoon. — CANADA. Information 
Canada, Ottawa, (Ont). — CYPRUS, MAM", Archbishop 
Makarios 3rd Avenue, P. O. Box 1722, Nicosia. — 
CEZCHOSLOVAKIA. S.N.T.L, Spalena 51, Prague 1 
(permnent display); Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka 
Prague 1. For Slovakia only : Alfa Verlag - Publishers, 
Hurbanovoe nam. 6, 893 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — DEN- 
MARK. Munksgaards Boghandel, 6, Norregade, DK- 
1165, Copenhagen K. — EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC 
OF). National Centre for Unesco Publications, N+ 1 
Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir Square, Cairo; Librairie 
Kasr El Nil, 38, rue Kasr El Nil, Caire. — ETHIOPIA. 
National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis 
Ababa. — FINLAND, Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Kes- 
kuskatu, Helsinki. — FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 
7-9, place de Fontenay, 75700-Pars, C.C.P. 12598-48. 
— GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REP. Deutscher Buch- 
Export und Import Gmbh, Leninstrasse 16, 701 Leipzig. — 
FED. REP. OF GERMANY For the Unesco Kurier 
(German ed. only): Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg- 
Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650. For scentfic maps only: 
GEO CENTER D7 Stuttgart 80, Postfach 800830. 
Other publications: Verlag Dokumentation, Postfach 148, 
Jaiserstrasse 13, 8023 Munchen-Pullach. — GHANA. 
Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Lid, P.O. Box 195, 
Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Led, P.O. Box 7869, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; 
The University Bookshop of Cape Coast, The University 
Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — GREAT 
BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. — GREECE. Anglo- 
Hellenic Agency, 5, Koumpari Street Athens 138; 
— HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co. 13-15, Lock 
Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akadémiai Kényvesbolt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; AK.V. Konyvtarosok Bola, 
Népkortarsasig utja 16, Budapest VI. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. 
— INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd., Nicol Road, Ballard 
Estate, Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 
13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; B-3/7 Asaf 
Ali Road, New Delhi 1; Sub-Depots: Oxford Book 
& Stationery Co. 17 Park Street, Calcutta 16: and 
Scindia House, New Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry 
of Education and Social Welfare, 72 Theatre Communication 
Building, Connaught Place, New Delhi 1. — INDONESIA. 
Indira P.T., JI. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, Jakarta. — IRAN. 
Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution C*., 229 Danesh- 
gahe Street, Shah Avenue, P.O. Box 14-1486, Teheran, 
Iranian National Commission for Unesco, Avenue lran- 
chahr Chomali No 300, B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ, 
McKenzie's Bookshop, Al-Rashid Street, Baghdad; 
University Bookstore, University of Baghdad, P.O. Box 
75, Baghdad, — IRELAND. The National Press, 2, 
Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4. — ISRAEL. 
Emanuel Brown, formerly Blumstein's Bookstores, 
35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat Benjamin Street, 
Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street Jerusalem, 
— JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Stores Ltd., P.O. Box 
366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston, — JAPAN. Maruzen 
Co. Ltd., P.O. Box 5050, Tokyo International 100-31. 
— KENYA. The E.S.A. Ltd., P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi. 
— KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait 
Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LIBERIA. 
Cole and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O, Box 286, Monrovia. 
— LIBYA, Agency for Development of Publication 
& Distribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEM- 
BOURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, Luxem- 
bourg. — MALAYSIA. Federal Publications Sdn. Bhd,, 
Balai Berita, 31, Jalan Riong, Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. 
Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kingsway, Valletta. — MAURI- 
TIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd, 30, Bourbon Street, 
Port-Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30, Bid 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. For 
the ** Unesco Koerier '' Dutch edition only : Systemen 
Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, Amsterdam-1007. Agent 
for all Unesco publications : N. VY. Martinus Nithoff, 
Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. — NETHERLANDS 
ANTILLES. G. C. T. Yan Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant). NLV,, 
Willemstad, Curacao. N. A. — NEW ZEALAND. 
Government Printing Office, Government Bookshops 
at : Rutland Street, P.O. Box 5344, Auckland; 130, 
Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, Christchurch; Alma 
Street, P.O. Box 857, Hamilton; Princes Street, P.O. 
Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, 
Wellington. — NIGERIA The University Bookshop 
of Ife, The University Bookshop of Ibadan, P.O. Box 
286; The University Bookshop of Nsukka; The University 
Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu Bello University Book- 
shop of Zaria. — NORWAY. All publications : Johan 
Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl Johans gate 41/43, 
Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Littera- 
turtjeneste, Box 6125, Osle 6. — PAKISTAN. The 
Woest-Pak Publishing Co. Ltd., Unesco Publications 
House, P.O. Box 374 G.P.O., Lahore: Showrooms: 
Urdu Bazaar, Lahore, and 57-58 Murree Highway, 
G/6-1, Islamabad. Pakistan Publications Bookshop, 
Sarwar Road, Rawalpindi. Mirza Book Agency 65 Shahrah 
Quaid-e-azam, P.O. Box N* 729, Lahore-3 — PHILIP- 
PINES. The Modern Book Co., 926 Rizal Avenue, 
P.O. Box 632, Manila D-404. — POLAND. All publica- 
tions : ORWN PAN Palac Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw. 
For the Unesco Courier only : RUCH, ul. Wronja, 23, 
Warsaw 10. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Ltda, 
Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — SINGA- 
PORE. Federal Publications Sdn Bhd., Times House, 
River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOUTHERN RHO- 
DESIA. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Avenue, 
Salisbury. — SRI LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata P.O.B. 244 
Colombo 2, — SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. 
Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publications: 
A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, 
Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Courier: Svenska FN-F8rbundet, Skolgrind 2, Box 150 
50 S- 104 65, Stockholm. — SWITZERLAND. All 
publications : Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich. 
Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 
12-236. — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, 
P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansi 9, Rajd n Avenue, Bangkok. — 
TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, 
Beyoglu, Istanbul. — UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 145, Kampala, — SOUTH AFRICA. All 
publications: Van Schaik’s Bookstore (Pty). Led. Libri 
Building, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. For 
the Unesco Courier (single copies) only: Central News 
Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. UNITED KING- 
DOM. H.M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, 
S.E.l., and Government Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, 
Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol. — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, P.O. 
Box 433, New York, N.Y. 10016, — U.S.5.R. Mezhdu- 
narodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. 
Jugoslovensita Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna 
Zalozba Slovene Mestni Trg. 26, Ljubljana. 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074869engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

DAILY 
CONSTITUTIONAL, 
CRUTCHES & ALL 
Lae 
"nr. 
. 
“ 
: ‘8 - » 
. of . + '» - 
a : = RL and, CaN Fe his Low BRN Ih J a SAL Ls Be 
Photo APN © Parimage, Paris 
Crutches and all, Rafik Nesanov plunges lustily into the water. Undaunted by the polio 
which paralyzed him when he was only one year old, he now lives a normal life thanks 
to the rehabilitation efforts of the Special Sanatorium for Children at Eupatoria on the 
Black Sea coast not far from Sebastapol (U.S.S.R.). Countless polio victims all over the 
world have learned to win a physical and psychological victory over their handicaps thanks 
to modern educational and therapeutic methods. 