# [071135](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

TR 
T
T
L
 
  
  
VOLUME V — Nos 8.9. — AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 
A report on 
race relations in 
BRAZIL 
(see pages 6 to I5) 
Photo Pierre Verger 
i 
.

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

Page 2. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER [952 
 SC _ 
¥ 
EDITORIAL OFFICES : 
UNESCO HOUSE 
i9, Ave. Kiéber, PARIS-16 
* 
Editor-In-Chief : S. M. KOFFLER 
English edition : R. S. FENTON 
French edition : A. LEVENTIS 
Spanish edition : |]. DE BENITO 
EDITORS 
MC. 52 1 63 A. 
Yearly subscription: $2; 10s 6d; 500 
French francs. Sales agents are list- 
ed below. Where none is listed, 
write to Unesco, 19, avenue Kléber, 
Paris, 16e. 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana, 
S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos Aires. 
Associated States of Cambodia. Laos 
and Viet-Nam : K. Chantarith, C.C.R., 
38, rue Van Vollenhoven, Phnom-Penh. 
Australia : HAA. Goddard Ltd, 255a 
George Street, Sydney. 
Austria : Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27 Gra- 
ben, Vienna 1. 
Barbados: S.P.C.K. Bookshop (Regional 
Office Caribbean Area), Broad Street, 
Bridgetown. 
Belgium : Librairie Encyclopédique, 7, 
rue du Luxembourg, Brussels IV. 
Bolivia : Libreria Selecciones, Av. 16 de 
Juiio 216, Casilla 972, La Paz. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua 
Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio 
de Janeiro. 
Canada : English speaking : University 
of Toronto Press, Toronto. French 
speaking Centre de publications 
internationales, 4234, rue de la Roche, 
Montréal 34. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The 
Associated Newspapers of Ceylon, 
Lid, Colombo I 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 
924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 
9a, 1791, Bogota. 
Costa Rica : Trejos Hermanos, Apartade 
1313, San José. 
Cuba : Unesco, Centro Regional en el 
Hemisferio Occidental, Calle 3, 
Ne 306, Vedado, Havana. 
Czechoslovakia : Orbis, Narodni 37, 
Prague 1, 
Cyprus : Tachydromos, P.O.B. 473, 
Nicosia, 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard Ltd., 6 
Norregade, Copenhagen, K. 
Ecuador : Casa de la Cultura Ecuato- 
riana, av. 6 de diciembre, Casilla 67, 
Quito. 
Egypt : La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9, 
dly Pasha st., Cairo. 
Finland : Akateeminen 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
Formosa : The World Book Company 
Kirjakauppa, 
France : Librairie Universitaire, 26, rue 
Soufilot, Paris (5°). : 
Germany : Unesco Vertrieb fiir Deutsch- 
land, R. Oldenbourg Minchen. 
: Elefthéroudakis, Librairie In- 
ternaticnale, Athens. 
Hungary : Kultura, P.O.B. 149, Buda- 
pest . 
India, Orient Longmans Lid, Bombay, 
Calcutta, Madras : Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co., Scindia House, New 
Delhi. Rajkamal Publications Ltd, 
Himalaya House, Bombay 7. 
Indonesia : G.C.T. van Dorp & Co. 
NV., Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Iraq : McKenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Israel : Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 
35, Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Italy : G.C. Sansoni, via Gino Ca- 
poni 26, casella postale 552, Flo- 
rence. 
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc., 6 Tori-Ni- 
chome, Nihonbashi, Tokyo. 
Lebanon : Librairie Universelle, Avenue 
des Frangais, Beirut. 
Luxembourg : Librairie Paul Bruck, 
50, Grand-Rue. 
Malayan Federation and Singapore : 
Peter Chong and Co., P.O. Box 135, 
Singapore, ) 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo 
Sierra 16, México D.F. 
Netherlands : N.V. Martinus Nijhoif, 
Lange Voorthout 8, The Hague. _ 
New Zealand : South's Book Depot, 
8 Willis Street, Wellington. 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 
, Oslo. 
Pakistan : Ferozsons Ltd, Karachi, 
Lahore, Peshawar. 
Panama : Agencia International de Pu- 
blicaciones, Apartado 2052, Panama. 
Peru : Libreria Internacional del Peru, 
S.A., Giron de la Union, Lima. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 
Portugal : Publicacdes Europa-America, 
Ltda, 4 Rua da Barroca, Lisbon. 
Puerto Rico : Pan American Book Co. 
San Juan, 12. 
Spain : Aguilar S.A. de Ediciones, Juan 
Bravo 38, Madrid. 
Sweden : AB. C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov- 
bokhandel. Fredsgatan 2, 
holm 16. 
Switzerland : French speaking cantons : 
Librairie de 1'Université, 22-24, rue de 
Romen!, Fribourg. German speaking 
cantons : Europa Verlag, 5 Rdmi- 
strasse, Zurich. 
Syria : Librairie Universelle, Damascus. 
Tangier : Centre International, 54, rue 
du Statut. 
Thailand : Suksapan Panit, Arkarn 9, 
Raj-Demnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. 
Union of Burma : Burma Educational 
Bookshop, 551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. 
Box 222, Rangoon. . 
Union of South Africa : Van Schaik’s 
Bookstore, Ltd., P.O. Box 724, 
Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : HM. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.L 
United States of America : Columbia 
University Press, 2960 Broadway, 
New York. 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacion Cien- 
tifica pura la America Latina, Unesco, 
Bulevar Artigas. 1320, Montevideo. 
Yugoslavia : Jugoslavenska Kniiga, 
Marsala Tita 23/1] Belgrade.   
Except when otherwise stated, arti- 
cles appearing in this issue may be 
reproduced without prior permission, 
provided acknowledgement Is given 
to the Unesco COURIER. 
  
* 
Imp. GEORGES LANG, | 1, rue Curial, Paris. 
Stock--   
% United Kingdom : A Ministry of Edu- 
cation report on a steady increase in the 
demand for adult education has surpris- 
ed certain quarters in Britain. It had 
been expected that the interest in adult 
education during the years following the 
War might be cnly temporary. The 
latest statistics, however. show a per- 
manent increase in the number of stud- 
ents attending adult education classes 
throughout the country. 
+ Italy : The Food and Agriculture 
Organization’s new library, which has 
been inaugurated in Rome, is the largest 
agricultural library in Europe with its 
400.000 volumes. It is called after David 
Lubin, founder of the International In- 
stitute of Agriculture, one of the 
world’s first international organizations. 
+ Syria : On the invitation of the Syr- 
ian Government, the Netherlands So- 
ciety for Land Reclamation, in co- 
operation with an engineering concern 
and an airline, is planning to convert 
15,000 acres of wasteland to agricultural 
use, in the Syrian valley of Gab. 
detailed plan will be made after air sur- 
veys of the region. 
Norway: The Norwegian Government 
as asked Parliament to approve a 
$1,400,000 appropriation for technical 
and eccnomic assistance to India. Nor- 
wegian engineers, doctors and fisheries 
experts will be sent to India, while In- 
dians will be invited to Norway for tech- 
nical training. 
+% Sweden : Thanks to intensive scien- 
tific and industrial research, things once 
considered useless are being changed 
into much-needed industrial and con- 
struction materials. Swedish experts 
are using common peat-moss to make 
insulating boards. In the United States, 
technicians are developing electric equip- 
ment that will turn sea-shells into 
cement. 
Brazil : Outstanding physicists from 
all American countries met in Rio de 
Janeiro for a scientific meeting organiz- 
ed by Unesco’s Scientific Co-operation 
office for Latin America, which func- 
tions in Montevideo. This symposium 
was held with the help of Brazil's scien- 
tific institutions, and of the Internation- 
al Union of Pure and Applied Physics. 
+ El Salvador : Savings stamps which 
will be issued shortly by the school co- 
operatives will bear pictures and slogans 
illustrating different aspects of the 
work of the United Nations, Unesco and 
other UN specialized agencies. The Cul- 
tural Ministry of El Salvador has 
appointed a special commission to make 
selections from among 100 themes sub- 
mitted by UN agencies at El Salvador’s 
request. 
4 U.S.A. : It is estimated that 20,000 
American students, will cross the Atlan- 
tic this summer to Europe. Some of 
them will tour Europe by bicycle, while 
others intend to stay in students’ camps. 
Several groups will attend special 
courses in cultural institutions. 
Meanwhile more than 30,000 
foreign students from 126 countries are 
this year studying in United States col- 
leges and universities, an all-time record 
number according to statistics published 
by the Institute of International Educa- 
tion, New York City. The fact that 
women students form nearly a quarter 
of this total is also a record. Almost 
half of the students have won scholar- 
ships from their own governments, the 
U.S. Government, private agencies or 
the colleges and universities themselves. 
By far the largest number of students— 
10,952—come from Asia and the Near 
East. From Europe there are 7,220, from 
Latin America 6,802, from Canada 4,232 
and from Africa 1,072. Subjects studied 
show engineering to be the most popu- 
lar, attracting nearly 18 per cent of vi- 
siting students. Almost as many are 
taking courses in social sciences and the 
liberal arts, while other popular fields 
are medical and physical sciences, com- 
merce, agriculture and the fine arts. 
+ Hungary : Something like 2,000 
theatre groups are functioning in rural 
areas of Hungary. Special talent-spot- 
ting boards visit the villages to select the 
most promising actors, whose train- 
ing is then paid for by the State. 
Amateur actors from similar groups 
formed in factories now form the major- 
ity of the student body at the Budapest 
High School of Dramatic Art. Some 
2,800 factory troupes took part in last 
year’s Hungarian National Culture 
Contest. 
+ France : Paris children now have 
their own theatre, set up under the aus- 
pices of the Unesco-sponsored Interna- 
tional Theatre Institute. Since the 
theatre opened, thousands of schoolchil- 
dren have had an afternoon off from 
lessons in order to see a stage adaptation 
of Robert Louis Stevenson's “Treasure 
sland". 
+ Austria : A society of film sciences 
has been formed by Austrian film- 
makers, research workers and writers to 
further the study of film problems, in- 
volving mainly history, aesthetics, social 
sciences and psychology. 
+ United Kingdom : Old masters will no 
longer “rcb” space from contemporary 
artists in the British Pavilion of the 
Venice Biennale. This year’s exhibit is 
to consist of paintings, drawings, engrav- 
ings and sculpture produced by modern 
artists. Since the Pavilion was opened 
in 1910, it had been the practice to com- 
bine works cf early English artists with 
those of the moderns, but the British 
Council has decided that the new policy 
better serves the purpose for which the 
Biennale exists. 
% International : In order to help inter- 
national technical assistance experts to 
form a better idea of the cultures of the 
different countries they are serving, 
Unesco is publishing an explanatory 
handbook called Cultural Patterns and 
Technological Changes. It was prepared 
by a committee headed by Dr. Margaret 
Mead, the noted American anthropo- 
logist. 
+ Denmark : According to News from 
Copenhagen, well intentioned — if some- 
what disrespectful — students at Copen- 
hagen University have asked for more 
“canned professors”. By this, they mean 
tape recordings of lectures given by pro- 
minent guest speakers, which will make 
them available to many more students, 
row and in the future. In the United 
States schools, universities and other 
educational institutions which have their 
own radio stations send tape recordings 
of their most interesting broadcasts to 
the National Association of Educational 
Broadcasters, which passes them on to 
other school staticns, thus supplying a 
wide range of interesting programmes at 
very low cost. 
+ France : A unique collection of 500 
rare or little known books on Joan of 
Arc which an American jurist and 
statesman, Judge Bingham, of Ken- 
tucky, spent a lifetime assembling, have 
been donated to the City Library in Or- 
leans (France). The collection which 
includes books in English, French and 
Latin, covers every aspect of the life of 
the Maid cf Orleans. ..... ..._ .. 
  
BETTER HISTORY 
TEXBOOKS 
Methods of improving the treat- 
ment of German history in American, 
and of Uniterl States history in Ger- 
man textbooks, have been discussed 
at a German and American Confer- 
ence in Brunswick, Germany. The 
historians, teachers, textbook writers 
und representatives from European 
professional groups who attended 
drew up a list of items which ap- 
peared to be neglected or inadequa- 
tely presented in well-known tert- 
books used in the two countries. 
Their general reconunendalions for 
the tmprovements of content and 
method will be used as guidance in 
future meetings to carry out the 
actual work of revision of textbooks. 
The Brunswick conference was one 
of a series of similar bilateral 
gutherings to discuss the revision of 
various countries’ textbooks, which 
were initiated by Unesco at a sem= 
inar in Brussels in 1930.     
% Scandinavia : History teachers from 
all types of schools in Sweden, Norway 
. and Denmark have been invited to par- 
ticipate in a regional seminar near 
Stockholm in August to study ways of 
using history courses as a means of fos- 
tering international understanding. The 
seminar is being organized by the 
Swedish National Commission for 
Unesco in co-operation with the Norden 
Asscciation and the Swedish Association 
of History Teachers. It supplements the 
Unesco International Seminar on the 
same subject held at Sevres, France, last 
year. 
+4 United Kingdom : The International 
Sculpture Competition for a work on the 
theme “The Unknown Political Pri- 
soner” sponsored by Britain's Institute 
of Contemporary Arts, has brought 
in about 3,000 entries, represent- 
ing 67 nationalities in 52 countries. The 
largest number, 450, came from Ger- 
many. Entries have also been received 
from Canada, the United States, Austra- 
lia, New Zealand, the Union of South 
Africa, India, Ceylon, Burma, Malta, 
British Guiana and the West Indies. 
Many countries are arranging to hold 
preliminary exhibitions where the best 
works will be chosen before going to 
London for final judging. In Italy, 
prizes are offered to scuiptors who 
commemorate the Italian Resistance. 
The prize money totals £11,500. 
+ Chile : The second Congress of Latin 
American universities will take place in 
September in Santiago de Chile. The 
first Congress, which took place in 1949 
in Guatemala, proclaimed the Latin 
American universities charter, which 
deals with the problem of educational, 
scientific and cultural collaboration be- 
tween the Latin American countries. 
v International : A two-barge floating 
summer theatre, travelling along the 
Rhine, is performing before riverside 
audiences in Switzerland, France, Ger- 
many, the Netherlands and Belgium. 
The actors are amateurs from ten dif- 
ferent countries. 
+ United Kingdom : The invention of a 
simple and inexpensive method - for 
mass reproduction of manuscripts in 
Braille has been announced in London. 
The characters are reproduced in stencil 
form and printed on paper with slow 
drying ink. The paper is then coated 
with a powder which sticks to the wet 
dots. The characters are hardened by 
heat treatment, so that they stand out 
1 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
from the surface of the page to be felt 
by the sensitive fingers of the blind. 
% International : The International 
Civil Aviation Organization has begun 
work on a international aviation 
language that can be used, without 
danger of misunderstanding, between 
speakers of various tcngues. It has 
already published a dictionary designed 
to clarify the specialized aeronautical 
vocabularies in English, French and 
Spanish. The need for a standard 
language of communication between air- 
craft in flight and the ground has been 
increased by the greater emphasis which 
is being placed on the use of radiotele- 
phony rather than code. Pending the 
development and adoption of ILA or 
Internaticnal Language for Aviation, 
English is recommended by ICAO, be- 
cause it is now by far the most used 
language in wcrld air transport. Indeed, 
the basis of ILA is to be a simplified, 
codified, limited English with the addi- 
tion of words from other languages. 
% France : Second-hand booksellers in 
Paris, whose stalls on the banks of the 
Seine are a well-known sight, have 
founded an unusual annual literary 
prize, le Prix Littéraire des Bouquin- 
istes. Its purpose is “to attract the 
attention of readers in general—and 
idlers on the quays of the Seine in par- 
ticular—to a worthy book in French 
which has escaped the vigilance of 
literary critics and book selection com- 
mittees”’, and has wound up on a 
second-hand bookstall, probably before 
ending its days among old papers at the 
pulping mill. The winning author must 
not already have received a literary 
prize. 
Y Mexico : Colour television has been 
installed in the National School of Me- 
dicine of the University of Mexico to 
train students. The equipment is of 
particular value for the broadcast of 
practical demonstrations, and will en- 
able large numbers of students to see 
operations in close-up which they could 
not possibly observe in such detail in 
any other way. 
+ International : The Conservatories of 
Music in Paris and Rio de Janeiro have 
recently concluded an agreement where- 
by scholarships awarded in a compe- 
tition of young Brazilians will permit 
them to finish their studies in Paris. 
+ United States : An ornamental foun- 
tain has been presented to the United 
Nations by schoolchildren of the United 
States as an expression of their faith in 
the Organization. The fountain was de- 
dicated at the United Nations Headquar- 
ters in New York on the seventh anni- 
versary of the signing of the UN Char- 
ter .in San Francisco. Ifs plaque bears 
the inscription “Presented to the United 
Nations by the children of the United 
States and its territories as a gesture of 
friendship to the children of the world 
and a constant reminder of our hope for 
a peaceful world through the United Na- 
tions.” 
+ International : An illustrated hand- 
book for education through art, entitled 
“Creative Teaching in the Visual Arts”, 
will be published this year by Unesco, 
under the general editorship of Dr. Ed- 
win Ziegfeld of Teachers College, Co- 
lumbia University, New York. Reflecting 
theories and practices in many coun- 
tries, it will epitomize various aspects of 
education through art considered during 
the Unesco Seminar on the Teaching of 
the Visual Arts which was held in Bris- 
tol in the United Kingdom in July, 1951. 
+ International : The first Internatio- 
na] Poetry Biennale will be held under 
the auspices of Unesco and the Inter- 
national PEN Club at Knokke-le-Zoute, 
Belgium, from September 11 to 15. In- 
vitations to attend this meeting of poets 
have been issued by the Belgian Minis- 
uy of Education to all Unesco Member 
ates. 
+ Israel : Unesco is sending five scien- 
tists in optics, bio-chemistry, geology 
and experimental physics to Israel as 
part of its Technical Assistance pro- 
gramme. Five fellowships will also ena- 
ble Israelite scientists to study abroad in 
these fields. Unesco has previously pro- 
vided technical aid in the setting up of 
a seismological network and in research 
into new scurces of electric power in 
Israel. 
vw Great Britain: The University of Bir- 
mingham has established a Shakespeare 
Institute for the promotion of Shakes- 
pearean and related Elizabethan studies. 
The new institute, organized as a cen- 
tre for research work, will have a staff 
of teaching fellows. Its students will be 
largely candidates for advanced degrees. 
Resources will be available from the 
Shakespeare Memorial Library, other lo- 
cal collections and the archives at Strat- 
ford, Birmingham and Warwick. 
vw France: Children in isolated rural 
areas of France no longer have to tra- 
vel to the city to visit a museum—it now 
ccmes to them in the form of a travel- 
ling “bus-museum” service. Set up by 
the International Children’s Centre in 
Paris, the first travelling museum has 
been visiting the French countryside for 
the past months with exhibitions of all 
kinds in the form of drawings, photo- 
graphs, small scale models as well as 
large panels showing engravings and co- 
lour reproductions of works of art. Use 
is also made of books, films and record- 
ings. All exhibits are periodically chang- 
ed. Through this service, the Children’s 
Centre seeks to bring country boys and 
girls aspects of French life as well as 
that of other lands.

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### 71106: The Television set becomes a French village meeting place

COURIER 
    
      
    
  
A novel movement for the collective viewing of television programmes is bringing 
entertainment and education to young people and old in an increasing number of 
small villages in France. When the notice “Television programme this afternoon”— 
  
—is posted outside the local school (above), children can hardly wait to get into the 
classroom to see the ‘‘show’’ which gives lessons a new interest. In the evening, 
villagers (below) gather in the school house to watch and discuss programmes. 
  
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 3 
EVISION 
OMES A 
VILLAGE 
G PLAC 
by Henry R. CASSIRER IRE 
N the village of Nogentel, 60 miles east of Paris, television was 
known two years ago as one of those miracles of modern science, 
like atomic energy or air conditioning, which belong to a world 
far removed from the traditional life of the peasants. 
Today, however, the village gathers several times a ‘week to 
‘watch television programmes in its little one-room school house, and 
1s proud of having started a movement for collective viewing — a 
movement which may hold great significance for many countries. 
Television today is developing rapidly in the United States and 
Great Britain, and also in many countries of Latin America and on 
the European continent. Even in Asia and Africa steps are being 
taken to establish television broadcasting. But because sets are 
expensive in most of these countries, there is the danger that this 
great new medium for education and information may become 
nothing but a source of entertainment for those who can afford to buy 
luxury items. 
That is why Unesco is particularly interested in the movement 
for collective viewing in French villages, which is showing a way to 
bring television to poorer people and enabling them to use it primarily 
for education. This movement is a French contribution to the use of 
television for education which ranks with efforts of a different kind 
being made in the United Kingdom and the U.S.A. 
Here is what happened in Nogentel, Gland, Chaudun and 40 other 
villages of 200 or 300 inhabitants where most people make their living 
as land labourers, small farmers and wine growers. 
The idea of using television sets for entertainment and education 
in these villages originated among a group who had tried to organize 
film clubs but who had run up against many obstacles. These were 
due to the high cost of projectors and film rentals, the problem of 
moving the few projectors available from village to village and the 
difficulty of finding skilled projectionists without whose services th 
projectors frequently broke down. 
Those film clubs, and now the television clubs, are guided mainly 
by the primary school masters. In France, adult education rests 
predominantly in the hands of these teachers, who are well organized 
throughout the country and spend a good deal of their after-school 
time in bringing cultural activities into the lives of villages and 
townspeople alike. 
The plan which these teachers developed together with a group 
of television enthusiasts works as follows : by agreement with 
various television set manufacturers, a set is placed for a limited 
period in the school house, and the villagers are invited to view 
programmes in the evenings. At first they can see them free, later 
a small entrance fee is charged. 
After a few ‘weeks the teacher asks the villagers whether they 
want to buy the set. So far, in all except one village, the answer has 
been affirmative, and many villagers have even volunteered to 
advance the necessary funds (in France these amount to about 
180,000frs. or $500 for complete installation of a set with a screen 
measuring 12 square feet. 
A local committee is formed which organizes the purchase, 
determines the entrance fee (the money that has been advanced is 
paid back out of this) and chooses the programmes, as the set is 
turned on only a few nights a week. 
Soon the villagers get into the habit of gathering in the school 
house for entertainment, and also for education and informal 
discussion. Quite naturally a closer link develops between the 
schoolmaster and his community, ‘while the adults take a greater 
interest in the life of the school. 
One of the essential conditions of this plan is that the set is made 
available during day-time for reception of educational programmes 
in the clasg room, and that it will become school property once it has 
been fully paid out of the admission fees. It is therefore of immediate 
advantage to the school, and becomes eventually a valuable source of 
additional income which can be used for school purposes, such as 
trips and special equipment for sports and theatre activities. 
Even though French programmes are at present only of limited 
educational value, it is undeniable that the television set is already 
enriching the life of the community. The programmes which are 
being received with the greatest interest by adults and children alike 
are those which tell them “how things work”. An inside view of a 
newspaper plant, films showing life abroad, personal accounts by 
explorers and scientists, unusual sports events all find an eager 
audience among the peasants who rarely emerge from the isolation 
of their normal life. 
At the same time, the viewing groups are constructive critics for 
the improvement of broadcasts. They strongly objected to the 
broadcast of gangster films, with the result that these were finally 
omitted from French programmes. The organizers realize that 
their movement can be really beneficial only if they are supported by 
special educational programmes which can be prepared from 
information distributed in advance and exploited more fully through 
discussions following the broadcast. Educators and French televi- 
sion are therefore planning to co-operate in the creation of such 
programmes. 
The peasants and schoolmasters of the French départments of 
Aisne and Marne have only made a beginning. They have organized 
themselves into the National Federation of Educational and Cultural 
Television in order to give organized support to this movement, ‘which 
is spreading wherever télevision can be received. 
The entire project is now being officially sponsored by the Ligue 
Francaise de I'Enseignement (the French League for Education). 
Their efforts may eventually help many other countries to find a 
way to give television its place as a vital force for the improvement of 
education, the dissemination of knowledge and the enjoyment of an 
expanding life of culture.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 71108: Women have always been men's equals in Burma

Page 4. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 UNESCO out 
25,000 MILES 
THROUGH 
SOUTH-EAST 
ASIA 
@ 
  
  
   
 
   
     
A report by 
Ritchie CALDER 
U. N. Photographs 
“by Eric Schwab 
In Burma, an ever-increasing number 
of women and young girls are volun- 
teering to train as doctors, nurses, 
social workers and midwives thanks 
to the energetic efforts of Daw Khin 
Kyi, widow of one of the country's 
national heroes, who directs Burma's 
Mother and Child Welfare Depart- 
ment. Trained women are badly 
needed in the hospitals and dispen- 
saries of which there are still too few 
(upper photos). Their skill and devo- 
tion are just as urgently required by 
families crowded into single rooms 
(photo below). In this room live six 
people—including a T.B. sufferer. 
TE TEN 
A 
  
WOMEN HAVI 
CC 0, No !” protested Daw Khin Kyi, 
when a fulsome compatriot des- 
cribed her as the Little Mother of 
the Country. And she added : 
“Just call me Little Sister”. 
. Little Sister of her Country is the widow of 
Aung San, the statesman who negotiated the 
treaty with Britain which gave Burma its inde- 
pendence. He was later assassinated by polit- 
ical rivals in the government buildings where 
Daw Khin Kyi now ‘works. 
As the widow of a national hero, she would 
‘have been honoured in Burma—but she has 
won a place of her own as well. She does not - 
call herself Mrs. Aung San, but, in this country 
of emancipated women, retains her maiden 
name (pronounced Dawkinchee), and works for * 
her living as the Director of the Mother and 
Child Welfare Department. 
I had been warned of the charm of Daw 
Khin Kyi—“warned” because her flashing 
smile and disarming chuckle is calculated to 
win any argument. 
That is why I found myself being eaten alive 
by nocturnal insects as I sat in a tropical garden 
and watched a revue of which I did not under- 
stand one word. It was no use pleading that 
we had been out since before dawn, labouring 
in the sweltering heat, without respite or a 
meal. Even the fact that it had been all in the 
interests of Daw Khin Kyi's mothers and chil- 
dren was no excuse. She just Smiled... 
It was graduation day for her student nurses. 
They had qualified for their arduous assign- 
ment of going out into the country, to the vil- 
lages of the Irrawaddy delta and up into the 
hill states. And she was going to see that they 
enjoyed themselves. She had been a nurse 
herself once. (It was while nursing Aung San, 
then leader of the Burmese resistance army, 
that their romance started.) So she was stag- 
ing a party for them. And they were staging 
a party for her. :

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

~ problem of recruiting nurses. 


### 71108: Women have always been men's equals in Burma

ALWAYS BEEN MEN'S EQUALS IN BURMA 
emphasis is on health, then agriculture, home 
crafts and rural industries, co-operatives, tech- 
niques and adult education. They come from 
the villages and go back to the villages. 
These 12 girls were Daw Khin Kyi's pride 
and joy. They were girls whom she had 
selected from the countryside and had brought 
to Rangoon to train (because city-bred girls 
would not take very well to the country life for 
which the nurses were needed). 
qualified with honours. 
Their idea of a celebration was to put on a 
- play or a series of sketches with songs and 
dancing, illustrating a student nurse's life and 
why they were going to be nurses (with a lot of 
slapstick to liven the argument). 
The stout figure under the banyan tree was 
U Bat Sein, Permanent Secretary of the Minis- 
tries of Health and Education, laughing 
uproariously and applauding vigorously. 
“This,” he said, “is part of the answer to our 
Let’s send this 
show round the countryside, and the people 
will love it, and the girls will rush to join...” 
Daw Khin Kyi has other methods as well. 
She gets the wives of cabinet ministers lo 
appear at women’s meetings. Most of them 
have been nurses, doctors, or professional 
women. And the idea is that if a girl takes up 
nursing, she may get a good match. 
“But,” I warned her, “if you bring girls into 
the nursing profession just as a prelude to get- 
ting married, isn’t your training going to be 
wasted?” 
She smiled pityingly at this male logic. 
“No training of women is ever wasted in our 
country,” she said. “When a woman sets up a 
home she does not cast away her experience. 
Even if she makes a modest match, the girl- 
nurse is always the ‘good neighbour’. Her 
skill is a permanent part of the community. 
And when a woman marries she does not give 
up her career. There are more women than 
men doctors in Burma. Our leading lawyer is 
a woman...” 
And she quoted a whole list, pointing out, 
too, that women were responsible for organiz- 
And they had 
  
ing and running most of the social institutions 
in the country. 
That is what makes Burma exceptional in 
South-East Asia. Women from time imine- 
morial have had: equality with men. At one 
time there was probably polyandry (the form 
of polygamy in which the woman has several 
husbands). Marriage is an equal contract, civil 
and not religious. Divorce is by consent. All 
property is shared equally between husbands 
and wives. Most of the trading is done by 
women and, in the case of market-traders, the 
housekeeping is often done by the husband. 
Burma also claims to be exceptional in its 
high proportion of literacy. Boys and girls, in 
the Buddhist tradition, have attended the temple 
schools, Now these schools are run by lay 
teachers (another secular function which the 
priests have lost), but visiting educationists and 
quite a number of Burmese expressed some 
misgivings about what “literacy” amounts to. 
The content of education leaves a lot to be 
desired. 
One of the most significant developments in 
independent Burma is the Burmese Translation 
Society, which is setting out to put worthwhile 
literature from every language into Burmese. 
The government supports the Society and has 
helped it to send missions to other parts of the 
world to get help for this enlightened enter- 
prise. 
Another new development is mass education. 
Aung Min, Secretary of the Mass Education 
Council, told me how, in spite of insurrection 
in the countryside, Government trained mass 
education organizers spread through the vil- 
lages. - 
“Our activities”, he said, “are entirely confin- 
ed to rural areas. We choose a village as the 
centre of a district — even in the Hill States — 
and there are now 105 of these village centres. 
“We select men who can provide leadership, 
and give them six months’ training. Main 
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 5 
  
  
“The organizer’s house becomes the model 
home in the village, an example to others to 
improve their cleanliness and sanitation. He 
lives the lives of the villagers, takes a part in 
their work problems, their education problems 
and their health problems. He leads the chil- 
dren in games, and adults into the anfi-illiteracy 
campaign. 
“Priests play a big part in this movement. 
They urge the people in their areas to start the 
community centres and to get a mass education 
organizer, and many of the centres are in the 
monasteries, just as the schools are.” 
Unesco sent Dr. Tisinger and Prof. Her- 
nandez, at the request of the Government, to 
help with the educational problems of Burma. 
One of the biggest problems is training. There 
are 13,000 teachers available in the country, but 
45,000 are needed—a deficiency of 32,000. 
Apart from filling that gap, the output of 
existing teachers’ training colleges are putting 
out only a fifth of the replacements required. 
Plans for new training schools and new edu- 
cational improvements in line with the 
Unesco recommendations are now in process 
for both normal and Fundamental Education. 
The task of equipping a new country with 
staff for Government administration, education, 
health services, new industries, improved agri- 
culture, financial and economic services, is 
enormous. The Burmese Government has 
recognized that in its very extensive and extra- 
ordinarily varied requests for technical assis- 
tance from U. N, 
One of the advantages which Burma has is 
the full participation of the women. When 
women are on the side of change, everything 
is possible. )

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Page 6. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 


### 71109: An Inquiry into race relations in Brazil

AN NQUIRY INTO RACE 
RELATIONS IN BRAZIL 
‘by Dr. Alfred METRAUX 
o
A
 S
E
 
HY has Unesco undertaken a sociological inquiry into 
race relations in Brazil ? This question has often been 
asked, for it comes as a surprise to some people that 
an international organization should choose for its study 
of inter-racial relations a country which is considered 
& J ~ to have no urgent problems of this kind, People are 
s0 accustomed to seeing efforts being made to relieve 
critical situations that they cannot understand why a more or less har- 
monious state of affairs has need of attention. 
Even the purpose of this inquiry has caused a certain amount of alarm 
among people who fear it might have repercussions on the very situation 
Unesco is trying to analyze and describe. “Beware,” they say, “of making 
the Brazilians conscious of racial differences to which at present they 
apparently attach little importance. Take care not to arouse by indiscreet 
questioning the sort of antagonisms which are always ready to flare up.” 
Such remarks, even if made seriously, have no careful thought behind 
them, for the social sciences are not able, at present at least, to exercise 
a direct and immediate influence on ideas which have taken root since 
centuries. It is quite natural, however, for people to express surprise 
that the study of race relations in Brazil should be part of Unesco’s 
campaign against racial prejudices and discrimination. 
It is particularly important to explain 
the reason for this choice since the 
racial relations were not as harmonious as many Brazilians and foreigners 
liked to believe. 
Yet if even no discordant note had been sounded, the existing harmony 
would still have needed clarification and explanation by concrete examples. 
It is the scientist’s duty to discover which factors have so far preserved 
Brazil from the bitter fruits of racial discrimination. 
Thus it was in order to draw a lesson from the case of Brazil that Unesco 
entrusted to different teams of sociologists, anthropologists and psycholo- 
gists the task of completing existing knowledge by making studies of other 
areas and different social groups. 
These investigations extended from the Amazon region to the industrial 
area of Sao Paulo and covered varying sections of the community ranging 
from populations living in sertao (backlands) villages to members of uni- 
versity circles. 
Brazilian authorities and scientific centres gave Unesco their whole- 
hearted support, knowing that their country’s reputation had nothing to 
fear from such research. The few shadows on the picture only help to 
intensify the light which suffuses it. 
Unesco’s inquiry has been of a purely sociological and psychological cha- 
racter, that is, it has dealt with present-- 
day social realities, while historical 
questions have been given only a minor 
UNESCO 
gravity of racial conflicts in other parts 
of the world would seem to call for an 
entirely different approach. 
But it was not in a spirit of escap- 
ism or with the desire to undertake 
an easy task that Unesco embarked on 
this analysis of Brazilian behaviour in 
matters of race. Innumerable studies 
have already been made of racial dis- 
~ crimination in all its forms. Whole 
libraries could be filled with books and 
articles devoted to descriptions and 
analyses of racial prejudice and its 
effects. 
In the United States alone, hundreds 
of organizations and public and private 
institutions concern themselves with 
problems arising from racial discrimi- 
nation in the hope of solving them 
through scientific methods. Again, the 
fierce tensions which racial antagonism 
provokes in South Africa form the sub- 
ject of an abundant and ever-increas- 
ing literature. 
It would have been extremely diffi- 
cult, therefore, for Unesco to find new 
facts to add to those already assembled, 
and it is doubtful whether supplement- 
ary inquiries could have thrown new 
light on these problems that have been 
studied and discussed so often. 
The rare examples of harmonious 
race relations have not, however, 
received the same attention either from 
scientists or the public in general. Yet 
the existence of countries in which 
different races live in harmony is itself 
an important fact capable of exercising 
a strong influence on racial questions 
in general. 
One of the basic dogmas of racialism 
is that men of different races cannot 
mix without condemning themselves to 
moral and physical decadence. 
Those who believe this declare that 
complete segregation is the only 
ast year, Unesco undertook a full, on-the-spot inquiry into the 
L various social, economic, cultural and psychological factors— 
both favourable and unfavourable—which condition race 
relations in Brazil today. The reasons why a country like Brazil, 
which has been regarded by sociologists and students of race rela- 
tions as a remarkable example of racial harmony, was chosen for 
Unesco's “pilot survey” rather than some other country in which 
racial tensions are more bitter, are explained on this page by 
Dr. Alfred Métraux, of the Race Relations Division of Unesco. In 
order to avoid giving this survey too local a character, the most repre- 
sentative regions throughout Brazil were included, and the task 
entrusted to a number of different scientific groups and individuals 
from Brazil itself and from abroad. The survey included direct 
contact and case studies of the attitudes towards racial problems 
—particularly towards the Negro and his position in the social scale— 
of the population of four large metropolitan areas of Brazil: Sao 
Paulo, the fastest growing city not only of Brazil but of all Latin 
America ; Rio de Janeiro, the federal capital and a large industrial 
centre ; Bahia (also called Salvador, or Salvador da Bahia), the great 
Negro metropolis of Brazil ; and Recife, capital of the arid State of 
Pernambuco, in the north-eastern hump of the country. The ques- 
tion of race relations in rural Brazil —a subject that up to now has 
been largely neglected— was also undertaken by a Unesco team in 
a series of first-hand case studies in representative communities of 
mountainous Central Brazil, the Amazon region, the arid backlands 
(sertao) of the north-east, and the plantation area of the Bahian area, 
The articles published on the following pages present a picture of 
what the scientists conducting the Unesco survey found to be the 
state of racial attitudes in Brazil today. Except for the article on the 
place of the Negro in Brazilian history, by Gilberto Freyre—author of 
‘The Masters and the Slaves'’, a monumental study of the develop- 
ment and evolution of the patriarchal society in Brazil—the articles 
presented in this issue were written by the scientists who have played 
a leading role in Unesco's survey. The work of the Unesco team 
on race relations in rural Brazil is being published by Unesco in book 
form this year under the title “Class and Caste in Rural Brazil", 
edited by Dr. Charles Wagley, of Columbia University, New York. 
The studies and findings of the other teams will be published by 
Unesco within the next two years. This complete up-to-date study of 
the Negro and race relations in Brazil will total at least six volumes. 
place. Nevertheless we should not for- 
get that the racial attitudes found in 
Brazil spring from a long historic tra- 
dition. They show us that the attitude 
of the Iberian peoples towards the slave 
differed greatly from that of other 
colonial powers. 
Thus, clauses favourable to slaves 
have always existed in Spanish and 
Portuguese laws and the laws them- 
- selves have aimed at helping slaves 
win their freedom. Such clauses reflect 
the will of the church which, as early 
as the 16th century, defended the In- 
dians and the Negro slaves as human 
beings. However miserable was the lot 
of the slave in Brazil, he was never at 
any time reduced to the level of an ani- 
mal, and once freed he could aspire to 
joining the community of free men, 
and thus begin to rise in the social 
scale. IEE EAE pe 
FE 
Debt to former slaves 
a country like Brazil of a large 
minority of coloured people too 
easily tend to forget the role which the 
Indians and Negroes have played in the 
growth of Brazilian civilization. As 
many historians have already pointed 
out, the Brazilian nation would have 
had an entirely different character 
were it not for the African contribu- 
tions which it owes to its former slaves. 
Can there be any doubt that this 
contribution by the Negro has singu- 
larly enriched the social, religious and 
artistic traditions of a country now in 
the course of demonstrating its power- 
ful originality and of setting up a new 
type of civilization ? To be astonished 
that a Negro or a mulatto can be 
talented and rise to a position of 
importance is to express an unconscious 
T HOSE who deplore the presence in 
solution for countries inhabited by two different races, for, they say, there 
must be a congenital incompatibility between human beings whose skins 
are of a different colour or whose noses have a different shape. 
If we can show, by one or more concrete examples, that this argument, 
or more precisely this belief, is false, the injustices and sufferings which 
segregation policies inflict on members of the so-called “inferior” races 
can no longer be justified. 
Is the harmony real or apparent? 
creed. It is not therefore a waste of time to learn more about a social 
environment which so strongly refutes everything that theorists of 
racialism and politicians who support them continue to affirm. 
T HE case of Brazil offers the strongest argument against this racialist 
The generally favourable impression produced by Brazil's race relations 
has for many years been remarked on by travellers and sociologists who 
have been greatly surprised to find there such different attitudes from 
those observed in other parts of the world. Brazil has, in fact, been hailed 
as one of the rare countries which have achieved “racial democracy”. 
But science demands more than general observations. It wants to know 
if this harmony is real or only apparent and if it appears in the same form 
on all social levels and in every part of Brazil. 
Earlier inquiries, particularly the historic works of Gilberto Freyre and 
the sociological research done by Donald Pierson in Bahia had already 
confirmed the favourable opinions that had been widely formed on Brazil's 
racial situation, but not all doubts had been removed. Several incidents, 
and some angry statements made by Negro organizations, suggested that 
racialism, as well as to cast doubt on the innate capabilities of the black 
race. 
When we speak of the debt owed by Brazil to its coloured citizens, we 
are not thinking of those of its distinguished men who are wholly or 
partly Negro. More significant is the wider contribution of the Negro 
civilizations superimposed on that of the Portuguese by millions of slaves 
imported from Africa. 
The colonization of Brazil has been an adventure shared in by whites 
and Negroes who even against their inclination have worked closely 
together to set up a new social environment. The charm of Brazilian 
life derives to a certain extent from those African traditions which have 
moulded the national character. 
Another lesson which can be drawn from Brazil's example is the large 
part which economic factors play in the formation of racial prejudices. 
Rapid urbanization in Brazil has upset the relations between whites 
and Negroes in certain large towns, and has provoked conflicts which 
threaten to become serious. 
The rise of a rural working class, accompanied by growing competition 
between immigrants and the large numbers of coloured people who are 
moving into the industrial centres, could destroy this “racial democracy” 
if the racialist feelings they bring to the surface.were not countered by a 
strong resistance based on liberal and open-hearted traditions. 
In Brazil, “racial” laws were passed to combat racial prejudice and not 
to give it official existence. 
That is why—as Unesco’s inquiry has clearly shown—Brazil remains an 
exemplary nation, destined because of this to play an important role in the 
building of a world in which mutual respect between races will become an 
established and universal fact. }

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 71110: The Negro's role in Brazilian history

~OURIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. 
  
(Photo Pierre Verger) 
any account of the Negro in Brazil would be 
no less than the history of the country itself. 
This is obviously an exaggeration, for the same 
thing has been said of the Portuguese, who made 
a nation of Brazil through the development of a 
patriarchal, slave-holding, agrarian system, in 
which the Negro was a basic element, but not the 
whole system. 
There are also interpreters of Brazil's social and 
cultural development who consider that the Indian 
—and not the European or Negro “intruder”— 
should be the central figure. According to them, 
Brazilian history should be Indocentric (to use the 
technical term), and not Lusocentric of Afrocen- 
tric. 
The problem of which group has played the 
greatest role in Brazilian history is a difficult one 
to deal with objectively; but the best evidence so 
far assembled by social anthropologists and histor- 
ians seems to indicate that the Negro is second 
only to the Portuguese as the basic element to 
which Brazil owes not only its economic existence, 
but also the main extra-European traits in its 
modern culture and social organization. 
Throughout America, Brazilian culture is noted 
more for these extra-European traits (although 
it remains predominantly European in culture) 
than for its passively colonial sub-European 
churacteristics. And much of what contributes to 
this vigorous beginning of an original Brazilian 
culture comes from the fact that the Negro, as a 
result of the comparatively liberal treatment given 
him by the Portuguese, has had an opportunity 
to express himself as a Brazilian and not as an 
intruder, either ethnically or culturally. It is also 
because he has had an opportunity to express 
himself as a Brazilian of African origin and not 
as an undesirable African who should never have 
I T has been said by more than one author that 
by Gilberto FREYRE 
Author of The Masters and the Slaves 
been introduced into Brazil at all. 
The African came as a slave to Brazil as early 
as the 15th century, the very century when the 
country was discovered by the Portuguese. He 
was introduced, first to supplement, but soon to 
take the place of the Indian who was so hard to 
maintain in slavery that it became uneconomic to 
use him as a slave. 
Admirers of the Indian regard this as evidence 
that he was, and is, ethnically superior to the 
African, in whom social psychologists like MecDou- 
gall have not hesitated to find a sort of instinct of 
submission. More than this, they see here evidence 
to confirm the idea that the Indian should be 
considered by Brazilians as the really “noble 
savage”, whose blood Brazilians should be proud 
and honoured to have running in their veins. 
This may be true, but it is also true that the 
insubordination of the Indian slave to his captors, 
and his lack of adaptability to routine agrarian 
work in the Portuguese plantations were not 
enlirely an expression of race, psychology or 
character; they were also a consequence of the 
fact that culturally most Indians were in a nomad- 
ic, non-agricultural stage, while many of the 
Africans brought to Brazil as slaves had reached 
this agricultural stage and therefore accepted a 
sedentary life more readily than the Indians. 
Besides, it is not correct to say that Africans in 
Brazil were always submissive to their masters. 
Africans adapted themselves to their sedentary 
life, but not always to slavery. From the early 
colonization period, right down to the abolition of 
slavery by the Brazilian Empire in 1889, there 
were a number of slave uprisings, not only on 
plantations, but also in towns and cities. 
The most important Brazilian city during the 
colonial period, Salvador da Bahia, was rocked by 
a violent rising of African :zlaves against their 
masters in the early days of the Empire. The 
astute Mussulman slaves were the “grey emi- 
nence” behind this and other slave risings—for 
among the Africans imported for household and 
plantation work, Brazil was fortunate in having a 
considerable number of Mussulmans, and a still 
larger number of Negroes who had come under 
Islamic influence and adopted that religion and 
part of Mohammedan culture. 
A number of these imported Africans knew how 
to read and write Arabic, and some of them even 
imported Arabic books through a French book- 
seller in Rio. At that time, a large number of 
white plantation owners hardly knew how to read 
their prayer-books or write notes for their wills, 
while the ladies were kept so ignorant that they 
were considered accomplished when they could 
laboriously trace their own Christian names! 
It seems also to have been a fact that a number 
of girls were imported from Africa to Brazil to be 
the mistresses of Portuguese princes of trade 
established in cities like Salvador. Therefore 
these girls were selected somewhat according to 
Caucasian standards of beauty and European 
refinement, and usually from slightly Arabized 
and Islamized African groups. 
In connection with the history of the Negro in 
Brazil, it should never be forgotten that Brazil 
was colonized by the Portuguese who, as early as 
the 15th century, became captors of slaves in 
Africa. These were used in domestic as well as in 
plantation work, and some were treated as if 
they were members of the white families to whom 
thev became attached. The 15th century Portu- 
guese historian, Zurara, tells us that he knew a 
number of such cases. : 
The Portuguese had 
probably learned from {Continued on next page) 
the Moors to be humane

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 71110: The Negro's role in Brazilian history

AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 Page 8. 
. to their slaves in the 
(Continued from previous page) field and more than 
humane to theirslaves 
in the home. This explains why so many of the 
slaves introduced into Portugal during the 15th 
century were gradually Christianized and Europe- 
anized, instead of being kept apart as “Negroes” 
or “barbarians”. 
Such an example was followed, to a large extent, 
in Brazil, though it must be admitted that, under 
the pressure of violent economic and environ- 
mental changes, some masters were both inhumane 
and cruel to their slaves. 
A number of these masters had only one aim: to 
become rich in the tropics as quickly as possible. 
Therefore, they treated their slaves, not as mem- 
bers of their patriarchal family, according to the 
best Arab and Portuguese tradition, but as ani- 
mals, from whom an ambitious sugar cane or 
coffee planter sought to extract the maximum of 
productivity for a minimum of expense in food, 
clothing and lodging. 
But it is only fair to say that, as a rule, the 
patriarchal system of slave-holding and agrarian 
family life preserved in Brazil some of the Arab 
methods of dealing with slaves that 15th century 
Portugal introduced into Europe. A number of 
reliable foreign observers tell us that slavery in 
Brazil was more humane than in other parts of 
America and of the world. 
Some of them go so far as to contrast the 
situation in Brazil with that of workmen in the 
new factories of Europe during the early 19th 
century. They reached the conclusion that it was 
better to be a slave in a typically patriarchal sugar 
or coffee plantation in Brazil than a labourer in 
a European factory at that time. 
    
Comparisons have also been made between the 
treatment received by slaves in Brazil under the 
patriarchal system and that received by free la- 
bourers during the years of economic laissez-faire 
that followed the liberation of the Negroes in Por- 
tuguese America. Some investigators reached the 
conclusion that the slaves, under the patriarchal, 
paternalistic regime, were probably better cared 
for by their masters than free labourers, black 
and white, during these years of transition. But 
it is probably true that this period, cruel as it 
was, contributed to the development of a more 
virile personality among the ablest groups of black 
or coloured labourers. 
Throughout the history of Brazil, the contri- 
bution of Negroes, both slave and free, has not 
only aided Brazil's economic development, but 
enriched Brazilian cultural life. In addition, as 
more than one foreign observer has pointed out, 
the Negro has contributed to what may be 
described as the most originally Brazilian types of 
feminine grace or beauty. 
Brazilian quadroon or octoroon girls have a 
special charm that harmonizes peculiarly with the 
forms and colours of the tropical landscape. It is 
rarely attained by completely white girls or girls 
with only a touch of Indian blood. And it is 
common, now, in Brazil to observe, in even the 
whitest Brazilian girls, a sort of subtle or indirect 
imitation of this type of feminine beauty or grace, 
as in the Negro’s rhythm of walking, and her grace 
in dancing and smiling. 
One may say that, even without race mixture, 
the profound influence of the Negro has made 
itself felt in Brazil. Every Brazilian, no matter 
how blonde, bears in his soul something of the 
-\ 
UNESCC 
  
   
   
kJ
 
-
~
 
i
y
 
h
e
 
RS
 
] 
- —
 
n
h
 
  
| { 4 
RL MN
 
J
a
b
s
]
 
A
 
JS
 
A
R
 
be LX
 A iY
 ih
 a.
 
C
a
 
i
 
      
(Photo Jean Manzon) 
Negro. This influence is to be seen in a number 
of intimate aspects of Brazilian life or culture such 
as in the colourful form of Catholicism which 
delights their senses, and their typical way of 
walking, laughing and dancing. 
The Negro influence is evident in Brazilian 
music too, particularly in lullabies, ghost and ani- 
mal stories, and folk tales. 
As for Brazilian cooking, it would be nothing 
more than that of Portugal, with a touch or two 
of Indian influence, were it not for the African 
contributions such as African vegetables, African 
stimulants to taste of the kind that have been 
described as “aphrodisiac to one's appetite”. 
These, Brazil has assimilated and blended with 
European, Arab, East Indian and American Indian 
tastes. 
In fact, African culture in Brazil is far from a 
mere museum or anthropological curiosity. It is 
not merely picturesque, but living and creative. 
A Brazilian whose skin is black and whose hair 
is woolly does not consider himself an African or 
a Negro, but a Brazilian. This explains why his 
situafion is entirely different from that of the 
Negro in the United States or in South Africa, 
even though he may not be as well adjusted to 
predominantly European ways as he is to those 
whieh characterize modern Brazil. 
This also explains why it was so natural for a 
famous Brazilian Negro, with a good European 
literary education, to have once said in a speech: 
“We, members of the Latin race...” In Brazil, a 
Negro with a literary education finds no difficulty 
in considering himself not only a Brazilian, that is 
a full-fledged citizen of Brazil, but also a Latin, a 
member of the Latin race.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

ZOURIER 
RACE RELATIONS 
12. VA |S 
(Continued) a 
  
SAO PAUL 
by Roger BASTIDE 
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. 


### 71112: Sao Paulo, the octopus town

"THE OCTOPUS 
TOWN 
Page 9 
Ecole des Hautes Etudes (Paris) and University of Sao Paulo 
N 1888, when slavery was abolished in Brazil, 
Sao Paulo was still only a colonial town where 
life followed the traditional rural rather than 
the urban pattern. Today it is the second city of 
Brazil, with nearly a million-and-a-half inhabit- 
ants, and the largest industrial centre in the 
whole of Latin America. With its reinforced 
concrete skyscrapers and its feverish construction 
boom (a new building goes up at the rate of one 
every fifteen minutes), its ring of smoking chim- 
neys, its mixture of peoples and races — Italians, 
Portuguese, Spaniards, Germans, Slavs and 
Japanese, mingled with the old Brazilian stock — 
and with its Negro population, flocking from north 
and central Brazil to join the army of industrial 
workers, Sao Paulo is truly, 
phrase, an “octopus” town. 
Industrialization and city life have given the 
coloured man opportunities which he has learned 
to take advantage of with practical common sense. 
First of all, in the big city where most people pass 
unknown, he has been able to melt into the crowd 
and thus escape from the patriarchal life of the 
old rural families and the tradition of passive sur- 
render or servile submission to the whites as a 
class. And although he may live in a slum, it does 
not prevent him from breathing the air of free- 
dom. He has a better chance of giving his children 
an education which will help them to rise in the 
social scale. Above all, he finds jobs open to him 
in factories and industries, both big or small, 
where he can earn wages high enough to improve 
his standard of living. Already a middle class of 
coloured people is emerging in Sao Paulo, who 
own their houses or land, and who are distin- 
guished from the lower working class by their 
puritanical outlook and their sense of dignity. 
It was, of course, possible for the mulatto or the 
Negro to make his way upward in the old-time 
Brazilian society but such opportunities were then 
open to very few. The great families always had 
their coloured protégés — adoptive children, god- 
children, sometimes their own illegitimate 
offspring, or those who were singled out from 
others of their colour for their intelligence or 
their devoted attachment to the family. Such 
children were sent to school or found a job in 
government service, so that the old families all 
had a number of Negroes who advanced socially 
under their protection. But these where only the 
“élite”, and the improvement in the position of 
the favoured few did nothing for the mass of their 
fellows, who remained in slavery. Industrialization 
and the growth of cities, and the labour legislation 
which applies to all workers, irrespective of colour 
or origin, are now helping to improve the posi- 
tion of the coloured people as a whole, rather 
than that of a few isolated individuals. 
It is obvious, however, that for this very reason 
the whites are bound to feel that the privileged 
situation they enjoyed in the past is threatened, 
and they will try to defend their governing posi- 
tions against the increasing numbers of black or 
brown competitors. They will seek to put up bar- 
riers at least to retard, if not to arrest, the move- 
ment. But how can they do this in a democratic 
country like Brazil where all mention of colour 
is taboo and where the old tradition of friendly 
relations between whites and Negroes continues 
to exist? They can only do this by indirect, round- 
about ways, by rejecting, on medical grounds, for 
example, a successful Negro candidate in a compe- 
in Verhaeren’s 
titive examination. There is thus a policy of 
directing coloured workers into certain branches 
of industry, such as the building trade or hard 
and dirty types of work for which the whites are 
not anxious to compete. I myself have known of 
several coloured men with academic qualifications 
who tried to get “white collar” jobs but finally 
had to put up with sweeping floors or acting as 
doormen. 
The basis and grounds for this policy are to be 
found in stereotypes and ideologies, which vary 
in different sections of the population. In the old 
traditional families, which are accustomed to 
submissive affection from the Negroes under their 
protection, there is a reaction against the arrog- 
ance and aggressiveness of the new generation 
of Negroes, a desire to maintain the old patriar- 
chal control and to compel the Negro to “keep 
his place”. Among the descendants of immi- 
grants, the struggle to make a living, the compe- 
tition for the best jobs and the effort to find work 
for newly-arrived compatriots lead them to stress 
the “technical inferiority” or the “unprepossessing 
appearance” of the Negro. In addition, for cer- 
tain children of foreigners, becoming assimilated 
Brazilians has had a tendency to mean acquiring 
the outlook of Brazilian society of the past and 
adopting the ideas and feelings of the old ruling 
class which held sway when slavery still existed. 
In spite of ail this, however, with the spread of 
education, with the influence of the war which 
speeded up both industrialization and the influx 
of needed labour from Europe, with the competi- 
tion between political parties and their increasing 
bids to the electorate, the Negro has managed to 
make his way into positions which he could never 
have hoped to reach in the past. The whites have 
therefore been compelled to revise their conven- 
tional views, to acknowledge the worth of their 
coloured colleagues in the office, and even, in some 
cases, to take orders from Negroes who have 
proved to be more capable. 
The whites then usually fall back on a second 
line of defence; they respect official superiors 
whose skin is darker than their own, they treat 
their coloured colleagues in the office or factory 
on the same terms as their white colleagues, but 
they do not invite them into their homes. In the 
sphere of family or social life, there is a barrier 
which the white can pass but not, as a general 
rule, the Negro. This attitude is found even among 
the working classes. Sports clubs accept Negro 
athletes in their games but they will not admit 
them to the dances they run, and even less to 
their swimming pools. Professional associations 
exclude from their social functions those whose 
skin is too dark. 
This semi-voluntary segregation and the whole 
phenomenon of Negro segregation is particularly 
striking to the observer of Sao Paulo since it is in 
complete opposition to the status of the Negro in 
the rest of Brazil. Let us not be led to believe 
that the phenomenon in Sao Paulo is simply a 
question of class, with the Negroes at the lowest 
stratum of society and the whites, occupying a 
higher position, anxious to avoid a degrading 
contamination. The coloured middle classes are 
also excluded and, as their members do not wish 
to be assimilated to the lower class, and as the 
whites spurn them, they have been obliged to 
organize their own recreational clubs. : - 
It would be wrong, however, to exaggerate the 
effect of this segregation. The sexual attraction 
which, under the Empire, brought about the 
mingling of races of different colour and so pre- 
vented the formation of distinct castes, is still in 
operation to encourage intermarriage, though pos- 
sibly mainly among the lower classes and in 
illegitimate relationships. Marriages do also take 
place, however, between dark-skinned and lighter- 
skinned people, the difference in colour being 
offset by the economic advantages which the 
darker partner can offer. A study of the census 
returns for the population of Sao Paulo, and a 
comparison of the birth and mortality figures for 
Negroes and mulattoes, prove that a certain 
number of coloured people cross the dividing line 
each year and are absorbed into the white popu- 
lation. This is not simply a question of statistics 
but of their own outlook and of the attitude of 
other people towards them. By this I mean that, 
living in the impersonal atmosphere of a big city 
where it is impossible to keep track of family 
descent, they will be treated as whites and, at the 
same time, they will adopt the white man’s dero- 
gatory stereotypes and prejudices against those 
who have remained on the other side of the colour 
barrier. 
North American sociologists have given the 
name of “transition societies” to these commu- 
nities where the social structure is undergoing an 
upheaval through the action of new economic 
factors while many traditional values still sur- 
vive. The city of Sao Paulo is an instance of such 
a society in transition, where the patriarchal way 
of life is succumbing to economic competition, and 
the formation of social classes is undermining the 
domination of the old rural aristocracy. The 
colour prejudice which served to justify slavery 
for the Negro is now out of date. It is changing 
into class prejudice to justify white retention of 
the governing or controlling positions in society. 
Nevertheless, the democratic laws of Brazil and 
the development of industrialization, with the 
accompanying demand for more labour, are 
helping to improve the position of the coloured 
people as a whole. The classic master-and-man 
relations is no longer applicable to the relations 
between whites and blacks at work. This 
accounts for the reluctance of the white man to 
share his social life with the Negro and for his 
desire to put the latter “in his place”. It also 
accounts for the uneasiness of the black man; 
he may still, in some cases, make his way up- 
wards, as in the past, through the patronage of 
a white but, in others, he may give way to resent- 
ment at the obstacles he encounters in his efforts 
to rise in the social scale, and in turn may deve- 
lop racial prejudices of his own against the 
Negro. The unifying forces and the forces of 
segregation are thus accentuated and intensified 
in the tangled relationships of city life. The ideo- 
logical chaos is indicative of the conflict between 
opposing social trends. Yet the coloured man has 
glimpsed a better world, even though the way to 
it lies through the sufferings of a painful period 
of transition, in which outworn prejudices seek 
to stave off final defeat by assuming a new guise 
seemingly even more intense than the old; a 
period, in particular, in which those prejudices, 
even when weakened, are felt more bitterly by 
men and women who have been taught by free- 
dom the meaning of human dignity. 
Brazil is one of the rare countries which have achieved racial harmony and racial democracy. Although a few discordant notes can be found 
in white-Negro relations in certain large, industrialized towns, they are in complete opposition to the status of the Negro in the rest of Brazil. 
 
(Photos Pierre Verger) 
1 
Fs
 
J 
£  

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

Page 10. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 
\CE RELATIONS 
a IY:LY-VA[ 
: (Continued) 
  
HE racial situation in Rio de Janeiro 
offers some striking analogies with 
what has been written about that in 
Sao Paulo. In Rio, just as in Sao 
Paulo, the harmonious integration which is 
regarded as characteristic of inter-racial rela- 
tionships in Brazil fails to correspond to facts 
revealed by sociological investigations. 
It has been said $o often and for so long that 
racial prejudices do not exist in Brazil, that this 
affirmation which has 
been passed around the 
world has finally become 
a source of Brazilian na- 
tional pride. Yet, behind 
this piece of dogma lie 
feelings of bitterness and 
an obvious uneasiness. To 
describe this phenomenon, 
we might well use the 
expression “cryptomelan- 
ism”, which was applied 
by the sociologist Renzo 
Sereno to Puerto Rico. 
The word denotes the fear 
to admit or the desire to 
hide the importance which 
is, in fact, attached to the 
question of race and of 
colour. Such a refusal to 
face up to reality springs 
from various causes. The 
first must be sought in 
the extreme forms taken 
by racialism in other 
countries by comparison 
with which Brazil's situa- 
tion takes on the air of a 
model of tolerance and 
harmony. Yet if the situa- 
tions of the United States 
and Brazil are placed side 
by side, it can be seen that 
the differences are of 
degree rather than of 
nature. They are differ- 
ences of degree easy to 
identify in one country or 
the other according to the 
areas examined. 
~ There is no question of 
persecutions or even of 
brutal discrimination, but 
of a series of small facts 
of greater or less import- 
ance, more or less gene- 
ralized and more or less 
frequent which by their 
sum total develop among 
the members of a racial 
group the feeling that they 
may, at any moment, be 
exposed to injustice or 
even to discourtesy simply 
because of their racial 
origin. It is this insecur- 
ity which produces in many Negroes a serious 
state of anxiety, of fear and instability. Even 
though someone may never have suffered from 
another person's lack of respect for him or may 
never have been snubbed because of his colour, 
the threat of this is sufficient to put him on 
the defensive and to give him a feeling of 
victimization. 
What seems typical of the Brazilian situation 
is not the complete lack of prejudice, but the 
absence of violence in the forms of discrimina- 
tion shown to the Negro. 
First of all it should be made clear that the 
appearance of a new racial situation which can. 
be observed in Rio de Janeiro is directly related 
to the influx from the countryside into the 
Brazilian capital of people attracted by the 
possibilities opened up to them by a rapidly 
developing industry. 
As a very large proportion of these emigrants 
from the interior of the country is made up 
of coloured people, it follows that the urban 
proletariat is also made up to a great extent of 
Negroes or mulattos. Statistics bring the 
picture even more clearly into perspective. 
They show that the number of Negroes who can 
be classed as employers is insignificant in 
comparison with the mass of coloured 
employees, and that posts of authority in 
industry, trade and agriculture are, with very 
few exceptions, occupied by white people. 
The men of colour who have succeeded in 
  
UNESCO 


### 71115: Rio de Janeiro, melting-pot of peoples

RIO DE JANEIRO 
MELTING-POT OF PEOPLES 
By Professor L. A. COSTA PINTO 
University of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro 
rising above the general mass of the people and 
in establishing themselves in the higher ranks 
of the social scale represent “honourable 
exceptions” which can give rise to no illusions 
about tMe true state of the racial situation. 
These men, who appear to have successfully 
overcome barriers raised against them because 
of the colour of their skin, underwent a 
process of “whitening” and in proportion to 
their rise in the social scale were treated as 
on the imaginative level. It is of little import- 
ance that these conceptions are naive ones. 
The fact is they do exist and the socio- 
logist is obliged to recognize their power 
and analyze their origin. 
It must be understood that this exaltation of 
“Negro consciousness” and the contradictions 
which are so apparent in the ideological systems 
are, in fact, the expressions, in racial terms, of 
the aspirations and disillusions of a middle 
class group which is try~ 
ing to rise, not as a race, 
- FF % 
a + Fh 
 
if they had been white. 
Alongside this long-standing élite which the 
upper classes of the community accept and 
regard as the symbol of their own liberal 
outlook, is rising a new Negro élite which, 
while wishing to progress, in no way desires to 
renounce its “Negro consciousness”. In its 
march forward, this group runs into prejudices 
expressed as racial stereotypes. Before this 
barrier its reaction to the problem confronting 
it takes the form of an awareness of race. 
The ideology which Negro intellectuals have 
built around the idea of “Negro consciousness” 
is the form taken by this race consciousness 
forced on the coloured élite. Its development 
has been made possible because the whites 
themselves sowed the seeds of the idea in the 
very midst of the Negro “intelligenzia.” =~ For, 
just as one can say that the Negro problem is, 
above all, that of the white man who has 
mistaken ideas about Negroes and who acts on 
the basis of these false ideas, so one can also 
affirm that the idea of “Negro consciousness” 
is not of Negro origin but merely a Negro 
reflection of the ideas which white men have 
about him and also the result of his race 
consciousness which has been developed by the 
obstacles he has met throughout life. 
It is these obstacles which are at the root of 
racial ideology and which make of race a 
mystic entity, mystic in the sense that it 
transposes a daily experience into something 
~ but as a social class. 
~~ Their overriding aim is to - 
: obtain for themselves and 
their likes the acquisition 
of the sort of life led by 
the upper and middle 
classes which are the 
traditionally white classes 
of Brazilian society. 
While this rise of a 
Negro élite in Brazilian 
society is slow, it is 
nevertheless certainly tak- 
ing place in existing 
social frameworks and in 
accordance with the values 
and attitudes which belong 
to them. 
Progress: in the case of 
a Negro who is a member 
of the proletariat is limited 
by the boundaries of the 
particular social group in 
which he lives. As one of 
this mass of people the 
Negro does not suffer 
from the same feeling of 
oppression and suffocation 
of which the “élite” 
complain. He does not 
feel, as do the latter, that 
he is “two people in one.” 
He is; he feels, simply a 
Negro of the proletariat. 
When he is attacked by 
racial prejudice he reacts 
simply and directly as an 
injured party without in 
any ‘way seeking the 
transcendent causes for 
the affront he has suffered. 
Because racial prejudice 
does not appear to him as 
a coherent system, but 
rather as a series of 
incidents, he fights it as 
a member of a social 
class and not as a member 
of a race. Furthermore, 
he views his progress 
not as something which 
has a racial element but 
which affects a mass 
whose - members include 
men of other colours. : 
Brazil has no racialist philosophy to support 
or give moral sanction to racial discrimination. 
Only the “cryptomelanism”, of which I spoke 
earlier, had an effect of this kind. There 
exists, however, no absolute or hard and fast 
values capable of preventing the development 
of racial tensions or of ensuring that they do 
not lead to catastrophes. 
The racial question in Brazil is not a problem 
which is independent from others facing the 
country. It has not been resolved in some 
miraculous fashion, nor is it, as some declare, 
an unchangeable state of affairs. We would 
not say that Brazil has a racial problem, if, by 
that, we mean the particular form this question 
has taken in other social structures which differ 
from our own. Nor would we say, in view of 
the facts brought to light by our investigation, 
that no problem exists. We would simply say 
that there does exist a racial question which is 
undergoing a process of change and which 
displays particular characteristics within any 
given social structure. This cannot be sepa- 
rated from other present-day tensions. 
This interdependence, then, can result in a 
crisis or a solution according to the nature of 
Brazil's social evolution in the coming years. 
(Photo Pierre Yerger) 
  
This article is a resumé of the conclusions of Professor 
Costa Pinto in his study The Negro in Rio de Janeiro— 
Race Relations in a Changing Society, fo be published by 
Unesco early next year,

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

COURIER 
  
i 
x the United States an absolute 
1 “line” is drawn between white 
and Negro. A person who is not 
white is Negro, whatever his small 
percentage of Negro blood may be. In 
Vila Reconcavo, a pseudonym given 
in a Unesco study to a town situated 
in the zone known as the Reconeavo 
which surrounds Salvador, the capital 
-of the State of Bahia, this “line” 
is recognized rather than drawn. A 
distinction between Negro and white 
is always kept in mind when classi- 
fying an individual. Everyone knows 
who is “pure” white and who is not. 
Classification by race is one of the 
most important aspects of local cul- 
ture, and one of the most difficult 
aspects for the outsider to grasp. 
Bahians of the RecOncavo feel that 
one may instantly recognize the dif- 
ference hetween a “pure” white and 
a mixed white-Indian, white-Negro 
or Negro-Indian, but they do not let 
it go at that. They classify or des- 
cribe minutely each person; they 
classify according to skin colour, 
‘according to hair form and according 
to facial features. Their classifica 
tions of racial types are used in 
everyday conversation. Just as it 
would be said that someone is short 
and - fat in the United States, the 
people of Vila Reconcavo will 
describe a person's colour and hair. 
In the Reconcavo three race stocks 
are recognized: the white, the Negro 
and the Indian. A white is called a 
branco. The Portuguese term negro 
is rarely used to denote a person of 
African descent. Rather such a per- 
son is called homem de cér (man of 
colour). Negro is used abstractly to 
denote the Negro race, but it is almost 
never used to single out an indivi- 
dual. Nego (a softened variation of 
the word negro) may frequently be 
used as a term of endearment, even 
among whites, and it is sometimes 
“used as a nickname. When a Bahian 
of the Reconcavo speaks of indio, he 
usually thinks of the Indian of the 
interior of Mato Grosso or of the 
Amazon, When he wishes to indicate 
people of American Indian physical 
type, lie generally savs caboelo. 
Yet even the whites are sub-classi- 
fied, being divided into two cate- 
gories, the louro (blond) and more- 
no (dark). There is still a third 
term for people with Caucasoid phy- 
sical characteristics, but one which 
is used only by those who are consi- 
dered “pure” white — namely, bran- 
co da terra. He is someone who has 
the physical characteristics of a 
Caucasold: fair skin, fine features 
and “good” (meaning straight) hair 
— but whose ancestry has Negro 
blood. He or she is generally moreno, 
and is frequently “characterized by 
a slightly yellowish tinge to the skin. 
The white branco da terra sometimes 
also shows traces of caboclo blood as 
well as Negro and white blood. To 
the majority of the population, the 
brarco da terra is always called 
white, and no-one would ever call 
anyone a branco da terra to his face. 
He is accorded the same treatment as 
is any white by both whites and non- 
whites, and there is no constraint on 
anyone's part. 
In classifying people, skin colour is 
an important factor but hair form is 
equally important. If there is any 
question as to what to call a person, 
generally the hair is the deciding cri- 
ferion. After skin and hair, facial 
features (prognathism, nose shape 
and thickness of lips) are considered. 
The many designations used in Vila 
Reconcavo for the people of Negroid 
or mixed ancestry can be broken 
down roughly into the following types 
in terms of these various criterion: 
1. The preio (black) has black 
shiny skin, kinky. woolly hair, thick 
lips and a flat broad nose. The pre- 
tos distinguish among themselves, 
having what they call “qualidade, or 
 
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 11 


### 71117: Shades of colour and of meaning

mm SHADES OF COLOUR 
AND OF MEANING 
by Harry W. HUTCHINSON 
quality, and they rank themselves 
according to minute differences in 
(quality of skin colour or nose form. 
The prcto with the most gquali- 
dade 1s the farthest from the usual 
concept of a Negro, but is a “prettier” 
black. 
2. The cabra (feminine, cabrocha) 
1s generally slightly lighter than the 
preto, with hair growing somewhat 
longer, but still kinky and unmanage- 
able, and with facial features less 
Negroid, although often with fairly 
thick lips and flat nose. He @eneral- 
lv lacks the definite features and 
shine of the preto. 
- F.N * i wo ar \ LL PR 
  
3. The cabs verde is slightly light- 
er than the prefo, but still very dark. 
But he has long straight hair, and 
his facial features are apt to be very 
fine, with thin lips and a narrow 
straight nose. ‘He 1s almost a “black 
white man”. . 
- 4. The escuro, - or simply “dark 
man”, is darker than the usual run 
of mesti¢os, but the therm is gene- 
rally applied to a person who does 
not fit into one of the three types 
mentioned above. The “dark man” 
is not a Negro with Caucasoid fea- 
tures, but he almost is. He gene- 
rally has qualidade. Escuro is a very 
useful term for the outsider in the 
Reconeavo. 
5. The mulato is a category always 
divided into two types, the mulato 
escuro and mulato claro (dark and 
light mulattoes). The mulato has 
hair which grows perhaps to should- 
er length, but which has a decided 
curl and even kink. It can, however, 
be straightened. The mulato’s facial 
features vary widely; thick lips with 
a narrow nose, or vice-versa. As a 
rule, the features are thicker than 
the 'white's, and thinner than the 
negro’s, The mulato is - -generally 
distinguishable by a yellowish tinge 
{o his skin colour, varying from very 
light to very dark. A mulato claro, 
with straightened hair, thin lips and 
a “good” nose is very much like the 
branco da terra. 
6. Pardo is a term not often used 
in speech. It is one of the official 
classifications used in the census and 
on identification papers. However, 
it is used occasionally to describe an 
individual who is closer to the white 
than a light mulatto. Occasionally 
mestico children are described as 
pardo during the early vears of their 
life, before their features become 
distinctive enough to fit them defi- 
nitely into one of the other groups. 
In one case, a little girl of three was 
called parda by her mother. The girl 
lives with her godfather, who is a 
branco da terra. He lists the girl as 
white, since her skin is very light 
and her hair is growing long and 
only slightly wavy. But ‘her mother 
says she 1s a parda because she 
knows that “her hair may curl up 
any day, which would make her a 
mulata clara.” 
7. The sarara is not difficult to dis- 
tinguish. He has very light skin, and 
hair which is reddish or blondish 
but kinky or curled. His hair is des- 
cribed as duro, or hard. His facial 
features are extremely varied, even 
few 
more so than the mulato’s. “There 
are sararas who would “pass” for 
white in the United States, but more 
often they have a curious appear- 
ance; skin which is neither dark nor 
light, frequently freckled, eyes with 
a greenish-blue cast and hair which 
bleaches easily in the sun. 
8. The moreno has excellent skin, 
fine-textured and smooth. He is 
light-skinned but not white. 
dark hair, which is. long and either 
wavy or curly. It is manageable and 
does not need’ straightening. His fea- 
tures are much more Caucasoid than 
Negroid. Here again we can distin- 
guish between the dark and light 
morenos. Also we must distinguish 
between the moreno mulato and the 
moreno of the white families — the 
moreno branco. Morerdo, as. used 
regarding the “white”, distinguishes 
the brown from the blond of the 
sane group. 
Few people fit any of these 
“racial” types one hundred percent. 
When some one comes very close to 
being a perfect prefo—that is, has 
all the characteristics of the preto— 
people call him bem precto or bem 
pretinho (really black). The same 
1s true of the sarard — bem sarard, 
or of the moreno, who will be called 
bem moreninho or moreno fino. It is 
just as difficult to find the perfect 
type for the other classifications, 
because there are so many variations. 
Many times one must point out that 
an individual is of one physical type, 
but has one or more characteristics 
of another type. For instance, one 
young man in Vila Reconcavo has the 
characteristics of an escuro, but 
since most people like him they like 
to think of him as moreno. He has 
fine skin and thin facial features, but 
has tight kinky hair. People gene- 
rally refer to him as moreno, adding 
“but he has poor hair.” One fre- 
but 
These verbal descrip- 
tions paint a vivid picture of the 
quently hears he is “mulato, 
very light.” 
person in question. In Vila Recon- 
cavo, it is not simply a matter of 
black and white, but of all the 
shades in between. 
A term of classification not listed 
above, caboclo, presents something 
of a special case. As mentioned 
earlier, most people with Indian 
physical traits have come into the 
Reconcavo region from the dry 
hinterland during the dry spells of 
the North. Considering the length 
of time that people of the North 
have been periodically coming into 
the Reconcavo region, comparatively 
have remained. Nevertheless, 
the population of Vila Reconcavo 
shows a considerable caboclo ele- 
ment—that is, of people with a 
reddish or bronze tinge of their skin 
colour, more prominent cheek bones 
than the African or white elements. 
and a tendency toward an almond- 
shaped eve. However, few people 
in Vila Reconcavo bearing these 
marks are called caboclos. They 
are classified instead in the loca! 
terms listed above, 
can Indian traits. “In Vila Recon- 
cavo, there is a cerlain dispraise of 
He has- 
ignoring Ameri- . 
the caboclo. He is considered less 
civilized than the resident of the 
Reconcavo. He iz often known as a 
better worker, more ambitious, 
trustworthy, more frugal and less 
genial than the easygoing person of 
the Reconcavo. In the rural area of 
Vila Reconcavo, each year many 
caboeclo men come to the plantations 
to work during harvest time. For 
the most part they stay together, 
away from the resident worker of 
the ‘plantation. 
There is a mutual desire to keep 
apart, for while the resident worker 
looks down on the caboclo, the 
caboclo feels very much the same 
about the local people. He feels 
that they are lazy, ignorant, and 
“above all superstitious. The cabo- 
clo vaqueiro (north eastern cowboy) 
of one -.planiation says that the 
workers of the plantation are always 
talking about black magic, that they 
are lazy and spendthrifts, and at the 
same time deride his frugality. He 
says he is not afraid of their black 
magic, since le knows there is 
nothing to it, but he does not 
understand it, and distrusts those 
who speak of it. People in Vila 
Reconcavo will not admit they have 
caboclo or Indian blood ancestors. 
One voung girl who is almost a per- 
fect ‘American Indian type says she 
is a mulatinha or little mulata. 
(Using the diminutive form seems to 
be a softer and more agreeable way 
of saying mulato.) She vehemently 
denied there was any Indian blood in 
her family, but finally reluctantly 
admitted that a great-grandparent 
of hers had been partly Indian. This 
girl's niece would make a perfect 
double for the popular conception of 
Pocaliontas, given a feather in her 
hair and a sarong, but she is con- 
sidered a “mulata, almost morena.” 
However, among the “pure” whites 
there is a different feeling about ‘the 
caboclo. White families say that 
they would feel proud to know that 
they have “Indian blood” for it 
would indicate the length of time 
their family has been in Brazil. 
Frequently a white child is extreme- 
Iv “Indian looking”, that is, a 
moreno with jet black, straight hair. 
The nickname of tapuya 1s often 
given to this type which is generally 
admired by the whites. “And ail 
plantation owners agree that, for 
work, no-one can top the caboclo. 
The north eastern worker of Ameri- 
can Indian physical type will go into 
the fields at six in the morning and 
not return until six at night. He 
takes his lunch with him and eats it 
there. On the other hand, the 
resident worker will go to the fields 
at six and return at noon. However, 
as permanent resident workers, 
plantation owners will prefer the 
Negroes of the Reconcavo. Little if 
any effort is made to “fix” the 
caboclo on the plantations. When 
the harvest is finished, he takes his 
money and departs. Next year he 
may come again to the same plan- 
tation, or he may not. It seems to 
make little difference to either party. 
This article is taken from the study Race 
Relations in 
shortly by °° 
Rural Brazil, to be published 

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 71119: Attitudes in the 'backlands'

RACE RELATIONS 
IN BRAZIL. 
(Continued) 
  
E
T
 
p
—
—
 
'BACKLANDS' 
Vv 4 
E
i
s
 
  
RAZIL is a living example of 
how a nation composed of 
people of diverse racial 
stocks need not be split by 
tensions, segregation, or discrimi- 
nation between racial groups. 
In this vast country, however, 
there are striking contrasts from 
region to region, as well as between 
the cosmopolitan cities and the small 
towns and rural homesteads of the 
interior. Like other aspects of the 
Brazilian social scene, the patterns 
of race relations may be expected to 
vary within the common framework 
of national life. Differences in 
ethnic composition, living standards, 
the extent of industrialization, and 
receptiveness to foreign ideas 
further complicate the problem of 
generalizing on a national scale. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that 
there are ‘wide gaps in our infor- 
 
mation. This was, until a short 
time ago, especially true of our 
knowledge of race relations in the 
interior portions of the country. 
Since over 70 per cent of Brazil's 
approximately 50,000,000 people live 
in towns with fewer than 5,000 inha- 
bitants, or on scattered farms and 
plantations, studies of the rural 
population were particularly urgent. 
In 1950 and 1951 such studies were 
carried out by the Fundagao para o 
Desenvolvimento da Ciencia na 
Bahia and the Department of An- 
thropology of Columbia University, 
in co-operation with Unesco. Three 
small communities in different 
regions of northern Brazil were 
covered. A fourth anthropological 
“community study” was made in 
1948 as one of the surveys for the 
International Hylean Amazon Insti- 
tute sponsored by Unesco. 
A report based upon these studies 
has already been received by 
Unesco. ‘Called Race and Class in 
Rural Brazil, it includes articles on 
a traditional plantation community 
of the Bahian area (Vila RecOncavo), 
an old mining town of the Brazilian 
plateau (Minas Velhas), a character- 
istic community of the arid north 
eastern sertao (Monte Serrat), and 
a community situated along the 
Amazon River, (Ita). These studies 
were prepared respectively by Harry 
W. Hutchinson, Marvin Harris, Ben 
Zimmerman, and Charles Wagley. 
Each is a first-hand “case study” 
of race relations in a representative 
community of an important region 
of north Brazil. There are differ- 
ences from one community to an- 
other, and from one region to an- 
other; but the common patterns of 
race relations which emerge from a 
  
 
comparison of all four communities 
seem to be basic traditions shared 
by a significant segment of the Bra- 
zilian nation. 
In all of the communities included 
in our research programme, it was 
observed that the most important 
principle governing relations be- 
tween people was membership of 
a social class rather than “race”. 
People are assigned a place in the 
social hierarchy depending on their 
income, occupation, level of educa- 
tion, family connections and finally, 
but only of equal importance with 
these qualifications, on their “race”. 
Considered separately from the 
other criteria, the qualities popularly. 
associated with the various racial’ 
types stand out as evidence for a 
mild form of race prejudice. Phy- 
sical characteristics are rated higher 
as they approach the white model, 
and lower as they approach the 
Negro or (in the Amazon) the In-" 
dian. Thus people speak of “bad 
hair”, meaning the kinky hair of 
the Negro, and everywhere very 
dark skin colour is considered less 
desirable than light skin colour. 
In addition, psychological fea- 
tures, some of them derogatory, are 
regularly attributed to the various 
races ; the average Negro, for exam- 
ple, is considered to be innately less 
intelligent than the white. Strictly 
speaking, these are prejudices, but 
the fact that racial criteria are regu-

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 71119: Attitudes in the 'backlands'

  
larly weighed against the other 
components of the over-all social 
ranking system greatly diminishes 
their effect upon actual behaviour. 
In the old mining community of 
Minas Velhas, for example, a man 
who told us that he would never 
welcome a Negro in his home, soon 
afterwards entertained a Negro 
engineer with the utmost respect 
and cordiality. In concrete social 
situations, other qualities such as 
wealth, education, family member- 
ship, personal attachments, and 
politics seem to determine the way 
people treat one another rather than 
“race”. 
Instances in which race preju- 
dice enters into actual behaviour 
are not, however, entirely lacking. 
Occasional tension occurs at the 
margin of the upper class, where, if 
other criteria have not been met deci- 
sively, the racial factor is liable to 
assume critical and disputed propor- 
tions. Peoples who are clearly lower 
class do not try to compete with the 
upper class, but those striving to 
enter the upper class or to attain 
secial prominence in their commu- 
nity do, as elsewhere, compete 
‘with one another. 
It was at this point in the social 
hierarchy that “race” was often 
found to be the crucial qualification 
for social success, when participa- 
tion in festive ceremonies, appoint- 
ment to political office, or marriage 
 
    
with an economic equal were at 
stake. On the other hand, if the eco- 
nomic and educational criteria are 
clearly and undoubtedly satisfied, 
dark-skinned individuals easily 
cross the threshold of the upper 
class and are fully accepted. 
Thus in all of the communities 
studied there are “people of colour” 
by Charles WAGLEY 
Columbia University 
in the upper class groups — indivi- 
duals of relatively high income, 
engaged in a “white collar” occupa- 
tion, who are literate, related in one 
way or another to an important local 
family and ‘who are Negro, mulatto, 
or caboclo (American Indian) in 
appearance. Though their achieve- 
ment of high social rank may be 
more difficult, it 1s possible. 
Despite the relative unimportance 
of racial criteria so far as rank is’ 
concerned, the majority of the 
people in the upper class groups 
of their respective communities are 
European in appearance. In other 
words, the “people of colour” gene- 
rally do occupy positions that are 
socially, economically and educa- 
tionally inferior. It would be a 
mistake, however, to regard this 
correlation between race and class 
as being wholly or largely the effect 
of a mild race prejudice. 
The causes of this situation must 
’ yr 
. ’ » tw 
’ “ 5 . . 
. vy." J - «0 - 
be sought for rather in the slowness 
with which economic and educa- 
tional advantages have been 
extended to those who are but third 
or fourth generation descendants of 
slaves and of primitive Indians. 
The principal barrier to social 
improvement is not race prejudice, 
but the inherited disadvantage of 
the non-European in terms of edu- 
cation and wealth. 
Of fundamental importance in 
this respect is the fact that there is 
no institutionalized segregation or 
occupational and educational discri- 
mination based on “race” alone. 
Apparent instances of segregation 
do occur when poor people who are 
also “people of colour” occupy 
certain districts of the towns. But) 
in fact, segregation on any large 
scale would be impossible here. 
There is no simple two - or three- 
fold classification of racial types 
which would permit the parcelling 
of people into residential districts, 
different schools, churches and 
other such arrangements. There 
are, instead, numerous physical 
types, such as the branco (Euro- 
pean), the mulato, the moreno 
escuro (dark brown), the moreno 
claro (light brown), the cabo 
verde (dark skin, but European 
features), the sarara (light skin but 
Negro features), the caboclo (Ameri- 
can Indian features), and the pardo 
(brown), to mention only a few. It 
    
G1
1 
i
N
e
w
 
/
 ~ 
  
 
Photos Pierre Verger 
is hard to imagine a “Jim Crow” 
system in these circumstances. 
The recognition of so many 
intermediate types shows in one 
sense an acute awareness of racial 
differences. People go so far as 
habitually to identify others in 
conversation by referring to their 
physical type. 
“Aquele mulalo” or “aquele ca- 
boclo” is mentionned in much the 
same way as other people speak of 
“that tall, thin fellow”. 
One of the important lessons 
which a study of Brazil can teach 
us is that intense awareness of racial 
differences need not necessarily be 
accompanied by an equal intensity 
of prejudice or discrimination. 
In rural Brazil, “people of 
colour” may improve their social 
status by improving their economic, 
educational, and occupational posi- 
tion. As the Brazilian economy 
continues to expand, and educational 
and economic opportunities become 
more widely distributed, the people 
of dark skin colour who now occupy 
the lower ranks of society should 
tend to take their places with the 
more ‘privileged groups. 
Rural Brazil is not totally free of 
prejudice and discrimination based 
on race, but on the whole, the 
traditional patterns of race relations 
- present in these rural communities 
are a rich social heritage from 
which the world has much to learn.

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

Page 14. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 
RACE RELATIONS 
IN BRAZIL 
= (LLU) 
  
HE best type of social 
relationship between whites 
and coloured people is pro- 
bably to be found in 
the regions colonized by the 
Portuguese during the last four 
centuries. This, for example, was 
the impression which André Sieg- 
fried formed after his travels round 
the world. 
Brazil, the biggest nation that the 
Portuguese discovered and popu- 
lated, is no exception to this rule. 
BAHIA 
by Thales de AZEVEDO 
of the University of Bahia, Brazil 
In fact, one of the characteristics 
of Brazilian cultural life is the 
harmonious way the various 
ethnic groups of native, European, 
African and, more recently, Asiatic 
origin, live together. 
In other lands too, it is true, 
whites of different origin and 
people of various colour groups, 
live together peacefully and 
without tension; but in few parts 
of the world today is the relation- 
ship between whites and coloured 
people (and especially the descend- 
ants of African slaves) better 
than in Brazil. 
Active racial prejudices do not 
really exist in Brazil, much less 
any organized or open struggle 
between whites and Negroes even 
in those parts of the country, such 
as the south-central and eastern: 
States, where Negroes are most 
numerous. 
Of all parts of Brazil, the State 
of Bahia is undoubtedly the most 


### 71122: Bahia, the negro metropolis

 economic 
THE NEGRO 
METROPOLIS 
UNESCO 
typical of Negro-white race rela- 
tions. Its population consists for 
the most part of white descendants 
of the Portuguese, Negroes whose 
ancestors were slaves brought 
from Guinea and Angola, and 
mulattos who are the result of the 
constant 
riage} which has been going on 
between whites and Negroes since 
the middle of the 16th century. 
(In fact, early colonial laws 
banning the marriage of free men 
and slaves had become a dead 
letter long before these laws were 
done away with.) 
If anything now tends to lessen 
intermarriage, it is not so much 
mesticagem (intermar- 
colour prejudice as the social 
barriers fostered by class feeling. 
Even this, however, is not very 
strong, although it is unquestion- 
ably stronger than colour prejudice 
as such. 
In Bahia, the capital of the State 
of the same name, and one of the 
most important cities of Brazil, a 
little more than one-third of the 
population of 400,000 is white. 
Twenty per cent is Negro, while 
mestizos total about 47 per cent. 
The number of whites is increas- 
ing slowly — as slowly as the 
‘Negro population is decreasing; 
but mulattoes of all shades are 
increasing at an ever mounting 
rate which has now reached the 
highest figure for all Brazil. This 
1s true even when compared to the 
rate observed in those regions 
where the greatest proportion of 
Negroes live, such as the States of 
Maranhdo and Piaui in the far 
north. 
However, far more characteristic 
than race mixture which is very 
frequent in the lower levels of the 
population but decreases in inten- 
sity at the upper levels, are the 
possibilities of advancement which 
coloured people have in their local 
communities. Since these commu- 
nities are made up of multi-racial 
classes in which caste is non- 
existent, a man of colour can, as - 
the sociologist Donald Pierson has 
shown “by reason of individual 
merit or favourable circumstance, 
improve his status and even 
achieve position in the upper levels 
of society and this position will 
then be with reference not merely 
to the darker group whose colour 
he shares but to the total com- 
munity.” (1). EVRY So 
‘A simple accident’ 
AVING more or less dark skin 
1s regarded as “a simple 
accident” of physical nature 
which has nothing to ‘do with 
one’s moral qualities or intellectual 
ability. It does not predetermine 
a person’s social position but only 
conditions it. For it is a symbol 
of the low status which the major- 
ity of the Negroes and mulattoes 
have occupied throughout Brazilian 
history as contrasted to the whites 
who, despite the same political and 
factors, were always 
the dominant class of Brazilian 
society. 
Because of this, the lighter 
skinned “whiter” .mulattos find it 
easiest to rise in the social scale. 
In fact, when by reason of their 
wealth, their talent, their political 
influence or their university 
“degrees they reach a high position, 
they are no longer considered 
mulaltos or mestizos, but whites. 
It would be considered impertinent 
(1) Donald Pierson-——VNegroes in Brazil : 
A Study of Race Contact at Bahia.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 71122: Bahia, the negro metropolis

and inelegant to remind such a 
person of his ethnic background. 
As in any other part of Brazil, 
all racial groups mix freely in 
theatres and cinemas, cafés and 
restaurants, public conveyances, 
churches, schools and in the 
armed forces. This can be observed 
more especially in Bahia where in 
addition it causes less surprise 
than elsewhere and where the 
improvement in social position of 
dark-skinned people is taken as a 
natural thing. 
Education is most important if 
this improvement is to take place, 
however. Bahians are fond of 
saving that differences in their 
social position are only a question 
of education; that anyone can rise 
if he has reached a certain level 
of instruction or professional 
training and his moral conduct is 
compatible with accepted local 
patterns. Although the great ma- 
jority of darker skinned coloured 
people and mulattos are concen- 
trated in the lower levels of society, 
and in the lowest, humblest 
occupations, many are to be found 
in practically all the professions 
which enjoy prestige. 
Professions bring prestige 
Hus, coloured citizens work, 
~ not only with one another but 
also among whites, as doctors, 
judges, lawyers, engineers, uni- 
versity professors, priests, poli- 
ticians, high government officials, 
and — although relatively less 
frequent — as businessmen, indus- 
trialists, bankers and army officers. 
Once they are classed as part of 
these groups, they can enter scien- 
tific societies, literary academies, 
and the leading social and sporting 
clubs. 
  
It is to a great extent through the 
liberal professions that poor 
coloured people can achieve social 
position. Among the poets, writers, 
scientists and statisticians, whose 
activities are a source of pride to 
the people of Bahia and many 
other Brazilians, there are many 
coloured men — sometimes very 
dark skinned and unmistakeably 
Negro. 
This is no romantic picture of 
life in Bahia, painted with im- 
pressions of hurried observation or 
uncritical admiration but the result 
of sociological inquiries based on 
direct verification of the racial 
composition of different “prestige” 
groups and organizations in the 
educational, sports, religious, poli- 
tical, administrative and economic 
fields. The writer of this article 
himself undertook one of these 
inquiries last year, under Unesco 
auspices, as part of the programme 
of social research in the State of 
‘Bahia undertaken by the Founda- 
tion for the Development of 
Science in Bahia (Fundag¢ao para o 
Desenvolvimento da Ciencia na 
Bahia) in co-operation with Co- 
lumbia University. 
It must be pointed out, however, 
that inter-racial relations in Bahia 
are not entirely free from friction 
and discrimination, but these are 
often confused with antagonisms 
of class. An analysis of the local 
customs and social structure 
shows that there are certain points 
of resistance to the social rise of 
individuals with the most pro- 
nounced Negro traits. It reveals 
that there are people in Bahia who 
blame the Negroes for the eco- 
nomic back wardness of the region, 
as compared with other parts of 
Brazil where industrialization and 
economic advancement are much 
more rapid. 
In the upper class of society, 
for example, inter-marriage runs 
against barriers which at times are 
extremely powerful, so that one 
usually hears it said that except in 
the case of marriage, no colour 
prejudice really exists in Bahia. 
In spite of this, however, a mulatto 
who exercises a liberal profession 
and who has a certain level of 
income can marry an “aristo- 
cratic” white girl — that is— one 
of authentic European origin and 
unquestionable white traits. 
Paradoxical attitudes 
ARRIAGE is the touchstone 
of inter-racial relations. In 
- Bahia, the number of mixed 
marriages is very high (about 20 
per cent of all marriages), and the 
social forces which formely ope- 
rated to prevent them are now 
diminishing. 
There are coloured men with 
responsible positions who marry 
white women or at least girls with 
skins much lighter than their own, 
and for many of these men inter- 
marriage opens the door to better 
social standing. 
A curious fact has been revealed 
by a study of such cases. It shows 
that a coloured man who marries 
a white woman or a woman 
of whiter skin than his own, is 
much less likely to meet with 
opposition from his wife’s family 
than is the dark-skinned woman 
from the family of the white man 
she marries. 
These two attitudes which seem 
paradoxical, are explained by the 
fact that married couples in Bahia 
live much more under the influence 
of the wife’s family than the hus- 
band’s, and the married man is 
inevitably drawn more closely 
into the family circle of his wife. 
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 15 
  
A coloured man is consequently 
“raised in position” by joining the 
family of a lighter-skinned or 
white wife, ‘whereas a white man 
who weds a dark-skinned woman 
“steps down from his class”. As 
a popular Bahian proverb puts it, 
“When a girl marries, her family 
acquires a new son”. By the same 
token, a young man joins the 
coloured community from ‘which 
his wife happens to come. 
But this occurs not only when 
two different racial groups are 
concerned, but also with different 
social classes. Marriages between 
educated and refined young men 
(who happen to be poor) and rich 
girls, are regarded more favour- 
ably than those between men from 
the upper classes and ‘women of a 
lower class—regardless of colour. 
The important thing is that the 
man must be “educated and refin- 
ed”, so as to make up for his 
poverty or his colour. In a sense, 
therefore, he offers his “good cha- 
racter” in exchange for his wife’s 
fortune and high social standing, 
or her lighter skin colour—which- 
ever the case may be. 
These few examples show that 
even though colour prejudices may 
exist, they are not strong enough to 
prevent inter-racial marriages in 
the upper levels of society. 
The fact is that antagonisms 
between individuals and groups of 
different racial stock is reduced to 
a minimum in Bahia. Moreover, 
they are further attenuated by the 
process of adaptation and adjust- 
ment which similarly affects other 
aspects of social life, so that 
competition tends to lose its 
aggressiveness and conflicts much 
of their bitterness. The people of 
Bahia finally are very proud of 
their traditions of tolerance and of 
the absence among them of any 
“racialism*.

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

Page 16. 
t
d
 
a
 
do
, 
B
a
t
.
 
r
o
 
W
a
l
 
o
e
 
B
s
 a
 
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 
  
      
  
UNESCO 
  
Using light chariots, like one shown here, or a series of post horses, ancient 
Roman couriers could bring dispatches from Britain to Rome in 26 days. 


### 71125: Around the world for the price of a stamp

AROUND THE WORLD 
O mail a letter or a newpaper to a friend 
on the other side of the globe is a 
simple, everyday affair. So simple, 
indeed, that few of us ever realize that it 
took many centuries for the postal service 
to achieve its present reliability and effi- 
ciency, and to grow into the vast and com- 
plex system which now spans the world. 
For thousands of years, primitive man was 
limited for his means of communication to 
smoke signals, tom-toms and stick messages. 
It was only when Middle Eastern scholars 
devized the first form of writing that mail 
services by runner or horseman began to be 
organized. From this humble beginning, the 
post has developed into one of the most 
effective instruments of civilization. 
Many nations have contributed to the ad- 
vancement of this oldest of public services, 
and today the world’s postal systems, grouped 
under the Universal Postal Union (UPU), play 
a vital role in promoting the free flow of 
word ond image. It is only within the past 
60 years that printed materials have enjoyed 
low postal rates in more than a few coun- 
tries. Until then, they were usually mailed 
at the more costly letter rate. And it is 
only within the past 150 years that the letter 
post itself has been made available to people 
generally. Before then the post was in most 
cases reserved for royalty, the aristocracy and 
State officials. 
The first recorded post was founded about 
500 B.C. by Darius the Great of Persia, who 
used relays of horsemen to send messages 
throughout his vast empire, ranging from 
India to western Egypt. Macedonian, Egypt- 
ian ond Roman rulers followed suit. The 
Chinese emperors then devised an elabo- 
rate courier system, which Marco Polo des- 
cribed centuries later during his journey to 
the court of the Grand Khan. 
The Romans raised the imperial post to a 
height of efficiency surpassed only in 
modern times. Julius Caesar's letters to 
Cicero, written from Britain, reached Rome 
in 26 days. Letters carried along the same 
route were still taking a month as late as 
1800. . So 
The word “post” dates from the Roman 
period. It is derived from the Latin positus 
meaning “placed”, because horses were 
placed at set distances to carry dispatches. 
Private persons employed slaves to carry 
letters or entrusted them to obliging travel- 
lers. Around 300 A.D. the Emperor Diocle- 
tion started the first public post for Roman 
citizens. 
With the fall of the Roman empire, the 
European post collapsed, though Charle- 
magne partly restored it during the eighth 
century. Medieval rulers maintained royal 
couriers, but no regular public post. Mer- 
chant’s guilds in England, France, Germany 
ond Italy conducted private services, and 
from the 13th century right up to the revolu- 
tion of 1789 the University of Paris main- 
tained an international post for its cosmo- 
politan body of students and professors. 
By 1550, royal couriers in England, France 
and Spain were permitted to carry private 
letters. Queen Elizabeth's master of posts 
authorized his messengers to convey private 
mail by cutter to the Continent. The Em- 
peror Charles V had meanwhile extended the 
German post to Austria and Holland. 
‘In 1635 Britain’s postmaster, Thomas 
Witherings established a public service be- 
tween London and Edinburgh. Rates, payable 
by the recipient, were 2d for a letter conveyed 
under 80 miles and 8d to Scotland. Wither- 
ings also organized a foreign service through 
France, with the consent of the French 
Government. 
Cardinal Mazarin, Prime Minister under 
Louis XIIl and Louis XIV, was responsible for 
improving the parcel post in France. In 1653 
Renouard de Villayer created a local post 
for Paris, which was run from a central 
office. Under this scheme, the many letter 
boxes set up in the streets of Paris were 
emptied several times daily. The postal 
charge (one sou) was paid by the sender, and 
the receipt slip accompanying the delivery 
thus constituted the first use of a form of 
postage stamp. An English imitator, William 
Dockwra, organized a very efficient daily 
  
The helicopter, latest means of transport employed by postal services, 
is able to bring mail direct from airports to the roofs of the sorting offices.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

COURIER 
Be m——h 
In addition to the king's messangers, there existed in medieval France a 
Monk's Post”, which carried messages on rolls of parchment (rotula). 


### 71125: Around the world for the price of a stamp

FOR THE PRICE OF 
“* by Philip L. SOLJAK 
penny service for the London area, but was 
gaoled by James, Duke of York, who enjoyed 
a monopoly of postal revenues. 
The regular international governmental, or 
official, post dates from 1670, when England 
and France established the “Lyons Mail” by 
special treaty. England provided twice- 
weekly mail packets across the Channel, and 
France furnished the overland service to 
Lyons. Fees to this point were prepaid, but 
charges for further transmission were col- 
lected from the addresses. - =, 
LP 
British and French correspondents wel- 
comed this innovation. Delays in the foreign 
mail had become frequent, and were offi- 
cially blamed on irresponsible post-boys who 
spent too much time “peddling their own 
traffic” and “lying in tippling houses.” 
A new Anglo-French treaty of 1713 provided 
a basis of accounting for transit mails which 
continued with little change until 1870. 
Letters could be franked to Italy, Spain and 
Turkey. Accounting between the English and 
French post offices was based on the total 
of amounts due on separate letters, mail by 
mail. 
Queen Anne's postmaster-general had in 
1711 reorganized the British post and regu- 
loted the services in the North American 
colonies and West Indies. The celebrated 
Falmouth packets began running from 
England to Spain, Portugal and the West 
Indies about this time, and by 1800 served a 
large part of the world. 
To supplement their low pay, the crews of 
these little ships often indulged in smuggling 
or capturing foreign vessels as prizes of war. 
Their activities brought the luckless post- 
master-general into frequent conflict with 
other government departments, such as the 
customs and the navy. 
In North America, Benjomin Franklin 
expanded the inter-colonial post and in 1755, 
as deputy postmaster-general for the colonies, 
started a packet service from New York to 
Na Loy ~. wr 
EH - “- 
_ ~at 
ly. he ) rs TN   
  
England. The Continental Congress founded 
on independent American post when war 
broke out between Britain and her American 
colonies in 1775. 
The fate of empires has often depended 
on the mails, as was illustrated during 
this conflict. In October 1777, General 
(“Gentleman Johnny”) Burgoyne, commanding 
loyalist and Indian troops at Saratoga, near 
New York, was waiting for General Howe to 
advance up the Hudson Valley and 
join forces with him. But London officials 
failed to send instructions to Howe by fast 
ship. The luckless Burgoyne was isolated and 
overwhelmed by the Americans. 
This victory was a turning point in the war, 
for it encouraged France, Spain and Holland 
to support the Americans openly. Bernard 
Shaw incorporated this incident in his play 
The Devil's Disciple. 
By 1790 the British mailcoach service, 
founded by William Pitt six years before, was 
carrying letters and parcels at half the cost 
of the post-boy system. More and more 
people were writing ‘“Post—Haste I” on 
their letters. But the rates, based on the 
distance carried, rose rapidly during the 
Napoleonic wars. In France, the National 
Convention put an end to the farming out of 
mails to private contractors in 1795, and in 
1804 Napoleon established a nationalized 
service under a director-general. 
By 1835 an Englishman was paying 1s 5d 
to mail a letter 700 miles, or to receive one. 
Sir Rowland Hill, urging that rates should be 
based on weight, not on distance carried, pro- 
posed the adoption of a uniform 1d fee, and 
prepayment by postage stamps. Both reforms 
were in force by 1840 and soon after were 
followed in the United States, France and 
Germany. Before long, Britain was also first 
with cheap rates for newspapers and books. 
Trade and communications were expanding 
rapidly throughout Europe, and pioneer 
settlers were opening up vast new territoires 
overseas. Railways and steamships carried 
the post faster and in greater volume. Mail 
subsidies enabled shipping companies like the 
(Dé pmnt Jw Bab 
During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, besieged Paris remained in 
contact with the rest of France by balloon pos! and carrier pigeons. 
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 17 
These scenes, reconstructed by the French Postal Museum, show letters 
being sorted at a Paris post office two hundred and fifty years ago— 
Cunard Line, the P. and O., and the Royal 
Mail Line to start running to the Americas 
and colonies. 
Before this, in 1834, the Canton firm of 
Jardine, Mathieson and Company had esta- 
blished the famous China Clippers which 
raced across the seas under full sail with 
cargoes and dispatches. 
In India, the service started by Lord Clive 
in 1766 was following the British example of 
low uniform rates, despite the great distances 
involved. Stage coaches and horsemen were 
carrying mails to isolated settlers in the 
United States, Canada, Australia, New 
Zealand and South Africa. The Australian 
post, founded in 1810 by Governor Macquarie, 
had regular sea communication with the 
United States by 1866. The post first 
employed Maori runners in New Zealand, ond 
- Hottentot post-boys in South Africa. 3 
A famous pioneer service was the “Pony 
Express”, which carried mails over 2,000 miles 
from St. Joseph (Missouri) to San Francisco 
for 16 months during 1860-1861, when it was 
replaced by Western Union telegraph. 
Eighty riders ond 400 horses in relays co- 
vered the distances in under ten days, or one 
third the time taken by stage coach. Brav- 
ing blizzards, floods and attacks by Indians, 
these horsemen won a renown which time has 
not diminished. 
Another colourful service was the “tin can” 
post maintained until recently ot the South 
Sea island of Tofua, in the Tonga group. 
Coral reefs prevented ships from approaching 
the island closely, so a tin can containing 
mail was thrown overboard. The island's 
strongest swimmer dashed out through the 
surf and towed the mail ashore. 
As international mails expanded, more 
postal treaties were concluded. But due to 
the many differences in rates and procedures 
in various countries, rapid and accurate 
handling of the mails became almost 
impossible. In 1863, at the suggestion of the 
United States, an inter- : 
national conference in 
Paris agreed on a code 
(Continued on 
next page.) 
| 
| | ) 
| } HJ LL g 
a pe 
  
-and the bustle and scurry 
in the courtyard as couriers 
arrived or left with the mail, 
  
  
la TREN  
This is how an Halian postman 
in the Tuscany region looked 
at the start of the 19th century. 
Ll Gal | 
i . 
LN 
     
  
  
An Indian “Dak”, or runner, 
carrying a wand lipped with 
bells and a message pouch. 
America's Pony Express men surmounted fantastic difficulties. Their day was 
done when the first transcontinental telegraph line was completed in 1861.

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Page 18. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 
  
  
¢¢C O a boy 12 years old who 
can speak English, Paris, 
France.” 
A letter bearing this address 
was recently posted in Kansas 
(U. 8S. A). In Paris a postal clerk 
glanced at the address, smiled, and 
forwarded it immediately to the 
French division of the International 
Federation of Organizations for 
Scholastic Correspondence. He had 
handled many such letters — and so 
have the postal clerks of most other 
countries, for they are written every 
day by the school boys and girls of 
all five continents to unknown boys 
and girls whose languages and coun- 
tries they wish to know. 
The thirst for knowledge which 
these youngsters show is at times 
insatiable. Consider this “testimo- 
nial” from a young girl : 
“Thanks to you, I have found an 
American pen-friend. She has sent 
me the addresses of others, so now 
I keep up a correspondence with 
nearly every one of the States! In 
addition, through you, I got to know 
an Argentinian, and there is a good 
chance that I may one day visit her 
country. But my biggest wish is to 
EI ARES We SV I 
learn languages and my latest is 
Swedish ; so I am now going to ask 
you for a Swedish correspondent. I 
hope you can manage this. With the 
help of your service, I can perfect 
my foreign languages, and 1 also 
have friends pretty well everywhere. 
I think International Scholastic 
Correspondence is the best example 
of world understanding that the 
youngsters of today can have, living 
as we do in an atmosphere of per- 
petual discord.” 
Teachers are convinced that the 
pen-friend scheme has very real edu- 
cational value. It awakens a deep 
interest in language study. It leads 
the young writers to better under- 
standing of how other people live. 
The exchange of ideas and impres- 
sions quickly leads to mutual esteem 
and often to personal friendships. 
Letters are supplemented by an 
exchange of view cards, magazines, 
and other informative matter, and 
even by presents and souvenirs. The 
friends, especially the girls, join in 
each other’s personal joys and sor- 
rows. Exchange visits are arranged. 
In fact there are many examples 
that go to prove the solidity of the 


### 71128: Dear Stranger...'

‘DEAR STRANGER...’ 
| by Jacques GUERIF 
links which International Scholastic 
Correspondence has helped to forge. 
It has even been the first step 
towards a number of marriages. 
Started almost simultaneously in 
North America and France, the 
movement has continued to grow 
ever since the end of the first World 
War, and a system of co-ordination 
— now provided by over 30 national 
offices — rapidly became indispens- 
able to make sure that letters 
actually found appropriate reci- 
pients, and also to ensure that the 
correspondence had an instructional 
and generally beneficial background. 
This co-ordination, which, since 1929, 
had been aided by the Institute of 
Intellectual Co-operation of the 
League of Nations, was extended in 
1946 to exchanges of, and trips by, 
students. The permanent committee 
of International Scholastic Corres- 
pondence was transformed into the 
International Federation of Organi- 
zations for Scholastic Correspon- 
dence and Travel, with the aim of 
uniting all efforts in this direction 
on an international basis — and 
especially in relation to Unesco. 
Thanks to these organizations, 
hundreds of thousands of young 
people from 45 countries now ex- 
change letters regularly. Many 
among them apply direct to the 
national offices to find a correspon- 
dent, but most of the exchanges are 
made through teachers and head- 
masters. They send requests to their 
own national offices, who get in 
touch with similar organizations 
abroad and make the arrangements. 
Educators insist that correspond- 
ence must be personal, individual 
and voluntary. The teacher should 
avoid even the appearance of 
meddling ; but he can suggest, 
propose, or guide, and he can often 
integrate the correspondence into his 
lessons. It is easy enough, and well 
received by the children, if he knows 
how to make the right approach — 
for instance, by putting up a map 
of the foreign country with which 
most of his pupils communicate. It 
must, of course, be on a sufficiently 
large scale to indicate the towns 
where the correspondents live, and 
the places where events reported in 
the newspapers or in the letters have 
occurred. He may also hold tempor- 
ary and frequently-changed wall 
exhibitions, each dealing with an 
aspect of life abroad. 
The letters thus are used to give 
children an idea of the different 
countries which speak the language 
they are learning. When English is 
taught, for instance, to French, Ita- 
lian or Belgian youngsters, their 
correspondents in various parts of 
Great Britain, the Dominions and 
North America often give the 
teacher ideas for study themes such 
as the wool trade in the Common- 
wealth ; British cathedrals ; the part 
sport plays in English life ; various 
types of buildings in the United 
States ; plant life of Australia and 
New Zealand. 
Inevitably, the natural curiosities 
of one land will be compared to those 
of another : the Italian, French and 
Canadian lakes and the Norwegian 
fjords; prairies and steppes; the 
Alps and the Rocky Mountains ; the 
Thames and the Orinoco Rivers; 
agriculture and stock breeding; 
industries (especially in professional 
and technical schools); types of 
houses, schools, monuments; cos- 
tumes and typical meals in differ- 
ent countries; sport; the theatre. 
Correspondence in just one language 
can lead to an infinite enlargemen 
of horizons. 
The ‘documentation received also 
leads to the production of albums of 
pictures from illustrated magazines, 
or of postage stamps — and even 
of collections of insects and plants. 
Small libraries of foreign books have 
been set up following exchanges 
between correspondents. And to 
these visual aids to learning without 
apparent effort can be added aural 
aids — the singing of songs in for- 
eign languages, readings of parti- 
cularly interesting letters, and the 
recitation of poems suggested by the 
foreign writers. 
In addition to exhibitions and 
collections organized in collaboration 
with the geography teacher, drawing 
teachers find foreign themes which 
can be used. Problems of foreign 
money and measurements lose their 
boredom in the mathematics class, 
and become an important prepara- 
tion for travel. The study of litera- 
ture in all its forms also benefits 
from these exchanges of letters. 
Pupils see, for instance, how classical 
or modern plays are presented else- 
where. (A number of Continental 
schools recently illustrated the study 
of Hamlet by photographs of the 
actors and decor in a London 
theatre.) It is not only a knowledge 
of foreign works which increases 
from hearing about the most read 
authors in other lands; to inform 
their pen-friends reciprocally, the 
children feel obliged to get better 
acquainted with the literary life of 
their own country. 
Through their faraway friends 
thousands of youngsters have learn- 
ed to appreciate better the human 
community to which they belong. 
More and more of the teachers and 
parents whose children take part in 
these exchanges are enthusiastic 
promoters of the scheme, seeing in 
its further development an import- 
ant contribution to genuine in- 
ternational understanding. 
UNIVERSAL POSTAL UNION MEMBERS HANDLE 60,000,000,000 LETTERS A YEAR 
#) 
(Continued from to improve and sim- 
previous page) plify international post- 
al relations. 
Progress was delayed by the American 
Civil War and the Franco-Prussian War. During 
1870-1871, besieged Parisians organized a 
pigeon and balloon post to Tours. This was 
the first regular airmail. Three hundred and 
sixty pigeons carried micro-photographed 
dispatches. During the same period balloon 
postmen made 63 ascents, transporting over 
3,000,000 letters and 91 passagers, despite 
attacks by high-firing German guns. 
Meanwhile Dr. Heinrich von Stephan, Ger- 
man postmaster-general, was preparing a plan 
for an international postal union. In 1874, 
Switzerland convened at Berne a congress at 
which all the European countries, the United 
States and Egypt were represented. The 
result was the International Postal Conven- 
tion, which, for the first time, brought order 
and uniformity to this international service. 
This treaty, which came into force in 1875, 
provided for uniformity in treatment of cor- 
respondence, simplification of accounts and 
reduction of rates within limits. Rates were 
to be based on weight rather than distance. 
The ogency thus founded was named the 
Universal Postal Union in 1878 and by 1900 
included almost every country in the world. 
Nations large and small continued to contri- 
bute to the . advancement of the service. 
New Zealand, for instance, produced the 
automatic stamp-selling machine in 1908, and 
in 1920 won international recognition for the 
letter-franking machine. 
Air mail, established in Britain, France and 
the United States in 1919, covered four 
continents within a decade. The UPU in 1927 
adopted a code of international air mail 
regulations, which have been expanded as 
required. 
The basic principle of the UPU is that, for 
postal purposes, all Member States form a 
single territory. Each member undertakes 
to transmit mails entrusted to it by the best 
means of communication it uses for its own 
mails. Thus each country today enjoys full 
use of the railway, shipping, and air mail ser- 
vices of the whole world. 
Organization of the UPU is simple but effec- 
tive. Most questions are settled by the coun- 
tries directly concerned, but for matters 
concerning all members an international 
bureau is maintained at Berne. This bureau 
collects and publishes informations, issues lists 
of air and steamer services, and acts as re- 
quired as an office for settling international 
accounts. These are based on a return, 
taken every three years, of one month's 
correspondence. 
The Universal Postal Convention is revised 
every five years by the UPU Congress, to 
which all members send delegates. The UPU 
Congress which was held this year in 
Brussels and which ended on July 12, took 
decisions which will lead to a wider appli- 
cation of lower international postal rates for 
newspapers, magozines, books, maps and 
printed music. These concessions, based on 
recommendations by Unesco or inspired by its 
aims for the free flow of information, will : 
1. Allow all newspapers, books and maga- 
zines sent abroad to enjoy a 50 per cent 
reduction in rates, regardless of sender. 
2. Ensure that rates for publications sent 
abroad will parallel the favourable rates 
for publications posted within a country. 
3 Allow literature for the blind to be mailed 
free of charge. 
4. Broaden an existing scheme permitting 
payment in national currency, at local post 
offices, for subscriptions to foreign 
newspapers and magazines, and their 
dispatch at low rates. This service will 
be greatly simplified, so that many more 
countries may be able to participate. 
In addition to the Congress there is a 
19-nation executive committee which meets 
annually. Under the revised convention of 
1948, the UPU became a Specialized Agency 
of the United Nations. 
Today the Union's members handle over 
60,000,000,000 letters annuaily. Their air- 
liners speed across the skies with tons of 
mail. This is a far cry from the turbaned 
horsemen of ancient Persia, the cross-Channel 
cutters of Queen Elizabeth's time, or the 
reckless riders of the Pony Express. Yet all 
who have served the post have been inspired 
by the same objective—to transmit news and 
informations to the furthest corners of the 
earth.

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

~OURIER 
  
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page {9 
EYED TA TNE TTR I SR IES RET | ro I OE ons ory ES ie i. ie S| 
» 
: 
V 
\ 
ft 
: 
8  
 
E
i
 
hs
 
aT
 
A
R
I
E
 
A
E
 
r
h
 
A
 
S
N
 
5
 
hd 
-
 
b
E
 
N
s
 
s
e
 
a
,
 
T
e
e
 
{ 
8 


### 71129: The UNESCO Gift Coupon Scheme

i St] THE UNESCO GIFT COUPON SCHEME 
ouxa people following world 
events these days often ask 
themselves, “Is there any- 
thing we can do to help the 
United Nations succeed ?” 
There is. Unesco’s Gift Coupon 
Scheme offers students as well as 
older persons who belong to vo- 
luntary organizations, clubs or 
other groups, a direct and per- 
sonal part in the work of a United 
- Nations agency. 
In fact, for some time, young 
people in the schools of France, 
the United Kingdom and the Unit- 
ed States have been among the 
pioneers in making the Gift Cou- 
pon programme a successful 
form of international co-operation. 
They have been spending their 
pennies, cents and francs so that 
other people in less favoured 
countries throughout the world can 
also have the advantages of edu- 
cation. They have been selling 
Gift Stamps and buying Gift Cou- 
pons so that teachers, schoolchild- 
ren, students of all ages and 
tvpes, artists and scientists can 
obtain the books, films, micro- 
scopes, music, and indeed equip- 
ment of every kind that they need 
for their work. : 
The Gift Coupon programme 
was created by Unesco to help 
struggling schools and other insti- 
tutions of learning in under-deve- 
loped and war-damaged countries 
and at the same time to provide 
voluntary organizations in 
more fortunate countries with a 
practical way to join in the work 
of the U.N. and Unesco. 
Unesco evolved the Gift Coupon 
scheme when it realized that many 
such voluntary organizations and 
groups ‘were finding their efforts 
to carry out programmes of inter- 
national friendship hampered. in 
various ‘ways. Details about 
worthwhile assistance projects 
were hard to find. Buying, pack- 
ing and shipping supplies pre- 
sented troublesome, complicated 
the 
problems. And fund raising for 
sending gifts abroad had become 
more difficult. 
Unesco Gift Coupons eliminate 
transportation problems as well as 
currency difficulties. It enables 
voluntary groups to send coupons 
abroad to institutions of learning 
whose needs have been made 
known to them by Unesco. The 
recipients themselves order the 
equipment they need from a 
list of suppliers who accept 
the Coupons as a form of inter- 
national currency. These sup- 
pliers hdndle all shipping. packing 
and crating, and are reimbursed 
in their own currencies by Unesco.

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 71129: The UNESCO Gift Coupon Scheme

Page 20, AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 
A PRACTICAL WAY FO 
Gift Coupons, which are issued 
in denomination of $10, £1, and 
1,000 ‘French francs, are bought by 
the voluntary donor group from 
Unesco which furnishes lists of 
specific needs in particular places. 
The buyer of the Coupon can 
decide whether, for example, he 
wants to provide tools for a funda- 
mental education project in Burma 
or Indonesia, laboratory equipment 
or research apparatus for India, 
- radios or cinema equipment for 
villages in Africa. 
In order to make it easier for 
- clubs and other groups to buy a 
$10 Coupon, Unesco added a fund- 
- raising device to its programme — 
the Gift Stamp. These are print- 
ed in small denominations, such 
as a 25 cent stamp, a 20 franc 
stamp, a sixpenny stamp. These 
stamps not only make if 
convenient for children to parti- 
cipate but they provide a symbolic 
- token for old and young as well. 
Money raised by the sale of stamps 
is sent by the donor group to 
Unesco by cheque or money order, 
and Unesco returns the Gift Cou- 
pons to the group. These cou- 
pons are then mailed by the donor 
group directly to the recipient 
- together with a person-to-person 
letter. 
Thus, when a club or voluntary 
organization adopts a Gift Coupon 
project, it is on the pvay to making 
new friends in other parts of the 
world, and is helping in a practical 
way “to build peace in the minds 
of men” which is Unesco’s goal. 
Success after || months 
HE Unesco Gift Coupon pro- 
~ gramme was launched experi- 
mentally in the United States on 
December 15, 1950. On that date 
“the first twenty $10 Unesco Gift 
Coupons ‘were purchased by the 
American Association of Univer- 
sity Professors (Hunter College 
Chapter, New York). They sent 
half — $100 worth —to Professor 
Franz Faltis at the University of" 
Vienna to help him obtain labo- 
ratory equipment, books and scien- 
tific periodicals. The other ten 
coupons went to the University of 
Wurzburg. 
Eleven months later, the U.S. 
National Commission for Unesco 
pronounced the trial period a 
success and gave the scheme its 
complete endorsement. The Na- 
tional Education Association, the 
largest body of educators in the 
United States, recommended offi- 
cially that schools, teachers 
and schoolchildren participate in 
the programme as a means of 
promoting international under- 
standing and goodwill. Clubs, 
schools, church groups, labour 
unions, professional societies, 
national and other organizations in 
46 out of the 48 states undertook 
gift projects. 
By the middle of 1951, the 
Unesco National Commissions of 
the United Kingdom and France 
decided to adopt the scheme. In 
April 1952, Canadian groups 
joined; and by July of this year, 
the number of donor countries had 
risen to seven when Australia, the 
German Federal Republic and the 
Netherlands agreed to participate 
in the programme. Meanwhile, in 
New Zealand, the Council of Orga- 
nization for Relief Services Over- 
  
seas decided that a portion of its 
funds would be converted into Gift 
Coupons for 
Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden 
and Switzerland are also consi- 
dering participation as donor 
countries. 
The gift projects for the re- 
ceiving countries are carefully 
chosen by Unesco from the most 
urgent cases of needy schools and 
other institutions in the under- 
developed countries or those still 
suffering the effects of ‘war. 
Whenever Unesco field officers or 
experts, for example, find schools, 
educational services, scientists or 
artists whose work is important 
for the development of their 
countries but is retarded by lack 
of equipment or supplies, the facts 
are reported back to Unesco in 
Paris. Once approved the projects 
are included in a Gift Coupon 
“catalogue” and distributed to 
prospective donor organizations. 
The “catalogue” gives a general 
background story summarizing the 
salient historical facts and details 
ol each Gift Coupon project. 
By July of this year, there were 
more than 100 high-priority insti- 
tutions in 37 countries listed as 
Unesco Gift Coupon Projects. 
Here are a few examples of 
some of these institutions and of 
the kind of material already 
furnished to them through the 
Unesco Gift programme : 
Teacher Training College for 
Girls, Kabul, Afghanistan : 16 mm. 
sound projector and films, worth 
$ 550; 
University of Rangoon, Burma : 
laboratory equipment, $ 950; 
Unesco Schools for Arab Re- 
fugees in the Middle East; 16 mm. 
spund projector and film library, 
$750; 
Social Education Centre, Delhi : 
Artists’ supplies, $ 20 ; 
Uffizi Galleries, Florence 
mera equipment, $ 390; 
Public Library, Bayreuth, Ger- 
many : microfilm reader, $ 210; 
Institute for Blind Children, 
Bandung, Indonesia : blind ‘writ- 
ing apparatus, $ 30; 
Adult Education Service, Tunis : 
audio-visual van and films $ 6,500; 
Fundamental Education Centre, 
. ca- 
Patzcuaro, Mexico : bookmobile, 
$ 8,500; , 
Library of the National Museum, 
Prague, Czechoslovakia : books, 
$190; 
Leyte High School, Tacyoban, 
Philippines : laboratory equip- 
ment, $200; 
Hydro-Biological Research Ins- 
titute, Lake Ohrid, Jugoslavia : mi- 
crobalance and weights, $ 700. 
In the donor countries school 
teachers take an unusually active 
part in the promotion of the pro- 
gramme. In the United States, 
they participate through their own 
organizations. In France, with 
the approval of the Ministry of 
Education and the help of their 
trade unions, they have introduced 
the scheme in the public schools 
and aroused the interest of their 
pupils. In the United Kingdom, 
it has also been the schools which 
have been most active. 
Corsica to India 
N long ago, for example, a 
letter from a small town In 
Corsica was sent to Mr. S.S. Ma- 
thur, director of Janata College, a 
rural education centre for Indian 
peasants. The envelope contained 
a blue piece of paper, about the 
size and shape of a bank cheque, 
labelled “Unesco Gift Coupon — 
1,000 Francs”, The Corsican vil- 
lage school whose fifteen pupils 
collected the sum, had studied a 
list of Janata's needs, ranging from 
a 7,000-franc farm implement to 
several 1,000-franc sewing Kits. 
The children decided they could 
raise the 1,000 francs for one 
sewing kit, and received from 
selected projects. 
R SCHOOLS TO HELP THE U.N. 
Unesco a booklet of fifty 20-franc 
Gift Stamps to sell to their families 
and friends. 
About the same time, a similar 
letter from the United States 
reached Mr. George Yemenetsis in 
Salonika, Greece. It contained 
30 Unesco Gift Coupons each for 
$10. Mr. Yemenetsis is Chairman 
of the Anatolia College Alumni 
Association’s Committee for the 
Adoption of Lefkohori Village, and 
the money came from a special 
bazaar held by the students of 
Public School Number 221, Brook- 
lyn, New York. 
A third letter reached Professor 
A. J. van der Beek of Bandung, 
Indonesia, on the other side of the 
world. It contained 15 orange- 
coloured Unesco Gift Coupons, of 
one pound sterling each, and came 
from the Bournemouth School for 
Girls in Hampshire, England. 
When these girls decided to join 
the Unesco programme, they se- 
lected Gift Project No. 23.2-B — 
“Kit of raffia-weaving materials, 
fifteen pounds or fifteen Gift 
Coupons.” This unit was reserved 
for the school by the Council for 
Education in World Citizenship, 
which manages the Gift Coupon 
programme for the schools of 
England, Wales and Scotland. 
College and university students are 
reached by the British World Uni- 
versity Service, young peoples’ 
organizations by the World 
Assembly of Youth, and adult 
groups by the U. N. Association. 
U. K. plans big campaign 
ROFESSOR van der Beek had 
submitted a list of his school’s 
urgent needs varying from vo- 
cational training materials to a 
$ 500 instrument for measuring the 
hearing of nearly-deaf children. 
The children in Brooklyn had 
learned through Unesco of the 
needs of Lefkohori, one of a num- 
ber of war-wrecked villages in 
Northern Greece which have been 
“adopted” by urban groups in 
Salonika. These village “adop- 
tion” groups or committees sup- 
lement their relief and welfare 
work with long-range educational 
assistance for which they need 
special teaching equipment, such 
as film projectors and radios. 
Dr. Luis Padilla Nervo, President 
“of Unesco’s Sixth General Assem- 
bly has said : 
“Without doubt, this programme 
will be accepted by the majority 
of men, women and children in all 
countries who desire to contribute 
to peace, because 1 believe that 
never before today has the will for 
peace been more apparent in all 
countries of the world. All the 
world is convinced that peace must 
be built in the minds of men, and 
that this must begin with edu- 
cation. Thus, to collaborate in this 
Unesco activity means also colla- 
borating in the work of building 
the peace.” 
The results of the programme in 
the United States, the United 
Kingdom and France seem to 
confirm Dr. Padillo .Nervo's op- 
timism. When the New York 
State Classroom Teachers Asso- 
ciation undertook to raise $ 1,500 
for the University of Vienna, 
Mr. Erwin Coons, its president, 
said : 
“We started modestly with the 
idea that our members would 
purchase or sell 6,000 Gift Stamps 
during this school year, but our 
original plan has mushroomed. 
One county alone has already 
taken more than the original 
number of stamps we expected to 
sell all year.” 
Since the programme was 
launched experimentally in the 
United States in December 1950, 
the value of the Gift Stamps 
issued on consignment in that 
country has mounted to the equi- 
valent of about $120,000 and the 
Gift Coupons thus far sent to re- 
International 
  
  
cipient countries to a total of over 
$ 40,000. Ten national organi- 
zations are among the large 
number of educational, civic, pro- 
fessional, religious and other 
groups which are actively pro- 
moting the scheme. 
During the past year, twenty 
state organizations of the De- 
partment of Classroom Teachers of 
the National Educational Asso- 
ciation have adopted some $50.000 
worth of Gift Projects. 
During the first half year of the 
programme’s operation in the 
United Kingdom, groups in 
England, Wales and Scotland 
contributed £1,070 for various 
projects. Thus far, some twenty 
different projects, each comprising 
dozens of separate specified needs, 
have been given assistance from 
groups in the United Kingdom. A 
big campaign is planned in 
connexion with United Nations 
Day on October 24 when pro- 
minent national and international 
personalities will visit schools, 
universities, youth and adult 
groups to describe the programme. 
The most popular project among 
United Kingdom donors thus far 
has been Unesco’s Arab Refugee 
Schools in the Middle East. 
Nearly fifty donations have been 
sent in the form of Coupons to buy 
basic school supplieg, vocational 
training and other equipment. 
Other popular projects have been 
the Village Adoption Scheme in 
Greece, to which more than thirty 
donations have been made, and the 
School for Crippled Children in 
Swiebodzin, Poland, ‘which has 
received fifteen donations. 
A new “money” 
I N France, the programme has 
also caught the imagination of 
schoolchildren and more than 
100,000 twenty-franc Gift Stamps 
have been ordered by schools in 
more than fifty French counties, 
including those in North Africa and 
Corsica. Coupons worth 1,250,000 
francs have been bought. In the 
Limoges region of Central France, 
the Unesco Committee has been 
particularly active, selling stamps 
at the Limoges Fair as well as in 
the schools. Coupons worth more 
than 100,000 francs, bought in the 
Haute Vienne County, went to 
Burma, Indonesia, India, Greece 
and Ceylon. A half-dozen ele- 
mentary schools in Corsica, includ- 
ing tiny, one-room schools with a 
dozen or so pupils, raised funds 
varying from 1,000 to 3,000 francs 
which were sent to the University 
of Belgrade for French books, to 
the Home for Crippled Children in 
Sweibodzin, Poland, for occupa- 
tional therapy materials, and, as 
in the example cited previously, to 
the Janata College in India for 
sewing equipment. 
Unesco’s Division of Voluntary 
Assistance (VIA), 
responsible for the Gift Coupon 
Project, is soon to consolidate the 
different Coupons which now exist 
in dollar, franc and pound deno- 
minations, into one unit of 
currency. This is to be called 
the UNUM Gift Coupon. The 
term “UNUM” stand for “Unesco 
Unit of Money”. Each 1-UNUM 
Gift Coupon will be sold for the 
equivalent of five dollars in donor- 
countries, and will avoid the 
necessity of issuing new Gift 
Coupons in national currencies as 
additional countries join in.

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

JNESCOOURIER 
WHAT GIFT COUPONS 
CAN BUY 
Books, magazines and periodicals 
All books and periodicals in the fields of education, science 
and culture. Subscriptions to periodicals (except daily 
newspapers). Membership fees in learned societies, when 
required for obtaining the publications of the society. Micro- 
films, photocopies. Maps, charts, globes.       
  
Films and audio-visual equipment 
Educational and scientific films including original and 
duplicate negatives, screening and duplicate prints. Raw 
film (16mm. only). Projectors for 16mm. films, filmsirips 
and slides. Screens, microphones and other projection 
accessories. 
  
  
    
  
  
Artists’ and musicians’ supplies 
Sheet music, musical instruments. 
Gramophone records. 
~. Art reproductions, paints, brushes, canvas, art paper. 
Scientific equipment and material 
Optical instruments. Balances. Glassware. Electrical 
measuring apparatus. Analytical, chemical, biological and 
physics study apparatus. Radio parts and accessories, elec- 
tronic equipment. Temperature measurement apparatus. 
Incubators, ovens. Meteorological, surveying, and engi- 
neering instruments. Drawing, drafting and workshop 
   
 
      
 
   
   
tools. Pure chemicals. Culture media... .. 
v We ee RE 4 
Tgadainio A94308 cour ON 
: GIFT 
"yNESCO as == 2 
i 
-- vy 
» 
       
    
   
   
 
SRR WBA =~ 4a] - 
Li OR SE Ana308 a NE 
isi UNESCO GIFT COUPON &F 
™E UNITED NATIONS EDUCATONAR WE AND CULTURAL ORCANEATION 
promises io poy an eutherited scppliec Sabie to Steed renllicns We pquivalest bn the 
cutrenty of his country of Tos US Dalle of Op Slcia! rol of sschange # Be 
     
-ha — 
CONDITIONS OF USE: ¥) 
ad eal rT Cr wd powian a“ wr be wend betes 0 Demis THI, ben 3 
wg Rg BBs. aged | nerd ow Dea br ar SE i whe SH 
rope iy Te sung and grdosm ot 4 a —— J : a - RS Sips | TY, treat ne i ine wn Sie # ded Ne cwrdinily 
~~ tor vematien  Twanag Sen wvidh way be i 
Tepniienm who wad We Veens Wa handily gaa wl Guest 
aR aE Ee — 
Irgurier so Gift Cowpant david ve eddressed aE a EE 
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 21 
 
  
HOW THE 
SCHEME 
WORKS 
Here is the procedure your 
~ group should follow to partici- 
pate in the Unesco Gift coupon - 
scheme: 
Your group adopus a giiL pru- 
ject. To do this, Unesco will of- 
fer your organization the names 
of a wide choice of schools, 
universities, libraries, laboralo- 
ries and the like in over three do- 
zen countries which have serious 
needs that can be met through 
this plan. 
2 
When your organization has 
selected a project, Unesco will 
send you, on consignment, Gift 
Stamps worth 25 cents, sixpence, 
20 francs or 20 pfennig. By 
selling Unesco Gift Stamps to 
finance a specific project vour 
membership not only collects 
funds but helps. spread informa- 
tion about the purposes of the 
. UN and Unesco. 
3 
Each booklet of 40 Gift Stamps 
sold pays for a Unesco Gift Cou- 
“pon worth ten dollars or one 
pound. This is a special kind of 
international money order bear- 
ing the name of your organiza- 
tion and of the recipient you and 
Unesco have agreed upon. You 
mail the Gift Coupons directly to 
the recipient together with a per- 
son-to-person letter. Your new 
friends use the Coupons as 
“foreign exchange” to buy the 
specific items they need from 
an approved supplier of their 
choice. The supplier then sends 
the coupons to Unesco 1o be 
redeemed. 
4 
The Unesco Gift Coupon Plan 
works only through organized 
groups such as clubs, societies, 
schools, unions and the like; 
individual enquiries cannot be 
acknowledged. Co 
For further details —- 
The donor group must be, for 
1952-53, an organization in the 
United States, United Kingdom, 
France, Canada, Netherlands, the 
German Federal Republic, Aus- 
tralia. It is expected that other 
countries will join the scheme 
next year. 
If you live in one of these 
countries, you can obtain fur- 
ther details of the Scheme from: 
UNITED STATES AND CANADA: 
Unesco Gift Coupon: Office, 
United Nations, New York. 
UNITED KINGDOM: U.K. Nation- 
al Cominission for Unesco, 
Ministry of Education, 11 
Bryanston Square, London, 
W.1. | 
FRANCE: Unesco Gift Coupon 
Office, 19, avenue Kléber, 
Paris, 16e. 
AUSTRALIA : United Nations As- 
sociation, 29 Bligh Street, Syd- 
ney. 
NETHERLANDS : Unesco Centrum, 
Vondelstraat 20, Amsterdam. 
GERMAN FEDERAL REPUBLIC: 
National Commission for Unes- 
co, Hansaring 24, Cologne. 
  
 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 71134: A Garland was placed on the new radio set

Page 22. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 
BR A GARLAND 
(Cont'd.) 
OMBAY is called “the gateway to India”. 
Its harbour on the western coast is one of 
the finest natural shelters in the world and 
is only rivalled by those of Rio de Janeiro, Naples 
and perhaps San Francisco. The city itself is 
built on an island (in ancient times there were 
seven islands) but it is connected to the mainland 
by a series of causeways and breakwaters so that 
it is practically a peninsula. Owing to its position 
on the Far Eastern trade route to Europe, it is 
today the second largest city in India (Calcutta 
in the north-east is the first). 
Bombay boasts many of the finest buildings in 
India, both public and private, and its university 
is one of the oldest in the country. But it also 
has some of the worst industrial slums in the 
world and 75 per cent of its inhabitants are 
illiterate. 
The population of Bombay is in the region of 
1,250,000, but this figure is probably an under- 
estimation since thousands of immigrant labour- 
ers from all over India are attracted to the textile 
mills, factories and workshops of the city every 
year. In addition, the population of Bombay has 
been swollen by thousands of refugees who 
migrated from Pakistan following Partition. 
New arrivals to the city usually settle in what 
is known as a chawl (a tenement block) or in 
one of the groups of slums surrounding Bombay. 
For the past 13 years, an unusual organization 
has been at work to clean up as many of these 
slums as possible, to raise sanitary conditions, 
and reduce the high percentage of illiteracy. 
The organization is called the Bombay Social 
Education Committee. Since it began this huge 
task in 1939, over 300,000 men and women have 
taken four-month courses and two-thirds have 
passed the basic tests which certify them as being 
able to read and write. Wherever the committee 
is active, improvements are to be found in the 
slum conditions of the chawls. The committee, 
whose educational and cultural influence has 
spread throughout India, offers instruction in 
literacy, health, citizenship, handicrafts and 
many other aspects of social education. 
Recently, a Unesco official visited classes of the 
Bombay Social Education Committee and re- 
ported as follows : 
“I visited both men’s and women’s classes of 
various sorts, during the evening as well as by 
day. 
“A large percentage of Bombay's industrial 
workers are housed in chawls, of which there are 
many hundreds. From the outside, these four- 
storey reinforced concrete blocks have the 
misleading appearance of fairly modern housing 
units. Inside, however, they are like rabbit 
warrens or, as someone said, ‘human filing 
systems’. 
“The average chawl contains about 30 rooms 
of medium size. Each accommodates a dozen or 
more people of all ages and both sexes. Often   
Radio sets bought with Unesco Gift Coupons enable groups living in chawls (tenement buildings) of Bombay to profit from education pro- 
grammes. A set from America is handed over (below) to a representative of the bahya (municipal milkmen) for the building where his 
group lives. A worker (above) garlands the new radio set with almost religious fervour. Following one of the broadcasts, mothers form 
discussion group (bottom photo). First radio programme was amplified for public through loudspeakers attached to palm tree (below, right). 
SCIEN AT Ay 
rN 
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 71134: A Garland was placed on the new radio set

JURIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 23 
WAS PLACED ON THE NEW RADIO SET 
two whole families are crowded into a single room 
on the rough concrete floor. 
“The only light comes from smoky candles or 
dim kerosene lamps. It is not difficult to 
imagine the problems of health, sanitation and 
welfare in the chawls. In every chawl the 
Social Education Committee organizes a centre. 
“In and around those chawls where literacy 
classes had barely started, conditions were 
appalling. In others where the programme has 
been operating for some time, cleanliness and 
order prevail in spite of the crowding. Here I 
could see clearly that ‘literacy’, as taught by the 
Social Education Committee, means far more 
than the alphabet. People displayed evidence of 
good civic sense, cared better for their children, 
and seemed altogether more alert and capable.” 
It is the aim of the Social Education Committee 
to transform the 75 per cent illiteracy in Bombay 
into 75 per cent literacy. 
The education of women, however, presents 
special problems. Although women have made 
enormous strides in recent years towards 
achieving equality with men, millions of Indian 
wives still live in purdah — the word means 
veil or curtain — set apart and veiled from others 
around them. It was only in 1939, the same year 
that the Bombay Committee was formed, that 
the Indian Government passed a law called the 
“Child Marriage Restraint Act” forbidding child 
marriages under the age of 16. All over India, a 
great movement is growing to educate girls and 
young women after they have married. The 
opposition to such educational activity remains 
strong, however, in many groups. Since even 
today many women will not or cannot drop the 
curtain of purdah, teachers must seek them out 
behind their veil. 
This the Bombay Committee is succeeding in 
doing. More and more husbands of wives in 
purdah are being brought into literacy and “What curious money is this? ”, asks a Bombay worker, seeing Unesco Gift Coupons for the first time. Mrs 
fundamental education classes. And as a result K. Sayani (right) Vice-President of the Bombay Social Education Committee, explains that they can be used 
of this, veiled women too are now coming to the to buy radio sets, filmstrips and similar materials for the centres it has opened in the slum areas of the city. 
education centres, and in many cases they are 
taking an active part in the different activities. 
The Bombay Social Educatio.l Committee is 
supported in its work by local government grants 
and voluntary local donations, but its resources 
are still insufficient. 
Last year, the Bombay Committee became one 
of Unesco’s Gift Coupon projects. Unesco 
notified voluntary groups and organizations in 
donor countries of the equipment the Committee 
urgently needed — equipment ranging in price 
from $10 to $5,000. It explained how Unesco Gift 
Stamps could buy Gift Coupons which the Bom- 
bay committee could use to buy radio sets 
specially adapted for use under tropical 
conditions, or film strip projectors as well as 
16mm. documentary films. It explained that All 
India Radio (known as “AIR”) has a regular 
educational broadcasting programme for indus- 
trial workers, villagers, schoolchildren and college 
students; that local Bombay stations broadcast 
special programmes for workers every evening 
and how the Committee would use the receiving 
sets in its educational programmes. In a similar 
way, Unesco explained the particular need for 
film projectors and the filmstrips which “not only 
speed up the rate of learning among large groups 
of people but also serve to arouse the interest of 
the people who have so far been untouched by 
adult education activity.” It showed how print- 
ing equipment was urgently needed by the Bom- 
bay Committee for the literacy primers it 
produces and the special newspapers it publishes : 
for the newly literates; and that the vocational Rapt attention on faces of Bombay women (left) seeing their first filmstrip show. Subjects include health anc 
courses undertaken by the Committee at its hygiene, home economics and general knowledge. Veiled women (right) watch show at education centre. 
different centres in Bombay were seriously Curiosity overcomes traditional reserve (below) as purdah spectator examines a filmstrip she has seen projected. 
hampered by the lack of necessary lathes, drill- } 
presses, wood-working ‘machines, bookbinding 
equipment as well as sewing machines. 
Since then, a large number of groups and 
organizations of young people in the United 
States have adopted different parts of the Bom- 
bay Social Education Gift Project. Several 
months ago, for example, the first three film 
projectors along with a whole series of filmstrips, 
and 16 radio listening sets reached the pioneer 
education group in Bombay. All this equipment 
had been purchased by the Social Education 
Committee with the aid of Gift Coupons supplied 
by club women in the United States. 
The arrival of the radio sets, for example, was 
greeted by the inhabitants of the Bombay chawis 
with almost religious fervour. Crowds gathered 
to watch the crates being opened. A representa- 
tive of the bahya (the municipal milkmen of Bom- 
bay) proudly stood to attention to receive the gift 
for his chawl. The sets were carefully decorated 
with garlands of flowers, after which they were 
switched on and special loudspeakers attached 
to the high poles in the courtyards so that 
the men, women and children could hear their 
first programme broadcast by All India Radio. 
For some inhabitants of the chawis, the arrival 
of this equipment from the other side of the 
world seemed almost unbelievable. But the 
feeling quickly grew of a new bond of friendship 
with the women of a country which until then 
had seemed so strange and far distant to them. 
For the world-minded women from Okla- 
homa, Texas, Illinois, Kentucky, Alabama, Florida, 
Montana, and other states in the United States, 
the Gift Project was an answer to their question 
“What can we do to help the purposes of Unesco 
and the United Nations ?” In it they have found 
a new way of sharing with, a new way of speaking 
to people in other lands, and a new way of foster- 
ing international goodwill by joining to help 
worthwhile causes most in need. 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/071135engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

5 
il 
G
R
E
E
T
 
Dag 
\f
 
\ 
a
l
 
# 
Ie
 
~~ 
» 
  
A
C
T
 
b 
Wi 
% 
hb 
‘ 
UNESCO'S GIFT 
COUPONS SERVE 
OVER 35 NATIONS 
 
This small boy from India is learning to walk again thanks to Unesco Gift Coupons. A victim 
of infantile paralysis, he is being helped to recover his sense of balance on special apparatus 
at the Bombay Society for the Rehabilitation of Crippled Children. Five French schools and 
two American organizations have already contributed equipment to the Bombay orthopaedic 
centre through the Gift Coupon Programme of Unesco. The Unesco Gift Coupon is a form 
of international money order or cheque which groups can send to any one of more than 35 coun- 
tries all over the world, for the purchase of equipment for schools and other institutions in 
under-developed or war-affected areas. For the story of the Unesco Gift Coupon Programme 
and how it is bringing help to where it is most badly needed, see pages 19 to 23.