# [185900](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

Iii 
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
  
  
  
2009 * number 3 * ISSN 1993-8616 
 
J 
  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
l
I
s
a
b
e
l
l
e
 
Ar
ro
u 
  
Contents 
2009 - number 3 
  
     
TROUBLED WATER 
Increased demand, waste and insufficient investment: water shortage may 
come sooner than we think. Although water covers three-quarters 
of the world’s surface, only 0.0075% of this immense volume is available 
for humanity’s use. Some countries have already reached the limits 
of their resources. 
EDITORIAL 3   
THE YANGTZE 
OR A JOURNEY 
THROUGH TIME 
On the banks of Asia's longest river, 
the Yangtze, which winds some 
6000 km across China, yaks and yurts cohabit with cars 
and high-rise buildings. Source of life to six million Chinese, 
it is undoubtedly also a source of development — as long as 
the means are there to make use of it. 10 
  
Water is a crucial factor in economic development. 
AUSTRALIA'S 
WATER REVOLUTION 
Returning an over-allocated system 
to sustainability while combating 
BE THE WATER WE EAT 
AR The water we drink is less of a 
problem than the water we eat. 
Agriculture absorbs 70% of this 
    
resource, which is both omnipresent 
and scarce. Growing plants that are resistant to drought and 
salt, desalination and storage are among the solutions recom- 
  
the harmful effects of climate change 
and drought — these are the challenges taken on by the new 
Murray-Darling Basin Authority, founded in 2008. 
mended by experts to deal with water shortages. 9 In seven years the annual inflow of one of Australia’s largest river 
basins has dropped nearly 80%. 12 
water crisis, says Olcay Unver, i] 
) coordinator of the World Water 
Assessment Programme (WWAP). But while water crises 
remain local, climate change is global, and we have 
to find global solutions for a problem that threatens 
the future of the planet. 14 
BLUE SCORPIONS AGAINST 
- WATER CORRUPTION 
Zero tolerance is the motto of the 
“Blue Scorpions”, a special unit created 
within the South African Department 
of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) to fight water related 
crimes. With severe water shortages, South Africa is susceptible 
to water corruption, but is tackling it more effectively 
than most of its neighbours. 8 
WATER 
IN A CHANGING WORLD 
We are not experiencing a global 
FOCUS 
Saving our nearest relatives 
Humanity’s closest relative, the gorilla, is in danger. Development, poaching and war have been decimating 
one of the only animal species which, like us, can use tools. 16 
 
# UNESCO: NEWS 
i Confronting climate change in the Arctic. Education for sustainable development. 
Monuments of Nubia, past and future. 20 
&—     

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

~ EDITORIAL 
  
THE IMPORTANCE OF WATER 
IN DEVELOPMENT 
AND ECONOMIC GROWTH 
© 
Ar
ia
ne
 
Ba
il
ey
 
Demand for water has never been greater, due 
to such factors as population growth, changes 
in food consumption and increased energy 
production. These are among the conclusions 
of the latest United Nations World 
Water Development Report, 
an assessment of water resources, entitled 
‘Water in a changing world’. It highlights 
the importance of water in development 
and economic growth. 
emand is increasing, and some 
countries are already reaching the 
limits of their water resources. The 
effects of climate change are likely 
to aggravate this situation even 
further. Competition for water is 
intensifying — whether between 
countries, urban and rural areas, 
or different sectors of activity. This 
may make water an increasingly po- 
liticized issue. 
Access to basic water-related ser- 
vices remains inadequate in much 
of the developing world. The link be- 
tween poverty and water resources 
is obvious: the number of people 
living on less than US$1.25 a day 
coincides approximately with the 
number of those without access to 
safe drinking water. 
This situation has a major impact 
on health. Almost 80% of diseases 
in developing countries are associ 
ated with water, causing some three 
million early deaths. For example, 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
Bottom of empty water bottle. 
5000 children die every day from 
diarrhoea, or one every 17 seconds. 
In all, about one tenth of all illness- 
es worldwide could be avoided by 
improving water supply, sanitation, 
hygiene and management of water 
resources. 
One kilo of meat = 
16,000 litres of water 
While part of the population still 
lacks adequate access to water, 
demand has never been greater. 
Freshwater withdrawals have tripled 
over the last 50 years, while the 
area under irrigation doubled during 
the same period. This phenomenon 
is particularly linked to population 
growth. The world's population, 
currently estimated at 6.6 billion, is 
growing by about 80 million people 
each year. This means demand for 
freshwater is increasing by 64 bil- 
lion cubic metres a year. 
Population growth implies in- 
3 
creased demand for agricultural 
products, and so increased de- 
mand for water. Agriculture is by far 
the greatest consumer of water, ac- 
counting for 70% of all water con- 
sumption (compared to 20% for in- 
dustry and 10% for domestic use). 
There have been changes in life- 
styles and eating habits in recent 
years, in particular an increase in 
the share of meat and dairy prod- 
ucts consumed in emerging coun- 
tries. The production of a kilo of 
wheat requires 800 to 4000 litres 
of water, while a kilo of beef, takes 
2000 to 16,000 litres. 
Water shortage linked to climate 
change can also be expected. Ex- 
perts say that by 2030, 47% of 
world population will be living in 
areas of high water stress. Water 
scarcity in some arid and semi-ar- 
id regions will have major impacts 
on migration. From 24 to 700 mil- 
lion people are expected to be 
(eee)

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
D
o
m
i
n
i
q
u
e
 
Ro
ge
r 
Cattle in Abidi, Senegal. 
(o0°) 
displaced because of a scarcity of 
water. 
Obviously water is one of the key 
issues the world, and particularly 
developing countries, has to face. 
Yet an inadequate percentage of 
budget allocation by governments 
and in official aid goes to water. For 
example, overseas development 
assistance to the total water sector 
has been decreasing and remains 
at only about 5% of total aid flow. 
At the same time, corruption in the 
water sector may add to the over- 
all cost of these investments: typi- 
cal examples include falsified me- 
ter readings, favouritism in public 
equipment purchases, and nepo- 
tism in the allocation of public con- 
tracts. Estimates indicate that 30% 
of budgets can be siphoned off in 
some countries. These practices 
are rarely curbed, despite initiatives 
by some countries, like South Af- 
rica. 
Managing crisis 
Confronted with shortages, some 
countries have already begun to 
integrate their strategies for man- 
aging water resources with their 
development plans. Urban waste- 
water use remains limited for agri- 
cultural purposes, except in certain 
countries: 40% of uses in the Gaza 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
SR: 
  
Strip (Palestinian Territories), 15% 
in Israel and 16% in Egypt. 
Desalination of sea water is an- 
other process used in arid regions. 
lt is used to obtain drinking water 
and for industrial use in countries 
that have reached the limits of their 
renewable water resources (e.g. 
Saudi Arabia, Israel, Cyprus). 
Australia has also changed its poli- 
cies, with a range of new measures. 
Restrictions have been introduced — 
on watering gardens, washing cars, 
  
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
F
o
g
Q
u
e
s
t
-
V
i
r
g
i
n
i
a
 
Ca
rt
er
 
  
Cr EI EEE IR 
filling swimming pools, etc — in the 
country's major cities. In Sydney, a 
dual water supply was introduced 
in 2008 — one for drinking water, 
another for other uses, which draws 
on recycled water. 
This issue of the Courier includes 
a series of articles illustrating the 
main points of the latest World Wa- 
ter Development Report, “Water in 
a changing world". 
Agnés Bardon (UNESCO) 
  
     
vA $2 A 
” @ ‘ 
. LAL he i ’ 
AS a Yu 7 yn E 
wo Vora LEY ER 
Fog collectors being constructed in La Ventana, Guatemala 
4

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 186116: The Water we eat

THE WATER WE EAT 
  
© 
Gu
y 
Be
sc
on
d 
we 
Traditional irrigation around Mopti, Mali. 
The water we drink is less of a problem than the water we eat. Agriculture absorbs 
IT NEN EE MG EEE TET IE (RS I El RET CRE Tay Loli [oe Ro ER [Thi {ed 
‘70% of this resource, which is both omnipresent and scarce. Growing plants that are a 
recommended by experts to deal with water shortages. 
  
| 
he Earth really ought to be called 
‘Aqua’ because more than two- 
thirds of our planet is covered by 
water. It's where life evolved, and, 
even four billion years later, life still 
needs it. 
“Paradoxically, though, water is a 
commodity in short supply — 97.5% 
is actually salt water, making it un- 
usable for humanity. And most of 
the fresh water is not obtainable, 
either, being frozen in glaciers, inac- 
cessibly deep beneath the earth's 
surface, or in swamps. Only about 
0.0075% of total water is acces- 
sible fresh water — and even that 
is very unevenly distributed around 
the world. 
Water shortage is a big problem, 
particularly in developing coun- 
tries, since these countries are 
mainly arid and dependent upon 
agriculture, which swallows up 
most of the water used world- 
wide. According to the United Na- 
tions Water Development Report 
2009, this is approximately 70%, 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
and could even double by the year 
2050. 
Asia is the thirstiest of all. Admit- 
tedly, the continent — according to 
the UN Food and Agriculture Orga- 
nization — holds the second larg- 
est stock of fresh water on earth, 
but this is also the site of 70% of 
total irrigated agricultural areas 
world-wide. The four billion Asians, 
however, consume only about 6% of 
the water, and industry 10%. A good 
84 % is swallowed up by agriculture. 
Things are moving swiftly on the 
Asian continent. It's estimated that 
about 9 billion people will be living 
on Earth in 2050, 5 billion of them in 
Asia. But it's not just the population 
figures that are rising; the economy 
is growing and prosperity increas- 
ing, bringing with it a change in 
consumer behaviour. The produc- 
tion of rice — which is extremely wa- 
ter-intensive anyway — will be joined 
by the increasing demand for meat. 
Approximately 2.5 million tons of 
meat were produced in China in 
5 
1960. In 2006 the figure was over 
80 million. According to the Institute 
for Water Education, 3000 litres of 
water are required to produce one 
kilogramme of rice, 16,000 litres for 
a kilogramme of beef. 
Wanna fill up - 
or drink?” 
Automobile production is booming 
too. Between 20,000 and 300,000 
litres of water are needed to make 
a car. Bio fuel has become increas- 
ingly popular over the last few years. 
Cars need fuel, too. Ethanol, made 
from maize or sugar cane, has be- 
come a profitable source of income 
for farmers in Mexico and Brazil, ag- 
gravating not only the problem of 
food, but that of water, too. About 
2500 litres of water are required 
to produce one litre of ethanol. Ac- 
cording to World Energy Outlook 
2006, biofuel production is increas- 
ing at the rate of approximately 7% 
per year. This may not present so 
much of a problem in rain-laden 
(o0°)

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### 186116: The Water we eat

THE WATER WE EAT 
  
(vee) 
Brazil, but biofuel could well be- 
come one in the China or India of 
the future. 
Just as you can already hear peo- 
ple in Mexico sometimes saying 
“Wanna fill up — or eat?” you may 
one day hear people in Asia asking 
“Wanna fill up — or drink?” 
It's agriculture, then, that's the 
main water-waster. It is estimated 
that about half the water used is 
wasted. That translates to 30% 
of the Earth's total available fresh 
water. This gives rise to a huge 
potential saving. There are sev- 
eral ways to go about it. “Irriga- 
tion is very inefficient”, says Jan 
Olof Lundqvist from the Stock- 
holm International Water Institute. 
“And there is quite a big loss of 
food during production. That is 
what we call the loss from tree to 
fork” About half of all food is lost 
in harvesting, storage and trans- 
portation. “All the food produced 
needed water — and that means: 
if we lost the food, we also lost 
the water! 
But savings can be made at the 
beginning of the production chain 
as well. Surface irrigation is main- 
ly used in developing countries, 
usually by damming methods, also 
used for the cultivation of rice. It is 
cheap and technically simple. The 
drawback is that a large propor- 
tion of the water is lost by seepage 
and evaporation — approximately 
half of it. 
It would be easy to make savings 
here by using drip irrigation. By 
means of hoses or pipes laid above 
(or better, below) the ground, small 
amounts of water are directly aimed 
at the plants. This method is eco- 
nomical, but also costly. In addition, 
technical know-how is necessary for 
laying the pipes and, once installed, 
cultivation is no longer flexible. 
‘And it needs very much energy’, 
says Lundquist. “You need pumps 
to get the water everywhere. The 
investments are fairly high — so it 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
Is not suitable for every crop, es- 
pecially not for rice production. It's 
simply too expensive 
New strategies 
Lundqvist can see other avenues 
for improvement: “For rice produc- 
tion and not so high-value crops you 
could improve the situation simply 
by working on the coordination be- 
tween water supply schedules and 
farming operations.” The problem is 
simple: there's usually not enough 
water there when it's needed, and 
vice-versa. In Lundquist's opinion 
there is an urgent need for farm- 
ers to improve their water manage- 
ment. 
And one final point: “There is a 
need to utilize more ‘green water’ 
in agriculture — which means rain- 
© 
Li
sa
 
G
r
i
m
a
u
d
 
fall, Lundqvist says. “It should be 
captured and stored, probably by 
underground storage systems 
But what should be done in areas 
where itrarely rains? “There, it would 
be a good thing to have drip irriga- 
tion — however, it wouldnt make 
any sense to grow water-intensive 
crops there!” One solution for these 
regions — albeit controversial — 
might be genetically modified plants 
resistant to drought and salt. “But 
still: farmers won't use them if they 
can't sell them”, says Lundqvist. 
One possible alternative here 
could be the production of biofuel. 
Jatropha curcas is a spurge plant, 
the seeds of which contain 30% 
oil. The plant requires little water, 
and the oil can be processed to 
make bio diesel. It does, however, 
(00°) 
About half the water used in agriculture is wasted. 
6

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 186116: The Water we eat

THE WATER WE EA 
  
© 
Ek
o 
Su
li
sy
on
o 
  
The Jathropha curcas represents a green alternative for biofuel production, needing little water. 
(00°) 
contain toxicants as well. “In India 
and parts of Africa, Jatropha can 
be grown without competition with 
water and food production”, says 
Lundqvist. “But it depends on the 
scale. And | suppose the scale 
will be fairly modest, compared to 
the amount of energy that will be 
needed” 
Apart from saving water, the exploi- 
tation of new water sources could 
be the solution, particularly for the 
other regions. The huge amounts 
of water in the oceans, for example. 
But the desalination of water re- 
quires lots of energy and money. 
Which is why, in numerical terms, 
it doesn't play a big role yet. Only 
one% of desalinated water is used 
for agriculture. “Thanks to modern 
membrane technology, the prices 
for water desalination have come 
down,’ says Lundqvist. “Fifty cents 
(in US$) per thousand litres — but 
that's still too expensive for the 
amounts of water that you need for 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
food production” This is why Lun- 
dqvist regards desalination more 
as an option for producing drinking 
water and possibly for the produc- 
tion of premium foodstuffs. 
If one were to succeed in further 
reducing the cost of desalination, 
the water problem could be largely 
resolved . The Desertec consortium 
has concepts for linking concen- 
trating solar thermal power (CSP) 
plants — mirrors that concentrate 
sunlight and produce cheap elec- 
tricity on the coast of North Africa 
and the Middle East - with desali- 
nation plants. These regions are 
the most arid in the world, so their 
problems could thereby be solved 
in one fell swoop. 
Climate change will also aggra- 
vate the water crisis in the future. “It 
will bring big changes in the rainfall 
pattern”, says Lundqvist. “Therefore 
it is important to have a strategy to 
combine irrigation and supplemen- 
tary irrigation systems with local 
7 
rainfall better and to store it under 
the soil” This is a big challenge, but 
he believes it can be done. “I'm a 
born optimist. 
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist for Der Spiegel Online, 
Germany, correspondent 
for the UNESCO Courier 
  
Ethanol and biodiesel are the two kinds 
of biofuel. 
The production of bioethanol tripled 
between 2000 and 2007 and was 
estimated at 77 billion litres in 2008. 
Brazil and the US are the main 
producers accounting for 77% 
of global supply. 
Biodiesel derived from oll 
increased by a factor of 11 
between 2000 and 2007 with 67% 
produced in the European Union 
(OECD-FAO, 2008). 
Global ethanol production 
is projected to reach 
127 billion litres in 2017. 
In 2007, 23% of maize production 
in the US was used to produce 
ethanol, as was about 54% 
of Brazil's sugar cane crop. 
In the EU, about 47% of vegetable 
oil produced was used 
for the production of biodiesel. 
The 2008 ethanol share of the 
gasoline transport fuel market 
in these countries is estimated 
at 4.5% for the US, 40% for Brazil 
and 2.2% for the EU. 
About one fifth of the maize harvest 
in the US was used for ethanol 
production in 2006/2007, it only 
displaced about 3% of the country’s 
gasoline (World Bank's 2008 World 
Development Report).

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### 186117: Blue scorpions against water corruption

BLUE SCORPIONS 
AGAINST WATER CORRUPTION 
(c
) 
Fé
li
x 
H
é
n
o
n
 
  
Dam in Swaziland. 
Zero tolerance is the motto of the ‘Blue Scorpions’, a special unit created 
 
s demand for clean water grows 
worldwide, so do concerns about 
corruption in the water sector. Not 
least in South Africa, where a gov- 
ernment unit that combats water 
crime is getting a much-needed 
boost. 
Water corruption in Southern 
Africa hit the headlines earlier this 
decade when the chief executive of 
a US$8 billion construction project 
was found guilty of having accepted 
more than US$2 million in bribes 
from multinational construction 
companies to secure contracts. 
Masupha Ephraim Sole was in 
charge of the Lesotho Highlands 
Water Project, an ambitious pro- 
gramme to build dams and canals 
for water transfer from the highlands 
of Lesotho, a country the size of Bel- 
gium which is entirely surrounded 
by South Africa, to the dry Gauteng 
area around Johannesburg. 
Despite limited assistance from 
the international community, Leso- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
tho succeeded in bringing the err- 
ing parties to justice — the chief ex- 
ecutive was sentenced to 18 years 
in prison in 2002 and some of the 
companies involved received multi- 
million fines and have been de- 
barred from receiving World Bank 
contracts. 
Fighting corruption 
Since the incident, the govern- 
ments of both Lesotho and South 
Africa have stepped up their fight 
against corruption in the water sec- 
tor. Such corruption can take many 
forms, from petty bribing to avoid a 
pollution fine to multi-million payoffs 
to secure large contracts. 
In South Africa, compliance with 
water regulations is monitored and 
enforced by a special unit in the 
Department of Water Affairs and 
Forestry (DWAF). The unit is nick- 
named the “Blue Scorpions” after 
the country’s elite anti-corruption 
force, the Scorpions. 
8 
within the South African Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) to fight 
JES wisi sais (1 CER TO ETE CRE TIE Led g =e [MRS Te TN | WAY [or WEFT oY o1 i] o] [SR (ATTEN 
corruption, but is tackling it more effectively than most of its neighbours. 
The Blue Scorpions, set up in 
2005, fight a range of water-related 
crime, from pollution to unlawful 
abstraction of South Africa's water 
courses. The funding increase will 
increase the unit's number of staff 
from a handful to, eventually, over 
100. It is also going to get access 
to better technology, including sat- 
ellite imaging, to track down wrong- 
doers. 
Corruption is one part of the murky 
activity the unit unveils, says Nigel 
Adams, its director. “If you get to 
a place and there's just a big hole 
in the ground, but 50 million rand 
(nearly US$5 million) has been 
spent, then you know something 
strange has happened, he says. 
His unit's success depends on 
three things, he says. First, its close 
working partnership with other gov- 
ernment agencies and the South 
African police. Second, its open 
door policy that welcomes anyone 
(00°)

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 186117: Blue scorpions against water corruption

- BLUE SCORPIONS AGAINST WATER CORRUPTION 
  
(00°) 
concerned about their compliance 
with water regulations to come in 
and talk to the unit. The third, how- 
ever, Is a zero-tolerance policy for 
those who refuse to comply with 
the law. “To those people, | am hard 
as steel Adams says. 
Adams and his team are likely to 
have their work cut out for them. 
Last year, South Africa dropped in 
the corruption index compiled by 
Transparency International to 54th 
place, down from 43rd place in 
2007. There is corruption on many 
levels in South Africa's water sec- 
tor, said a representative of a water 
NGO who refused to be named. 
Some of the most common forms 
of dodgy dealings are fast-tracking 
procurement contracts and giving 
consultancy jobs to pals, she said. 
South Africa has many ‘risk fac- 
tors’ that make it susceptible to 
water corruption. It is a dry country, 
with some regions facing critical 
water shortages. Urbanisation and 
industrial growth are putting pres- 
sure on the water supply. In addi- 
tion, the country's Institution for 
Civil Engineering 2006 infrastruc- 
ture report card identified the need 
for extensive refurbishment of the 
country’s dams and sewage sys- 
tems, meaning more tenders, which 
can be corruption-prone. 
Still, South Africa is tackling cor- 
ruption more successfully than 
most of its poorer neighbours on 
the continent. The poor gover- 
nance structure and large funding 
flows that characterise the water 
sector in the rest of Africa provide 
fertile growing grounds for abuse, 
according to the 2008 Global 
Corruption Report. The report es- 
timates that due to corruption, the 
cost for reaching the Millennium 
Goal on drinking water and sanita- 
tion in developing countries could 
increase by as much as with US$48 
billion over the next decade. 
Such money-loss will have a direct 
effect on all Africans. Consumers 
will pay more and water quality will 
deteriorate (when pollution is over- 
looked in exchange for a bribe, for 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
.
 
Vr
ee
de
 
“If you get to a place and there's just a 
big hole in the ground, but 50 miflion rand 
(nearly US $5 million) has been spent, then 
you know something strange has happened, 
says Nigel Adams, director of the Blue 
Scorpions. 
example). Meanwhile, restricted ac- 
cess, lower economic growth (be- 
cause companies need water) and 
water shortages could spark unrest, 
damaging national security. 
A range of actions 
But few studies investigate the 
situation on the ground, says Piers 
Cross, a consultant who is investi- 
gating water corruption in drought- 
stricken Ethiopia for the World 
Bank. Ethiopia is currently investing 
heavily in water infrastructure, such 
as dams and bringing water to rural 
areas. 
With a large number of contracts 
being offered to improve access to 
clean water across Ethiopia, there 
are question-marks both over how 
contracts are being handled, both 
for large infrastructure projects and 
smaller-scale borehole drilling, says 
Cross. He's going to Ethiopia in 
April to take photos of new equip- 
ment. “We'll try to compare if what 
is built equals what is being paid 
for, he says. 
Some countries are addressing the 
problem. In Zambia, following the 
re-organisation of the water sector 
to allow more local control, commu- 
9 
 
nity-based Water Watch Groups 
were set up to monitor water pro- 
viders' performance. The onus is on 
communities learning about their 
rights and raising awareness of in- 
fringements. A 2008 study by S. 
Kayaga and R. Franceys, two UK 
academics, found that NWASCO, 
the Zambian regulator, had made 
“commendable progress” towards 
better accountability and transpar- 
ency in the water sector. 
Due to the relatively short time 
water corruption has been in the 
spotlight, there is little information 
on what interventions work, says 
John Butterworth from the Interna- 
tional Water and Sanitation Centre. 
“What has been shown is that a 
quick fix just pushes the corruption 
into a different area. If you sort out 
a particular aspect of your procure- 
ment, the people who were engaged 
in corrupt practices will just shift to 
another part of the process. It needs 
a whole range of actions’ 
Something that seems to work is to 
raise the awareness of communities 
of the problem and how it affects 
them, he adds. “It's called social ac- 
countability. Involving communities in 
looking at the quality of construction, 
making sure all material is delivered, 
that sort of thing’ 
Nor is the problem unique to 
Africa. Water corruption by cartels 
in South Asia inflated prices be- 
tween 15 and 20% between 2001 
and 2002, according to a survey. 
Recent member countries of the 
EU, such as Romania and Bulgaria, 
are, for example, ranking lower on 
Transparency International's corrup- 
tion perception index as compared 
to some African or Asian countries, 
says Hakan Tropp, chairman of the 
Water Integrity Network, set up in 
2006 to improve transparency and 
governance in the global water sec- 
tor. “So it is also problem we in de- 
veloped countries have to deal with 
in our own back yard” 
Linda Nordling, 
Swedish journalist 
living in South Africa

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

  
un
 
© 
Ge
of
fr
oy
 
an
d 
Lo
ic
 
de
 
La
 
Tu
ll
ay
e 
  
The Yangtze, near Yushu. 


### 186119: The Yangtze or a journey through time

THE YANGTZE OR A JOURNEY 
THROUGH TIME 
  
~~ On the banks of Asia’s longest river, the Yangtze, 
which winds some 6000 km across China, yaks and yurts cohabit with car 
nd high-rise buildings. Source of life to six million Chinese, it is undoubtedly 
[LX Bo IT (We il (SCA [oT CL A FR 1 [EER GU CRN CEU EI CRUE CR CRU EL CRITE Xe) i 
 
Loic and Geoffroy de La Tullaye’s documentary film, ‘Yangtze Expedition. 
An adventure by the La Tullaye brothers; shows just how crucial access to water is for human life. 
Here, they answer questions put by Katerina Markelova (UNESCO Courier). 
Why did you choose 
development as the theme 
of your ‘Yangtze Expedition’? 
Geoffroy: Traveling down the 
Yangtze is like travelling through time. 
High up on the Tibetan plateau, there 
are still people who have to walk 
for three hours a day to fetch wa- 
ter. It's like the Stone Age. If you 
travel downstream for a while, it's 
the industrial era, with big cities that 
are beginning to control the water. 
And, in Shanghai, at the mouth of 
the same river, there is round-the- 
clock running water. It's the modern 
world. 
We wanted our documentary to 
show the link between access to 
water and level of development. We 
very quickly realised that China was 
the ideal place for this, because 
of the extraordinary diversity in the 
ways water figures in the lives of its 
people. 
Loic: Through this expedition we 
were able to rediscover our own 
history. It was important to trace the 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
evolution that western countries 
have gone through so that we can 
drink from a tap today. 
The idea behind the journey was 
also to translate the relationships 
between man and water into imag- 
es. In the West we have lost sight of 
the importance of this vital resource. 
It's there in abundance; even hot 
water comes out of a tap. And, 
worse still, we use drinking water 
to flush our toilets. Most people on 
the planet find this incomprehen- 
sible. In China, for example, water 
is so precious they see the Yangtze 
as a source of nourishment, like a 
mother. 
So there is a direct link between 
water and development? 
G: Absolutely. Because of their geo- 
graphical isolation, people living high 
up on the Tibetan plateau are, in a 
way, condemned to underdevelop- 
ment. Of course, the new railway 
that opened in 2006 will help Tibet 
become less cut off, but, for the 
10 
time being, there is nothing modern 
about life there. One Tibetan stu- 
dent who went back to her home vil- 
lage, Qmar He, in the holidays, told 
us she spent most of her free time 
fetching water. In the city, she uses 
this time for reading and leisure. 
A little further down river, we saw 
a water mill, which is already a sign 
of development. But it took a long 
time before this kind of technology, 
albeit simple, was available. An- 
other 1000 km further down river, 
we came across the famous Three 
Gorges dam. It is also a water mill, 
but much bigger. It was completed 
in 2009 and is the end result of a 
gigantic construction project that 
lasted 15 years. Still further down, 
we came across a paradox that is 
characteristic of all developed soci- 
eties: we want clean water to drink 
yet still want to be able to use it to 
dump all of our rubbish! We finally 
arrived in Shanghai, where we found 
ourselves in a society, which, long 
ago, realised that, if you want to 
(00°)

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

  
(o00) 
have drinking water, you have to 
treat your wastewater. 
As we travelled down the Yang- 
tze, we witnessed a whole series 
of stages in human development, 
marked by access to water, master- 
ing it, making it secure, and manag- 
ing it over the long term. 
You were able to see the 
world’s largest dam, the Three 
Gorges. It made navigation on 
the river possible, and there- 
fore brought development. But 
it is also causing some serious 
environmental problems. 
G: This dam has really turned the 
Yangtze into a growth highway, link- 
ing the developed East with the un- 
derdeveloped West. Since the river 
has been navigable, the port city of 
Chongqing, which is upstream of 
the dam, has been mushrooming: a 
thousand people settle there each 
day! It now has a population of over 
32 million. 
L: Having said that, most of its 
wastewater still goes directly into 
the Yangtze. This polluted water 
then reaches the dam, where it 
stagnates, loses all of its oxygen 
and undergoes eutrophisation. In 
some places on the river, the layer 
of algae is 30 cm thick. 
If the Yangtze dies, so will the 
600 million people who live in the 
river basin - 10% of the planet's 
population. If the Chinese do not 
act quickly, they will turn the Three 
Gorges reservoir into an enormous 
cesspit, an open-air sewage dump. 
And everyone knows this. If noth- 
ing is done, the treatment that the 
Chinese will have to apply to make 
the Yangtze water drinkable will be 
a lot more complicated than it is to- 
day, and may even be impossible. In 
China, surface water is still the main 
source of drinking water, not un- 
derground water, which is practi- 
cally untapped. 
What about the Yangtze river's 
biodiversity? 
G: In 2006 pollution, the dam, in- 
creased river traffic, and extensive 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
© 
Ge
of
fr
oy
 
an
d 
Lo
ic
 
de
 
La
 
Tu
ll
ay
e 
l
l
 
0 
fishing led to the extinction of the 
Yangtze dolphin. The disappearance 
of this symbolic species caused 
quite a reaction, but there are still 
a great many other threatened spe- 
cies that we don't hear about. Like 
the Yangtze finless porpoise, which 
Is also endemic to the river. 
The extinction of the dolphin is an 
alarm signal. Even if we talk about 
the overpopulation of the planet, we 
might wonder if the next mammal to 
ETL REY 
2. / Id 
A, 
R    
    
   : : ow oo . 
- ~-— # hh . re 
0: = CT SAAN) 
  
Daily life in Miao Ajigen village. 
I 


### 186119: The Yangtze or a journey through time

GTZE OR A JOURNEY THROUGH TIME 
nd | 
»y 
I a 
become extinct won't be man. Every 
year nearly three million people in 
developing countries die of water- 
related illnesses. Every 17 seconds 
a child dies of diarrhoea. So we 
might say the process has already 
started ... 
Having said this, the aim of our ex- 
peditions was not to criticise, but to 
provide tools so that people can in- 
terpret their environment a little bet- 
ter, and do something to preserve it. 
    Shanghai-bound boats waiting for lock entry, 
Three Gorges dam. 
Shanghai docks (China). 
_ Benefits 
from investing in water 
It is estimated that for every US$ 1 invested in improved water supply 
and sanitation there will be gains of from US$ 3-34. 
The overall economic loss in Africa alone due to lack of access to safe 
water and basic sanitation is estimated to be some US$ 28.4 billion per year 
or around 5% of GDP (WHO, 2006). 
A study in the MENA region noted that groundwater resource depletion 
appears to have reduced the GDP of certain nations (Jordan by 2.1%, 
Yemen 1.5%, Egypt 1.3% and Tunisia 1.2%) 
In China, there is local evidence that action on water management 
has delivered measurable improvements in local GDP terms. The 335 
counties in China with completed primary electrification from hydropower 
showed a doubling of GDP compared with those without rural electricity. 
Annual average income per farmer increased by 8.1% per year, nearly 3% 
above the national average. 
11 
© 
Ge
of
fr
oy
 
an
d 
Lo
ic
 
de
 
La
 
Tu
ll
ay
e 
© 
Ge
of
fr
oy
 
an
d 
Lo
ic
 
de
 
La
 
Tu
ll
ay
e

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

Returning an over-allocated system to sustainability while combating 
he harmful effects of climate change and drought - these are the challenges anon 
Oo) TA CI TR TT EVR ETT [EE EL WNT Led oT (e111, [o [=0e Ty PAO 01: I VET MYCE TER OG CEL TE THe) 
  
(0) Me CX WTS EEE ET CH AE EH ER ETE {e] of Te J EET RL BRE 


### 186120: Australia's water revolution

AUSTRALIA'S WATER REVOLUTION 
© 
Ec
o 
I
m
a
g
e
s
 
| 
Clayton Sailing Club Jetty, high and dry (Clayton, Lake 
South Australia - Lower Lakes of Murray-Darling River) 
ustralia's newly-created Murray- 
Darling Basin Authority is about 
to embark on a world-first venture. 
Chief Executive, Rob Freeman, is 
charged with putting together a plan 
covering the basin, which is the size 
of France. “It has never been done 
in the world at this scale, he said. 
“No-one has tried to return a sys- 
tem that is over-allocated [back to 
sustainability] 
Mr Freeman said the over-alloca- 
tion is “a legacy of the past, com- 
pounded by the early onset of cli- 
mate change and on top of that we 
have one of the worst droughts on 
record”. 
The legacy is the issuing of water 
licences for over 5000 gigalitres 
(billion litres) a year, in wetter times. 
The Murray River historically had an 
annual inflow of 8900 GL a year. 
But drought struck seven years 
ago; in the last three years the 
annual inflow has averaged just 
1783 GL. 
The basin is highly vulnerable to 
climate change, because just four 
percent of the rain that falls on the 
basin ends up in the river (com- 
pared with 39% in Europe and 
52% in North America). If the tem- 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
perature rises one degree — and 
this has been happening under 
climate change — 15% less water 
flows into the river. 
Before the drought struck, the 
Murray-Darling Basin supported 
40% of the country’s farm produce, 
including most of its irrigated agri- 
culture, worth $A15 billion. 
Its waters support over two million 
people, including Australia’s fifth big- 
gest city, Adelaide, but in the last 
three years they have endured se- 
vere water restrictions. In Adelaide, 
for example, gardens can only be 
watered with hand-held hoses for a 
maximum of three hours a week. 
Irrigation allocations have been 
slashed. Along the river, grape 
vines and citrus trees have been 
bulldozed. Wetlands are drying out, 
and huge old river red gums are dy- 
ing. 
At the end of the river lie the lower 
lakes, separated from the ocean by 
man-made barrages. Those lakes 
are facing ecological catastrophe, 
according to South Australia’s 
Commissioner for Water Security, 
Robyn McLeod. As the lakes dry, 
their acid sulphate soils become 
dangerously acidic when they are 
12 
Alexandrina, 
exposed to air. There is not enough 
fresh water in the Murray-Darling to 
keep the lake beds covered. Letting 
in salt water might halt the acidity, 
but, Ms McLeod said “they will be- 
come hypersaline very quickly and 
it will be a dead sea’ 
Measures called for 
Adelaide takes up to 90% of its 
drinking water from the Murray, 
but it is developing other sour- 
ces. It recycles 30% of its water, 
and is aiming for 45% by 2010. 
New housing estates have two 
sources of water; purified water 
is used in the kitchen for drinking, 
while recycled water, delivered 
through distinctive purple pipes, 
is used for toilet flushing, washing 
clothes and watering gardens. 
Adelaide is also building a desal- 
ination plant that will provide one 
quarter of its needs by 2011. 
Arguments over the water of the 
Murray River, which is shared by 
New South Wales, Victoria and 
South Australia, nearly halted 
Federation, which occurred in 
1901. The States retained con- 
trol over water, and the arguments 
about the use of the water of the 
(eee)

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

EE a 
AUSTRALIS WATER REVOLUTION 
  
   
   
© 
Li
am
 
Jo
n 
    
      
   
 . CURL 
on 2 
ong Jol =n 
Demonstrators outside South Australian 
parliament protesting bad water 
management. 
(eee) 
Murray-Darling Basin continued. 
In 1991 it was clear the rivers 
were stressed when a one thou- 
sand kilometre long, stinking, lu- 
rid blue-green algal bloom infest- 
ed the Darling River. 
In 1994 the Council of Austra- 
lian Governments, comprising 
ministers from the State Govern- 
ments and the Federal Govern- 
ment, agreed on a new water 
policy. The health of the river had 
to be factored into all water de- 
cisions; water subsidies had to 
end and water licences had to 
be separated from land so they 
could be freely traded in a new 
water market. 
Mike Young is Executive Direc- 
tor of the Environment Institute 
at the University of Adelaide. He 
argues that policy made Australia a 
world leader. “I am now spending 
quite a bit of time around the world 
advising people on how to get to a 
system which has the best of the 
Australian bits and pieces in it! 
Central to the Australian system 
are clearly defined, tradeable shares 
in the available water supply. Profes- 
sor Young said this “took us down 
a pathway looking at competition 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3   
   
Bo
r:
 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
a
r
i
o
 
as a way to solve problems and to 
facilitate and expedite change. That 
has been a very powerful driver of 
reform that they haven't had in other 
parts of the world” 
As the value of water has risen, 
farmers have moved from wasteful 
open channels and huge overhead 
sprays to computer-controlled drip 
irrigation. Water has been traded 
from low value-uses like flooding 
paddocks for cattle feed, to high- 
value fruit, grape and vegetable 
growing. 
Australia 
on the cutting edge 
But in 2006, as the severe drought 
gripped the Murray Darling, it was 
clear more changes were needed. 
In 2007 the Federal Government 
offered a radical plan: if the states 
would sign over responsibility for 
the water in the Basin to the Federal 
Government, it would spend $A10 
billion buying back over-allocated 
water licences and upgrading ir- 
rigation infrastructure. It took 15 
months before the states agreed. 
In December 2008, a new era in 
Australian water management be- 
gan with the establishment of the 
Murray-Darling Basin Authority. 
Before, states were powerless 
to do anything about other states 
that breached the limits set for 
water extraction. South Australia, 
for instance, suffered fluctuations 


### 186120: Australia's water revolution

in its water supply because New 
South Wales was taking more than 
its share upstream and limiting the 
amount of water flowing down- 
stream to South Australia. 
The new Authority will have the 
power of enforcement, notably to 
issue injunctions to stop overdraw- 
ing of water. It will need it, because 
irrigation allocations are certain to 
be reduced. 
Mr Freeman said the “new sustain- 
able diversion limits will be based on 
how much water we need to retain 
to preserve key environmental as- 
sets and key ecosystem functions. 
The limits will be based on how much 
water we need scientifically, not how 
much we traditionally extracted’ 
It will be a huge revolution in water 
use, and the world will be watching 
how Australia does it. 
Asa Walhlquist, 
Australian journalist 
Hose for sullage waste water, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 186121: Water in a changing world

WATER 
IN A CHANGING WORLD 
We are not experiencing a global water crisis, says Olcay Unver, 
coordinator of the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP). 
ZIT RVE TT CRAVE | =] Me (T= CCT ETT (oT: | It IT EL Ro ET [s [REA | (oT oT MET Co RUN ENTER Co RT Le He | fo) oF 
ol [To] ER (oT gE Wo] (elo [=1) RG ET RT CEVCH ERG ERITH] Xo] R11 YET 53 
  
© 
DR
 
   
a 
J 
Olcay Unver, coordinator of the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP). 
What’s new since the last 
report, published three years 
ago? Is it possible to outline 
the latest developments? 
What has happened over the last 
three years in terms of the more ma- 
jor problems is that we have recorded 
considerable progress in some ar- 
eas and met frustration in others. 
Safe drinking water, for instance 
— as a result of the ambitious cam- 
paign championed by the UN and 
agreed to by the international com- 
munity, the Millennium Develop- 
ment Goals target seems likely to 
be met. Unfortunately Sub-Saharan 
Africa is a huge regional exception, 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
which will need specific attention. 
Some Arab countries are also hav- 
ing difficulty. 
Sanitation goals on the other 
hand are not very likely to be met 
if current trends continue. We are 
obviously urging the international 
community to provide more re- 
sources for sanitation [...] 
When economies develop and 
buying power increases, people 
tend to consume more water. The 
report gives examples to show that 
actually it is not the water we drink, 
it's the water we eat. The concept 
is called virtual water or water 
footprints — the amount of water 
14 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
 
Olcay Unver talks about the 
latest United Nations World 
Water Development Report, 
a comprehensive assessment 
of the planet's freshwater 
resources, which was launched 
last month in Istanbul (Turkey). 
Excerpts from an interview 
by Cathy Nolan (UNESCO) 
embedded in food or other com- 
modities needed in production. 
This becomes important vis-a-vis 
economic growth, when in emerg- 
ing economies, people start eating 
more meat rather than, say, grains 
or rice, or start eating three instead 
of two meals; it means a lot more 
water to produce the food. Also to 
manufacture the cars they want to 
(oo) 
WATER 
INA 
CHANGING 
WORLD   
Cover of latest United Nations World 
Water Development Report

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 186121: Water in a changing world

WATER IN A CHANGING WORLD 
  
(eee) 
drive and other consumer products 
demanded. On top of this you have 
to add the pollution that comes from 
a lot of these activities. That is another 
driver. lt influences water resources. 
[...] 
Another message of the report is 
that water problems are created 
and potentially solved by decision 
makers that are not the actual wa- 
ter managers. When | talk about 
leaders, | am talking in a broader 
sense, not leaders in the water 
sector. The past two reports and 
the processes have provided a 
good consensus among water re- 
sources professionals and leader- 
ship in the water community. But 
now we need to get out of the wa- 
ter box and get the broader frame- 
work involved in the identification 
and solution of water problems 
and preventing further water crisis. 
The report encourages more 
investment in water? 
The report has a complete section 
on the investment aspect. Obvious- 
ly the current crisis will have impact 
on water. What we are saying is 
that water infrastructure is not to be 
neglected and that investment in 
water infrastructure is to be accele- 
rated. 
We are saying that, in order to deal 
with the current crisis, water infra- 
structure and governance are more 
important than ever. Investing in wa- 
ter provides benefits not only to the 
society but to the economy. 
Does the report make 
recommendations for averting 
a water crisis? 
This is not a prescriptive report. There 
are water crises around the world, 
but hydrology is local, meteorology is 
global. We have now water crises 
around the world but we are not 
talking about a global water crisis. 
We are warning against one if the 
existing crises are not addressed 
properly and if water is not made an 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
©
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
I
s
a
b
e
l
l
e
 
Ar
ro
u 
integral component of broader deci- 
sion making frameworks. An excel- 
lent example is the food sector. You 
may want to increase production, 
but if you don't have the resources 
— imigation water — you have a con- 
straint. You cannot only resolve the 
food crisis - you create pressure on 
water resources that could turn into 
crisis. 
With increasing water scarcity, 
water becomes increasingly 
a political issue. Does the 
report address this aspect? 
It's a fact, when you have abun- 
dant resources, everybody is 
happy. When demand increases 
or the resource decreases, then 
you start seeing competition, then 
you start managing the demand in 
many ways. It can be economic, so- 
cial, legal or a combination. As the 
LA 
situation worsens, you may have to 
reallocate water from some sectors 
to others, and competition can turn 
into conflict. Managing the compe- 
tition is very important so that con- 
flict will not arise. There are plenty of 
examples of the report on how na- 
tions or river basins or municipali- 
ties have dealt with these issues. 
There are statistics and examples 
of conflicts as well. Again, there 
are general recommendations. The 
report avoids sweeping generaliza- 
tions and indicates at the beginning 
that, like water problems, solutions 
depend on circumstances in the 
country or society — resource en- 
dowment, financial resources, cul- 
ture, legal framework. Each country 
should look for their own solutions, 
using what can be learned from 
others who have successfully dealt 
with them. 
  
With the current crisis, “water infrastructures and governance are more important than ever! 
Malagasy woman drawing water from a fountain. 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

  
Saving 
    our 
  
very animal species is valuable 
and has a part to play in main- 
taining the ecological balance 
of its natural habitat, but the 
cause of the gorilla elicits particular 
sympathy because they are so similar 
to us. So much so that their name, 
has its root the Greek word gorilla, 
meaning tribe of hairy women, used 
by the Carthaginian, Hanno the Navi- 
gator, who sailed along the coast of 
West Africa in the 5th century B.C. 
and spotted hirsute creatures, some 
kind of ape if not actual gorillas, on 
his voyage 
In the absence of visual evi- 
dence from Hanno's journey, it is 
impossible to tell whether goril- 
las are indeed the “hairy women" 
he named. Up to date complete 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 


### 186122: Saving our nearest relatives

nearest 
relatives 
Humanity’s closest relative, the gorilla, is in danger. 
Development, poaching and war have been decimating 
one of the only animal species which, like us, 
can use tools. Nevertheless, UNESCO’s gorilla 
preservation projects have begun to bear fruit 
in this International Year of the Gorilla, 2009. 
The main objective of the International Year of the Gorilla 
is to mobilize decision-makers and the public to save 
this great ape species, a species capable of intelligent 
thinking, 95% of whose DNA is identical to ours. 
This is of vital importance as populations have been 
declining in recent decades. 
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
l
a
n
 
R
e
d
m
o
n
d
 
  
data about the gorillas is still 
not always available, but modern 
science divides them into two 
species - Eastern and Western 
gorillas - and four subspecies 
(see box). 
Social organization 
Each subspecies has feeding, 
physiological and life style differ- 
ences. But all gorillas are migra- 
tory and live in groups of five to 
30 individuals dominated by one 
silverback adult male, typically 
12 years of age or older. The 
silverback is the strong, domi- 
nant leader who is the centre of 
attention, makes all decisions, 
mediates conflicts, determines the 
movements of the group, leads 
16 
 
Young mountain gorilla (Rwanda). 
the others to feeding sites and 
takes responsibility for the safety 
and well-being of all. 
Younger males, called black- 
backs, may serve as backup pro- 
tection. Males will slowly begin 
to leave their original troop when 
they are about 11 years old, trav- 
elling alone or with a group of 
other males for 2-5 years before 
they attract females to form a new 
group and start breeding. Goril- 
las are vegetarian but silverbacks 
have been known to kill the young 
child of their predecessor. They 
will then mate with the female 
whose child they killed. 
Gorillas only breed every three 
or four years. Because of their mi- 
gratory lifestyle, they require a lot 
(00°)

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### 186122: Saving our nearest relatives

Saving our nearest 
 
relatives 
  
Four 
Subspecies 
of Gorillas 
Modern science 
divides gorillas into two species 
- Eastern and Western gorillas - 
and four subspecies: 
Western lowland gorillas, 
Cross River gorillas, Mountain gorillas 
and Eastern lowland gorillas. 
The Western Lowland Gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla) 
is estimated to have declined by more than 60% over the 
last two decades due to death from hunting and disease, 
notably Ebola. Population was estimated at 100,000 in 
the 1980s, but populations which had not been count- 
ed before were discovered in remote swamp forests in 
the northern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo 
bringing total estimates up to 150,000 - 200,000 mainly 
in Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, Con- 
go, and Equatorial Guinea. The subspecies is the small- 
est and lightest of the four subspecies. 
The Cross River Gorilla (Gorilla gorilla diehli) is a 
recently recognized subspecies of Western Gorilla liv- 
ing in tropical and subtropical broadleaf forests at el- 
evations of 200 to 2000 metres on the northern Cam- 
eroon-Nigerian border in an area of less than 10,000 
km2. They are found in eleven localities most of them 
connected by continuous forest. The subspecies, total- 
ling a mere 300 individuals, is critically endangered. It is 
particularly shy of humans and only few direct sightings 
have been made. Most information on their ecology and 
behaviour derives from observations of sleeping nests, 
feeding trails and reports by local hunters. The main 
morphological difference between the Cross River 
Gorilla and the Western Lowland Gorilla concerns the 
shape of their heads. 
The high forest Mountain Gorilla (Gorilla beringei 
beringei) is believed to total only 650 to 680 individu- 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
l
a
n
 
R
e
d
m
o
n
d
 
   
% ¢
 
: 
’ 
Young lowland gorilla hitching a ride (Congo). 
als, living in two isolated groups within protected areas 
in the Virunga Massif along the borders of the DRC, 
Rwanda, and Uganda, in the Virunga National Park 
(DRC), the Volcanoes National Park (Rwanda) and the 
Mgahinga Gorilla National Park (Uganda). A separate 
population of Mountain Gorillas is found in the Bwindi 
Impenetrable National Park in southwest Uganda. A 
2003 census of the Virunga Volcanoes Mountain Go- 
rilla population showed a 17% increase since 1989. 
But the subspecies remains critically endangered due 
to habitat loss, poaching, human disease and war. lt is 
very black and densely furred, with a broad face and 
massive jaws. The small of the back of mature males 
turns grey with age, hence the name of ‘silverback’ for 
mature males. 
Eastern Lowland Gorillas (Gorilla beringei grau- 
eri) have been severely affected by instability and war 
in much of its natural habitat since the 1990s. An in- 
crease in hunting of Eastern Lowland gorillas has been 
observed in war-torn eastern DRC, and their habitat is 
under stress due to mining for coltan ore, agriculture 
and charcoal production. Anecdotal evidence sug- 
gests a significant decline over the past 20-30 years. 
In the mid-1990s, population was estimated at 17,000. 
The Eastern Gorilla tends to be larger than the West- 
ern, with longer, blacker hair. 
R. A 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 17 
 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### 186122: Saving our nearest relatives

Saving our nearest 
 
relatives 
(00°) 
of space, which is why UNESCO 
favours the definition of large land- 
scapes for their preservation, ar- 
eas that include a wide buffer zone 
with biosphere reserves where peo- 
ple can find sustainable livelihoods. 
Education projects to help the in- 
habitants understand, respect and 
maximize the benefits of sustainable 
resource management are essential 
for the success of these preserva- 
tion projects. 
All species 
are important 
Mambaele Mankoto of UNESCO's 
Natural Science Sector is heartened 
by the recent increase observed in 
gorilla populations in the Virunga 
National Park, a UNESCO World 
Heritage site. This improvement 
can be attributed to ambitious pro- 
grammes for conservation of biodi- 
versity in regions of armed conflict 
launched by UNESCO in 2000 
with the United Nations Foundation 
and the European Union. The proj- 
ects have focused heavily on help- 
ing forest guards carry out their all- 
important work. “But conflicts are 
still latent and we must not lower 
our guard,’ cautions Mankoto, who 
highlights the need to convince 
donors to provide funds for proj- 
ects that specifically target gorilla 
preservation. 
One way to reduce hunting for 
bushmeat and traditional medicine 
is to convince local populations 
that gorillas are worth more alive 
than dead. Conservation institu- 
tions in the RDC and the Rwandan 
National Parks Office have con- 
cluded an accord whereby gorillas 
that come from RDC to Rwanda 
are visited by tourists there and 
Rwanda pays a share of the profit, 
US$ 30,000 per annum on aver- 
age, back to the RDC. Mankoto 
welcomes this as a fine example of 
transboundary cooperation within 
UNESCO's mandate of peace- 
building with the gorillas as am- 
bassadors. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
l
a
n
 
Re
dm
on
d 
Nevertheless, gorilla tourism must 
be managed with care, as contact 
with humans can have a negative 
impact on these great apes whose 
immune systems are unprepared 
for some of the diseases we carry. 
Humans also continue killing goril- 
las not just for bushmeat but also 
for cultural reasons. While some 
people still believe that placing a 
gorilla bone in a baby’s bathwa- 
ter will fortify the child, the major 
threats facing our closest animal 
cousins remain deforestation, 
road-building, traps laid for other 
animals and mining. 
Mankoto for his part hopes that 
the International Year of the Gorilla - 
launched by the United Nations En- 
vironment Programme's Conven- 
tion on Migratory Species (CMS), 
the UNEP/UNESCO Great Apes 
Survival Partnership (GRASP) and 
  
the World Association of Zoos and 
Aquariums (WAZA) - will serve as 
a plea for this animal which, in cap- 
tivity, has proven it can acquire an 
impressive mastery of human sign 
language. 
In their natural habitat, gorillas 
provide valuable services in forest 
husbandry as they make clearings 
along their migratory path, allowing 
the sun to reach the underbrush, 
and digest seeds of species which 
they disseminate in their faeces. 
Mankoto reminds us of the need to 
resist anthropocentrism: “All spe- 
cies are important; the loss of any 
species represents an impoverish- 
ment of the environment — physical, 
cultural and spiritual” 
Roni Amelan 
(UNESCO) 
Old Titus with a group of mountain gorillas (Congo). 
18

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### 186122: Saving our nearest relatives

Saving our nearest 
 
relatives 
  
 
© 
joy 
o 
£ 
© 
@ 
or 
c 
Ke] = 
eo} 
O 
n 
ii] 
Zz 
j= 
© 
  Martyn Colbech filming gorillas in Rwanda. 
PROTECTING GORILLAS 
BEGINS WITH EDUCATION 
   
Like elephants, gorillas are migratory 
species that need wide areas. 
Conserving such species is not about 
fencing large areas but about teaching 
  
populations to contribute 
to conservation through good 
territorial management policies. 
This requires educating 
the young and UNESCO 
has not waited for the International 
Year of the Gorilla to start this work. 
activities in favour of the gorilla are 
its World Heritage Centre and the 
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) 
Programme. But education projects 
have also contributed to these 
programmes, particularly now, during 
the Decade for Education for 
Sustainable Development. 
UNESCO recently granted US 
$100,000 for GRASP scholarships 
for young researchers who spent 
two years studying issues pertaining 
to great apes. 
The Regional School on Integrated 
Management of Tropical Forests and 
Territories (ERAIFT) [Ecole Regionale 
T: main axes for UNESCO's 
Family of gorillas in Uganda. 
post-universitaire d' Amenagements 
et gestions Intégrés des Forets et 
Territories tropicaux] was created by 
UNESCO ten years ago at Kinshasa 
University with support from the RDC, 
the United Nations Development 
Programme, the European Union 
which has just announced a four 
million-Euro allocation within the 
framework of the 10th European 
Development Fund (2009-2013), 
Belgium, France and several partners 
such as the World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF). The school brings 
together young postgraduates 
specializing in human and 
social sciences with geographers, 
>» fod gn XEARY ‘ RLY 
    yh ] 
J ’ 2a ® oe al oy iy 
GREE CE SLAG SS 
sociologists and economists along 
with agronomists, forest managers, 
biologists, and ecologists. 
They follow an 18-month Masters 
programme which includes six months 
of fieldwork. This allows for 
cross-disciplinary training, favouring 
a multidisciplinary grasp of issues 
which can help open the 
students’ eyes to new approaches. 
Eighty-one masters from 12 African 
countries have been trained to date 
along with three PhDs. 
A further 60 people will hopefully 
be trained by 2013. 
R.A. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 number 3 19 
 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

  
Monuments of Nubia, 
past and future 
In 1959, the governments of Egypt 
and Sudan asked UNESCO for 
assistance in safeguarding monu- 
ments that the construction of the 
Aswan High Dam threatened to sub- 
merge. This inspired a major cam- 
paign by UNESCO to safeguard 
cultural heritage. The success of the 
Campaign inspired the development 
and adoption in 1972 of UNES- 
CO's World Heritage Conven- 
tion and the inscription of sites on 
UNESCO's World Heritage List on 
which the Nubian Monuments from 
Abu Simbel to Philae were inscribed 
in 1979. To mark the 50th anniver- 
sary of the appeal to save the monu- 
ments of Nubia, UNESCO's office 
in Cairo organized a conference in 
cooperation with the Egyptian and 
Sudanese ministries of culture. 
= 
© 
N 
c 
2 
S 
< < 
oO 
Oo 
0 
pri 
=z 
= 
© 
  
~E - J ol hd . 5 a 4 
Safeguarding Nubian monuments: detached head of Great Temple colossus in storage. 
 
Confronting Climate Change in the Arctic 
The rapidly changing climate in the Arctic is putting pressure on hundreds of thousands of indigenous 
people in the circumpolar North. 
In March 2009, UNESCO organized a conference in Monaco to address the concerns of the Arctic 
community and identify strategies for the sustainable development of the region. 
Education for Sustainable Development 
The UNESCO World Conference on Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) will be held from 31 March 
to 2 April in Bonn (Germany). The event brings together some 700 experts and stakeholders. Graga Machel, 
international advocate for women's and children’s rights and former Minister of Education and Culture 
in Mozambique, will present a keynote speech. 
The conference will underline the relevance of ESD to all of education; promote international exchange on ESD, 
especially between North and South; assess results of the United Nations ESD Decade (2005-2014); and 
develop strategies for the future. 
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°3 20

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

  
NN 
        
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour |'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
Opranu3auums 
O6beanHeHHbIX Hauwin no 
BONpocaM 0bpa3oBaHus, 
HayKU WU KYNbTypbl 
LiLasly alally Ly 
EEA. 
BH BOUL A   
  
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization. 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
http://www.unesco.org/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
Director 
Saturnino Muioz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Jasmina Sopova - j.sopova@unesco.org 
Editorial assistance 
Katerina Markelova - k.markelova@unesco.org 
EDITORS 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour - b.mansour@unesco.org 
assisted by Zaina Dufour - z.dufour@unesco.org 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape - w.cauhape@unesco.org 
English 
Cathy Nolan - c.nolan@unesco.org 
Portuguese 
Ana Lucia Guimaraes et Nelson Souza Aguiar 
a.guimaraes@unesco.org 
Russian 
Victoria Kalinin - v.kalinin@unesco.org 
Spanish 
Francisco Vicente-Sandoval - Liglesias@unesco.org 
Photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
and Ariane Bailey 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web Platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
s.roberts@unesco.org 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be 
reproduced and/or translated providing the credit line 
reads “Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” 
and includes date and hyperlink. Photos without 
UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations 
of the countries and territories concerned. 
 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/185900eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
     
     
Sc hoo! For 
[HE FUTURE    
R T 
A SYNONYM 
FOR CULTURE 
of    