# [074825](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf) 6

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
 
—- 
2 
     
i 
   
Pr 
 
. ! 
3 : B=. x } " 
& LY nd : 
iB ‘ - 
: 
OF : 
y E . 
Fil 
: . 
g” & 
i rg 
Li 
& ii 
3 
: : . : 
= 4 
l = 
v a 
| 
- = 
| = a —————————— 
y 
3 June 1976 (29h yeuy 280 Fron frames 
 
~ overhead

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

| or (€ToTe fo [T1000] ETATETS £5 
Discovered in Turkmenistan (U.S.S. R) i n 1974, this unusual statuette (40 cms high) represents a 
goddess of fertility. It dates back to the time, some 4,000 years ago, when a flourishing civiliza- 
LGU UCI CL EL GTR GENCE CIO REL GER GER OE EET TER CR CRETE ICT [ER BR TLE TE LT 
desert, a region spanning Turkmenistan’'s present-day border with Iran. The fertility goddess was 
Mighty revered in this farming civilization, LOE TH ERG TON GF To SE GR GRE GIT EL TTT = Ko 
al 
Photo B. Ushmaikin © APN, Moscow 
TREASURES 
i 
WORLD ART 
» 111 
U.S.S.R. 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

"mCourier 
JUNE 1976 a 29TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 15 LANGUAGES 
“ English Arabic 
French Japanese 
. Spanish Italian 
"Russian © Hindi 
German Tamil 
Hebrew 
Persian 
Dutch 
Portuguese 
Turkish 
 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
" The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
- Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Annual subscription rate 28 French francs 
. Binder for a year's issues : 24 French francs 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly (11 issues a 
year). For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit line reads * ‘Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER.” plus date of issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles reprinted must 
bear author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied 
on request, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon covering pos- 
tage. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and 
do not necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO or those 
of the editors of the UNESCO COURIER. Photo captlons 
and headlines are written by the Unesco Courier staff. 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- 
film and/or microfiche) by: (1) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A, ;: (2) N.C.R 
*Microcard Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 ‘West oth 
Street, New York, U.S.A.; (3) Bell and Howell Co., 
Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the Readers’ 
Guide to Periodical Literature, published by H. W. 
. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Contents - 
Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
- Assistant Editors-in-Chief 
René Caloz 
Olga Rodel 
Managing Editors : 
English Edition: Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition: Francisco Fernandez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian Edition: Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Arabic Edition: Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition: Kazuo Akao (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition: Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Hindi Edition: N. K. Sundaram (Delhi) 
Tamil Edition: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian Edition: Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch Edition: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese Edition: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition: Mefra Telci (Istanbul) 
Assistant Editors: 
English Edition: Roy Malkin 
French Edition: Philippe Ouannés 
Spanish Edition: Jorge Enrique Adoum 
I'lustrations: Anne-Marie Maillard t 
. Research: Christiane Boucher 
. Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin 
All correspondence should be addressed to the 
~ Editor in- Chief in Paris. 
IS
SN
 
00
41
-5
27
8 
N®
 
6 
- 
19
76
 
MC
 
76
-3
-3
22
 
_ the human’ habitat and 
_ United Nations Confe- 
‘rence on Human Settle-   
Page- 
4 HABITAT AND THE QUALITY OF LIFE 
By Georges Fradier 
10 A THIRD OF THE WORLD IN SHANTYTOWNS 
By Samuel Chamecki 
12 A NEW UNIVERSE OF SQUATTER-BUILDERS 
By John F.C. Turner 
15 THE ARCHITECT: A MODERN SCAPEGOAT 
Reflections of a Soviet architect 
on the merits of old and new styles 
By Felix A. Novikov 
18 DRIVE-IN CARDEN PARTY 
Photos 
20 OUT IN THE COLD 
“In many Third World countries only the better off 
can afford “low cost” housing intended for the needy 
By Joseph Bain D'Souza 
21 HOUSING 
A LA CARTE 
‘By Yona Friedman 
 
24 THE UPROOTED 
An old couple moves from their cottage to 
a big housing complex 
27 A MAN'S SELF-BUILT HOME IS HIS CASTLE 
Photo report 
29 HONG KONG 
THE MOST URBAN PLACE ON EARTH 
By Dan Behrman 
34 UNESCO NEWSROOM 
2 TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
U.S.S.R.: Goddess of harvests 
Covers 
This issue ot the "Unesco 
Courier” is devoted to 
a crucial world problem: . 
quality of life. A global 
inquiry into this problem 
is being made. by the   Ph
ot
o 
G
e
o
r
g
 
Ge
rs
te
r 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 
Fr
om
 
th
e 
ca
ta
lo
gu
e 
of
 
an
 
ex
hi
bi
ti
on
, 
Fr
om
 
La
 
Te
rr
e 
de
 
h
o
m
m
e
,
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
H
u
n
d
e
r
t
w
a
s
s
e
r
,
 
Vi
en
na
. 
. 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
M
o
d
e
r
n
 
Ar
t,
 
Pa
ri
s,
 
1
9
7
5
 
pu
bl
is
he
d 
by
 
At
la
nt
is
, 
Zi
ir
ic
h 
ments, meeting in Van- v - 
couver (Canada) from 31 May to 11 June 1976. Our front cover reproduces 
a painting by the Austrian artist Hundertwasser, representing a garden- 
. dwelling. Its suggestion of harmony and well-being is recalled in another 
context by our back cover photo of the garden village of Brondby, near - 
Copenhagen (Denmark). Opened in 1964, it was created by the Danish 
architect and landscape designer Erik Mygind.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

and S 
b 
Carth 
S, 
safeguard and development of the 
pecia 
 
 
ecoming 
ocio- 
» ‘3
 
a 
of Unesco’s 
(1976) all pub 
(1959). and "About the Quality of Life” 
Unesco’s Div. 
and West, towards mutual understanding ?” 
isio 
Cultural 
staff 
age region 
missions to Mali 
of the Press Divisio 
Ei 
sin 
GEORGES FRADIER is Acting Director of 
n of Human Settlements 
nvir 
the author of “Encounters and Celebrations 
on the mutual apprecia t 
frequent contributor to the 
by Georges Fradier   
Western cultural values (1963), 
carried out by the T. 
pr, = ES 
director of the project for the 
T 
unisian 
unis- 
fished by Unesco. He has been a 
“Unesco Courier 
Government and Unesco with financial aid 
from the U.N. Development Programme 
! Fund. Novelist and essayist, he is 
onment. A member 
ce 1949, he was head 
n and chief of Unesco 
and Sierra Leone before 
jon of Eastern and 
r 
“East 
ar 
. 
a pi 
a musici 
-ways carries wi 
with his ambitions. 
ballerina of a spotlight 
teacher visualizes a school in k 
lot dreams of a clear sky and a 
th 
  
‘ 


### 49541: Habitat and the quality of life

OF LIFE 
AND THE QUALITY 
e aspiring 
ESIRES create their ownspace 
The quest for happiness almost al- 
cape, village, house, garden or city. 
Rare are the human beings who can 
find an environment which reflects this 
an sees a concert hall 
eeping 
th it an ideal lands- 
 
 
Photo © Terje Gustavsen, 
pri 
villas. 
their country houses and seaside 
Norway. 
apartments in the best parts of town, 
vileged 
power or both are quite happy to be 
able to live i 
ideal, and still rarer are those who are 
- TE a. 
it. 
A 
But as nothing in this world i 
International Photo Competition, U.N.-FIAP 
Those who have either money or 
they enjoy their spacious 
fect, the best parts of town are some- 
times too close to other less desirable 
s per- 
3 : 8 
 
 
    
    
    
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
W
a
 
N
N
N
 
A
N
N
N
s
N
 
ie
 
H
i
 
A 
F
e
 oo] 
|]
 : H
H
 
11.
 1»
 
 
 
I
L
 
3!
 
ad
 
Pp
 
1 
[9 
eb 
5 
-am 
r 
fa
g 
y : 
<1
 
i 
 
 
{i » 
a
l
 
3 
T
H
N
 
RY 
{i
 
    
    
   
; 
H
y
)
 
y
n
 
G
E
N
 
E
I
 
i
i
 
[k
h 
W
i
k
a
 
{H
R 
HRI
 
A 
\ 
q 
8 
" 
Ee a al a 
WA EN TY 
t 
4 
i
d
 
    
  
  
  
   
; i 
1}
 
. 
-e 
  
  
 } 
  
  
  
i 
1
0
 
P
T
H
.
 
Si
nt
in
' YB 
j 
"
3
 
ij. 
1:1) 
LA
NE
 
dH
 
AE 
! 
HL
TH
 
RL 
¥ 
il
 
L
E
H
 
A
R
R
 
N
N
R
 
(h
d

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 49541: Habitat and the quality of life

   
  
  
  
   
Photo Unesco Couner 
+o 
Nd 
   
  
» 
  
»-_- l LOE SYESIXX 
Fa PC; a ER UR ~~ 
Sh 1 | 
    
Above, colourful townscape in Sanaa, capital of the Arab Republic of Yemen. This ancient city has 
many striking examples of traditional Yemeni architecture: tall flat-roofed houses with 
multi-coloured stained-glass windows on the upper storeys and fagades decorated in white, brown 
and green. Opposite page: dwarfed by a blank wall, a youngster strolls amid the “machines for 
living” in a modern city. 
ones and are beset by drawbacks ; 
mechanized agriculture and develop- 
ment spoil the beauty of the fields; 
beaches may be polluted by oil or the 
hotel trade. The struggle to preserve 
values is a hard one, and it is becom- 
ing increasingly difficult to reign 
over one’s environment while recalling 
the famous lines from Baudelaire’s 
L’Invitation au Voyage: 
La, tout n'est qu'ordre et beauté, 
luxe, calme et volupté (1). 
Yet this is precisely what the quality 
of the environment ought to mean. 
Most people are not so demanding, 
even if they consider, not unreason- 
ably, that they too deserve their share 
- of ordre and beauté. They are housed, 
whether well or badly, they have a 
job and play their part in production 
and society. On the subject of their 
a There, all Is order and beauty, 
undance, peace and pleasure. 
place of work, their small towns, fac- 
tories, suburbs, shops, offices, their 
“machines for living”, that is, their 
residences, they are far from reticent. 
All of these, they complain, mean . 
inequality and exploitation, almost in- 
variably segregation and sometimes 
alienation, with men and women work- - 
ing solely in order to live and living in 
a place only because they work there. 
They are dependent on the tyranny of 
industry, exposed to various kinds of 
pollution, fragmented like the times 
they live in. 
Now some are beginning to ques- 
tion the political and economic struc- 
tures of the system which is respon- 
sible for the lives they are forced to 
lead, but more often they simply ac- 
cept them without imagining that there 
could be an alternative. Some people 
are used to living where they were 
born; others, who form the majority, 
are resigned to living where they can; 
AAI A RRA A 
4 $aL 
- 
> . 
me 
       
few believe there is any choice. It - 
seems that for centuries most human 
beings have ceased to choose their 
environment. 
Even so, those who work, drive, eat 
and sleep in an environment which 
- may be dilapidated or pleasant, dull 
or dangerous, but is nonetheless a 
recognized, legal and permanent dwel- 
ling-place, are the fortunate ones; 
for there are people who do not have 
regular work or “decent” housing or 
indeed any sort of job or shelter at all. 
~ These are the people who are pitied 
for being undernourished, inadequat- 
ely clothed and poorly educated, and 
accused of having too many children. 
They are described as living on the 
margin of world .economy and pro- 
gress—enormous margins growing 
ever wider on the supposedly proud 
pages of history. 
The population of rural and urban 
slums, together with that of areas of 
b 
4

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 49541: Habitat and the quality of life

Planned urban 
development with 
functional and 
geometrical high-rise 
blocks (right) is today 
replacing the kind of 
. chaotic city growth that 
produced decrepit slums 
(opposite page). But in 
which of these two homes 
do people feel happier 
and less oppressed by 
solitude? 
Hf 
+ 
F
r
 
F
w
 
me
 
a 
1 
g
p
 
    
spontaneous settlement known var- 
iously as bidonvilles, gourbivilles, fav- 
ellas, squatters’ encampments, bus- 
tees or barriadas, probably numbers 
two thousand million today. At least 
one-third and in many cases a half of 
“the inhabitants of the great cities of 
“Asia, Latin America and Africa live in 
huts without light, situated in shameful 
fringe areas without water or sanita- 
tion, and places of almost comparable 
squalor can be found in North Americ 
and Europe. . 
When we talk about improving hu- 
man settlements like this, we see that 
their occupants are seeking to pro- 
tect themselves from cold, heat, hun- 
ger, disease and dirt; in short they are 
struggling to exist. What they want is 
an environment which will not harm 
either their. lives or their dignity; and 
the latter consideration is sometimes 
more important to these people than 
to the relatively privileged. It explains 
to a certain extent why people migrate 
to cities. 
To sum up, the occupants of human 
settlements can be divided into three 
main categories: those who can select + “they”. 
! ’ Tien Ba = GI 
  
   
 
      
  
    
  F
E
E
 
E
E
R
 
A
 
-                     
  
          
’ J . y will, BC 
Photo © Arn. Aartsen, Netherlands. International Photo Competition, U.N.-FIAP 
the best possible environment; those 
who are housed without having much 
choice; and those who inhabit fringe 
areas. lt is true that all human beings 
have the same fundamental needs; but 
it is only true in theory. If these three 
categories have any practical prob- 
lems in common, they are those of 
freedom, the right to speak, and the 
right to act. 
. Members of the ruling classes auto- 
matically possess these rights. The 
essential thing is to belong, either 
directly or at second-hand, and money 
is less important than friendship with 
- those who count. But even if people 
from the same milieu have no commu- 
“nication difficulties, this still does not 
solve all problems. For instance there 
- is hardly a city in the world capable 
of controlling its own growth: when 
centres decay and suburbs sprawl, all 
the inhabitants suffer together. 
For the majority, communication with 
the authorities is difficult, and indeed 
until recently people did not even 
know how to single them out, and 
merely indicated them collectively as 
“They” built expressways, 
» 
_—
 
: 
hs
 
: 
a
 
  
    
                
created or transposed industries, re- 
grouped and redistributed land; by a 
stroke of then pen “they” increased 
land prices tenfold, demolished sound 
houses and erected high-rise office 
blocks: and all thes were so many 
events to be endured, for both town 
and country were governed by fate. 
Today however, fate, that far-off 
galaxy in charge of planning and 
development, is emerging from its 
anonymity. The promotors,. econo- 
mists, civil servants, engineers and 
towr: planners are acquiring an iden- 
tity and thus losing some of the magic 
powers which admittedly not all of 
them were so anxious to possess in 
the first place. Now they are coming 
forward as technicians of goodwill. 
They are by no means infallibie, this 
they concede, and do so more fre- 
quently now that their decisions are 
being challenged; for they are begin- 
ning to see the public manifesting. its 
rebellion on all sides. Those concern- 
ed are demanc’ng to be informed of 
urban planning and development pro- 
jects, so that they can have a chance 
to discuss, modify or reject them.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 49541: Habitat and the quality of life

—— 
This movement is almost universal, 
and is seen particularly in efforts to 
prevent destruction, protect areas 
threatened by pollution, whether 
visual, chemical, nuclear or military, 
and to preserve ancient parts of towns 
and with them ways of life. 
Some observers deplore the move- 
ment as representing a negative atti- 
tude aimed only at obstructing dev- 
elopment or delaying worthwhile pro- 
jects and making them too expensive. 
In fact the desire to protect country- 
sides, rivers or human settlements is 
never negative; it is proof of a definite 
choice. 
The rejection of so-called renewal 
schemes which kill urban life and 
drive out local inhabitants is not nega- 
tive: it represents a perfectly lucid 
judgment on the kind of town planning 
which has, unfortunately, been leaving 
its traces’ all over our planet for the 
© last thirty years. 
Yet it is just those citizens who only 
become militant in a crisis situation | 
who would much prefer participation 
to confrontation. Instead of opposing 
projects which have been made known 
  
He 
; - on -—. 
Photo © Gerhard Neisins, Germany (Fed. Rep.) - International Photo Compeution, U.N.-FIAP 
to them at the last minute, they would 
be quite happy to take part in discus- 
sions of plans which concern them, if 
they could first have the chance of 
approving the objectives and knowing 
the facts. 
Those in charge of development and 
administration have everything to gain 
by obtaining co-operation from local 
inhabitants rather than imposing ready-. 
+ made solutions on them supposedly 
for their own good. This fact has been 
appreciated by many town planners 
and architects, and it is they who are 
today seeking. out the most efficient 
channels for participation. 
They have also realized that this 
new form of democracy, perhaps the 
only one capable of revitalizing poli- 
tical life in more than one country, 
requires first and foremost a complete 
knowledge of the facts; and that it is 
their job to make these facts known to 
the people concerned. 
Everyone knows that nowadays to 
possess information is to possess 
power. But power is empty unless 
there is the will to exercise it, and 
when it comes to guiding or control- 
ling the course of human settlements, 
there is a need for civic awareness, 
“energy and tenacity to which we 
ordinary peace-loving citizens of the 
seventies are not accustomed. 
The sub-privileged, sub-rural and 
sub-proletarian in their sub-urbaniza- 
tion are also beset with problems, 
albeit different ones, of freedom and 
participation. When peasants who 
own no land make their way towards 
- the cities, escaping from isolation, 
they are exercising a choice: they are 
leaving one kind of poverty for another 
which may be more squalid but is not 
quite as hopeless. 
To them the clty represents an infi- 
nity of opportunities, a horizon of 
liberty. There is no need to ask them 
to take part in reconstructing the envi- 
ronment; they will dig, shape, build 
and try to renovate come what may; 
that is what they have come for. As 
for a dialogue with officialdom, they 
would be quite willing, but too often 
the’ dialogue turns sour and official 
dom listens to them with deaf and 
authoritarian ears. Sometimes archi- 
tects work with them, acting as thei: ) 
1 
I — —-—

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 49541: Habitat and the quality of life

  
    
  
  
BE Fr als 1 | LAL TE J lrg 
| 
ig 
= aa 
= vr — 
~ T — 
4 Cie wl 4 . 3 J . a 3 & 
hy - En rm ~v¥} | V, » », NS 
mei NARRE B, 
4 g: a | 
    
  
: \ i sae . 
: A] hs “ . : f SR > | | F % 
- rel 3 - k J. Ye salt & ARE wie ol JeTY PH 
   
    
~ i — , 
Sami EL RR a Cho RET Sg 53 en. “sf, 
“Li wr SA o¥ : 1 or . $e Be © 
we ——— : 
ox 8 FE Rr HE 
  LE we 
EW nse Sri be : 
  A 32 ne a 
      
 
- ———   tr        ry Tn — # pay if 
a, ow £5 VA | re 
r 
ar ae 
   i = —_— 
Gh 4 i Be , (A dia, 
~~ 7 MRT A : ’ gti i 
  
 
HOG HEAVEN AND LOVERS PARADISE. These farmland vistas with pigs grazing 
- and gambolling across the fields (above) painted on the walls of a pork processing 
plant in California, are eye-catching and amusing. Begun in 1957 when the 
factory commissioned an artist, Les Grimes, to decorate its exterior walls they: 
] interpreters or advocates; and they are also the work of another painter, Arno Jordan. Today known as 
understand. Hog Heaven: Farmland Vista'’, they foreshadowed the current U.S. trend in 
It is the authorities, finally, who are 
now being invited to play their part in 
the efforts being made by society's 
fringe-dwellers. The invitation is being 
issued with growing urgency, whether 
in the name of justice, solidarity, or 
even quite simply of realistic com- 
mon sense, as is being done by the 
Secretary-General of the United 
Nations Conference on Human Settle- 
ments, Enrique Pefalosa. It does no 
good to say that government must 
provide housing if in fact government 
cannot provide... 
“The houses of the poor will be 
built by the poor, as they always have 
been. The great majority of all dwel- 
lings in the world today were built by 
the people who lived in them. Beyond 
the provision of land, the role of 
government in the actual construction 
in poor countries will be catalytic...” 
(Speech at the American University, 
Washington D.C., 10 November 1975). 
These principles, still considered In 
some quarters as revolutionary, were 
debated at Habitat, the United Nations : 
conference on Human: Settlements a | 
8 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 49541: Habitat and the quality of life

  
        
   
  
wid tf ! i os A , 
oy hokid 4 3 fr 8 we) Lr dd tia wf 
Sd Su ire 
. outdoor wall decoration which began in California about 1967 when young 
artists sought a new outlet for their talents. As one artist has put it: “We 
wanted to take paintings off collectors” walls, out of the museum and the studio 
and into the streets where everyone can see them.” Below, “Lovers Paradise’ 
a Philippines entry in an international photo competition held in connexion with 
the United Nations “Habitat” conference (see also box page 32). 
 
ht - 
Photo © Ang Kim-Shing, Philippines. International Photo Competition, U.N.-FIAP 
  
  
rn — I ——— . . 
Photo from “"Currnt Art Magazine”, June-July 1975 © 1975 KORE Enterprises In¢., Los Angeles, U.S.A 
which brought together over 3,000 
delegates from 140 governments in 
Vancouver (Canada) from 31 May to 
11 June 1976. 
In other words governments are 
being asked to gain control over the 
land in order to entrust it to those who’ 
need it, and to ensure essential ser- 
vices such as transport and sanitation. 
Apart from this, let them collaborate 
with those who are doing the building. 
These then are the objectives of 
free participation in the development 
of human settlements: on one hand to 
give a rudimentary habitat the status 
it deserves (“Sub-standard is still bet- 
ter than sub-human” as Pefialosa has 
also said) and on the other to create 
the social conditions necessary for an 
acceptable environment. 
At all events, however, men and 
women will enjoy a more harmonious 
and dignified relationship with their 
environment when they realize that 
they bear the responsibility for it. 
HW Georges Fradier 
 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 49543: A Third of the world in shantytowns

A THIRD 
OF THE WORLD 
SHANTYTOWNS 
by Samuel Chamecki 
A: incredible as it may seem, 
more than half the population 
of the globe will be city dwellers by 
the year 2000. According to a study 
just published by the United Nations 
entitled “World Housing Survey”, 51 
per cent of the world’s population will 
be living in urban areas within the next 
two decades as opposed to 49 per 
cent living in rural areas. 
Today, 39 per cent of the world’s 
population live in towns and cities 
while in 1920 only 19 per cent lived in 
urban areas as compared to 81 per 
cent in rural zones., 
More than’ one billion people, or 
nearly one third of the world popula- 
tion, now live in substandard housing 
conditions, and this situation is likely 
to worsen in the years to come. The 
problem has become increasingly 
acute in cities in the developing 
world, particularly capital cities, 
where slums and squatter settlements 
account for one third to half of the 
population. ) 
Overcrowding and lack of basic 
sanitary facilities are the two most 
striking features. of poor housing. 
These dwellings lack a water supply 
or a public service for waste collec- 
tion. Already we find three and more 
  
SAMUEL CHAMECKI of Brazil is chief 
of the Section of Research in the Engineering 
Sciences inUnesco’s Division of Technologic- 
al Research and Higher Education. A member 
of Unesco’s headquarters staff since 1964, 
he was a Unesco expert on structural and 
foundation- engineering at the Middle East 
Technical University (Turkey) in 1963-64. 
A former professor of Structural and Foun- 
dation Engineering at the University of 
Parand (Brazil) he has published more than 
30 books and research papers on housing 
problems, engineering education and struc- 
tural and foundation engineering. 
10 
persons to a room in many countries. 
In 1920 large cities were still a rari- 
ty; in developing regions, only 20 
per ,cent of the urban population 
was concentrated in cities of half a 
million or more inhabitants, and in the 
more developed regions the corres- 
ponding percentage was then 47. 
“In 1950, in the more developed re- 
gions, -over 50 ‘“million-population- 
cities” accounted for about 130 mil- 
lion people and, in the less developed 
regions, about 25 cities comprised 
some 50 million inhabitants. In 1985 
there will be 126 “million population 
cities” with some 340 million inhabi- 
tants in the more developed regions, 
and in the less developed regions 
147 “million-population-cities” with 
465 million people. 
During the present decade, for the 
first time, the “million-population- 
cities” located in developing coun- 
tries will outnumber those of develop- 
ing countries. 
Migration from rural to urban areas 
accounts for most of the growth of 
cities, being responsible in many cities 
for more than 90 per cent of the total 
population increase. 
Slums and squatter settlements 
bear the brunt of the accelerating 
rural-urban migration and city growth. 
In most cities of the developing world, 
slums and squatter settlements 
account for one third to a half of the 
population. 
Africa has 44 cities with populations 
ranging between 100,000 and 500,000 . 
inhabitants. Studies of 15 of these 
cities show that they have a consis- 
. tently high percentage of slums and 
squatter settiements. In only two of 
the cities does the percentage of slums 
and squatter areas fall below 48 per 
cent and in one case it is actually 
seen to be as high as 90 per cent. 
Precise data is available for only 6 
of the 15 cities in Latin America with 
more than one million inhabitants. Of 
these, 3 each have more than one 
million slum and squatter dwellers. 
In Asia, 7 cities with a population sur- 
passing one million each have squat- 
ter populations exceeding one million 
inhabitants. Three of these cities are 
found in India where 70 per cent of 
all families live in one room or less. 
Until recently most governments 
considered the urban squatter com- 
munities as temporary in nature, a 
phenomenon that could be easily 
weeded out some day along the cities’ 
road to progress. But despite the 
efforts made by governments to get 
rid of this problem, squatter settle- 
ments have proved to be surprisingly 
persistent, continually increasing in 
i 
3 
= 
oO. 
oc 
£ 
fol 
a 
oc 
© 
Be 
2 
© 
[&] 
o 
[= 
[+] @ 
Q 
2 
Q rs] 
a. 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 49543: A Third of the world in shantytowns

size and number. The question is: 
will the squatter settlements of our 
cities be assimilated through the nor- 
mal “urban metabolism” or have they 
reached such a magnitude that they 
are an “urban cancerous process”? 
In fact slums and squatter settle- 
ments form only part of the desperate 
world housing situation. Deteriorating 
dwellings which are overcrowded and 
lacking in basic amenities produce 
squalld living conditions for another 
large portion of the world's popula- 
tion. Nor are these slums restricted to 
developing countries; they are tradi- 
tional living quarters for the urban 
poor in many industrialized nations 
as well. 
Over 730 million dwelling units need 
to be constructed by the end of the 
century in Africa, Asia and Latin Am- 
erica as compared .to the 200 million 
dwelling units required in North Am- 
erica, Europe, the Soviet Union and 
Oceania. 
Many countries are building only - 
two or four dwelling units per one 
thousand population per year, 
whereas about eight to ten units per 
one thousand population per year are 
required to meet total housing needs. 
This target, according to available 
information for the year 1970, is. attain- 
ed in most developed countries such 
as France with 9.3 units, Denmark, 
Finland and Switzerland 10.4 units, 
Japan 14.3, Czechoslovakia, Romania, 
Federal Republic of Germany 8.0, 
Spain 9.0, Sweden 13.6, Australia 11.3, 
and the Soviet Union 9.4. 
However, enormous gaps between 
the mass housing needs and supply 
are to be found in most of the dev- 
eloping countries, a few examples on 
the poorer side being in Africa: Alge- 
ria 1.0 housing units, Egypt 1.5, Tuni- 
sia 1.5. In Latin America: Columbia 
1.2, Dominican Republic 0.6, Trinidad 
and Tobago 2.0. In Asia: lrag 1.8, 
Ceylon 0.8, Yemen 0.1. 
As we have seen, one-third of the 
world’s population is currently home- 
less or living in sub-standard housing. 
It has been estimated that with the 
present demographic growth, and 
doubling of the population every 30 
years, the total number of people liv- 
ing today is greater than all the peo- 
ple who have lived and died in our 
entire past. Consequently, humanity 
has to build, in less than 25 years, 
more dwelling units than mankind has 
produced until now, the developing 
countries bearing nearly 80 per cent: 
of this immeasurable burden. 
' HW Samuel Chamecki 
Below, two examples of communities living "in the round”. Left, a farming village on 
the high plateaux of Ethiopia. Right, a modern town in Arizona (U.S.A.) where homes 
and districts are directly linked to a big central square, the heart of the community." 
The symbolism of the circle, which signifies harmony, is universal. 
  Ph
ot
o 
Ge
or
g 
Ge
rs
te
r 
® 
Ra
ph
o.
 
Pa
ri
s 
Fr
om
 
“L
a 
Te
rr
e 
de
 
’
H
o
m
m
e
"
 
by
 
Ge
or
g 
Ge
rs
te
r,
 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
At
la
nt
is
, 
Zi
ri
ch
.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

Photo © Paul Coulaud 


### 49546: A New universe of squatter-builders: millions of homeless people are creating a new movement of self-built homes

A NEW UNIVERSE 
OF 
SQUATTER-BUILDERS 
“millions of homeless people are creating 
.a new movement of self-built homes 
by John F.C. Turner 
- 
JOHN F.C. TURNER is an international authority on the promotion and design of 
community action and self-help housing programmes in villages and urban squatter 
settlements. A British architect, he worked in this field for Peruvian government housing 
agencies (1957-1965) and has been a consultant on housing and urban settlement 
. problems for national and international agencies in Latin America, India, East Africa 
and the Middle East, Since 1973 he has been teaching at the Architectural Association 
Graduate School and the Development Planning Unit of the University College of 
London. A fuller version of the article published here was presented as a lecture to 
the Egyptian Society of Engineers in Cairo in May 1975. It summarizes the author's 
argument in his’ book Housing by People, published by Marion Boyars, London, 1976. 
12 
   Pusu housing projects are 
now being seriously question- 
ed in many countries and in all world 
contexts. New directions are emerging 
that promise far better physical, eco- 
nomic, and social results for rich and 
poor countries alike. Let us examine 
some of the problems posed by such 
housing projects and the alternatives 
that progressive governments and in- 
ternational agencies are now moving 
towards. 
The new government policies are 
policies that support the housing ac- 
tions of ordinary people and local 
enterprise, instead of government poli- 
cies that act to suppress local initia- 
tive and substitute it with massive 
public housing projects. 
One example of such support is 
found in the squatter settlements of 
Caracas, Venezuela. 
Most squatter settlements or, as |’ 
prefer to call them, uncontrolled ur- 
ban settlements, are really lower and 
moderate income suburbs. Typically, 
they start as collections of huts on 
land without any services. But, in time, 
the occupants build permanent single- 
family dwellings, often to quite high 
standards. Sooner or later these im-

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 49546: A New universe of squatter-builders: millions of homeless people are creating a new movement of self-built homes

proved or improving areas obtain the 
normal services and facilities. 
_ Settlers of permanently established 
and progressively developing suburbs 
are not the poorest citizens. Typically, 
they are established and regularly em- 
ployed working class people who have 
lived in the inner city before settling 
on the periphery, even if they were 
born in the provinces and came to the 
city as young migrants. 
The often overwhelming prolifera- 
tion of these uncontrolled settlements 
is a direct consequence of the failure 
of the private commercial and the 
public sectors to provide the kind of 
housing services the majority want 
and can afford or even the land and 
services with which they could build 
for themselves. 
Naturally, and inevitably when cities 
are doubling their populations every 
ten years or so, there soon comes a 
time when people suddenly burst out 
of the city’s overstrained seams, and 
flood uncontrollably over any land 
they can take. No government that | 
know of has ever succeeded in con- 
taining this. 
In most rapidly urbanizing countries 
with low incomes and small per capita 
r - 
“P
ho
to
 
@ 
J
o
h
n
 
F.
C.
 
Tu
rn
er
, 
U.
K.
 
& 
budgets, the settlements established’ 
and developed by ordinary people are 
growing at twice the rate of the city as 
a whole. And the cities are growing 
at twice the rate of the population as 
a whole. : - 
This means that if the rapidly urba- 
nizing nations are growing at between 
21/2 and 3 1/2 per cent, as almost all 
are, then the cities are growing at 
between 5 and 7 per cent; and the . 
uncontrolled settlements are common- 
ly growing at between 10 and 14 per 
cent each year. Some | know of are . 
growing much faster than that. 
Obviously this creates major prob- 
lems for the city and the nation. 
Equally obvious is the fact that no 
government can hope to rehouse 
such vast numbers in subsidized hous- 
ing projects. But, before going on to 
discuss the alternative that is both 
practical and far more desirable, | will 
briefly describe the process of urban 
settlement and progressive housing 
development as | observed it in the 
‘cities of Peru during the late 1950s 
. and early 1960s. 
A typical example is San Martin de 
Porres, a very large settlement in Li- 
ma. In fact, this huge area was settled 
with the unofficial support of the then 
A spectacular tidal wave of squatter 
settlements (ranchos) seems to have burst over 
the hillsides around Caracas in Venezuela 
(opposite page). More than a billion people 
in the world today live in substandard homes 
and this situation is likely to worsen. Squatter 
dwellings, generally built by the squatters 
themselves, at least provide shelter but often 
in appalling conditions. But with time and 
encouragement squatters in many parts of 
the world have upgraded their temporary 
shanties into solidly built permanent dwellings 
such as those shown in photo at left. 
President of Peru, General Manuel 
Odria. Rank and file and junior and 
non-commissioned officers of the 
army and police took a very active 
part in the illegal occupation—actual- 
ly an organized invasion—of this area. . 
A few years later, San Martin had a 
population of over 100,000 moderate 
and lower income people in a 
reasonable and rapidly improving 
environment. . 
In these areas, all structures are 
"built by those who acquire the build- 
ing plots, mostly ordinary low and 
lower-middle income families. Most 
of the labour is contracted by indi- 
vidual families but many participate in 
the construction of their own homes, 
and a few do all the building work 
themselves. 
It is a long process, usually taking 
between five and ten years to com- 
plete a first floor to modern space and 
construction standard—but they do 
it very cheaply and without mortgages 
or major debts that could threaten a 
fairly precarious household budget, or 
their security of tenure. 
As | saw for myself in Peru, the 
investment that one makes, and the 
care that one takes of one's house 
and home, depends very much on 
13 
4

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=14) 2

### 49550: The Architect: a modern scapegoat, reflections of a Soviet architect on the merits of old and new styles

### 49546: A New universe of squatter-builders: millions of homeless people are creating a new movement of self-built homes

. 
knowing one can stay as long as one 
needs, or that one can transfer to 
another suitable dwelling without los- 
ing money. The investment of per- 
sonal care and savings in housing 
depends on security of tenure. 
This is in fact the most common 
way in which houses have been built 
from ancient times. For me it recalls 
Thomas More's words in his famous 
Utopia written well ever 400 years ago: 
“Houses in the beginning were very 
low, and like homely cottages or poor 
shepherd houses, made at all adven- 
tures of every rude piece of timber 
that came first to hand, with mud 
walls, and ridged roofs, thatched over 
with straw. But now the houses be 
curiously builded, after a gallant and 
gorgeous sort, with three stories one 
over another.” 
A- Arequipa, in southern Peru, | 
saw a peasant’ “homely cot- 
tage” with “ridged roof, thatched 
over with straw” being enclosed by a 
new structure. When ready for roof- 
ing the original cottage would be dis- 
mantled and a relatively “gorgeous 
and gallant” sort of house would 
eventually be - built, - perhaps even 
“with three stories one over another”. 
. The question which must be asked 
in every country in the world is: Who, 
or what sectors in a society are best 
able to organize, build, and maintain 
peoples’ homes and dwelling environ- 
ments? The private sector? The public 
sector? The popular sector? Or some 
combination of these? 
I will not comment on the private 
commercial sector because, although 
obviously important, it does not 
actually concern itself with low- 
income housing and there is a far 
greater promise in .a co-operative 
relationship between the people and 
- the government. 
First, | will summarize what | be- 
lieve to be the common characteristics - 
of centrally administered housing pro- 
jects as opposed to user-controlled 
‘housing. The essential difference bet- 
ween these two systems is the struc- 
ture of authority or control, that is, 
who decides what. , 
In a typical_ centrally administered 
project, imal. all design, location, 
financin 
decisions are made by a central 
- agency. However, in the typical and 
traditional local housing system all 
those same decisions are made by the 
users—generally owners—in con- 
junction with local builders. 
Geographically, centrally adminis- 
tered housing projects tend to be lo- 
cated on the periphery of 
built-up area of large towns and cities. 
They are rare in villages and small 
towns. This is mainly due to the size 
of “the organization -administering 
them, and the consequent need for 
projects to be large in order to be 
14 
building, ‘and management. 
the 
economic. Large tracts of land, and 
land of low or relatively low cost, can 
only be found on the peripheries. 
On the other hand, user-controlled 
housing occurs in all parts of cities, 
towns and villages. 
Not all public housing projects are 
built in the form of blocks of flats, of 
course, but this is the tendency and 
- general rule. The idea that tall build- 
ings provide higher densities is not 
always true although it is generally 
easier for a big firm to build big 
buildings and anyway more profitable, 
especially as labour-saving machines 
like big cranes can be used to best 
advantage. 
adapt poorly to awkward sites. 
Another major difference between 
centrally administered projects and 
user-controlled housing areas is that 
project dwellings are highly standar- 
dized, and for the same administrative 
and technological reasons. The num- 
ber of dwelling types must be reduced 
to a minimum or the administration 
becomes impossibly complex and 
construction costs become impossi- 
bly high. 
Typical local housing, sponsored, 
built, and managed by local people 
and their small organizations, not 
only creates the needed variety of 
housing to match the variety of house- 
hold needs, but they can build very 
much faster, in the aggregate. 
In Villa Salvador, a new settlement 
to the south of Lima (Peru) sixteen 
thousand families, organized by their 
own associations, recently established 
what is virtually a new satellite town, 
practically overnight. Of course they 
were living in shacks to begin with, - 
but a few months later, the great 
majority were already building brick 
and concrete houses. 
i ODAY, four years later, over 
: 120,000 people are living there, 
almost all of them in better conditions 
than when they were living in the city 
slums and tenements- | challenge 
anyone to tell us of a case where as 
much, - let alone more, was achieved 
for so many, with so few resources, in 
such a short time. 
If we take a family lifetime—from 
-the marriage of a couple to their 
death, say 50 years—and consider 
the total cost and the total returns on 
a flat built as part of a centrally admi- 
nistered housing scheme versus a ty- 
pical user-controlled house over that - 
period, we will soon find that the dif- 
ferences are vast. 
In monetary terms the difference 
may easily run into thousands of per 
cent, for the following reasons: initial 
_ cost, or construction cost, for such a 
flat is generally twice the cost of a 
similar unit built by a private contrac- 
tor and developer, and often even 
more than when built by a small 
builder working directly for an owner- 
occupier. 
Big buildings, however, 
: published a photograph in my 
And, of course, when the owner- 
occupier is also an owner-builder, the 
difference is often 400 per cent. These 
differences are then multiplied by the 
interest and the duration of the loans 
needed—the bigger the sum, the 
longer the amortization period, of 
course. 
In addition to initial costs, one must 
consider operating costs. These are 
notoriously high in publicly owned and 
administered projects—or, alterna- 
tively, the buildings deteriorate, often 
very rapidly. indeed. 
book, Freedom to Build, that 
shows a public housing project in 
St. Louis, Missouri, (U.S.A) being 
blown up by the U.S. Army. This pro- 
ject won an architectural award for 
good design when it was built, just 20 
years before it had to be destroyed 
because management and mainte- 
nance had become so uneconomical. 
This is not an isolated incident. 
Several major projects are now being 
torn down in England, the most recent 
of which are two tower blocks near 
Liverpool, built in 1957. These are 
among the 100,000 unlettable public- 
housing units built in Britain since the 
end of the Second World War. 
It is therefore hardly surprising that 
housing costs are spiralling upward, 
- and out of sight of all low-income peo-- 
ple and low-budget governments, 
wherever centrally administered hous- 
ing and building systems have inhi- 
bited user controlled housing. 
This is true for the United Kingdom, 
as well as the United States, and for 
Turkey as well as Mexico—only the 
latter countries are more fortunate in 
that the ordinary people still have 
some freedom to build outside the 
official administered system. 
All countries, socialist as well as 
capitalist, and those with mixed eco- 
nomies, are now discovering the truth 
of this analysis. And they are also 
discovering that the same is true for 
other personal services, most notably - 
in education and health. 
Let me finally describe another 
successful user-controlled housing 
scheme in which | was involved. In 
1962 several thousand people invaded. 
Pampa El -Ermitafio—literally, The 
Hermit's Plain—on the northern out- 
skirts of Lima. Most had low incomes 
and 15 or 20 per cent were desperate- 
ly poor. 
Most of them were unable to stay 
in the settlement and returned to the 
central city slums or other more cen- 
trally located squatter settlements. 
The great majority that took part in 
"this highly organized and somewhat 
risky invasion did so because they 
could no longer afford to pay the es- 
~ calating rents for a tolerable dwelling 
in the city. They desperately wanted 
CONTINUED PAGE 33

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

    
a Co ag OS 
. Photo @ APN, Moscow 
by Felix A. Novikov 
  
FELIX A. NOVIKOV, a /eading Soviet 
architect, has designed such major buildings 
as the Palace of Pioneers in Moscow and 
the Institute of Electronic” Technology in 
Zelenograd, near Moscow, for which he was 
awarded the State Prize of the U.S.S.R. 
in 1975. He is also the architect of the Soviet 
embassy now being built in Mauritania, 
and has recently completed a book, The Blue 
Bird of Architecture. . 
Bh aire oT 
In the U.S.S.R. over 
20 new towns go up 
each year and hundreds 
of old ones undergo 
intensive reconstructior 
Altogether some p 
1,900 Soviet towns and 
over 1,600 settlements 
are today carrying out 
(NER CIC CEG TEL Se ET EA 
Here, Soviet designers 
assemble model of new 
urban development ELCER 
& “, = i : : ES Rai 
 


### 49550: The Architect: a modern scapegoat, reflections of a Soviet architect on the merits of old and new styles

THE ARCHITECT: 
A MODERN SCAPEGOAT 
reflections of a Soviet architect 
on the merits of old and new styles 
I is fashionable nowadays to cri- 
ticize architects. In fact this is 
nothing new: it may be recalled that 
even the Eiffel Tower once scandaliz- 
ed people, even some whose names 
are still respected, and it would not 
be surprising to learn that some 25 
centuries ago the people of Athens 
were extremely. annoyed about the 
building of the Parthenon. 
"Yet, seen from our own viewpoint, 
the environment which our predeces- 
sors succeeded in creating seems to 
have been a truly humane and harmo- 
nious one. h 
We cannot say the same about our 
own architecture, which is full of con- 
tradictions and: gives plenty of ob-. 
vious grounds. for acute public dis- 
satisfaction. Since this dissatisfaction 
15 
3 . 
 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 49550: The Architect: a modern scapegoat, reflections of a Soviet architect on the merits of old and new styles

4 is a fact, and since it is general, it 
might be useful to try and understand 
its nature. 
Why are people dissatisfied ? What 
don’t they like in present-day town- 
planning? And if there really is a 
problem, how can it be solved? 
There seems to me to be two types 
of problem involved: the first are 
purely consumer problems, which can 
therefore be fairly clearly defined and, 
given the requisite economic efforts, 
successfully dealt with, while the 
others are aesthetic problems and as 
such entirely a matter for the archi- 
tectural profession, problems which it 
is up to the architect himself to solve. 
But all too obviously, architects are 
not always capable of dealing with 
them, indeed many of them think it is 
none of their business. 
If only modern society put as much 
creative effort into its buildings as it 
does into inventing machines, if peo- 
ple would only acknowledge that hou- 
ses are more important than cars, then 
architects could again play an impor- 
tant role in society. -Failing this, peo- 
ple will feel increasingly drawn to the 
architectural past, comparing the 
present unfavourably with it. 
The American architect, Peter 
Blake, has remarked that old buildings 
converted to new purposes are far 
more popular these days than modern 
architecture employing the latest tech- 
niques. The Architectural Institute in 
Pennsylvania, which has moved into 
an old training college for dentists, is 
far better, he says, than Paul Rudolf's 
spectacular creation at Yale. Simi- 
larly, the French critic Pierre Schnei- 
der argues that the best thing for a 
young architect to do would be to re- 
fuse to create new buildings and to 
look for ways of using old ones while 
they are still useable. 
| think that this undisguised pre- 
ference for old buildings and the 
attraction widely felt towards every- 
thing antique 
reaction against the soulless, machine- 
like character of many present-day 
structures. It is true that people have 
‘always admired the old masters and 
always -cherished antiques and heir- 
looms, but has this admiration of 
antique objects ever been carried to 
such lengths? 
Have people ever before gone as 
far as to mass-produce furniture, do- 
mestic utensils and jewellery that are 
pure and simple fakes? This must be 
because people want some compen- 
sation for. what modern architecture, 
the entire artificial environment, has 
so far not always been able to pro- 
vide. Certainly, architects too can pas- 
* tiche the styles of the past but sham 
architecture is far dearer to produce 
than other kinds of fake. 
© Modern architecture draws criticism 
because it is predominantly and aus- 
. terely functional. The vast majority of 
modern buildings flaunt their con- 
16 
represent a natural 
nexion with engineering, and strive 
to exhibit their structure and the tech- 
niques used in their construction. 
But for architecture this is "not 
enough. It has another, a social func- 
tion. The primacy of technology 
seems as it were to wrest architec- 
ture away from the spiritual founda- 
tion on which it has stood since time 
immemorial. The modern preoccupa- 
tion with technique, if carried to ex- 
tremes, becomes almost inhuman. 
The time has therefore come to huma- 
nize architecture. 
But perhaps there is more to it than 
that. Architectural development is cy- 
clical—in a search for new inspira- 
tion, in a break with traditional forms, 
architects often turn to the past. 
These are the swings of the pendulum 
of history: Renaissance architects 
were inspired by antiquity, the Em- 
pire style was influenced by the ar- 
chaeological investigations carried 
out during Napoleon's Egyptian cam- 
paign, and perhaps we, too, are today 
at a point where the pendulum is be- 
ginning to swing back towards an in- 
terest in the architecture of the past. 
“People have very likely grown some- 
what tired of the headlong forward 
rush so characteristic of our age. 
This is very probably the case. 
significant that Unesco’ s cultural pro- 
gramme includes “study of traditional 
forms of architecture in order to use 
them in modern conditions™. 
A any point in the development 
of society, man is caught be- 
tween past and present, yet in art and 
particularly in. architecture the past, 
even the very distant past, often 
appears more accessible than the fu- 
ture. Reproduced in architecture, the 
past is recognizable. For this reason 
alone it is able to evoke familiar ima- 
ges, more readily acceptable than 
images of an as yet unknown, unfa- 
miliar future. 
Society, however, is forward-look- 
ing. There are always creative artists 
who respond to this challenge—that, 
too, is traditional. Although the future 
is frightening because of its unfami- 
liarity, at the same time it exercises a 
certain power of attraction. Even in 
the distant past, new ideas were 
never immediately accepted, and they 
never will be. Yet the brighter signs 
of the future exert a powerful attrac- 
tion, finding supporters, winning over 
the leaders of taste and ultimately 
gaining acceptance. 
What has tradition got to do with 
all this? 
- Max Frisch, an architect who built 
a number of important buildings in 
Zurich before embarking on his lite- 
rary career, puts the following words 
into the mouth of one of his charac- 
ters: “What in fact does tradition 
mean? | think it means solving the 
problems of our time no less boldly . 
itis - 
than our forerunners solved theirs. 
Everything else is stylization, mummi- 
fication (1). 
I am all for the programme of 
“studying the traditional forms of 
architecture”, but apprehensive of 
“using them’ in modern conditions” 
lest their “use” be understood in a 
purely mechanical sense. 
Tradition, | am convinced, means 
more than just the actual forms of past 
ages, otherwise we should have to 
renounce all the technical advances 
of modern times and go back to 
. craftsmen making architectural details 
in the classical style—unless we are 
supposed to mass-produce Corinthian 
capitals, to use modern technology to 
reproduce the traditional forms by the 
dozen. 
The problem is of course much 
more complex, which is probably why 
there are so many different attitudes 
to it, including the attitude of reviva- 
lists who would trick out modern 
structures with traditional forms so 
that they remain in keeping with the 
historical environment and the natio- 
nal traditions. 
But there is also another way—to 
create new, modern forms that de- 
velop the characteristic features of the 
native architecture. | think that here 
technology can only serve as a means 
to an end. It is quite obvious today 
that technology, no matter how ad- 
vanced, cannot of itself solve the 
problem of modern architecture. 
Those who believe scientific re- 
search can produce prescriptions for 
a harmonious environment are in my 
opinion mistaken. | offer my definition 
of architecture in the form of the fol- 
lowing equation: architecture = 
(science + technology) X art. No 
matter what the value of the sum- 
mands “science” and “technology”, 
no positive result can be obtained if 
the factor “art” is nil. 
Are we not asking too much of our 
architects? It is also a tradition to 
complain about them, as | mentioned 
earlier. It is just that the contradic- 
tions have never before been of such 
gigantic proportions. But then all fi- 
gures today are astronomical; our age 
is an age of quantity. 
This is why | think that if we archi- 
tects carefully and conscientiously 
counted up all the magnificent build- 
ings that have been built in the world 
in recent years, we should discover 
that never before were so many archi- 
tectural masterpieces created. But 
since ours is an age of large numbers, 
never has the shortage of good archi- 
tecture been so great either. 
There is one important point to be 
made here. We always judge the past 
by its highest achievements, whereas 
we judge the contemporary environ- 
  
(1) Max Frisch, “Stillek”, 1954." 
~
~

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 49550: The Architect: a modern scapegoat, reflections of a Soviet architect on the merits of old and new styles

   
    
   
H
E
 
E
T
E
!
 : 
-l
 
     er
 
ment as a whole, taking the good with 
the bad. This, of course, is only na- 
tural. | believe that if a town has at 
least one beautiful building to its 
‘name, it can consider itself lucky— 
by no means every town can claim as 
much. 
.Soviet society makes strict demands 
on its architects. It criticizes them for 
faceless, monotonously similar build- 
ings, but at the same time picks out 
and generously rewards those that 
reveal real architectural talent. State 
"prizes are awarded annually for out- 
standing achievements in architecture, 
just as in literature, music, art and the 
theatre. 
In spite of all, | feel sure that our 
age too, will be fondly remembered, 
and that our descendants will want to 
protect the many eloquent testimonials 
to our creative talent which we leave 
”A city without old 
buildings is like a man 
without a memory”’ 
goes the saying. 
This spired tower and 
wooden house serve 
to recall to the people 
of a new town in 
Czechoslovakia the 
former village around 
which their high-rise 
dwellings have 
mushroomed. 
  
P
h
o
t
o
 
© 
L
u
b
o
m
i
r
 
P,
 
Ne
db
al
, 
C
z
e
c
h
o
s
l
o
v
a
k
i
a
.
 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
Ph
ot
o 
Co
mp
et
it
io
n,
 
U
.
N
.
-
F
I
A
P
 
behind us. And not omy because our 
descendants will be kinder to us than 
we have been to our predecessors: 
modern architecture has already pro- 
duced, and will certainly produce 
many more,outstanding buildings that 
not only reflect or develop previous 
traditions, but also create new ones, 
and therefore hold out great promise 
for the future of architecture. 
HE Felix A. Novikov 
11

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18 
Photo Service Régional de I'Equipement de la Région Parisienne, Paris 
 
  

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

DRIVE-IN 
CARDEN PARTY 
  
  
  
  
   
Photo © Dirk Reinartz, Germany (Fed. Rep.) ~ Internationai Photo Competition - U.N./FIAP 
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

by 
Joseph Bain D'Souza 
  
JOSEPH BAIN D'SOUZA, Chairman and 
Managing Director of India’s Housing and 
Urban Development Corporation, is a noted 
authority on low-cost housing programmes 
and community action in new towns. Since 
joining the [Indian Administrative service 
jn 1847, he has been Municipal Commis- 
sioner (city manager) for Bombay and 
Managing Director of the City and Industrial 
Development Corporation of Maharashtra, 
responsible for planning and building the 
2-million-population city of New Bombay 
outside Greater Bombay. 


### 49552: Out in the cold: in many Third World countries only the better off can afford "low cost" housing intended for the needy

20 
OUT IN THE COLD 
in many Third World countries 
only the better off can afford 
“low cost” housing intended 
for the needy 
ACED with mounting prob- 
lems of slums and shanty 
towns, many Third World govern- 
ments have launched crash pro- 
grammes to build subsidized low- 
cost housing for the poor. In India, 
for example, public housing pro- 
grammes cost $550 million in the 
five years up to 1974. Yet in India, 
as in most nations of the develop- 
ing world, most of the subsidized 
low-cost houses are now being 
bought by the better-off sections 
of the community—and the poor 
are being left out in the cold. 
World Bank figures for five ci- 
ties—Madras, Ahmedabad, Nairobi, 
Mexico City and Bogota—show 
that the cheapest public housing 
now being built is too expensive 
for all but the richest 30 per cent 
to 50 per cent of the urban 
population. 
These figures are based on the 
assumption that people can afford 
to spend 15 per cent of their in- 
come on housing. It is a generous 
assumption. The poorest people in 
most developing countries prob- 
ably spend three-quarters of their 
income on food alone. The rest has 
to pay for fuel, clothing, education, 
medical care and household neces- 
sities, leaving only about 6 per cent 
to 10 per cent for housing. 
On this more realistic basis, an 
even smaller percentage of a de- . 
veloping nation's pecple can afford 
to buy the subsidized “low-cost” 
housing. For the city of Ahmeda- 
bad, for example, it means that the 
subsidized housing programme is 
catering only for the richest 15 per 
cent of the people. A recent survey 
of several housing projects in nor- 
thern - I dia confirms that out of 
every ten houses being built for the 
poor, between seven and nine are 
actually being bought by the bet- 
ter-off. 
Yet most public housing agen- 
cies have the genuine aim of build- 
ing houses for the very poor. 
What is going wrong? 
A scene in my own office, just 
the other day, provides an illustra- 
tion of what is going wrong. The 
Chief Administrator of one of In- 
dia’s largest cities looked at a 
chart on my wall which showed 
just how little a family living on less 
than $36 a month could afford to 
spend on housing. “But who can 
possibly earn less than $36 a month 
nowadays?” he asked, “Hardly 
anyone in our urban areas, surely.” 
The fact of the matter is that less 
than fifteen out of every hundred 
families in India’s towns and cities 
have more than $36 a month io live 
on. That means only 55,000 fami- 
lies in this particular Chief Ad- 
ministrator's city of 350,000 fami- 
lies. And of the remaining 295,000 
families, almost half have less than 
$18 a month coming in. 
The Administrator's question re- 
veals what is wrong—the gulf bet- 
CONTINUED PAGE 22

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

  


### 49555: Housing à la carte

HOUSING 
A LA CARTE 
We present here and overleaf drawings and 
captions by the French architect and urban 
planner Yona Friedman. They featured in 
a retrospective exhibition of Yona Friedman’ Ss 
work entitled ** Une Utopie Réalisée ’’ 
(A Utopia Made Real) held at the Museum 
of Modern Art in Paris in 1975. Yona Friedman's 
message is that it is quite feasible for people to 
help design their future homes, so long as 
they have a clear idea what the result will be. - 
Texts and drawings € Yona Friedman, Paris 
by Yona Friedman 
  
_ | 
  
Planning assumes that there is 
someone who visualizes his 
future home. 
0 
If he draws up his own plans, 
he has to accept his own errors 
He only finds out where he has 
gone wrong when he starts 
to live in his home. 
CONTINUED PAGE 22 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=22) 2

### 49555: Housing à la carte

BER. IE x 
: 
VS SE LM yl 
\1/ 
fat 
If he gets a specialist to do 
the job for him... 
op 
x 
AS 
    
/ 
A
 
 
+x 
+ 
  
* 
+* 
      
... and the specialist will work with 
only the “average man’’ in mind. 
i a EL 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 20 
ween the poor and those who plan 
for them. The planners, architects, 
engineers and administrators be- 
long almost exclusively to the 
middle and upper classes. . They 
seldom know just how numerous 
and how poor the poor really are. 
In consequence, they base their 
plans on their idea of a house and 
their idea of what proportion of the 
people can spend what proportion 
of their income on housing. They 
- often assume, for example, that the 
poor can afford to spend one quar- 
ter or even one third of their in- 
come on buying a home. 
But in practice a family living on 
$36 a month can barely afford 
$3.60 a month for shelter. Even 
with a 20 year hire-purchase 
scheme, and even with a subsi- 
dized interest rate of 5 per cent, 
this means that the maximum cost 
of a home which the majority of 
22 
... the specialist will (maybe) 
misunderstand what the user wants, 
and he may also make mistakes, 
but the user not the specialist 
will have to put up with them. 
07 
Obviously when people have actually 
to live in these homes they will be 
dissatisfied, because they were 
made for the “average man”’ 
(who doesn’t exist). 
  
     
the population can afford is about 
$550. 
Faced .with this reality, most 
planners and architects throw up 
their hands in helplessness and 
say that you cannot build a decent 
house fit for human beings to live 


### 49552: Out in the cold: in many Third World countries only the better off can afford "low cost" housing intended for the needy

in for about $550. The bricks and 
the cement and the steel are too 
‘expensive; the house has to stand 
for a hundred years; it has to pro- 
vide privacy for all its occupants; 
it has to meet standards and bye- 
laws laid down for the benefit and 
protection of its occupants. «j 
In practice these norms and 
standards, drawn up to protect the 
people’s welfare, are. actually op- 
erating against the welfare of the 
poorest majority by preventing the 
‘building of the kind of homes 
which they can afford. So houses 
which conform to these middle- 
class standards of what a house 
  
The specialist's mistakes can be 
avoided if he has time to discuss 
things with the future user. 
Lo 
En A 
many. His plans must not upset 
those of other people. He must 
learn to explain his own plan 
to others. So communication 
- - between users is the first step 
in real “do-it-yourself planning”. 
Between user 
and specialist 
there is a 
communication 
problem. One 
can imagine 
the future user 
doing his own 
planning. But 
he is not alone. 
ee a a a a I RL a RE ER. SX ee 9 a ET NC IE a 
should be, continue to be built and 
continue to be bought by the 
better-off people who alone can 
afford them. What can be done? 
Again, a recent episode in India 
provides a clue to what can be 
done. In 1975 disastrous floods 
destroyed 2,000 poor people’s hou- 
ses in just one State. Three months 
later, before any of the housing 
agencies had really moved, most 
of the flood victims had fashioned 
new homes for themselves out of 
whatever materials they could find 
or.buy. : 
One of the flood victims, Raj 
Kumar and his family, built a mud 
“and thatch house for themselves 
‘without the help of architects or 
engineers. Raj Kumar told me that 
the materials and the carpentry 
had cost him $55. 
Today, another three months 
later, the public housing authorities 
v 
a 
wl 
N
t
 
nt 
od 
L
L
 
Ky
 | 
Ea
 
  
g
e
 
E
e
 
E
R
 
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 49552: Out in the cold: in many Third World countries only the better off can afford "low cost" housing intended for the needy

But if there are many future users, 
it is impossible for each one h 
to 
An
e 
explain what he wants... 
The user can then plan for himself 
without an expert... 
wr
en
 
are starting to build well-appointed 
.up-to-standard houses for $800 to 
help those who, unlike Raj Kumar, 
could not afford the $55 for the 
material to build their own homes. 
Who will finally buy those houses? 
Left entirely alone and without 
help, the poor in the slums and 
shanty towns of the developing 
world - fend for themselves with 
remarkable success. Only by build- 
ing on this self-help can the 
“urban-blight” of millions of squa- 
lid slum-dwellings be solved. 
With the major part of their 
populations concentrated at the 
lower extreme of the income scale, 
it is idle for developing countries 
to carry on the pretence of provi- 
ding them all with “decent dwel- 
lings”, as defined by planners, at 
‘prices which they can afford. There 
is no realistic alternative to the 
legitimizing of the shanty towns. 
... SO the specialist invents 
an imaginary ““average man"... 
HT I I EE _L-4.L a RR Cy SN 
A
 
A
A
B
N
 
  
a
 
E
L
 
I 
  
  
. 
.. leaving the specialisttogeton | 
with his job as building technician. : 
§ 
dd SE = bs i a a ——H- SS — — = 5 
As some planners are now rea- 
lizing, the way forward lies in envi- 
ronmental improvement for the 
shanty-towns—the provision of ac- 
cessible clean water; hygienic sani- 
tation and surface drainage; gar- 
bage clearance arrangements, and 
other basic community amenities. 
The settlers and squatters them- 
selves will do the rest if they are 
assured that their tenure is secure 
and if they are given the encoura- 
gement and help they deserve. 
Selling them small plots of land 
and perhaps the basic skeletons of 
houses which they themselves will 
complete, is the way to help cre- 
ate thousands upon thousands of 
“new” homes on a government 
subsidy of only $360 or $550 in- 
stead of ten times as much. In 
many cases, no subsidy at all will 
be needed. Incentive is all. 
Initially, the settlers will complete 
their houses with whatever mate- 
rial they can lay their hands on. 
if it is their house, created by them 
in their own way, they will even- 
tually improve it as their own cir- 
cumstances improve. 
They will not look as tidy and 
photogenic and prestigious as -the 
smart new estates envisaged by 
most of today’s planners. Yet, as 
Habitat, the U.N. Conference on 
Human Settlements in Vancouver, 
is helping to make known, the only 
way of drastically improving the 
living conditions for millions in the 
slums of the Third World is to build 
on the self-help and ingenuity of 
the slum-dwellers themselves. 
And it will call for a drastic revi- 
sion not only of present norms 
and building codes but of “our” 
notion of what a “house” really is. 
XK Joseph Bain D'Souza 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

G RANDMA: | lived in a wooden 
house at Le Ranzay from the 
time it was built. | was seven when 
we moved in. It was 1920 and the 
house wasn’t even finished. We mov- 
ed out in 1965. | lived for 45 years in 
the same house, with the same gar- 
den and more or less the same neigh-’ 
bours. That's where | spent my youth. 
And how did we finally come to 
move? Well, one day we started hear- 
ing bits of gossip. You know how 
these things happen—they always 
start with rumours which you don't 
know whether to believe or not. 
People were saying that the Hal- 
véque and Baratte houses were going 
to be knocked down and they were 
going to build flats. That was when | 
went to see the landlord's agent—it 
was about 1963. “Look”, | told him, 
“we'd like to build a porch where we 
can put our boots and our outdoor 
clothes”. “All right”, he said, “but 
make sure you keep the bills so that 
if ever you leave you can arrange to 
get some money back from whoever 
moves in after you.” 
So my husband and the two boys, 
who were working as labourers then, 
built a fibro-cement porch. Well, we 
got a year or two's use out of it. Of 
course we knew they'd started build- 
ing here on the Renaudiére estate. A 
few wooden houses had already been 
knocked down and the people had 
either gone into new flats or else into 
other wooden houses on the Halvéque 
and Baratte estates. 
24 
  
  
the sad story 
For almost 40 years **Grandad’’ and 
**Grandma’’ (below) lived happily in their 
little wooden house with its garden (left) in 
an industrial suburb of Nantes, in western 
France. Then an “urban renewal’ plan led to 
their being rehoused in a modern block of 
flats (right). For “Grandad” and “Grandma”’ 
this meant not just having a new home but 
having to accept a new and to them - 
unwelcome way of life, as they relate below. 
  Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Pi
er
re
 
Pi
ch
ar
d,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 


### 49556: The Uprooted: the sad story of an old couple who moved from their wooden cottage to a concrete housing complex

THE UPROOTED 
of an old couple 
who moved from their wooden cottage 
to a concrete housing complex 
The text we present here is a story told by a husband and wife, ““Gran- 
dad’ and Grandma” who live in a suburb of Nantes (France). It is 
taken from an inquiry carried out between 1968 and 1971 by a group 
of teachers and students at the School of Architecture of the University 
of Nantes. In September 1972 the French monthly, Temps Modernes 
(No. 314-315) published a series of interviews from the same inquiry 
in which people of Nantes and its suburbs talked freely to members 
of the university team about the problems facing them, particularly 
when they had been rehoused in new districts of the city. 
People in Le Ranzay were telling 
each other: “It's not our turn yet”. 
But as it happened Le Ranzay was 
the first place to be demolished. One 
day somebody came along and said, 
“Let me give you a tip. You ought to 
move into the Renaudiére flats now 
while you can. First come first serv- 
ed”, he said, “you’ll be able to take 
your pick if you get in at the start.” 
But we wondered what on earth we 
would do with ourselves in a block 
of flats. We'll be much better off stay- 
ing put in our own little house and 
garden, we said... They aren't going 
to come yet, we'll just wait and see 
what happens when the bulldozers 
arrive, 
Well, we didn’t have long to wait. 
One day the roadmen turned up be-

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 49556: The Uprooted: the sad story of an old couple who moved from their wooden cottage to a concrete housing complex

/ , Mgt IW [A 
i b ™ ! 
ve 
“rm 
  
  
hind the house. My husband asked 
them what they were doing. “We're 
laying out the line of the new road”, 
they said, “and your house is going to 
be cut in two. Yes”, they told us, “Le 
Ranzay 
down.” 
- So what did we do? We came here. 
We talked it over, and the boys said, 
“We'd do better to stay in the same 
neighbourhood and take one of the 
new Renaudiére flats.” At least Gran- 
dad doesn't have too far to go to 
work. He works shifts you see, a week 
on - mornings from 4 o'clock to 1 
o'clock and then a week on afternoons 
from 1 o'clock till 10 o'clock. He 
doesn't want to change now at his 
age. He's 59, and in the past 41 years 
he's got used to the same hours. 
You couldn't expect him to get up at 
3 in the morning and ride across town 
on his moped. 
Here, at least we'd still be in the 
same neighbourhood, not too far from 
our friends. So we moved in here, 
into a brand-new 3-room flat. It took 
a bit of getting used to, | can tell you. 
There's nothing much wrong with 
the flat, | suppose, but we don't like 
any of the things that go .with it. 
Worst of all is not having our own 
garden. That's what made it so diffi 
cult for us to get used to this place. 
Of course we've got the central 
is going to be knocked 
heating, the hot water, and so on, and 
you find these things a comfort as 
‘you get- older. But what we can't 
stand in this flat is the feeling of 
being cooped up. And then there are 
  hh | 
A I 
A po 
these big windows. They're supposed 
to be the latest thing, but everyone 
wonders why we need windows right 
down to the floor. You get enough 
light from the top of the window and 
it would be a lot better if you could 
move your furniture right under the 
windows. 
You know, when they build houses 
they ought to get .women to plan 
them. They'd see things with a wo- 
man’s eye; they know.what it's like 
living in a flat and they wouldn’t have 
things like that in it. : 
And then it’s such a job to keep the 
place .clean. You. need big curtains 
and there’s lots of othar things to buy 
when you move in. What makes it 
worse is that you get no allowance or 
loan or anything else—in fact you 
have to pay your rent in advance! 
And the amount of work you have 
to get through cleaning these big 
windows and the floors... Housework 
can really get:you down, you know. ° 
Of course, we cleaned the windows in 
the old place, but they were small, 
four windows and that was that. The 
real work was doing little jobs like 
building an arbour in the garden, mak- 
ing a chicken coop or putting up 
cupboards in the kitchen, but at least 
you had something to show for it, you 
were adding things to the house. 
Here the only job is cleaning and 
starting all over again the next week. 
In the old place there were always 
odd jobs to do, and we had a proper 
workbench. You can't do anything 
like that here. They don’t let you 
make holes in the walls and anyway 
the noise would be bound to upset 
the neighbours. 
Grandad: We completely changed 
that house. | made a sort of workshop 
with my bench, because there was no 
room in the ceilar. We built a bike 
shed, a chicken coop and a porch. 
We added bits on.” We completely 
changed the inside as well. We made 
a little kitchen in the cellar and we 
divided the main room to make a little 
bedroom for dad. The rest of it was 
our dining room. 
We used to get our building mate- 
rials from the works, it was cheaper 
that way. You could always count on 
your neighbours to give you a hand.- 
People were always adding to or im- 
proving their homes. Those who had 
cars even built themselves garages. 
Grandma: It's a good job we did 
our own improvements, because the 
houses weren't all that comfortable. 
To start with we had to fetch water 
from an outdoor tap. Later on we 
paid for the water to be piped to the 
house. You arranged with your neigh- 
bour for the two of you to be joined 
up to the mains at the same time. 
So you can see there was plenty to 
do. Even so we had some spare time. 
It was a good life. Nowadays people 
never have a minute to spare, they're 
always in a hurry. And another thing: 
in the old days most of the wives 
didn’t work. That gave us time to do 
everything. | used to do the washing 
in the washtub, | had the lads to look 
after and | still found time to knit and 
make clothes. And | used to go out 
into town. | was always cheerful. . 
| know I'm not getting any younger, 
| haven't so much energy now, but | 
always have to be on the go and yet | 
feel lonely and fed up. 
Grandad: It's true, people weren't 
nervous and .irritable like they are 
now. | was able to relax while | work- 
ed quietly in the garden or did odd 
jobs about the house. They're always 
on about leisure nowadays, but it’s not 
the same thing, it seams to make peo- 
ple even more tired. 
Grandma: We had to look after the 
animals as well. We kept chickens and 
rabbits and pigeons. We could always 
get plenty of grass for them in the 
fields all round. :1 had a dog as well. 
But .the poor thing just couldn't get 
used to being here. We'd only been 
here a fortnight. i - was downstairs. 
The dog wanted to come to me. He 
jumped out of our bedroom window 
and was killed. He thought he was 
still jumping out of a ground floor win- 
dow as.usual but this time he was on 
the third floor. 
As for comfort, we've got central 
heating here and that’s convenient be- 
cause we don't have to fetch the coal 
in and empty out the ashes... In the 
old place we had a kitchen range and 
we put an all-night burner in the 
back bedroom. We certainly: needed 
it, when the wind was whistling round 
the house. But we never froze. 4

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 49556: The Uprooted: the sad story of an old couple who moved from their wooden cottage to a concrete housing complex

> But I'll tell you one thing, since 
we've been here, I've never had so 
many colds. . You've got to admit that 
coal fires are healthier. Yet we used 
to go out a lot; even in winter we'd 
be out in the garden seeing if the 
frost had got at the plants, and we'd 
have a little chat with the next-door 
neighbour over the fence when we 
came back from the shops, even 
when there was frost on the ground. 
Yet we never caught colds! 
And we got plenty of sun as well. 
But in this flat," the sun just catches 
the bedroom in the morning and this 
room in the afternoon, and that's 
about it. You don't feel as if you're 
living with the sun like you did before.’ 
The sun used to go right round the 
house. If it was too warm on one side, 
you'd close the blinds and move to the 
other. 
People have said to me that it must 
have been much too hot in a wooden 
house in summer. But it was never 
. too hot for us: to start with, we were 
outside all day long. I've sometimes 
taken my sewing machine out in the 
garden where Grandad had put down 
some concrete. | used to cook out- 
doors all summer on an old stove; 
we always used t0 eat outside, where 
we'd fixed up lights for the evenings. 
Here we may have big windows and 
modern conveniences and the sun, but 
you still have the impression of being 
shut in. Sometimes | get so desperate 
that 1 feel like throwing my pots and 
pans around just to let off steam. 
When we lived in the cottages we 
and the neighbours were like one big 
family. When somebody died or when 
a baby was born or when there was 
something to celebrate, all the neigh- 
bours used to join in. We were always 
in touch, we used to see each other 
all the time, and that was because of 
the gardens, To start with you had to 
go down to the bottom of the garden 
to the outdoor privy. ~ You could 
always stop for a chat. Not an ideal 
place perhaps, but you got to see 
each other that way. 
I had a lilac tree and we’d stop and 
have a gossip under the lilac, talk 
about this and that, and tell each 
other our troubles and how things 
were going.- Mind you we weren't in 
each other's pockets all the time. You 
didn't have to go into your neigh- 
bours’ houses to see them because 
everybody lived outside. If you didn't 
want to listen to what your neighbour 
had to say, you just went into the 
house. 
But the garden fence wasn’t the 
only place where we met. We used 
to talk to each other from our windows 
without even going outside. The 
houses were grouped in fours, making 
a sort of square. These were your 
nearest neighbours and you always 
knew whether they were in or not, you 
knew when anybody needed you and 
you knew when you could go and ask 
them for something. 
You knew whether you'd be disturb- 
26 
ing them or not. It was all as natural 
as could be and we didn’t spy on each 
other, either. If a neighbour was 
going into town she'd s ay, “Will you 
look after the boy?” or “Can | leave 
you the key so you can go and see 
that they're asleep?”. They were only 
little things like that, but they kept you 
in touch. That's what's missing here 
and a lot of it's due to the way we're 
housed. 
Here we're closer to each other, we 
live on top of each other, but we don’t 
feel we're neighbours. The staircase 
is the only place where you meet peo- 
ple, but you have to be there just at 
the right time; it's not the sort of 
place where you want to hang around. 
And what do you see of other people’s 
homes? The landing door, and that's. 
always closed. 
In this block | can sometimes go a 
week without seeing even the people 
| know well. The woman upstairs 
doesn’t go out to work, but we can go 
three weeks or a month without seeing 
each other. And when a new family 
moves in, it can take ages before you 
get to know them. At first, when 
everybody was new here because the 
place had only just been built, we 
were completely cut off for a long 
time. 
[ remember that we didn't know 
who lived in any of the other flats 
when we'd been here nearly a year. 
That's what's so stupid. It was diffe- 
rent on the estate. When somebody 
new arrived you'd help them to move 
in to start with. Like that you soon 
got to know them—Where are you 
from? and so on. 
The awful thing about this place is 
that you never meet people and yet 
you seem to be living right in your 
neighbour's flat, especially because of 
the noise. . 
In the house, once you closed the 
front door you didn’t hear a sound. 
Here you're always worrying that if 
you make a noise it'll disturb the 
neighbours. On the estate you felt 
really. at home, that. the neighbours 
were part of the family. Here you 
seem to be living with other people 
but you always feel you're alone. 
What this place needs is some life. 
There's nothing going on here. On a 
“ Sunday it's as dead as a doornail. 
They all get their cars out and off they 
go, but that’s not what | call an outing, 
it's just getting out of the house. 
remember when a lot of us used to 
get together on Sundays with our 
bikes, the kids sitting on the back, and 
~ we'd go down to the river to picnic. 
We'd spend the whole day like that, 
we 'd meet our old friends down there. 
You went where you liked, nobody 
bothered you. The menfolk would go 
out on their boats, or stay on the bank 
fishing. You could spend a nice quiet 
day there. 
1 think it's worse for the teenagers 
and the kids. Where can they go 
round here? This used to be a quiet 
| can 
neighbourhood, it was safe for the 
youngsters and the best thing was 
that they had plenty of room to play. 
| remember how my own boys were 
always outside playing on the tip, 
where they used to dump the rubbish 
from the factory, carbide, clinker from 
the blast furnaces. They'd filled in a 
hole and the tip had grown over with 
trees and bushes. The children used 
to play cowboys and indians, they had 
a whale of a time there. 
When they'd had enough of playing 
cowboys, they used to build huts. 
They'd take their comics out there. 
They used to live outside, either on 
the tip or behind the house where 
there was an old sandpit that had 
been filled in. The lawns around the 
flats certainly don't make up for play- 
grounds like that. The kids here can 
ride around them on their bikes but 
that’s about all. And the lawns cost 
us a lot of money. We have to pay for 
them to be cut and watered and all 
that... I'm not against having a few 
lawns; they look nice and we need a 
bit of greenery, being so enclosed, 
but you can tell that the children 
haven't got enough room. 
| can see very well that when a child 
is cooped up all day it gets wild and 
over-excited. But they've nowhere 
else to go. So they shout and scream, 
they fight in the stairways or else they 
can’t sleep at night. 
Grandad: it's all the same problem, 
you see: the kids haven't a place of 
their own, so they kick up a row in the 
flats and on the staircases. Then that 
gets the old people's backs up. In 
some of these blocks they've put 6- 
room flats and single-room places to- 
gether on the same landing so that 
there are only old-age pensioners and 
big families together. "And that’s 
something that just doesn’t work. 
Grandma: The old housing estates 
had a life of their own... There was 
the mutual aid club which organized 
entertainments. There were dances 
and plays, there was always. some- 
thing going on. . It was all done by the 
working people. The entertainments 
committee (this was in the days before 
works’ committees) prepared the 14 
July celebration. It was grand! The 
night before there was always- a 
“torchlight” procession. We used to 
go all round the estate carrying lan- 
terns and the youngsters who kept 
their candles alight right to the end 
used to get a few coppers. 
There was a horse-drawn cart deco- 
rated with chestnut branches; all the 
big nobs used to get in it and we'd 
drive them around. One of them was 
the lady they called the super- 
intendent—she was in charge of the 
estate. She was also captain of the 
local fire brigade and she was the one 
who played the bugle calls at the 
14 July parade. 
The lads in our fire brigade came 
from the Batignolles quarter of Nan- 
tes. One of them was only about four 
foot ten, you could hardly see him

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 49556: The Uprooted: the sad story of an old couple who moved from their wooden cottage to a concrete housing complex

A MAN'S SELF-BUILT HOME IS 
Fred Burns (photo right) is an 88-year-old American who has 
lived for the last 37 years in a home he built for himself on a 
beach on the Atlantic coast of Maine. His life was one of 
ups and downs before he cunstructed this brightly-coloured 
dwelling (above) —the sort that children dream of living in. 
Orphaned as a young child and penniless, Fred Burns earned 
his living picking potatoes, and later fought in the First 
World War. 
“| only had $ 12.50 when | come here’, he says. “And | catch 
some fish here. A starving man will eat anything, won't he? 
under his helmet. We used to have a 
good laugh when we saw him next to 
his great tall woman officer. On 
14 July, the entertainments committee 
organized games in a square full of 
apple trees. There used to be a 
bicycle race. The shopkeepers offer- 
ed prizes—the first prize was always 
a calf's head. There was the Bati- 
gnolles orchestra as well. 
Two or three times a year, the en- 
tertainments committee would get 
buses from the works and we'd go 
on excursions to Saint-Malo or to Les 
Sables d'Olonne. Nowadays there's 
only the social centre, but it's not the 
same at all because we don’t organize 
it ourselves. 
"Another good thing about our estate 
was that people used to come around 
selling things. = The coal merchant 
turned up once a fortnight, the day 
after payday! He was really marvel- 
lous, our coal merchant, he was a 
friend of the family. He used to tell 
us the news and if anybody was sick, 
he'd let you have coal on credit 
if you couldn’t pay straight away. 
There were a lot of others who sold 
from door to door, the milkman, the 
grocers, the: fishmongers, the green- 
grocers with their horses and carts or 
barrows. And. people used to help 
each other a lot: when somebody was 
sick, we'd: make soup for all the 
family, or stew on a Saturday. 
People still do that here, but not as 
much as they used to. They just 
haven't got the time now. The women 
go out to work, they come back tired 
out, and it’s only right they should. 
look after their husbands before they 
start thinking about the neighbours. 
There was another thing that was 
different because of the gardens: peo- 
New York, 1976. 
ple always sow too many seeds and 
everything ripens at the same time, 
so there were windfalls for everyone: 
“Want some plums?” they'd say, 
“some tomato plants, some leeks?”. 
Grandad: Some of the shops on the 
estate were actually run by the wor- 
kers. It started out with bulk buying 
and after the war it became the Co-op. 
It was the workers themselves who 
started it, and you had to buy a mem- 
bership card. 
They used to buy in bulk from the 
wholesalers, but then the government 
tried to poke its nose in, and even 
tried to close them down. They pass- 
ed laws about the co-operatives and 
now of course we've got the super- 
markets. 
I've heard the manager of the Co-op 
say, “We pay the wholesalers more 
for our soap powders than you pay 
buying them retail in the supermar- 
kets.” Well that couldn't go on for 
long. And then the Co-op. used to 
give a lot of credit, people would pay 
when they got their wages. You can't 
do that sort of thing nowadays. 
Grandma: We've noticed the diffe- 
rence in rent too since we moved. In 
1965, to live in the cottage, cost us 
less than 4,000 old francs a month, 
and that included electricity, chimney 
sweeping, emptying the cesspool, and 
the water we used. Here in the flat 
we started paying 22,000 old francs 
in rent alone with the service charges 
and the rates on top of that. 
Money went much further in the old 
days. Between 1937 and 1939 it was 
marvellous what you could buy. We 
didn't earn so much perhaps, but 
paying the rent and electricity bills 
was never a problem. The first holi- 
 
HIS CASTLE 
Then the poultry plant come in and build a big factory here. 
| worked there a while till | got so | couldn't. And today | got 
a place to live, anyhow. It's just something different. All | 
done was pick up driftwood off the beach and nails. | bent 
old rusty nails and | built it a little at a time, and painted it 
with left-over paint. | live alone and | love everybody. That's 
the only way to be.” 
Text and photos © from “All Their Own — People and the Places they Build” by 
Jan Wampler, Schenkman Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass, and John Willey Co. 
day with pay we had, when my hus- 
band was earning 400 francs a week, 
we spent one week in Paris staying in 
a hotel and the next week with my 
family in the country, and we still had 
some money left over! 
The garden was a help as well. We 
grew our own fruit and vegetables... 
we bought potatoes and dried beans, 
that was all. We grew enough toma- 
toes and fresh beans to bottle and last 
us all year: we made jam and bottled 
our own gherkins. We did all right, 
| can tell you. 
Of course you had to save: it took 
us twenty years to save enough for a 
new cooker, [n 1938 we bought a 
wireless. Before that | bought a pedal 
sewing machine: | paid it off at 
50 francs a month. It cost us 1,800 
francs—more than a month's wages. 
Grandad: And | paid 700 francs for 
my first bike. It was a good one with 
drop handlebars. It was a Rafale, a 
well-known make at the time; they'd 
won the Tour de France. 
Grandma: They tell you nowadays 
“Advertising has such a hold on you 
that you buy things you don’t really 
need.” But you have to live some- 
where, and you need light and heat- 
ing, and that has nothing to do with 
advertising. But even these cost far 
too much; they take all your wages. 
We didn’t used to bother about the 
rent, | don't suppose it was even 
one-tenth of our wages, but now it's 
at least one-third ot what you earn. 
And now you have hire purchase to 
push you into buying things, yet 
without it we wouldn’t have anything. 
But it's the banks that do best out of 
hire purchase: you end up paying pro- 
bably double the price for things. li 
21

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 49558: Hong Kong, the most urban place on earth

Itt PCa rba Thine HA riier Korte’ 
Photo © Sta nley Chung, Hong ‘ong 
AI " MA . iin all - # = EE A Fs - " 
With a population density in some areas of up to 150,000 persons per sq.km. Hong Kong is one of 
~ the world’s most crowded cities. Above and opposite page, contrasting aspects of Hong Kong 
- ~ caught by photos entered in “One World for All", an international photo competition organized 
j jointly by Photokina (Cologne), the German Commission for Unesco (Fed. Rep.) and the North " 
GUILE ES GREED EEE TR EIR of 1 1 TES $1) for Youth Photography, in 1974. a - . 
IT 
pe BEE RR (NEE ey 

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

by Dan Behrman 
  
DAN BEHRMAN jis a Unesco science writer 
well known to “Unesco Courier” readers. 
He is the author of ‘The New World of the 
Oceans” (Little Brown and Co., Boston, 
U.S.A.) also published in a paperback edition, 
“In Partnership with Nature: Unesco and the 
Environment” (Unesco, Paris, 1972) ‘and 
“The Man Who Loved Bicycles” (Harper's 
Magazine Press, New York, 1973). His latest 
book '’Salar Energy and Awakening Science” 
will be published later this year (by Little 
Brown and Co.). 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
C
h
a
n
 
H
o
k
 
Li
ng
, 
H
o
n
g
 
K
o
n
g
 
HONG 
    
    
Ho KONG, the most urban 
place on earth (the density of 
150,000 inhabitants per square kilome- 
tre reached in one of its quarters is 
the highest ever experienced by the 
human species) has some lessons for 
the rest of the world, particularly the 
developing countries where, according 
to a United Nations forecast, 51 per 
cent of the population will be living in 
cities by the year 2000. 
Several of the lessons are unexpec- 
ted. Hong Kong tells us that, contrary 
to findings in certain Western cities 


### 49558: Hong Kong, the most urban place on earth

KONG 
THE MOST URBAN 
PLACE ON EARTH 
and in experiments with animals, 
anti-social behaviour need not rise in 
direct proportion to crowding. The 
quality of people would appear to be 
as important as their quantity : in 
Hong Kong, the bonds of traditional 
Chinese culture have held fast des- 
pite the pressure exerted on more 
than 49 per cent of its inhabitants who 
have less than 3.7 square metres of 
living space per capita. 
Hong Kong ‘also teaches that there 
may be limits to the process of urban 
growth. One is the very vulnerability > 

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 49558: Hong Kong, the most urban place on earth

4 
  
T
T
L
 
|   
Photo © Stanley Chung, Hong Kong - Unesco/Photokina/JPH 
Ld 
of the quality of life when more and 
more energy from sources other than 
human or animal muscle is brought 
into such a thickly-populated commu- 
_ nity as Hong Kong. 
Expressed in terms of consump- 
tion of fossil fuels which consist al- 
most solely of petroleum in the case 
of Hong Kong, energy use in the city 
has doubled in the past ten years as 
it continued to evolve from a trading 
centre into a hive of manufacturing. 
While the death rate from tubercu- 
losis was cut in half over this period, 
the death rate from lung cancer doubl- 
ed and so did the rate of violent crime. 
Otherwise, the city’s health is good 
although modern medicine has had 
much more success against bacteria 
than viruses. 
A second limit may lie in the feed- 
ing of a city of this size. From a Chi- 
nese type of agriculture in which noth- 
ing is thrown away and everything is 
recycled, Hong. Kong is moving 
rapidly into Western styles of food 
production and consumption. Organic 
wastes once used on the land now 
mount into a pollution problem while 
artificial fertilizer is imported from the 
Federal Republic of Germany 24,000 
kilometres away and hawkers’ stalls 
display lettuces wrapped in plastic 
and shipped from California. 
30 
Hong Kong's thriving light indus- 
tries based mainly on textiles can ex- 
port enough to pay for such luxuries 
but such a use of scarce energy to 
obtain scarce food would not appear 
feasible for the mega-cities that we 
are likely to see in the Third World a 
quarter of a century from now. 
All these remarks are based on the 
preliminary findings of a Hong Kong 
Human Ecology Programme initiated 
. by the Urban Biology Group of the 
Australian National University working 
in co-operation with the University of 
Hong Kong and the Chinese Univer- 
sity of Hong Kong as well as the 
Government of Hong Kong. These 
studies, which put emphasis on gner- 
gy use in the city and on-the environ- 
“mental_conditions of the 
inhabitants, have~become a pilot pro- 
ject under”MAB, Unesco’s Man and 
the Biosphere programme. Director of 
the project is Dr. Stephen V. Boyden 
of the Australian National University. 
Hong Kong lends itself well to such 
research. Since it is, in effect, a city- 
state bounded by an 
energy in and out of the city are mea- 
sured as a matter of routine and good 
records are available for study and 
comparison over a long period. At 
the same time, it stands athwart the 
.of 22 per cent a year. 
ife—of—its— 
international - 
frontier, all flows of materials and - 
industrial and the developing worlds, 
thereby constituting a valid example 
for both in many respects. 
One way to integrate the complex 
factors that constitute the life of such 
a community is to look at the energy 
that drives it. This has been done by 
Ken Newcombe, a research scholar at 
. the Australian National University, who 
has gone at the problem from the 
viewpoint of the ecologist. 
In 1971, the population of the city. 
was 3,939,000, including 78,000 boat 
people, and it was growing at the rate 
The city 
spreads over 1,046 square kilometres 
of land, including 253 islands rising 
from 1,823 square kilometres of water. 
The rate of energy use in Hong 
Kong has been growing much faster 
than its population—8.9 per cent an- 
nually from 1964 to 1971. The city is 
second only to Japan in per capita 
energy consumption in the .Far East 
and it is almost unique in its depen- 
dence upon petroleum. In 1954, liquid 
fuel met 70 per cent of its needs and 
solid fuel—mainly coal and firewood 
—30 per cent; by 1971, petroleum was 
up to 98.1 per cent. 
Hong Kong understandably lost 
little time switching. to cheap oil, so 
much easier to transport and handle

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 49558: Hong Kong, the most urban place on earth

Overcrowded | 
good 8 
neighbours 
Hong Kong's rehousing 
programmes have 
enabled well over one 
million squatters to leave 
the hillside shacks they 
once occupied. Though 
many thousands are still 
accommodated in huts 
(photo left) construction 
of large apartment 
blocks (seen at rear) is 
improving living 
conditions. Social 
disorder is not a 
major problem 
in Hong Kong. Recent 
studies attribute this to 
the prevalence of 
traditional Chinese values 
and family cohesion. 
These have reduced 
tensions, enabling people - 
to adapt to conditions 
in a high-density city 
and to live as friendly 
neighbours (right). 
J : i's 
al & 
for a city that must import almost 
every .calorie of energy that it use. 
Petroleum products, all refined else- 
where, are used principally to gen- 
erate electricity. They are found, of 
course, in the city’s transportation 
system—unusual in the large part 
played by 88 ferries carrying up to: 
600 passengers each—but they are 
also converted into town gas. 
Restaurants, ‘of which there are 
swarms, use Diesel oil for cooking 
but charcoal is still a standby for 
roasting meats and brewing Chinese 
medicines. Wood, so important a fuel 
only twenty years ago in households, 
has virtually vanished as an energy 
source." It was replaced by kerosene 
which, in turn, was being edged out 
by liquefied petroleum gas until the 
oil crisis of 1973-74 put the latter at a 
price disadvantage. 
This hard-working city does not 
squander energy. Only 30 per cent of 
the vehicles on the road are private 
cars (as compared to 70 per cent in 
a country like the United States} and 
most people move about in buses, 
some doubledecked along London 
lines. Energy efficiency in transporta- 
tion is dropping as the number of 
motor vehicles rises while trains only 
account for less than 3 per cent of 
all passenger movements. The trend 
—- 
Photo © Ho Kwok Boon, Hong Kong - Unesco/Photokina/JPH 
wil. be reversed, however, in the 1980s 
with the - completion of ‘an under- 
ground railway system. Even today, 
Hong Kong's per capita consumption 
of energy for transportation is eight 
times lower than in Sydney, Australia. 
Hong Kong's biggest leakage of 
energy occurs in the production of 
electricity since its power plants are 
only 33 per cent efficient, losing the 
rest as waste heat and in transmis- 
sion. Oil can be converted into gas. 
with an efficiency of 80 per cent and 
Newcombe suggests that consumption 
could be cut if more gas were used 
for cooking and water heating. 
Aimost two-fifths of the fuel that 
Hong Kong imports is thrown away in 
the process of turning it into electri- 
city. Newcombe comments: “Adver- 
tising by Hong Kong electricity com- 
panies shows that they are now openly 
soliciting increased consumption of 
electricity on the basis that there is 
no longer an ’oil crisis.” 
Partially because of its dependence 
on <lectricity, Hong Kong's energy use 
per unit area is twice as high as that 
recorded in any Western industrial 
city. There is room for savings. New- 
combe estimates that solar energy, 
applied to air conditioning, drying, 
space heating and water heating, 
could meet 5 per cent of the city's 
total requirements with another 10 per 
cent coming from methane gas pro- 
duced by the fermentation of animal 
and human sewage. Co 
He cites studies made during the oil 
crisis showing that local factories 
could easily cut their energy bills by 
20 per cent. Transportation could be 
made more efficient, he claims, if 
more food were delivered to small 
shops and stalls not in one-ton trucks 
but with heavy-framed bicycles such 
as those developed in Korea which 
can carry loads of 140 kilogrammes. 
He admits that such an innovation 
must await improved road safety. 
It is in the production and distribu- 
tion of food that the most striking re- 
volution in energy use has occurred in 
Hong Kong, a revolution quite similar 
to that now being wrought through- 
out the developing world. Hong 
Kong is moving away from its labour- 
intensive Chinese type of agriculture 
with a high return of energy in the 
form of crops as compared to the 
energy invested by the farmer. Sprin- 
kler irrigation and artificial fertilizer 
increase yields but at the cost of more 
and more energy imported from afar. 
Nevertheless, Hong Kong's perfor- 
mance remains remarkable compared 
to that of a typical Western industrial 
city. With only 109 square kilometres 
- 3 
4

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

> of arable land, the city manages to 
grow 5 per cent of the plant products 
it consumes. 
Its fleet of 5,200 fishing vessels that 
range the South China Sea bring 
home 40 per cent of its animal 
protein needs. However, not every 
growing city has such easy access to 
the sea and Hong Kong itself may run 
into trouble in the future world if fish 
catches continue to remain stable in 
the face of rising demand. 
In overall terms, Hong Kong's food 
supply system is efficient because, 
unlike that of Western countries, it 
demands but little energy to move 
food from the farm gate to the consu- 
mer. Since distances are short, trans- 
portation costs are low. Storage and 
-packaging are not major factors: the 
Chinese like their food as fresh as | 
possible and, most of the time, a piece 
of seagrass tied around it is all the 
wrapping it needs. 
But changes are appearing here as 
well. Plastic bags are replacing paper 
for packaging and this represents a 
loss. The plastic takes six times as 
much energy to produce and it cannot 
be recycled, unlike paper which is 
picked out of refuse and sold for ex- 
port. This may be an entering wedge 
for the system in industrial countries. 
where everything done to food after it 
leaves the farm accounts for far more 
energy than that represented by the 
food. 
High-energy . techniques , are also 


### 49558: Hong Kong, the most urban place on earth

appearing on the small farms of Hong 
Kong which average only 1/3 of a 
hectare. One example is automated 
sprinkler irrigation replacing the old 
system of furrows, buckets and man- 
power. This leads Newcombe to re- 
mark: “Where labour is abundant, it 
is not a labour-saving device but a 
labour-using device that is required.” 
Traditional Chinese agriculture was 
on the other extreme. A study made 
of two southem Chinese villages, 
Lutsun and Yunnan, in 1935-37 show- 
ed that the land was yielding about 
34 units of energy for every unit invest- 
ed. Of this investment, only 1 per 
cent (representing mainly steel used 
in hand tools) was supplied by fossil 
fuels rather than muscle. 
No one thinks that Hong Kong 
should go all the way back to such 
a system of food production but 
Ken Newcombe thinks there is much 
to be learned from the Chinese. It was 
from the 4th to the 1st centuries B.C. 
that they began to forego beef and | 
mutton for pork because the pig was 
so much more efficient in converting 
plant matter into meat. For the same 
reason, to get more food from the 
same amount of land, the Chinese 
(especially in the South) replaced 
wheat and pulses with rice from the 
3rd to the 6th centuries A.D. 
ONG KONG grew food the 
Chinese way in the past and, 
even today, it still uses food wastes 
to raise pigs and poultry. As a result 
of such thrifty practices,.only .57 hec- 
tares of “forage area” are needed to 
feed a citizen of Hong Kong compared 
to 1.12 hectares for his contemporary 
in Sydney, Australia. 
Again, changes are in sight. At 
present, food wastes are hauled out 
as swill to the New Territories of 
Hong Kong where they are fed to 
400,000 pigs. But the pigs create a 
sewage problem and some consultant 
engineers have suggested either 
pumping - the pig sewage out, to 
sea or getting rid of the pigs. This, 
Newcombe comments, might eliminate 
the pig sewage problem in the New 
Territories but it would certainly add 
to the problem of getting rid of food 
wastes in central Hong Kong because 
it could no longer be fed to the pigs. 
A happy example of recycling which 
could be of interest elsewhere is the 
  
H 
International photo competition 
«A better way to live» 
An international photo competition has been held in connexion with 
Habitat”, the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements. 
The contest was organized by the International Federation of Photographic 
Art (FIAP) and the U.N. on the theme of “A Better Way to Live”. More than 
1.000 photographers from 77 countries took part, submitting over 
5,000 photos. The “Unesco Courier’ presents some of the entries in this issue. 
The prizewinning photos were shown in Vancouver (Canada) during 
the “Habitat” conference and will later tour the world in a number 
of travelling exhibitions. Six joint first prizes were awarded to: Paul Almasy, 
Paris (a longstanding “Unesco Courier’ contributor); Jeffrey H. Hinman, 
U.S.A. ; Felix Tisnes, Colombia; Christoph Henning, Germany (Fed. Rep.) 
Peter Corniss, Hungary; and Masaru Uekawa, Japan. 
32 
use in Hong Kong of poultry manure 
to fertilize fish ponds whose area went 
up from 940 to 1370 hectares between 
1970 and 1974. This fits in with ano- 
ther old Chinese practice of raising 
ducks in combination with fish 
farming. 
Otherwise, Hong Kong handles its 
wastes much as any modern city does. 
The population accounts for 3,900 tons 
of human sewage a day, 80 per cent 
of which flows into the sea at Victoria 
" Harbour. As a consequence, an esti- 
mated 3,600 tons of phosphorus a 
year is lost in the Hong Kong food 
system. 
What Newcombe writes fits many 
an urban situation: “For the mo- 
ment, there are no proposals to re- 
cycle the bulk of human sewage, the 
largest source of phosphorus current- 
ly lost from the Hong Kong food sys- 
tem. The potential for applying human 
sewage, at the stage of primary treat- 
ment, to agricultural land is much 
diminished by the lack of available 
land and the prospect of increasing 
population generating even more 
sewage.” 
Incentives are needed, such as a 
tax on imported phosphates, and 
these might look more attractive eco- 
nomically if one added in the hidden 
costs of getting rid of pollution. 
Newcombe brings out the impact of 
the Westernization of eating habits. 
“Throughout Asia, including Hong 
Kong, beef is being.promoted as a 
prestige food, as opposed to pork and 
poultry. Any shift in meat consumption 
toward beef and away from traditional 
meats in Hong Kong will tend to in- 
crease forage area demand and even- 
tually decrease the capacity of the 
existing food system to recycle food 
wastes back into human fooa... 
“The importance of milk products, 
frequently stressed by nutritionists 
and exaggerated by multinational cor- 
porations, is questionable. Breast 
feeding is abandoned in favour of 
cow's milk, fresh or powdered, often 
leading to increased. costs, malnutri- 
tion and infection. According to 
Hong Kong paediatricians, there is 
evidence of malnutrition in children 
“whose mothers consistently misman- 
age the preparation of appropriate 
mixtures of powdered milk and water. 
Clearly, any nutritional justification 
for increasing milk consumpticn is 
subject to criticism.” 
Rejecting the diet and other mores 
of the industrial world need not imply 
a gloomy fate for Hong Kong and 
cities evolving along the same path. 
Stephen Boyden has the impression 
that psychosocial and behavioural 
needs are “much better satisfied for 
the average citizen in some of the

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=33) 2

### 49558: Hong Kong, the most urban place on earth

developing countries... than they are 
for the average citizen in many mo- 
dern Western communities.” 
A basis for his statement is the 
work done by Sheelagh Millar on the 
psychobiology of crowding in Hong 
Kong as part of the project. While 
high density has been correlated with 
high crime elsewhere, she finds: “In 
Hong Kong, evidence for any such 
density-related pathology is lacking. 
In spite of the fact that few other cities 
in the world approach its level of po- 
pulation concentration, the degree of 
social disorder or of crime in Hong 
Kong is relatively low, and disease is 
not at present an especially prominent 
feature of life as it is in some other 
high density cities.” 
She attributes this largely to the 
prevalence of traditional Chinese va- 
lues and family cohesion (many Hong 
Kong factories are, in fact, family 
enterprises) which reduce tensions 
arising when scarce living space must 
be shared. 
Hong Kong's inhabitants adapt well 
to density. They can sleep in crowded 
buses and on busy streets where an 
individual's desire for solitude might 
well be frustrated. Millar remarks: “If 
the desire for solitude is weak or ab- 
sent, such frustration is not likely to 
occur. The Cantonese term for ‘alone’ 
suggests that this is the case in Hong 
Kong. It translates as having no one 
EI] 
around whom one knows’. 
Factors such as these have led the 
Hong Kong project to shun the atti- 
tude that only what can be measured 
mathematically is worth measuring at 
all. Since the ultimate purpose of the 
group’s research is to improve the 
health and well-being of people in 
cities everywhere, it must take into 
account the “quality of human expe- 
rience” rather than just trends in the 
building of roads, housing, hospitals 
and other amenities. This has de- 
manded an integrated approach call- 
ing on a number of disciplines work- 
ing together dynamically. Boyden 
puts it this way: 
“An increasing number of'us are 
coming to appreciate that one of the 
important reasons why so many prob- 
lems in human settlements remain 
unsolved is the fact that knowledge is 
not put to best advantage, mainly be- 
cause of the fragmented structure of 
our various institutions of learning. 
“The academic world is in a state 
of extraordinary imbalance, in the 
sense that tremendous efforts in terms 
of finance and man-hours are devoted 
to highly specialized studies on very - 
narrow aspects of reality... If improved 
understanding is to be achieved, there 
is very much more involved than sim- 
ply collecting data from all these va- 
rious areas of specialism, feeding 
them into a computer or human mind 
and expecting something meaningful - 
tome come out.” 
Hl Dan Behrman 
il 


### 49546: A New universe of squatter-builders: millions of homeless people are creating a new movement of self-built homes

a new universe of squatter-builders 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 14 
a home of their own, free from fears 
of eviction or slum clearance, and free 
to build a permanent house, little by 
little, and without mortgages and risks 
of foreclosure. Most were young fa- 
milies, with their parents born in the 
villages and towns of the provinces, 
but with their children born in the city. 
To begin with, the settlement was 
nothing more than a shanty town on 
a barren desert. So many people 
took part, or followed the first settlers, 
that the site became hopelessly over- 
crowded. 
The government agency, with which 
| was working at the time, stepped in. 
Adjacent land was expropriated and 
the whole area was redesigned— 
except for the few blocks already laid 
out on which people had already 
made substantial investments. Work- 
ing with the local association, the 
government allocated plots to all the 
previously registered members of the 
association. 
Within one year an astonishing 
amount of investment in building had 
taken place—there was hardly a plot 
without a substantial amount of brick 
walling, and many had completed one- 
story structures. No credit had been 
made available, however, and we had 
not been able to install the water 
supply and electricity planned for the 
first stage. These utilities were ins- 
talled later. 
The schools that were initially 
organized and staffed by the people 
themselves became rehoused in per- 
manent structures, and now the main 
roads have been paved and the area 
is much like any other established 
working class and lower-middle in- 
come residential district ‘of Lima. 
The moral of this, and the earlier 
stories, is very simple: it is that the 
proper role of government is to en- 
sure that those who are best able to 
build, either for themselves or for 
their neighbours, have access to the 
tools or basic resources for the job. 
By “tools” | mean the supports and 
resources of the kind that the Peru- 
vian government provided for the peo- 
ple of El Ermitafio: /and, or titles to 
land illegally but rationally occupied; 
technical assistance for the economic 
design of subdivisions and dwellings; 
and infrastructure in the form of 
essential utilities and community fa- 
cilities that the people could not 
install themselves without government 
credit and technical assistance. 
In some other similar areas, un- 
secured, small, short-term supervised 
credits were made available to owner 
builders for completing unfinished 
houses—especially for roofing. 
When governments want to increase 
the supply of housing for the mass of 
people, they must make every effort 
to move large construction organiza- 
tions away from house building and 
into infrastructure development and 
into the manufacture of building 
materials and the provision of land, 
finance and tools. Only in this way 
can there be a real, and a rapid 
increase of housing for lower-income 
people in the short run, and for 
everyone in the longer run. 
Hl John F.C. Turner - 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  - 
|   | 
| Seles rights. 
BOOKSHELF 
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS 
BM Moving Towards Change: Some 
Thoughts on the New International 
Economic Order, 1976, 137 pp. 
(12 F). See inside back cover. 
BH Mother Tongue Education: The ‘ 
West African Experience, edited by 
Ayo Bamgbose. Co-published with 
Hodder and Stoughton, London. 
1976, 153 pp. Available through 
Unesco (39 F), except in U.K. where | 
co-publisher has sales rights. 
HB Planning Buildings and Facilities 
for Higher Education. Co-published 
with the Architectural Press Ltd. 
London, and Dowden, Hutchinson 
and Ross, Inc., Stroudsberg, Pa. 
(U.S.A) 1976, 137 pp. Available 
through Unesco (90 F) except in 
U.K. where Architectural Press has 
exclusive sales rights, and in U.S.A., 
Mexico and Central America where 
Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, Inc. 
have exclusive sales rights. 
BM World Guide to Higher Educa- 
tion. A Comparative Survey of Sys- 
tems, Degrees and Qualifications. 
Co-published with Bowker Publish- 
ing Co. and Unipub. 1976, 302 pp. 
Available through Unesco (78 F) 
except in U.S.A, Canada and U.K. 
where co-publishers have exclusive 
i 
  
  
—
 
__
—.
_—
 
"- 
a
 
E
E
E
 
  
 
[ OTHER BOOKS 
aims to focus public attention on | 
emerging global issues. : 
A 
BM The Home of Man by Barbara 
Ward, with an introduction by Enri- 
que Pefalosa, Sec. Gen. of the U.N. 
Conference on Human Settlements. 
W.W. Norton and Co., New York, 
1976, 297 pp. 
HB Losing Ground: Environmental 
Stress and World Food Prospects, 
by Erik P. Eckholm. Jointly spon- 
sored by the U.N. Environment Pro- 
gramme and the Worldwatch Insti- 
tute, Washington D.C. Published by | 
W.W. Norton and Co. Inc. New 
York. 1976, 223 pp. ($ 3.95). 
HB Worldwatch Papers 1-5 : 1) The 
Other Energy Crisis : Firewood, by 
Erik P. Eckholm, 1975, 22 pp.; (2) 
The Politics and Responsibility of 
the North American Breadbasket, by 
Lester R. Brown. 1975, 43 pp.; (3) 
Women in Politics : A Global Re- | 
view, by Kathleen Newland. 1975, 4 
45 pp.; (4) Energy : the Case for 
Conservation, by Denis Hayes. 1976, 
77 pp... (5) Twenty-two Dimensions 
of the Population Problem, by Les- 
ter R. Brown, Patricia McGrath and 
Bruce Stokes. 1976, 83 pp. 
The Worldwatch Paper Series is 
available from Worldwatch Institute, 
1776 Massachusetts Ave., NW, 
Washington D.C. 20036 on a sub- 
a
l
 
scription basis for $25 a year. 
Single copy : $2; 2-10 copies 
$150 per copy ; 11-50 copies, 
$1.25 per copy ; 51 or more copies, | 
$1.00 per copy. Worldwatch Insti- 
tute is an international research 
organization funded by private foun- 
dations and U.N. agencies which  
34 
UE EG 
Unesco African 
art exhibit in U.S.S.R. 
A Unesco-sponsored photo exhibit of 
African art is now on view in the Soviet 
Union. Comprising over 70 photos of 
wood sculptures, ritual masks and bronze 
works of art, the exhibit was first shown 
in Moscow and is now touring the capitals 
of the Byelorussian, Kazakh, Ukrainian and 
Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republics. 
Bio-gas for India’s fuel 
About 50 per cent of rural India's do- 
mestic fuel requirements could be met by 
bio-gas (methane) produced -by the fer- 
mentation of the dung of the country's 
220 million cows and buffaloes. The nitro- 
gen-rich waste that remains once the gas 
has been drawn off could help save up to 
30 per cent of India’s needs in costly che- 
mical fertilizers. This possibility was de- 
scribed by an Indian electrical engineer, 
Dr. Krishna Murty, of Indore University's 
Institute of Technology and Science, at a 
recent Unesco international forum on sci- 
entific and technological energy problems. 
Discovering 
modern astronomy 
To help educators develop the teaching 
of astronomy at all levels and to introduce 
astronomy into associated fields of studies 
(physics, mathematics, chemistry, etc.) the 
International Astronomical Union (AU) is 
making available high-quality photo slides 
(24 mm X 36 mm) from the world’s great 
observatories. The slides illustrate the 
discoveries of modern astronomy and 
their subjects range from distant galaxies 
to the spectra of comets. A number of 
them are being distributed on an experi- 
mental basis until August 1976 by the 
Institut d'Astrophysique (Institute of Astro- 
physics) In Paris. For full list of slides 
and how to obtain them write to: Contre- 
type Project, Mlle Gerbaldi, Institut d'As- 
trophysique, 98 bis, boulevard Arago, 
75014 Paris, France. 
Cancer and the 
environment 
Research in five continents shows that 
80 per cent of cancer cases are environ- 
mentally caused says a special report of 
the International Agency for Cancer 
Research, in Lyon (France). The United 
Nations Environment Programme publishes 
the findings in a special feature article on 
the occasion of World Environment Day 
(June 5). “Although ‘environment’ covers 
everything from cigarettes to sunlight,” 
says the report, “..In theory over three- 
quarters of all human cancer could be 
avoided by locating the carcinogens (can- 
cer causing substances) in the environ- 
ment and eliminating them.” 
  
U.N. stamp | 
for ‘Habitat’ S
A
A
R
 
A
A
R
R
R
A
R
A
R
A
R
A
A
S
S
 
  
     
"To mark the opening of Habitat--the 
United Nations Conference on Human 
Settlements—on May 31, the U.N. Postal 
Administration has issued the special 
stamp shown here. For details of all U.N. 
stamps write to the Unesco Philatelic Ser- 
vice, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Flashes... 
Hl Some sculptures on the Acropolis, cita- 
del of ancient Athens, are so badly affect- 
ed by atmospheric acid pollutants that 
they should be protected by plastic covers 
in winter, says a Unesco report on the 
state of the monuments. 
Bl The Jordanian Government has approv- 
ed two new regulations to help curb art 
smuggling: an outright prohibition of all 
trading in historic relics and an obligation 
for all owners of antiquities to register 
them with the authorities. 
Bl The major earthquake in Guatemala on 
4 February 1976 seriously damaged some 
of the country’s colonial period monu- 
ments, but the ruins of the ancient Mayan 
city of Tikal escaped, according to a 
Unesco on-the-spot assessment. 
  
Bicentenary of the Bolshoi 
Moscow's Bolshoi Theatre celebrates its 
200th anniversary this year. -A: bicente- 
nary highlight {on 28 March) was a tele- 
vised performance of Prokofiev's ballet 
Romeo and Juliet transmitted live to 116 
countries. In Europe's second biggest 
theatre (2,000 seats, see photo) and in its 
6,000-seat annexe In the Palace of Con- 
gresses in the Kremlin, the Bolshoi com- 
pany presents one or two opera or ballet 
performances daily to packed houses. , 
 
Photo © APN, Moscow

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
Moving 
towards 
change 
some thoughts 
on the new 
international economic order 
UNESCO 
A timely study 
on the new 
Just published... 
  
international economic order 
Prepared by Unesco as it celebrates its 30th anniversary, Moving 
towards change discusses the major problems facing mankind today 
and the role of the United Nations and Unesco in bringing about a new 
and more equitable world order. This timely Unesco study examines: 
o efforts to arrive at a new international economic order 
e current obstacles and possible lines of action 
e how to adapt the United Nations system to new situations 
o the importance of scientific, technological and cultural development 
¢ Unesco’s contribution to a global effort. 
“There can be no question of a new and more equitable world 
order unless due regard is paid to the requirements of educa- 
tion, science and culture, and full advantage is taken of the 
light they can throw on problems”, : 
— Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow 
Director-General of Unesco 
(in a foreword to “Moving towards change”) 
137 pages 12 French francs 
Also published in French. To appear in Spanish and Arabic. 
 
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the 
National Distributor in your country. (See 
list below; names of distributors in countries 
not listed, along with subscription rates in 
local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
AUSTRALIA. Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. 
Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW: Periodicals: 
Dominie Pty., Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brookvale 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association of 
Australia, Victorian Division 5th floor, 134-136 Flinders 
St. Melbourne (Victoria), 3000. — AUSTRIA. Verlag 
Georg Fromme & Ca., Arbeitergasse 1-7, 1051, Vienna. 
— BELGIUM. "Unesco Courier” Dutch edition only: 
N.V. Handelmaatschappij Keesing, Keesinglaan 2-18, 
2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. French edition and general 
Unesco publications agent: Jean de Lannoy, 112, rue 
du Tréne, Brussels 5. CCP 708-23. — BURMA. Trade 
Corporation No 9, 550-552 Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
— CANADA. Information Canada, Ottawa Cnt). —_— 
CYPRUS. "MAM", Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, 
P. 0, Box 1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA, 
S.N.T.L., Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); 
Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka Prague 1. For 
Slovakia enly: Alfa Verlag - Publishers, Hurbanovo nam. 
6, 893 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — DENMARK Munks- 
g ards Boghandel, 6, Norregade, DK-1165, Copenhagen 
.—EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre 
for Unesco Publications, N° 1 Talaat Harb Street, Tahrir 
Square, Cairo. — ETHIOPIA. National Commission for 
Unesco, P.O. Bax 2996, Addis-Ababa. — FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki — 
FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 7, place de Fontenoy, 
75700 Paris, C.C.P. 12598-48, — GERMAN DEMO- 
CRATIC REP. Buchhaus Leipzig, Postfach 140, 710 
Leipzig or from Internationalen Buchhandlungen in the 
G.D.R.-- FED. REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco 
Kurier (German ed. only): 53 Bonn 1, Colmantstrasse 
22, C.C.P. Hamburg 276650. For scientific maps only: 
GEQ CENTER D7 Stuttgart 80, Postfach 800830. Other 
publications; Verlag Dokumentation, Pdssenbacher 
Strasse 2, 8000 Miinchen 71 (Prinz Ludwigshéhe) — 
GHANA. Presbyterian Boakshop Depot Ltd., P.O. Box 
195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd., P.O. Box 7869, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The 
University Bookshop of Cape Coast; The University 
Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — GREAT 
BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. —GREECE.Interna- 
tional bookshops. — HONG KONG. Federal Publica- 
. tions Division, Far East Publications Ltd., 5 A Evergreen 
Industrial Mansion, Wong Chuk Hang Road, Aberdeen. 
Swindon Book Co., 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon. — 
HUNGARY. Akadémiai Kdnyvesbold, Vici u. 22, Buda- 
pest V: A.K.V. Kényvtarosok Boltja, Néopkdztarsasag 
utja 16, Budapest V..'— ICELAND. Snaebjérn 
Jansson & Co., H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. — 
INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd, Kamani Marg, Ballard 
Estate, Bombay 400 038; 17. Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 1; 80/1 Mahatma 
Gandhi Road, Bangalore-560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda 
Hyderabad-500001. Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & 
Stationery Co.-17 Park Street, Calcutta 16; Scindia 
House, New Delhi; Publications Section, Ministry 
of Education and Social Welfare, 72 Theatre Commu- 
nication Building, Connaught Place, New Delhi 1, — 
INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 
29 Ji. Oto Iskandardinata Ill, Jakarta; Gramedia 
Bookshop, JI. Gadjah Mada 109, Jakarta; Indira 
P.T.. JI. Dr. Sam Ratulangie 47, Jakarta Pusat. — 
IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution Co., 
229 Daneshgahe Street, Shah Avenue, P.O. Box 
141486, Teheran. Iranian National Commission for 
Unesco, Avenue Iranchahr Chomali No. 300, B.P. 
1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, 
Al-Rashid Street, 
University of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — 
IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd., 
Ballymount Road, Walkinstown, Dublin 12. — ISRAEL. 
Emanuel Brown, farmely Blumstein’s Bookstores, 
35 Allenby Road and 48, Nachlat Benjamin Street, 
Tel-Aviv; 9, Shlomzion Hamalka Street Jerusalem. — 
JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Stores Ltd, P.O. Box 
366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston. — JAPAN. Eastern 
Book Service Inc., C.P.O. Box 1728, Tokyo 100-92. — 
KENYA.East African Publishing House, P.O, Box30571, 
Nairobi, — KOREA. Korean National Commission for 
Unesco, P.0. Box Central 64, Seoul. —KUWAIT. The 
Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd., P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — 
LESOTHO. Mazenocd Baok Centre, P.O. Mazenod, 
Lesotho, Southern Africa. — LIBERIA. Cole and 
Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — 
LIBYA. Agency for Development of Publication & 
Distribution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripali. — LUXEM- 
BOURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxembourg. — MALAYSIA. Federal Publications 
Sdn. Bhd. Balai Berita, 31, Jalan Riong, Kuala 
Lumpur, -— MALTA. Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kings- 
way, Valletta. — MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company 
Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO. 
British Library, 30, bd des Moulins, Monte-Carlo, — 
NETHERLANDS. For the “Unesco Koerier” Dutch 
edition only: Systemen Keesing, Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, 
Amsterdam-1007. Agent for all Unesco publications: 
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
— NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. G.C.T. Van Dorp & 
Co. (Ned Ant). N.V., Willemstad, Curagao, N. A. — 
NE ZEALAND. Government Printing Office, 
Government Bookshops at: Rutland Street, P.O. Box 
5344, Auckland; 130, Oxfard Terrace, P.O. Box 1721, 
Christchurch; Alma Street, P.O. Box 857 Hamilton; 
Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave 
Baghdad; University Bookstare, 
Street, Private Bag, Wellington. — NIGERIA, The 
University Bookshop of Ife. The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286; The University Bookshop of 
Nsukka; The University Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY. All 
publications: Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl 
Johans-gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only; 
A.S. Narvesens Literaturtjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6, — 
PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid- 
e-azam, P.O. Box No. 729, Lahore 3.— PHILIPPINES. 
The Modern Book Co. 926 Rizal Avenue, P.O. 
Box 632, Manila D-404. — POLAND. ORPAN- 
IMPORT, Palac Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw ; Ars 
Palona-Ruch, Krakowskie Prze dmiescie No.7, 00-901 
WARSAW. — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Lida, 
Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. — SIN- 
GAPORE. Federal Publications (S) Pte Ltd., Times 
House, River Valley Road, Singapore 9. — SOMALI 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Modern Book Shop 
and General, P.O. Box 951, Mogadiscio. ~— SOUTH 
ERN RHODESIA. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd, 
67 Union Avenue, Salisbury. — SRI LANKA. Lake 
House Baokshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner 
Mawata P.0.B. 244 Colombo 2. — SUDAN. Al 
Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — 
SWEDEN. All publications: A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. 
Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Box 16356, 10327 
Stockholm 16. For the Unesco Courier: Svenska 
FN-Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 S- 104 65, 
Stackholm, — SWITZERLAND. All publications: 
Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrasse, Zurich, Librairie Payat, 
rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P, 12-236. — 
TANZANIA, Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.0.B, 2030 
Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. 
Ltd., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sri, 
P.O. Bax 402, Bangkok; Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company, 
1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. — TURKEY. Librairie 
Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. — 
UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kam- 
pala. — SOUTH AFRICA. All publications: Van 
Schaik’'s Bookstore (Pty.) Ltd., Libri Building, Church 
Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. For the Unesco Courier 
{single copies) only; Central News Agency P.O. Box 
033, Johannesburg, — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l, and 
Government Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, 
Cardiff, Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol. — 
UNITED STATES. Unipub, Box 433, Murray Hill 
Station New York, N.Y. 10016. For “Unesco Courier” 
in Spanish: Santillana Publishing Company, Inc. 
575 Lexington Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. — 
U.S.S.R. Mezhdu- narodnaja Kniga, Moscow, 
G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska Knjiga, 
Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zalozba Slovenije, 
Titova C 25, P.0.B. 50, Ljubliana.  

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074825engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

- 
e
l
 = 
 