# [191577](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
  
May » 2006 * ISSN 1993-8616 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
© 
Re
na
to
 
S.
 
R
a
s
t
r
o
l
l
o
/
N
C
C
A
 
 
EN Oe)115 1S SN. 
 
Contents 
MAY - 2006      
INTANGIBLE HERITAGE 
The entry into force of the Convention for the Safeguarding 
of the Intangible Cultural Heritage represents a new phase 
® for this living and intrinsically fragile heritage. 
The Hudhud chants of the lfugaos (Philippines).   
“SNE INTANGIBLE HERITAGE: 
ag | ATANGIBLE BOOST 
/ | Oral traditions and expressions, traditional 
performing arts, social practices, rituals 
and festive events, knowledge and practices concerning nature 
and the universe, traditional craftsmanship — all merit safeguarding 
for future generations, in the same way as the Galapagos Islands 
or the Egyptian Pyramid. 3 
Ey 4 r 
i} CULTIVATING COLOMBIAN 
TRADITIONS 
Thanks to a campaign sponsored 
by UNESCO, Colombia turns the spotlight 
on safeguarding its intangible cultural heritage. 4 
  
~ = THERE WILL BE NO MORE 
So PROCLAMATIONS 
OF MASTERPIECES 
Rieks Smeets, head of UNESCO's Intangible Heritage Section, 
examines the implications of the entry into force of the Convention 
for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. 6 
   
THE SACRED WOOD 
OF MADAGASCAR’S ZAFIMANIRY 
The Zafimaniry of Madagascar do more 
than sculpt wood. They inscribe 
their entire cosmogony on this sacred material. 
In 2003, UNESCO proclaimed their tradition a masterpiece 
of oral and intangible heritage. 7 
3 WEAVING COLOR 
fhe 3 INTO CULTURE 
I} 2 = Considered one of the best traditional weavers 
in the Philippines, Haja Amina Appi has been 
named a “living human treasure” in her country in 2004. 
By transmitting her art to future generations she guarantees 
the preservation of this example of intangible heritage. 9 
OLONKHO, AN EPOS FROM 
TWELVE HUNDRED YEARS AGO 
Recited for centuries in Yakutia but outlawed 
during the Soviet era, the Olonkho heroic L n IN 
epos came close to vanishing. This oral tradition linked to shamanic 
folklore was proclaimed a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible 
Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO in 2005. 10 
TIMELINE 12 
Important dates on intangible heritage at UNESCO. 
THE COURIER LOOKS BACK 13 
The UNESCO Courier has devoted many articles and issues to the intangible heritage. Here is a brief trip down memory lane. 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The entry into force of the Convention for the Safeguarding 
JRO ERNE To CRT ETN CT Te EW CTT CEE RE 1 A oh EER {TER TT 


### 210780: Intangible heritage: a tangible boost

  
INTANGIBLE HERITAGE 
A TANGIBLE BOOST 
© 
Cu
lt
ur
al
 
Co
un
ci
l 
of
 
Va
nu
at
u 
       radlitions and expressions (includ- 
age as a vehicle of intangible 
tional craftsmanship — all merit safe- 
guarding for future generations, in the 
same way as the Galapagos Islands or 
the Egyptian Pyramids. 
Since 20 April, date of its entry into 
force, the Convention for the Safe- 
guarding of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage stands watch to ensure the 
continuity of this living testimony to hu- 
man creativity. 
To date, 47 States — from Algeria, 
first to approve it in February 2004, 
to Albania, which ratified it on 4 April 
2006 — are parties to this Convention 
that completes UNESCO's standard- 
setting measures for the safeguard of 
cultural heritage. 
The text is based on certain articles 
of the 1972 Convention for the Protec- 
tion of the World Cultural and Natural 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
The sand designs of Vanuatu are a Materpiece 
of Intangible Cultural Heritage. 
Ea  
Heritage that protects “tangible” forms 
of expression of heritage, both monu- 
ments and natural sites. It thus antici- 
pates the creation of a General Assem- 
bly which will have its first meeting next 
June, an Intergovernmental Committee 
for the Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage and a Fund that will 
make it possible to finance safeguard- 
ing projects. 
The Convention also stipulates that 
two lists will be drawn up: the Repre- 
sentative List of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage of Humanity, and the List of 
Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of 
Urgent Safeguarding. 
The 90 Masterpieces of the Oral and 
Intangible Heritage of Humanity so far 
proclaimed by UNESCO are likely 
As the Galapagos Islands 
or the Egyptian Pyramids, 
all merit safeguarding 
for future generations. 
3 
to be incorporated gradually into the 
Representative List, provided they are 
located within States that have ratified 
the Convention. 
Discovering 
the soul 
Another of the Convention's important 
measures is the requirement that each 
country establish one or several inven- 
tories of intangible cultural heritage ex- 
isting on its territory. 
In certain cases, this process is well 
under way and is producing some truly 
remarkable results. “In Venezuela, we 
are now conducting a very detailed 
census of heritage in all its forms,” ex- 
plains José Manuel Rodriguez, presi- 
dent of Venezuela's Institute of Cultural 
Heritage. “We have recorded more 
than 68,000 entries coming from all 
of our country’s 335 communities and 
what we have discovered is the genu- 
ine soul of the population. People are 
astonished that the state is taking an 
interest in things that belong to them in

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 210780: Intangible heritage: a tangible boost

© 
Ch
ri
st
ia
n 
Lh
ui
ll
ie
r 
    
Demonstration devoted to the Intangible heritage 
of Southeast Asia, UNESCO headquarters, March 2006. 
a very intimate way.’ 
These inventories will make it possible 
to classify intangible heritage in its dif- 
ferent forms - the items to be included 
on representative lists, of course, but 
also Living Human Treasures. 
The concept, createdin 1950in Japan, 
was adopted by the Republic of Korea 
in 1964, then by the Philippines, Thai- 
land, Romania, the Czech Republic, 
Bulgaria and France, where the living 
treasures are called “masters of crafts” 
and are goldsmiths and silversmiths, 
traditional bookbinders or makers of 
musical instruments. 
Languages too are protected by the 
convention, not just as means of com- 
munication but also as reflections of 
a particular perception of the world. 
Inventories can also be taken of tradi- 
tional music. 
A little more than two years elapsed 
between the Convention's ratification 
by UNESCO's General Conference in 
October 2003 and its entry into force. 
For Antonio Augusto Arantes, former 
president of Brazil's Institute for Nation- 
al Historical and Artistic Heritage, “The 
speed of the ratification process was a 
real surprise. But it proves simply that 
governments are resonating to some- 
thing that civil society, at least in my 
country, has laid claim to for 20 years’ 
This is just what Juan Goytisolo, presi- 
dent of the jury for the first two Proc- 
lamations of the Masterpieces of the 
Oral and Intangible Heritage of Hu- 
manity, was describing when he spoke 
of “the infinite wealth and variety of hu- 
man inventiveness regarding the origin 
of the world and our presence in it” 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
(00) [o])) [oI ER UT ER CRS ool [Te [a AT BF 1 (Te [TE To [Ty [o i 
come to a campaign sponsored by UNESCO 
its intangible cultural heritage. 
  
     
ommercial aired in prime time recent- 
on Colombian radio and television 
be distinguished. Some sound as 
if they are related to Mandarin, others 
to the very marked phonetics of Slavic 
languages. Then, in the midst of the 
babble, you recognize a poem In 
Spanish by the great Colombia poet 
José Asuncion Silva. At that point the 
audience grasps that all the languages 
just heard were indigenous. 
The ad ends with a message under- 
lining that Colombia is a multicultural, 
multilingual country. Another spot stars 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 


### 210781: Cultivating Colombian traditions

CULTIVATING 
COLOMBIAN TRADITIONS 
© 
F
e
r
n
a
n
d
o
 
M
e
r
c
a
d
o
 
  
“The Carnival of Barranquilla “. 
4 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 210781: Cultivating Colombian traditions

© 
Co
lo
mb
ia
n 
In
st
it
ut
e 
of
 
An
th
ro
po
lo
gy
 
an
d 
Hi
st
or
y 
UNA TRANSMISIEN SIRZCTA DC GENZRACHN IN sENCZADN 
CLESTRINYE 
ENVIVO     
EL CARNAVAL DEL PERDON 
       &
 
-
 
Ch
na
an
an
et
t”
 
UNA CELEBRACION DE MUSICA Y COLOR 
QUE NO PODEMOS PER DER 
£1 Clestrimye del Fatzmayo. como todas lar Sestar de numtro 
Patrimonio bnmaterml es mejor celebeario gue olvidarls 
Conocerlo y tranurstale eo necemanin 
pars esaliar y revidalivar nuesirs den tides 
» PATRIMENIS INMATERIAL COLOMBIAND ° 
DEMUESTRA QUIEN ERES 
| 5 ® so Wm 
Poster edited for awareness campaign. 
the Mohan, a sylvan spirit of rivers and 
forests that farmers used to fear; yet 
another depicts pise (rammed earth) 
wall-building technique, a legacy of 
the Amerindians. Even the Pusandao, 
a Pacific Coast stew prepared with 
manioc, yams, fish and coconut milk, 
makes a subject for an ad. 
Colombia, with its wealth of 83 in- 
digenous peoples and nearly 70 lan- 
guages and dialects, intends to make 
the most of its intangible heritage 
from now on, to the point of launching 
a major awareness campaign. “Show 
© 
Lu
ca
s 
Si
lv
a,
 
P
a
l
e
n
q
u
e
 
R
e
c
o
r
d
s
 
who you are” was the slogan for the 
entire campaign, financed for the 
sum of US$ 150,000 by UNESCO, 
the Andrés Bello Convention and the 
Colombian government. 
UNESCO's proclamation in 2003 of 
the Barranquilla Carnival as a master- 
piece of the oral and intangible heri- 
tage of humanity contributed signifi- 
cantly to Colombia's realization of the 
value of its heritage. 
The Barranquilla Carnival encom- 
passes cultural events in more than 
50 villages and small towns along the 
banks of the Magdalena river. Tales 
are told of men turned into alligators 
and of Indians disguised as women 
to avenge the honour of their wives, 
abducted by Spaniards, all to the 
rhythm of cumbia music and drums 
that pound incessantly for five days. 
Taking inventory 
of traditions 
Coinciding with the proclamation, the 
Ministry of Culture launched a series 
of initiatives aimed at implementing the 
mandates articulated in the UNESCO 
Convention, soon to be ratified. First it 
set up a Sub-Directorate of Intangible 
Heritage, which assists communities 
in taking inventory of their oral tradi- 
tions. 
That's not all. “Thanks to the work- 
In 2005, UNESCO proclaimed palanquera culture 
a masterpiece of intangible heritage. 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
shops that we organized in five re- 
gions in the country, intangible heri- 
tage has become fashionable, claims 
Emiro Diaz, programming director at 
the Colombian Institute of Anthropolo- 
gy and History (ICANH), organization 
charged by the Ministry to formulate 
conservation policies. 
In November 2005, when the Min- 
istry's work on the Convention was 
well underway, UNESCO proclaimed 
the palenquera culture as Colombia's 
second masterpiece of Oral and In- 
tangible Heritage. San Basilio de 
Palenque is a tiny and very poor vil- 
lage inhabited by the descendants 
of slaves who rebelled against the 
Spanish crown in the 18th century 
and declared themselves an indepen- 
dent territory. UNESCO's intention is 
to preserve their language, a blend of 
Spanish and Bantu; their music, which 
is essentially African; their knowledge 
of traditional medicine; and their fu- 
neral rites. 
Tangible 
results 
“I's a very special case, explains 
Betsy Elena Hernandez, who works 
for the Sub-Directorate of Intangible 
Heritage. “Palenque needs not only 
policy to preserve its culture but also 
the means to fight poverty. We are 
talking about a village with no drain- 
age system, which only gets electricity 
for a few hours a day. The Ministry 
wants to attack on both fronts’ 
Meanwhile, in Baranquilla, there are 
already tangible results. Tourism in- 
creased by 20 per cent last year, ac- 
cording to Chamber of Commerce 
figures. In addition, several artisans 
are learning the traditional techniques 
for making masks and carnival cos- 
tumes. 
Intangible cultural heritage is now 
sparking interest in the most remote 
areas of Colombia, such as the sou- 
thern tropical forest where more than 
70 per cent of Colombia's indigenous 
communities live. Eight states in this 
region have launched inventory proj- 
ects that are certain to enrich know- 
ledge of the country’s oral heritage. 
Sergio Ocampo, 
in Bogota.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

examines the implications of the entry into force of the Conventio 
(@UEREICE ECL RI RUC EN [CXS E10, Cl ET 
Smeets, head of UNESCO’s Intangible Heritage Section, 


### 210782: There will be no more proclamations of Masterpieces

  
THERE WILL BE NO MORE 
PROCLAMATIONS OF MASTERPIECES 
© 
Fo
to
 
Lu
ig
i 
The Patum of Berga. 
 
Interview by Agnés bardon and Stephen Roberts. 
How would you define oral 
and intangible heritage in very 
simple terms? 
Rather than defining it, it may be bet- 
ter to recapitulate the areas covered 
by this heritage. It concerns music and 
traditional dance; traditional theatre; 
oral expressions such as folktales or 
sagas; traditional knowledge related 
to nature and the universe; skills linked 
to craftsmanship; and rituals and fes- 
tive events like carnivals. Generally, 
they are expressions passed down 
from one generation to the next that 
play a significant role in the commu- 
nities where they are practiced, inas- 
much as they give them a sense of 
continuity and identity. 
Among the many masterpieces pro- 
claimed by UNESCO, we can give 
special mention to the Patum in the 
city of Berga (Spain), proclaimed in 
2005. It's a noteworthy example be- 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
cause all the inhabitants are invited 
to participate, including the children. 
They take part in the festivities by pa- 
rading in the street like the adults, but 
with a miniature bestiary. They learn in 
this way to imitate the grown-ups’ be- 
haviour and become the future actors 
of this heritage. 
The Convention 
for the Safeguarding 
of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage, adopted in 2003, 
enters into force on 20 April. 
What impact will this have? 
The text consolidates a new con- 
cept of heritage that has developed 
in the last three decades. In 1972, 
the Organization adopted a Conven- 
tion on the Protection of the World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage, fo- 
cused on monuments and natural 
sites. Already in the 1970s we had 
6 
begun thinking about other aspects 
of human heritage. But it took time 
for this approach to become con- 
crete and to produce the Conven- 
tion that is now taking effect. 
What has changed is that now a 
binding legal instrument exists, ratified 
by numerous States. This instrument, 
first of all, will enable raising aware- 
ness in the international community. 
Then it will make it possible to safe- 
guard this heritage in new ways. The 
emphasis is placed on the role that 
must be played by the groups and 
communities who hold this heritage, 
not only to identify its different forms 
but also to safeguard them. Finally, the 
adoption of the text creates the pos- 
sibility of raising additional funds to fi- 
nance more programmes and actions. 
The proclamation 
of masterpieces was 
at the heart of the intangible 
heritage programme. 
Will that still be true? 
No, there will be no more proclama- 
tions of masterpieces as there were 
in 2001, 2003 and 2005. Once the 
Convention enters into force, master- 
pieces present in States Parties’ terri- 
tory will be inscribed on the Repre- 
“they are expressions passed 
down from one generation 
to the next that play 
a significant role 
in the communities 
where they are practiced”.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
.
B
u
r
k
e
 
    
  
for Intangible Heritage. 


### 210782: There will be no more proclamations of Masterpieces

sentative List of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage of Humanity. The condi- 
tions under which they will be in- 
cluded have yet to be determined 
by the Intergovernmental Commit- 
tee that will implement the Conven- 
tion. But most of the masterpieces 
are to be found on the territory of 
States that have already ratified 
the Convention. We can therefore 
expect that a great many of them 
will soon be included among the 
items inscribed on the representa- 
tive list. 
What are the key issues 
or the future? 
Many aspects need further definition. 
We have to specify what this repre- 
sentative list will comprise. The States 
that will implement the Convention 
must also identify the communities 
that hold this heritage. Often a system 
of representation has to be set up 
for these groups, or help provided 
so that they can create NGOs. 
Authorities, too, particularly at the 
local level, have to be made more 
aware of the existence, values and 
© 
Na
ti
on
al
 
Ce
nt
er
 
fo
r 
In
ta
ng
ib
le
 
He
ri
ta
ge
 
of
 
Mo
ng
ol
ia
 
importance of this heritage. There's 
still work to be done to increase 
consciousness of this cause. 
    
"4 M ~~ Fr 4 4 B J 
Traditional music of Morin Khuur (Mongolia). 
LEYLHINEI RR EEL ERIE [oN [eI (Ri ET ELoi 1] RT Te Te] 
hey inscribe their entire cosmogony on this sacred material. 
2003, UNESCO proclaimed their tradition a masterpie 
I CUELG RT EN TIEN Eels 


### 210783: The Sacred wood of Madagascar's Zafimaniry

  
THE SACRED WOOD 
OF MADAGASCAR’S ZAFIMANIRY 
  
   
has no particular charm. Yet the 
region's inhabitants are willing to 
walk for as long as four hours to 
get to its weekly market. 
Once there, throngs of kids guide 
the visitor around the houses and 
workshops where the famous 
sculpted rosewood chairs are 
Zafimaniry country, 
an area of 
700 square kilometers 
encompassing about 
100 villages. 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
© 
J.
Sé
gu
r/
ZE
D bi - 
   
The Zafimaniry are the last to practice woodworking.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

© 
J.
Sé
gu
r/
ZE
D 
Woodworking techniques. 
sold, and also stools, honey pots 
and diverse sculpted chests, re- 
nowned as far away as Scandina- 
via and Japan. 
Antoetra is the main gateway to 
Zafimaniry country, an area of 700 
square kilometers encompassing 
about 100 villages, the most re- 
mote of which is a ten-hour hike 
away. This community of 25,000 
is the last to practice woodcraft, 
previously widespread on the is- 
land. 
The elaborate tradition, transmit- 
ted from one generation to the 
next, is visible on every construc- 
tion and object made of wood, 
even the most ordinary. In 2003, 
it was proclaimed a masterpiece 
  
Deep in the heart of the Tanala forest, 
situated in the southeast of Madagascar, 
Zafimaniry encompasses about 100 villages. 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2008 
© 
J.
Sé
gu
r/
ZE
D 
 
of oral and intangible heritage by 
UNESCO. 
A few hours on foot from Antoetra, 
the village of Sakaivo emerges 
from the mist. Traditional wooden 
houses are built on both sides of 
a stream and a few rice paddies. 
lt is said they once covered all the 
central highlands, where construc- 
tions in pisé, cob or brick have 
now replaced them. 
Mr Rakoto, a reputed carpen- 
ter, takes me to see one of his 


### 210783: The Sacred wood of Madagascar's Zafimaniry

“creations”. While a cabinetmaker 
smoothes a plank, helped by an 
adolescent, he explains that a 
Zafimaniry house requires three 
months of work and is assem- 
bled only with planks and pegs, 
without a single nail or other metal 
hardware. 
Complex 
symbolism 
On doors and windows you dis- 
cover the finely chiseled geometric 
motifs for which the Zafimaniry are 
famous. The symbolism marked 
in the wood is in fact a reflection 
of their beliefs. The spider's web 
pattern stands for family ties, while 
the honeycomb represents com- 
munity life. 
And that's not all. The houses 
are actually built in accordance 
with even more erudite rules. From 
8 
their orientation in the heart of the 
village to the lay-out of the only 
room, it is the entire Malagasy cos- 
mogony that is represented in the 
four directions, or the four major 
destinies. 
The founder of the line always 
takes his place in the village's 
most sacred angle, the north-east. 
As for the oldest son, he takes the 
space just below his father while 
the youngest has to settle farther 
to the south-west, the entirely pro- 
fane angle. 
Similarly, inside the house, the 
bed is in the north-east while the 
entrance and the unimportant ob- 
jects are placed in the west. Each 
of the 20 different species of wood 
used by villagers is reserved for a 
specific purpose. 
A threatened 
culture 
But today this culture is endan- 
gered. Following food shortages 
in the 1950s, the Zafimaniry be- 
gan selling their crafts, but they 
have not succeeded in making 
their trading profitable, unlike the 
distributors of their products, nor 
have they been able to prevent 
counterfeiting. 
In addition, with the growing 
deforestation of the region, they 
have begun to run short of raw 
material and are turning to other 
activities, such as slash-and-burn 
shifting cultivation, which fur- 
ther aggravates the deforestation 
problem. 
In the end, young people tend to 
go look for work in town or in the 
shipyards, becoming part of the ru- 
ral exodus and the disintegration of 
Zafimaniry identity. 
This is why UNESCO has 
launched an action plan aimed at 
protecting the community's natu- 
ral environment and monitoring 
the transmission of traditional tech- 
niques. It is a way to preserve the 
knowledge acquired down through 
the centuries by the Zafimaniry, 
“descendants of those who desire”. 
Fabrice de Lestang

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

BI 001: [0 [=] (To le) We) ML) (No LI RU Ee [NT EYRVCENCT EF 1 Ra CR 2 TTT oo] EH 
IEW EWN JER EY I ET CTE RR BL [I UT EL RT CEI TCS ele TT Lig A PV 
LUCY J CECE Re @ TERY Elo CX aT EL Tol CY) El Te [2 
VALE TL IE EET RR TT CXC [SY EY Ei {o] EES XC TE TEL CTT 


### 210784: Weaving color into culture

  
WEAVING COLOR 
INTO CULTURE 
© 
Re
na
to
 
S.
 
Ra
st
ro
ll
o 
I 
  
LIA 1 
- 
.“ Foo was Tr % 
1 Lr As 
- g r=. *"R® 
[= A 
{ LARS FHETIAML ELI 
  
    
Wi 
Ny ¢ 
Ey 
sor 
al! 
Haja Amina Appi uses dryed pandan leaves to weave her mats. 
     
    
e pandan trees that grow 
her home in Ungos Matata, 
rovince of Tawi Tawi, a small 
the southwestern tip of the 
lippines. 
The bulky leaves are thorny-edged, 
but she prefers this variety because 
it produces strong and sturdy mat- 
ting strips. She has become accus- 
tomed to the prickly thorns after years 
of working with them to produce the 
raw materials of her art. 
Throughout her life she has been a 
mat weaver, teacher, artist, and most 
recently, a National Living Treasure 
or Gawad sa Manlilka ng Bayan 
Awardee. 
In line with UNESCO's efforts to 
promote living human treasures, the 
Republic of the Philippines esta- 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
blished this prestigious national title in 
1992 to identify individuals who play 
a special role in the preservation and 
revitalization of traditional arts threa- 
tened by extinction. 
Since then, eleven artists have 
been named in recognition of their 
dedication to their craft and use of 
indigenous methods and materials. 
Haja Appi received this designation 
in 2004 in recognition of her skills in 
the art of weaving mats from pandan 
leaves, or paghahablon. 
An ancient 
technique 
Tepo mat making is a very precise 
“counted thread” weaving tech- 
nique practiced by women of the 
Sama community of Tawi-tawi for 
generations. 
The Sama mat is known for its bold 
colors, geometric designs, and du- 
9 
rability. A plain white mat is sewn 
against a colored one and serves 
as the design's frame, contrasting 
with the rich palette and serving as 
a protection for the thin dried pan- 
dan strips. A mat can take up to two 
months to weave, even longer for 
more intricate designs. Haja Appi 
has earned a reputation for creating 
the most intricate and finely woven 
mats. 
Her work begins with the harvest 
of the pandan leaves. She then re- 
moves the thorns with a small knife 
and and strips them with a jangat 
deyum, a thin piece of wood with 
sharp tines. The resulting narrow rib- 
bons are then sun-dried and colored 
in a boiling vat of anjibi, a commer- 
cial powdered dye. 
To soften the strips and make 
them pliant enough for weaving, 
she crushes them repeatedly with a 
paggosa or heavy log, in a process 
called pagtabig. This arduous and 
repetitive chore is essential to prop- 
erly dry the pandan strips without 
rendering them brittle and useless. 
Bold designs 
Haja Appi does not work from a writ- 
ten pattern, nor does she use paper 
and pencil to keep track of each loop 
and fold. She relies on her innate 
Since 2004, 
Haja Amina Appi 
has been named 
a “living human treasure” 
in her country.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 210784: Weaving color into culture

sense of mathematical progression 
to calculate when and how the col- 
ored fibers will eventually join to 
create symmetrical geometric de- 
signs. 
What sets Haja Appi apart from 
her fellow mat weavers is the ex- 
ceptional evenness of her weave 
and the startling creativity of her 
patterns. Although she uses a tra- 
ditional repertoire of weaving tech- 
niques to create delicate, precise, 
and minutely detailed patterns, her 
simple geometric designs are dra- 
matic bursts of colort that both defy 
and celebrate tradition. 
Historically, the Sama mat was 
plain white in color, but she began 
experimenting with dye to achieve 
her desired effect. As commercial 
© 
R
e
n
a
t
o
 
S.
 
Ra
st
ro
ll
o 
 
To soften the strips, Haja Appi she crushes 
them with a heavy log. 
dyes are often not bold or striking 
enough for her taste, she mixes 
them to obtain vibrant reds, purples 
and yellows, sometimes using up to 
eight colors at a time. 
In order to preserve this tradition 
for future generations, Haja Appi 
teaches young women in her 
community the art of Tepo, a skill 
traditionally passed from mother 
to daughter. 
Her deep knowledge of both the 
technique of paghahablon, as well 
as her lifelong efforts to preserve 
this important Filipino tradition, has 
earned her a special place as one 
of the nation’s culture bearers. Her 
work is available for public view 
in the collection of the National 
Museum of the Philippines. 
Maricris Jan Tobias 
Recited for centuries in Yakutia but outlawed during the Soviet era, 
the Olonkho heroic epos came close to vanishing. This oral tradition linke 
ICE ETN EDT {eI CARVE TR oI (oT ET 1 IEW EES Cfo] [Yoo 1 [oY 0) 
ELGRNEDT oN SIGE Xe fl HELA AVL So oo BT) L111) 


### 210785: Olonkho, an epos from twelve hundred years ago

  
OLONKHO, 
AN EPOS FROM TWELVE HUNDRED YEARS AGO 
   
    
 
nce upon a time there was a witch 
abies from the Upper, Middle and 
Lower Worlds. Sarakhana's three 
adopted children, transformed into 
wolves, soon conquered the home- 
land of hero Chugdaan Bukhatyyr. 
He battled them and won the vic- 
Delving into local 
warrior legends 
and closely connected 
to shamanic folklore, 
it carries the epic memory 
of the Yakut nation. 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
© 
Pi
ot
r 
O
k
o
n
e
s
h
n
i
k
o
v
 
  
 
Scene extracted from the Olonkho performance Kyys Debiliié. 
10

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Na
ti
on
al
 
C
o
m
m
i
t
t
e
e
 
of
 
th
e 
S
a
k
h
a
 
Re
nu
bl
ic
 
(Y
ak
ut
ia
) 
-
—
 
  
The narrator, called Olonjosut, lends his voice to each character. 


### 210785: Olonkho, an epos from twelve hundred years ago

tory. But the losers called their “old- 
er brother” for help, the monster 
Dyghyidaana Beghe, and the hero 
was forced to retreat. 
Sobegins “Kyys Debiliie”, one of the 
countless variations of the Olonkho 
epos, handed down from genera- 
tion to generation in the Sakha Re- 
public in Yakutia, a north-eastern 
region of the Russian Federation. 
Delving into local warrior legends 
and closely connected to shamanic 
folklore, it carries the epic memory 
of the Yakut nation. As in ancient 
Greek myth, the Olonkho gods 
put the first humans on earth, in 
the Middle World. The gods ruled 
over the Upper World, its borders 
inhabited by dangerous giants, the 
abaasy. The Underworld was the 
domain of monsters hostile to hu- 
mankind. But behind the array of 
warrior adventures, the struggle for 
good and evil is at the heart of this 
oral tradition. 
An epos 
that is sung 
Unlike most other epic tales the 
Yakut Olonkho is not spoken but 
sung. The personality and actions 
of each character have their own 
melody. The Olonkhosut, the nar- 
rator, sings the monologues of the 
heroes and recites the rest in a 
rapid tempo, in a sort of sing-song 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
chant. He may mix in the imitation 
of a horse neighing, birds singing 
or other animal sounds. With these 
different voices, alternating song 
and recitation, the Olonkhosut can 
keep spectators on the edge of 
their seats the whole night long. 
The Olonkho belongs to the epic 
arts of the Turkic-Mongolian peo- 
ples and its melodies reveal its ori- 
ental influences. Specialists have 
also found that the Olonkho has 
elements in common with Indian 
raga, Central Asian makom and 
Azeri magam, which gave birth to 
Gregorian chant. Traditional Yakut 
music is also linked to the tradition- 
al song of the akyn in Kazakhstan 
and Kyrghyzstan. 
The Yakut epos had its moment of 
glory in the early 20th century. Plays 
were staged based on the Olonkho, 
including “Young Hero Beriet Ber- 
ghen” (1906) or “The Hero Kulan- 
tai on his Prancing Horse" (1907). 
Then it foundered in the Soviet 
period. Considered a remnant of 
the past, the popular tradition was 
banned. It continued, but went un- 
derground. As a result, while once 
there were hundreds of Olonkhosut 
in Yacutia, now there are only two: 
Daria Tomskaya, 96, in the village 
of Ene, and Piotr Rechetnikov, 77, 
in the village of Cherkekh. “Yet in a 
world where people are constantly 
11   
pushed around, the Olonkho's se- 
renity is beneficial comments An- 
drei Borissov, film and theatre di- 
rector of the Olonkho performance 
Kyys Debiliie. 
A threatened 
tradition 
In response to the threat against 
this oral tradition, UNESCO pro- 
claimed the Olonkho a Masterpiece 
of the Oral and Intangible Heritage 
of Humanity. A number of initiatives 
to ensure its safeguarding were 
taken following the proclamation. A 
decree “on the measures for con- 
servation, study and circulation of 
the Yakut heroic epos Olonkho" 
was adopted, proposing primar- 
ily to launch an “Olonkho decade 
2006-2015" in the Republic and 
pay a pension to the “living de- 
positories of the epic tradition” 
Daria Tomskaya and Piotr Rechet- 
nikov. An Olonkho study centre, 
an Olonkho theatre and an annual 
folklore festival entitled “World cul- 
ture on Olonkho territory” will also 
be founded. Particular focus, final- 
ly, has been given to the younger 
generation — the ministry of educa- 
tion will develop educational pro- 
grammes and material devoted to 
the Olonkho epos». 
Vladimir Sergueev

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### 210786: Important dates on intangible heritage at UNESCO

Important dates 
on intangible heritage at UNESCO 
Ko 
[} 
[0] 
< 
= 
2 
Q 
© 
= 
<C 
©] 
O 
(70) 
[IN] 
Zz 
> 
© 
1966 
UNESCO's General Conference 
adopts the Declaration on 
the Principles of International 
Cultural Cooperation which lays 
the basis for the development of 
cultural policies within UNESCO. 
1970 
An Intergovernmental Conference 
on the Institutional, Administrative 
and Financial Aspects of Culture 
is convened (Venice, Italy), 
marking the emergence 
of the notions of “cultural 
development” and of the “cultural 
dimension of development.’ 
1972 
When the Convention for the 
Protection of the World's Cultural 
and Natural Heritage is adopted, 
several Member States express 
interest in the importance 
of safeguarding the intangible 
heritage. 
1973 
Bolivia proposes that a 
Protocol be added to the Universal 
Copyright Convention 
in order to protect folklore. 
1982 
The Mondiacult World 
Conference on Cultural Policies 
(Mexico City) acknowledges 
the increasing importance 
attached to ‘intangible cultural 
heritage’ and includes 
it in its redefinition 
of cultural heritage. 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 
By José Banaag 
1982 
UNESCO sets up the Committee 
of Experts on the Safeguarding 
of Folklore. 
1989 
The Recommendation 
on the Safeguarding of Traditional 
Culture and Folklore is adopted 
by the General Conference. 
1994 
UNESCO launches the Living 
Human Treasures programme, 
following a proposal 
by the Republic of Korea. 
1996 
The report “Our Creative Diversity”, 
after remarking that the 
1972 Convention is not 
appropriate for the kinds 
of heritage most common in regions 
where cultural energies have been 
concentrated in other forms 
of expression such as artifacts, 
dance or oral traditions, calls 
for the development of other forms 
of recognition to match the true 
range and wealth of heritage 
found across the world. 
1997 
UNESCO and the Moroccan 
National Commission organize an 
international consultation on the 
preservation of popular cultural 
spaces in Marrakesh in June. 
1997/1998 
UNESCO launches 
the Proclamation of Masterpieces 
of the Oral and Intangible Heritage 
of Humanity. 
12  
1999 
UNESCO and the Smithsonian 
Institution jointly organize 
the Conference: 
‘A Global Assessment of the 1989 
Recommendation on 
the Safeguarding of Traditional 
Culture and Folklore: 
Local Empowerment 
and International Cooperation’, 
in Washington DC, USA. 
2001 
The First Proclamation of 19 cultural 
spaces or expressions takes place 
in May. UNESCO's Member States 
adopt the Universal Declaration 
on Cultural Diversity, together 
with an action plan. 
2003 
The 32nd session of the General 
Conference adopts the Convention 
for the Safeguarding of the 
Intangible Cultural Heritage 
in October. In November, 
the Second Proclamation 
inscribes 28 new Masterpieces. 
2004 
Algeria deposits its instrument 
of approval on March 15, 
thus becoming the first State Party 
to the Convention. 
2005 
The Third Proclamation 
of 43 Masterpieces brings 
the total to 90. 
2006 - The Convention enters 
into force on April 20. 
Forty-seven Member States 
have so far ratified it.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### 210787: The Courier looks back

The Courier looks back 
Since it began publication, The UNESCO Courier has devoted 
many articles and issues to the intangible heritage. 
OU Ic 
  
URES 
aw oa 
ie = g 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
.
B
u
r
k
e
 
  
Issues 
Great epics - Heroic tales 
of man and superman 
September 1989 
Whether composed by unknown poets, or 
transmitted orally and reshaped from century 
to century, epics relate to the birth of a culture, 
an empire, or indeed the universe, maintained 
in the national memory of one generation 
to the next. The epic has thus survived 
the vicissitudes of history. 
Theatre of the world 
April 1983 
From African rituals to the kabuki of Japan, 
world theatre covers an immense canvas, 
the “concentrated expression” of a culture. 
It draws on popular myths and customs, 
historic ways of life and experiences, 
and assimilates all forms of art, human 
expression and communication. 
Music of the centuries 
June 1973 
Music is associated with life itself and with 
human society. Even in the early stages 
of every culture, sung recitation is a vehicle 
for historical narrative and the teaching 
of philosophical and moral concepts. 
This issue examines the place of traditional 
music in the world of today. 
 
Sanskrit theatre from the province of Kerala, 
the Kutiyattam (India). 
The UNESCO Courier - May - 2006 13 
Here is a brief trip down memory lane. 
Articles 
“The rebirth of Kunqu opera” 
November 2005 
This traditional Chinese art, once threatened 
with extinction, is now the object of renewed 
interest. 
“Jongo’s rebirth” 
December 2004 
Thanks to certain communities, this blend 
of song, dance and magic, brought by slaves 
from Angola and the Congo, is again 
in the spotlight in Brazil. 
“Preserving the magic” 
September 2001 
Defining the intangible cultural heritage is far 
from simple, as UNESCO's efforts to safe- 
guard endangered masterpieces go to show. 
“A prince embroiderer 
without a kingdom” 
July 2001 
Among the last of a dying breed of gold 
embroiderers from Laos, Tiao Somsanith 
is trying to save this vanishing art without 
resorting to commercialism. 
‘“Jemaa-el-Fna’s thousand 
and one nights” 
December 2000 
The oral traditions of Marrakesh’s famous 
square are unique in the world for their 
richness and variety. 
“The past is not just made 
of stone” 
December 2000 
The world's heritage is not just monuments 
and natural wonders—the intangible ideas 
and beliefs that make up our collective memory 
also have their rightful place. 
José Banaag

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/191577eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

ro 
        
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour I'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHu3auus 
O6beanHeHHbIX Haumin no 
BOMpPOCaM 00pa3oBaHus, 
HayKn UN KYJbTYpbl 
Sata any aliie 
Lally alally Loy 
eA EAR A 
Brg ROUEAAR 
  
  
  
         
  
  
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
http://www.unesco.org/fr/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
Director 
Saturnino Muiioz Gomez 
Editors 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape 
English 
Edna Yahil 
French 
Agnes Bardon 
Russian 
Vladimir Sergueev 
Spanish 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
Editorial Assistant 
José Banaag 
Photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, Chakir Piro 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced 
and/or translated providing the credit line reads 
“Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” and includes 
date and hyperlink : http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Photographs belonging to UNESCO may be reproduced freely. 
They must carry the following caption: 
© UNESCO and photographer's name. For high resolution, 
please contact the Photobank: photobank@unesco.org 
Photographs without UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries 
and territories concerned 
 