# [068421](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

- o 
FY]
 
BE
RT
 
To 
T
C
 ch
 
AA
 
A time to live... 
43 Luxembourg 
Boundless visions 
On the occasion of a Unesco-sponsored 
meeting of experts in the field of still photo- 
graphy, a photo exhibition entitled “Visions 
sans Frontieres” was held in the city of 
Luxembourg from 11 December 1985 to 6 
January 1986. Organized by the city author- 
ities in collaboration with the Luxembourg 
National Commission for Unesco, “Vision 
sans Frontiéres” (an international association 
of professionals in the field of photography) 
  
  
  
and RTL Productions, the exhibition pre- 
sented the work of several photographers 
including Luxembourg-born Edward 
Steichen (1879-1973). Among the works 
shown were a number of photos by 
Dominique Roger, including this one of a 
child learning to sketch during an exhibition 
on Unesco’s work held at the Palace of 
Nationalities in Beijing in 1984. 
Photo Unesco-Dominique Roger

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

U
N
E
S
C
O
 
The Courier 
A window open on the world 
 
Editorial March 1986 
39th year 
 
city, “apparently watched over by a giant stone 
tortoise”, were discovered in Central Asia. They 
were the vestiges of Karakorum, capital of the Mongol 
Empire founded in the thirteenth century by Genghis Khan 
and the jewel of the rich artistic and cultural heritage of the 
Mongolia of the Khans, a region whose influence was to 
dominate the history of Central Asia and reach as far as Asia 
Minor and Eastern Europe. 
This issue of the Unesco Courier presents a glimpse of the 
artistic achievements of this ancient Mongol civilization, as 
well as a variety of other themes largely related to Unesco 
activities. Also under the heading “art” are articles on the 
magnificent Picasso Museum in Paris, opened last year, and 
on the great Chilean painter Roberto Matta, inspired by a 
recent retrospective exhibition of his work. 
The “powers of language”, a subject which falls within the 
scope of the social and human sciences, are explored in a 
thought-provoking article by a brilliant young French ling- 
uist, Claude Hagege, whose compatriot Elisabeth Badinter 
looks at the ways in which relations between the sexes are 
changing in the Western world today. 
Two highly topical ventures in the fields of international 
scientific co-operation and communication between peo- 
ples—Halley’s comet and the Channel Tunnel—also receive 
coverage in an issue which is completed by two features of 
broadly cultural interest: the curious history of the giraffe 
offered to the King of France by the pasha of Egypt in 1825 
and the eventful biography of that enigmatic, evergreen 
figure from Latin America, the tango. Also in this issue, our 
usual 1986 feature devoted to the International Year of 
Peace. 
A T the end of the nineteenth century the ruins of a vast 
Front cover: detail of a gilded bronze statue of the Buddha Vairocana 
(72 cm high, 46 cm wide) by the Mongolian sculptor Zanabazar (17th 
century). The symbolic hand gesture or mudra of this Tantric Buddha 
who “uproots stupidity and ignorance”—the upraised index finger of 
the left hand—is particularly remarkable. The statue is preserved in the 
Museum of Plastic Arts at Ulaanbaatar, capital of the Mongolian 
People’s Republic. 
Photo from Zanabazar, Eminent Mongol Sculptor, Stale Publishing House, Ulaanbaatar, 1982 
Back cover: poster by the French artist Alain Le Yaouanc. Copies were 
sold in November 1985 for the benefit of Unesco’s World Heritage 
Fund. 
Photo © Unesco 
Editor-in-chief : Edouard Glissant 
SCIENCE 
4 Rendezvous with Halley's comet 
A major international venture to study a visitor from space 
by Howard Brabyn 
CULTURE AND COMMUNICATION 
7 Home by a neck 
A giraffe’s epic journey from Cairo to Paris 
by Georges Poisson 
10 Tango time 
The Latin American song and dance 
that swept the world onto its feet 
by Luis Bocaz 
12 The Channel Tunnel 
by John Ardagh 
SOCIAL SCIENCES 
14 His n’ Hers 
The changing relationship between the sexes 
in the Western world 
by Elisabeth Badinter 
18 The powers of language 
by Claude Hagége 
ART 
26 The Picasso Museum in Paris 
by Dominique Bozo 
28 Matta 
A new way of looking at the world 
by Jean-Jacques Lebel 
30 Treasures of Mongolia 
by Namsrain Ser-Odjav 
38 1986: Year of Peace /3 
    
2 A time to live... 
LUXEMBOURG: Boundless visions 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Al
l 
ri
gh
ts
 
re
se
rv
ed
 
Published monthly in 32 languages English Italian Turkish Macedonian Finnish A selection in Braille is published 
by Unesco French Hindi Urdu Serbo-Croat Swedish quarterly in English, French, 
The United Nations Educational, Spanish Tamil Catalan Slovene Basque Spanish and Korean 
Scientific and Cultural Organization Russian Hebrew Malaysian Chinese Thai 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. German Persian Korean Bulgarian ISSN 0041-5278 
Arabic Dutch Swahili Greek N°3.1906-CPD- 26-1 - 432A 
Japanese Portuguese Croato-Serb Sinhala 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

3 
3 ~ 
3 
|
 
A
R
E
A
 
H
T
T
 
a
S
 
1 
        
  
BE 
MN oT " my 
BY Us qT 
photograph re- Above, computerized 
ceived from the European Space Agency's 
spacecraft Giotto when it encountered 
Halley's comet early in the morning of 14 
March 1986. Picture was sent from about 
1,500 km from the nucleus of the comet. 


### 68339: Rendezvous with Halley's comet: a major international venture to study a visitor from space

Pie
 ©
 A
ow
ia
d ros,
 
ue 
Rendezvous with Halley’s comet 
A major international venture 
to study a visitor from space 
rille, eight instrument-packed space 
probes (one launched by the Euro- 
pean Space Agency, two by the USSR, two 
by Japan, and three by the USA) are weav- 
ing intricate patterns in space in the biggest 
international astronomic co-operative ven- 
ture ever mounted—the investigation of 
Halley’s comet. 
Two space shuttle missions are also being 
in part devoted to observation of the comet, 
the trajectory of which will be continuously 
monitored by the world’s most powerful 
land-based telescopes. Altogether some 
900 professional astronomers from forty- 
seven countries are taking part in the 
investigation. 
Why all this interest in what veteran US 
astronomer Fred Whipple has described as 
“a large, dirty snowball”? 
The answer is that astronomers believe 
that comets consist of the remnants of the 
building blocks left over from the birth of 
the solar system some 4,500 million years 
ago. The history of the solar system is re- 
corded, so it is thought, within their frozen 
hearts. 
Today, for the first time ever, thanks to 
the genius of two seventeenth-century En- 
glish scientists, Isaac Newton and Edmond 
Halley, and the achievements of modern 
space technology, we have in our hands an 
L IKE courtiers dancing a stately quad- 
4 
BD 
! 
entrance ticket to one of these refrigerated, 
flying museums. For Halley’s comet is the 
only vigorously active comet whose orbit 
brings it relatively close to the earth (this 
time round, its thirtieth recorded appar- 
ition, it is coming to within 62 million 
kilometres of our planet) and has been de- 
termined precisely enough to allow of de- 
tailed scientific planning for investigation 
well in advance; and for the very first time 
space technology is sufficiently advanced to 
enable us to go out and meet a comet 
beyond the blanket of the earth’s atmos- 
phere instead of waiting for it to come to us, 
to penetrate its coma (the fuzzy gaseous 
cloud, up to 100,000 kilometres across, that 
shields the nucleus from our sight), to have 
a close up view of its nucleus and to analyse 
the components of its tail, in short, to 
understand the elements from which our 
solar system was constructed. 
In 1950, the Dutch astronomer Jan Hen- 
drik Oort postulated that comets originate 
from a vast cloud of hundreds of millions of 
small bodies (now known as the Oort 
Cloud) that orbits the solar system at a 
distance of one light-year. The nucleus, or 
core, of a comet is thought to consist of 
about 25 per cent dust and lumps of rock or 
metallic matter and 75 per cent of ice, in 
which are mixed compounds containing 
ammonia, methane and carbon dioxide 
by Howard Brabyn 
radicals. The 700 or so comets that have 
been scientifically recorded so far have had 
nuclei ranging in size from 0.5 to 70 
kilometres in diameter. 
From time to time a passing star sends a 
gravitational ripple through the Oort Cloud 
sending a flurry of these “dirty snowballs” 
hurtling off into space. Some of them, the 
“short-period” comets, like Halley’s comet, 
are projected towards the solar system and, 
influenced by its gravitational pull, become 
members of the inner solar system, com- 
pleting their orbits around the sun in less 
than 200 years. The “long-period” comets 
can take millions of years to complete their 
orbital cycles. An average of five new com- 
ets are discovered every year. 
The outer surface of a comet nucleus is : 
thought to consist mainly of dust. As a 
comet approaches to within three astrono- 
mical units of the sun (one astronomical 
unit equals the distance between the earth 
and the sun, roughly 150 million 
kilometres) this outer crust heats up and the 
sub-surface ice begins to sublimate (a pro- 
cess by which a solid is converted directly 
into vapour without going through the lig- 
uid stage). The resulting gas streams out 
from the comet carrying dust particles with 
it to form the coma. 
As it gets closer to the sun a comet de- 
velops two tails, a yellowish curved tail pr

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 68339: Rendezvous with Halley's comet: a major international venture to study a visitor from space

1) 
TARE 
EYP A 
  
The English Astronomer Royal Edmond 
Halley (1656-1742). He calculated the 
. orbits of many comets and correctly pre- 
dicted the return of the comet of 1682— 
Halley's comet—which this year Is again . 
approaching relatively close to the earth 
(for the 30th recorded time).

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 68339: Rendezvous with Halley's comet: a major international venture to study a visitor from space

path of Halley's comet 
nucleus position uncertainty 
Pp composed of dust particles released during 
the process of sublimation, and a blueish 
stream of gas called the plasma tail which is 
formed when the gases released from the 
comet’s nucleus become charged by solar 
radiation. 
In a few months’ time, when all the data 
have been gathered in, we shall have made a 
tremendous leap forward in our knowledge 
of the nature of comets and of the origins of 
the solar system. We should not, however, 
forget that this will be due not only to the 
brilliance of modern astronomers but also 
to a quite unprecedented effort of interna- 
tional co-operation. 
Launched on 15 December 1984, the 
Soviet space probe Vega I flew through 
Halley's coma on 6 March 1986, at a dis- 
tance of about 9.600 kilometres from the 
nucleus, and photographed and analysed 
the gases around it. Sister satellite Vega 2 
encountered Halley's comet on 9 March 
1986 and analysed its coma. 
The Japanese probe Sakigake (pioneer), 
launched on 7 January 1985, rendezvoused 
with Halley's comet on 9 March 1986 and 
measured the speed and temperature of the 
solar wind blowing against the comet, whilst 
on 8 March 1986 its companion satellite 
Suisei (comet) flew past Halley's comet ata 
distance of 144,000 kilometres and studied 
the enormous cloud of hydrogen gas sur- 
rounding the comet. 
Playing supporting roles are the veteran 
US space probes Pioneer 12, Solar Max and 
ICE (International Cometary Explorer). 
Pioneer 12 is turning its attention away from 
its long-term task of observing the effects of 
the solar wind on planet Venus to focus its 
spectrometer on Halley's comet during and 
after the perihelion (the period of the com- 
et’s closest approach to the sun). At the 
6 
Pathfinder Concept . 
reduced uncertainty 
Vega detects nucleus 
Schematic drawing above shows 
trajectories of the European Space Agen- 
cy’s (ESA) spacecraft Giotto (see caption 
page 18) and one of two Soviet Vega 
spacecraft which flew through Halley's 
comet in March 1986. To enable Giotto to 
pass near the comet's nucleus, which is 
disguised by coma dust and gas, the 
Soviet astronomers agreed to provide 
ESA with information derived from camer- 
as on board the Vega probes, the first to fly 
through the comet. The US National Aero- 
nautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
also supported this three-agency “Pathfin- 
der Concept” to reduce Giotto targeting 
uncertainty. 
same time Solar Max is studying the comet’s 
dust and plasma tails for comparison with 
observations made by ICE last September 
on the nature of the tail of comet Giacobini- 
Zinner. 
Last in the field is the European Space 
Agency's satellite Giotto. Named after the 
famous fourteenth-century Florentine pain- 
ter Giotto di Bondone, who included Hal- 
ley’s comet in his Paduan fresco The Adora- 
tion of the Magi (see colour page 19) after 
witnessing its apparition in 1301, space 
probe Giotto was launched on 2 July 1985. 
Basing its trajectory on data supplied by the 
two Soviet Vega probes, Giotto’s mission 
was to pass near the comet’s nucleus, ex- 
amining the material streaming from it and 
transmitting photographs to earth every 
four seconds. 
This might well have been a suicide mis- 
sion. The slightest error in calculation of its 
trajectory could have sent Giotto crashing 
into the surface of the comet. As a precau- 
tion against the particles which surround 
the comet, some of them large enough to 
have inflicted fatal damage, the satellite was 
fitted with an outer aluminium skin and an 
inner casing made of Kelvar, the material 
from which bullet-proof vests are made. As 
it happened, the spacecraft functioned per- 
fectly until 2 seconds before the scheduled 
time of closest approach when the telemetry 
signal was lost owing to dust impacts on the 
spacecraft. Just over half an hour later, 
however, the signal was recovered at 
ground stations in Australia, and data from 
all experiments was again being received. 
The results will take months to analyse 
fully but first impressions are that they are 
spectacular. The Halley Multicolour 
Camera on board Giotto, appears to have 
determined the size of the nucleus as appro- 
ximately fifteen by eight kilometres, and 
the spacecraft has contributed a mass of 
other information to the International Hal- 
ley Watch, perhaps the most complex inter- 
national astronomical project ever under- 
taken. And as scientists sit down to assess 
the information as it comes flooding in from 
the space Armada, they will surely sense 
the presence of two great figures from the 
past peering eagerly over their shoulders— 
Isaac Newton, the man who first prop- 
ounded a workable theory of the orbits of 
comets, and Edmond Halley who applied 
this theory to the comet named after him, 
which he had seen in 1682 and which he 
accurately predicted would return at regu- 
lar seventy-six-year intervals, thus blazing 
the trail for the amazing adventure we are 
living through today. [| 
HOWARD BRABYN is a Paris-based British 
writer and journalist with a special interest in the 
popularization of science. He was formerly editor 
in charge of the English-language edition of the 
Unesco Courier,

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

fall of Napoleon and the restoration of 
the monarchy in France, and all Cairo 
was buzzing with excitement. Muker Bey, a 
Sudanese nobleman, had sent two giraffes 
as a gift to the viceroy of Egypt, Muham- 
mad Ali Pasha. 
No one was more excited than the French 
Consul-General in Cairo, an engaging if 
somewhat eccentric Piedmontese called 
Bernardino Drovetti. Drovetti was a great 
connoisseur of Egyptian antiquities and his 
collections were later to form the nucleus of 
the Egyptian departments of the museums 
of Berlin, Turin and the Louvre. 
I: was the year 1825, ten years after the 
Relations between France and Egypt at 
that time were stormy. Aroused by the 
writings of Victor Hugo and the paintings of 
Delacroix, the youth of France was fired 
with enthusiasm for Greek independence. 
In 1822, however, Egyptian troops had 
assisted their Turkish allies in the massacre 
of Greek revolutionaries on the island of 
Chios. 
Considering it to be the primary duty of 
any true diplomat to do all in his power to 
reduce tension between countries, Drovetti 
saw in the arrival of two giraffes in Cairo an 
opportunity which he was quick to seize. 
Remembering that it was an ancient tradi- 
tion among Egyptian sovereigns to present 
one of these fabulous beasts to other 
monarchs whom they wished to honour, 
Drovetti requested that one of the two new- 
comers from Sudan be offered to the king of 
France, Charles X. An exceptional gift it 
would indeed be, since no giraffe had ever 
before been seen in France. 
Muhammad Ali Pasha readily gave his 
consent, but, alerted by the mysterious 
bush telegraph that operates within the dip- 
lomatic corps, the British consul, almost 
simultaneously, put forward a similar re- 
quest on behalf of his own royal master. His 
reasons for doing so were similar—the de- 
plorable state of relations between Britain 
and Egypt. 
Appreciating the advantages to be gained 
from this double proposition, the viceroy 
decreed in a Solomon-like judgement that 
one giraffe should go to each country, the 
choice between the two beasts to be made 
by the two consuls drawing lots. 
A few days later, Drovetti wrote trium- 
phantly to his superior, the lugubrious 
Baron de Damas: “I am happy to inform 
Your Excellency that fate has been kind to 
us. Our giraffe is strong and vigorous, 
whereas the one destined for the King of 
England is sickly and will not last long.” 
And indeed, the “English” giraffe was to 
die a few months later. Not, perhaps, a 
complete revenge for Waterloo—but all the 
Then came the problem of transporting 
the animal to France. Drovetti prepared the 
journey with painstaking care. In Alexan- 
dria he found a Sardinian brig, I Due Fratelli 
(The Two Brothers), whose captain under- 
took to treat the creature like his own 
daughter. Since the space between decks 
was not high enough, a hole had to be cut in 
the upper deck. The giraffe was installed 
below with her head (for she was a female) 
In 1984, the Musée de I'lle de France organized an 
exhibition entitled Une Girafe pour le Roi (A Giraffe for 
the King) which attracted several thousand visitors. Gab- 
riel Dardaud, who made a major contribution to the 
preparation of the exhibition, gave its title to his book 
about the story of the Charles X's giraffe, Une Girafe 
pour le Roi, Dumerchez-Naoum publishers, Creil 
(France), 1985. 


### 68342: Home by a neck: a giraffe's epic journey from Cairo to Paris

Home by a neck 
A giraffe’s epic journey 
from Cairo to Paris 
, , 
Filo hy 
Engraving above depicts the first giraffe to 
have been brought to France alive. The 
two-and-a-half-year-old, 12-foot-tall anim- 
al was sent as a gift to King Charles X by 
the ruler of Egypt. The engraving shows 
the giraffe in the “King’s Garden” (now the 
Jardin des Plantes) in Paris, in July 1827, 
shortly after its arrival. 
protruding into the open. The edges of the 
hole in the deck were lined with straw to 
protect her from bumps caused by the roll of 
the ship. A tarpaulin was rigged overhead 
to shield her from the rain. 
The next problem that arose was how to 
feed an animal that consumed twenty-five 
litres of milk a day. Drovetti decided to 
embark three milch cows and, for good 
measure, put aboard two antelopes, a 
cowhand to do the milking and three 
Sudanese to make the giraffe feel at home. 
As a final talisman to ensure that provi- 
dence would be on his side, he hung about 
the animal’s neck a parchment inscribed 
with verses from the Qur’an to protect her 
from the powers of evil. Preparations were 
 
by Georges Poisson 
a a Mwy Gop 
completed with a letter addressed to his 
colleague M. Bottu, an agent of the French 
Foreign Office in Marseille, advising him of 
the arrangements to be made for the giraffe 
on her arrival in France. 
Off sailed the brig, and on 13 October 
1826 it dropped anchor at Marseille after an 
uneventful journey, the only casualty one 
cow suffering from seasickness. Passengers, 
both two-legged and four-legged, were 
placed in quarantine in a hospital near the 
port, this respite giving M. de Villeneuve- 
Bargemon, Prefect of the Département des 
Bouches-du-Rhéne, time to prepare a wel- 
come fit for a present for a king. 
This was the first time that such a task had 
been entrusted to a member of the corps of 
Prefects and M. de Villeneuve-Bargemon 
devoted himself to it with conscientiousness 
and enthusiasm. Naturally, the only place 
that an immigrant of such distinction could 
be housed was at the Prefecture itself. An 
enclosure was erected in the courtyard as 
well as a heated stall with direct access from 
both floors of the building. 
There the giraffe wintered, her transfer 
to Paris awaiting a more clement period of 
7 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Bi
bl
io
th
eq
ue
 
du
 
M
u
s
é
u
m
 
d'
Hi
st
oi
re
 
Na
tu
re
ll
e,
 
Pa
ns
 
>

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 68342: Home by a neck: a giraffe's epic journey from Cairo to Paris

p> the year. Meanwhile, the Prefect kept the 
Minister of the Interior regularly informed 
of all the arrangements made...and also 
raised the delicate question of the reim- 
bursement of the expenses incurred. 
For fear of provoking a riot, the creature 
from the tropics was transferred from the 
quarantine centre to the Prefecture at dead 
of night on 14 November. For seven months 
M. de Villeneuve-Bargemon watched 
tenderly over his lodger, even allowing a 
touch of lyricism to creep into his adminis- 
trative correspondence in which he referred 
to her as “my ward”, or “this beautiful child 
of the tropics”. 
For her part, his wife gave a series of 
receptions, or “routs” as they were called in 
those days, to display the animal to the 
upper-crust of Provencal society. Day and 
night a constant stream of members of the 
Academy of Marseille came to gaze upon 
the beast, noting every detail of her be- 
haviour and marvelling at her silence, only 
to discover later that the long-necked crea- 
ture possessed no vocal chords. 
Meanwhile, to keep her in good con- 
dition, the Prefect decided that his protégée 
should be exercised, thus providing a choice 
spectacle for the people of Marseille. Every 
day, preceded by mounted gendarmes with 
sabres drawn, the giraffe calmly ambled 
through the streets of the city, to the great 
joy of the citizenry and to the great terror of 
the horses. 
The king, however, was eager to receive 
“his” giraffe and, the following spring, the 
question arose of how she should make the 
journey from Marseille to Paris. Should she 
go by sea, circumnavigate Spain and then 
sail up the Seine? This would be as long a 
journey as that which had brought her 
across the Mediterranean. Should she 
travel on the internal waterways, the 
Rhone, the Sadne and the Seine? In the 
end, since the animal had become accus- 
tomed to walking, it was decided that she 
should go to Paris on foot, in short stages. 
Clearly, an experienced man was needed to 
supervise the convoy and the choice fell on 
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, an illustrious natur- 
alist noted for his theory of the “compensa- 
tion of organs”, and, moreover, a veteran 
of Napoleon’s Egyptian expedition and 
perhaps the only man in France who had 
ever been anywhere near a giraffe. 
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire was fifty-five 
years old and suffered from rheumatism 
and other ailments. Nevertheless, he 
accepted the mission with enthusiasm. 
“Throwing a few essentials into a bag, he 
took the next stage-coach and within six and 
a half days had covered the itinerary he was 
later to retrace with the giraffe,” writes 
Gabriel Dardaud in his book Une Girafe 
pour le Roi (1985). At a meeting of the 
Academy of Marseille, on 10 May 1827, one 
of the members, a certain M. Jauffret, 
announced the arrival of his eminent col- 
league, and read out three fables he had 
written on the giraffe. 
Each stage of the journey to Paris was 
prepared down to the last detail. The cara- 
van included the giraffe, the cows, one of 
the antelopes—the other one had died in 
Marseille—two moufflons, the cowhand, 
the Sudanese, an interpreter and.a cart 
loaded with forage, seeds and a variety of 
other impedimenta, all ordered by the 
illustrious leader of the expedition. 
To protect her from the spring rains, a 
8 
Two days before the giraffe's arrival In 
Paris, the French naturalist Georges 
Cuvier (1769-1832) made the above draw- 
Ing during a session of the Council of 
State. He had never seen a living specimen 
and his not very realistic representation 
was inspired by depictions of giraffes 
made in earlier times. 
A giraffe-craze swept France and led to the 
creation of many objects inspired by the 
giraffe’s distinctive silhouette. The clavi- 
harp (below), a musical instrument in- 
vented in 1819, was renamed the “piano- 
girafe” after the animal's arrival in Paris. 
  
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Gu
y 
Bo
ul
ou
x,
 
Pa
ri
s 
two-piece set of lined oilskins with a hood 
was made to measure for the giraffe. On it 
were emblazoned the arms of the King of 
France and of the Pasha of Egypt. Vil- 
leneuve-Bargemon had provided for an 
escort of mounted gendarmes and took care 
to write to all the mayors of the communes 
within his jurisdiction through which the 
caravan would pass, as well as to his col- 
leagues in the other Départements, giving 
them instructions and advice. 
At dawn on 20 May 1827, the caravan 
sallied forth with Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire at 
its head. In the open country he would rest 
his rheumaticky joints beside the driver of 
the cart, but when the cortége passed 
through a town, or arrived at a staging-post, 
he was usually to be found at the side of the 
giraffe, reinvigorated by the enthusiastic 
welcome of the populace and the local 
authorities. 
Aix, Avignon, Orange, Montélimar, 
Vienne—and then, on 6 June, they arrived 
at Lyon, having achieved the respectable 
average rate of progress of twenty-seven 
kilometres a day. At Lyon, Geoffroy Saint- 
Hilaire wrote to Villeneuve-Bargemon to 
give him the latest news. An incident had 
occurred which had slowed their progress. 
“The giraffe had picked up a nail in the 
membrane of a hoof”; she seemed weary of 
the continual walking and was somewhat 
fatigued yet “very obedient”. A period of 
rest was needed and, for five days, installed 
* 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Bi
bl
io
th
éq
ue
 
du
 
M
u
s
é
u
m
 
d'
Hi
st
oi
re
 
Na
tu
re
ll
e,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 68342: Home by a neck: a giraffe's epic journey from Cairo to Paris

  
Ph
ot
o 
(©
 
M
u
s
é
u
m
 
d'
Hi
st
oi
re
 
Na
tu
re
ll
e 
de
 
La
 
Ro
ch
el
le
 
The giraffe as It is today, preserved in the 
Natural History Museum at La Rochelle, in 
France. 
in the Place Bellecour, the giraffe happily 
stripped the lime trees of their leaves and 
accepted titbits from the onlookers. 
Then they were on the road again, wend- 
ing their way through ever-larger crowds. 
“In 1827,” writes Gabriel Dardaud, “some 
thirty or more inns, shops and staging-posts 
adopted the sign of the giraffe to com- 
memorate her passage”. 
When the cortege was within fifty 
kilometres of Paris, excursions were orga- 
nized to go and meet it. The crowds 
streamed out in charabancs, four-wheelers 
and gigs. Even Stendhal did not disdain to 
join the ranks of the sightseers and, at the 
Court, it was only with the greatest of diffi- 
culty that the Duchess of Berry was res- 
trained from doing as much. As for the 
great scientist Georges Cuvier, instead of 
giving his attention to the discussions of the 
Council of State, of which he was a mem- 
ber, he spent his time covering his papers 
with drawings of a giraffe based on what 
little he knew of the animal and coming up 
with some bizarre results. 
After a journey of 880 kilometres in for- 
ty-one days, most of it on foot, Geoffroy 
Saint-Hilaire arrived in Paris at the head of 
A 
"2 
4 
Ei 
x 4 
y 
5 
ww 
ra 
Le 
  
the caravan on 30 June, thoroughly exhaus- 
ted. He installed the giraffe in its enclosure 
at the Jardin des Plantes (the Zoological 
Gardens of Paris). But scarcely had he re- 
gained the comfort of his armchair, his slip- 
pers and his own fireside than he was 
obliged to forsake them again. The king, 
who was spending the summer at his 
chiteau at Saint-Cloud, demanded to see 
“his” giraffe the very next day. 
The cortége made a fine sight as it 
wended its way along the bank of the Seine. 
Troops from the garrison of Paris lined the 
route; plume-bedecked generals caracolled 
at its head; among the robed ranks of pro- 
fessors from the Museum and university 
dignitaries, ermine-lined hoods vied for 
attention with medals and decorations; and 
the mace-bearers of the faculties sweated 
under the weight of their insignia of office. 
For Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, decked out in 
ceremonial dress and walking at the side of 
the giraffe, these last fifteen kilometres 
were sheer martyrdom. 
. At Saint-Cloud, in front of the orangery 
where, twenty-eight years earlier, Napo- 
leon had seized power—a memory it was 
wiser not to recall under the Restoration— 
the dignitaries in all their finery were drawn 
up in strict order of precedence, with the 
giraffe in pride of place. After a few 
minutes, as the soldiers presented arms, the 
king arrived wearing a blue sash and, as 
usual, cutting a fine figure. He was followed 
by his son the heir to the throne, the Duke 
of Angouléme; with him were his wife the 
duchess, and the petite Duchess of Berry, 
gracious, elegant and holding the hands of 
the two royal children who had eyes only for 
the strange beast that peered at them with 
no trace of emotion. The king was his usual 
amiable self, courteously attentive to 
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, whom he congratu- 
lated and questioned at length, and to the 
giraffe, to whom he did the honour of offer- 
ing some rose petals in the royal hand. 
“Once the audience was over,” says Gabriel 
Dardaud, “Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire jumped 
into a carriage and drove off to the hospital 
for a check-up. The giraffe went back to the 
Jardin des Plantes without him, passing be- 
tween two rows of spectators held back with 
some difficulty by the armed soldiers of the 
garrison.” 
The occasion gave rise to the production 
of innumerable “giraffe” objects that were 
hawked the length and breadth of the land. 
First came chinaware on which figured 
more or less diagrammatic representations 
of the animal’s characteristic profile. But 
the image of the giraffe also featured on 
printed cloth, in popular drawings, on 
smoothing irons, warming-pans, ink-wells, 
fans, snuff-boxes and almanachs and pub- 
lications of every sort. Women wore “giraf- 
fe” hair-styles and the claviharp invented in 
1819, was re-named the “giraffe-piano”. 
The giraffe was installed at first in the 
great greenhouse of the Jardin des Plantes. 
Later she took possession of the “apart- 
ment” specially prepared for her in the 
rotunda. There was one room for her which 
was lined with mattresses and heated by a 
stove as well as by the cows and other 
animals who, throughout the winter, main- 
tained the temperature at the fifteen de- 
grees necessary for the health of this native 
of Africa. Above was a room for her Egyp- 
tian keeper. 
Between July and December 1827, the 
Jardin des Plantes did a roaring trade, with 
600,000 Parisians going to visit the new 
inmate. Curiosity died down a little the 
following year, but the giraffe remained the 
star attraction at the Jardin, where she 
could be seen out walking when the weather 
permitted. In about 1835, plans were made 
to find her a mate, but the husband ear- 
marked for her never left Italy. She grew 
old peacefully and died in 1845 in her twen- 
ty-first year, outliving both Charles X and 
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire. 
She was stuffed, and her motionless 
silhouette long graced the zoological gallery 
of the museum, until, one day between the 
two World Wars, the curator of the 
museum of La Rochelle succeeded in get- 
ting her ceded to him. And so it came about 
that this creature, which had been born near 
the source of the Nile, which had travelled 
across part of Africa, the Mediterranean 
and France to delight Parisians for eighteen 
years, set out again to the ocean 
shore, where now she savours a kind of 
immortality. [| 
GEORGES POISSON has been curator of the 
Museum of the lle de France for 30 years. He is a 
specialist in the history of architecture, which he 
has taught in a number of institutions of higher 
education. He has published some 40 historical 
works on the architecture of Paris and the 
surrounding region. Several of them have been 
awarded prizes by the Académie Francaise or 
the Académie des Beaux-Arts. 
9

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

Che Bandoneén, drawing by Ricardo Carpani 


### 68343: Tango time

Tango Time 
by Luis Bocaz 
NE of the tango’s many mysteries is 
O its mixed cultural parentage. To ex- 
plain its origins, its chroniclers have 
had to investigate the aftermath of slavery 
in a region of old Spanish colonies. Vicente 
Rossi, for example, suggests that the tango 
was born in the African communities of 
Montevideo, a view not always enthusiasti- 
cally shared on the western bank of the 
estuary of the Rio de la Plata. 
Apart from the inevitable wranglings 
over paternity, there is no disagreement 
about the influence of the candombe on this 
dance in its early years, or about the con- 
tribution to its development made by the 
two Rio de la Plata capitals, Buenos Aires 
and Montevideo. The sprawling Argentine 
metropolis was, in the end, to monopolize 
the sobriquet “City of the Tango”, but in 
both ports (La Cumparsita, one of the best 
known tangos, is Uruguayan) the inter- 
mingling of its African and mestizo ances- 
tors, together with other local and Euro- 
pean strains, gave birth, in the space of a 
10 
  
That squall the tango, that deviiry, 
challenges the crowded years; 
man made of dust and time 
lasts less than the flighty tune, 
which is only time. 
Jorge Luis Borges, El Tango 
Dr
aw
in
g 
© 
Ri
ca
rd
o 
Ca
rp
an
i,
 
Bu
en
os
 
Ai
re
s 
   
   
The Latin American song and dance 
that swept the world onto its feet 
few decades, to one of the most distinctive 
cultural creations of the American con- 
tinent. 
Where did the name come from? In writ- 
ings and lectures on the subject, Jorge Luis 
Borges pokes fun at those who bend over 
backwards in their attempts to trace its 
origins to a Latin root. The distinguished 
writer's amusement is provoked by the 
lowliness of its earliest surroundings, the 
suburbs, and by the creature’s undeniable 
connections with disreputable -establish- 
ments. 
In Buenos Aires, the scale of the sub- 
urban fringe was a consequence of spec- 
tacular urban growth. This unpretentious 
colonial town, founded twice in the six- 
teenth century, was chosen in 1880 as the 
federal capital, and rapidly became a thriv- 
ing port. Thereafter, it absorbed wave upon 
wave of immigrants, who disembarked with 
their cargo of dreams and solitude and, on 
the so-called orillas, established a sort of 
frontier way of life. People were washed up 
here by the tides of fortune, as they were on 
the Pacific coast, in San Francisco of the 
Gold Rush, or Valparaiso, with their nos- 
talgic atmosphere of turn-of-the-century 
sailing ships. 
In this murky urban quarter, lone men 
fought one another over fortunes and brief 
affairs of the heart. So it is not difficult to 
understand how this branch of humanity 
found in the cortes and quebradas (literally 
“cuts and slashes”) of the tango a means of 
escape from the teeming solitude of the 
tenements. 
Those heroic times have left us with the 
stereotyped image of the original dancing 
couple. She, with her tight-fitting dress, 
split skirt and scarcely concealed hint of 
erotic aggressiveness; he, perched on high 
heels and wearing a narrow-brimmed hat. 
Even today, magazines and shows continue 
to reproduce this vignette of a bygone age. 
One thing is undeniable: in the last ten years 
of the nineteenth century, the music to 
which they danced was held in high esteem

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 68343: Tango time

in musical circles, and, at the turn of the 
century, a whole galaxy of distinguished 
composers ushered it out of the suburbs and 
into the city centre. 
By the time the Republic celebrated its 
centenary, definite rules had taken shape 
governing the instruments on which it was 
played. Flutes and guitars had been 
banished, making way for the ensemble that 
would henceforth be known as the orguesta 
tipica, consisting of piano, violins, double 
bass and a little-known instrument called 
the bandonedén. This emigrant accordeon 
from Central Europe came to symbolize the 
essence of the tango. Why did it become so 
prominent as a popular art form? After all, 
as musicologists point out, it was very diffi- 
cult to play. There is no convincing answer 
to this question, but the fact remains that 
from the legendary Ramos Mejia to Astor 
Piazzolla in our own time, the roll of honour 
of those who played it includes such glamor-- 
ous names in tango history as Eduardo Aro- 
las and Anibal Troilo. 
On a wave of popular creativity, this sub- 
urban adolescent rose irresistibly to fame. 
Before the First World War, Paris (Tango- 
ville, some historians would claim) had 
given her the keys to Europe. From London 
to Moscow, the great cities were held spell- 
bound by the mysterious creature. Her 
triumph heralded that of jazz, another child 
of miscegenation in the landfall cities of 
America. The tango craze spread through 
the ballrooms and fashionable watering 
places. Handbooks on how to dance it 
appeared by the dozen, and a certain shade 
of orange came to be called “tango”. In 
February 1914, an engraving in the French 
magazine L’Illustration showed the Pope 
thoughtfully watching the circlings of a 
dancing couple. The Holy See found itself 
obliged to make a pronouncement, having 
heard voices raised in condemnation of the 
morals of this Latin-American upstart. Its 
concern was justified. Some of the vitupera- 
tion came from Argentine circles. The poet 
Leopoldo Lugones called the tango a “rep- 
tile from the brothel”, and more than one 
diplomat showed distaste for the discon- 
certing way in which this ignoble compatriot 
had won general acceptance. 
The international renown of this ambas- 
sador of working-class descent was decisive- 
ly heightened by a man of obscure extrac- 
tion with an extraordinary voice. His name 
was Carlos Gardel. He came to the tango 
when it had already acquired cosmopolitan 
status. Nevertheless, his indisputable artis- 
tic talent and and a modicum of publicity in 
the media, combined with the strange cir- 
cumstances in which his life began and 
ended, were enough to give him mythical 
stature: the accident at the airport of 
Medellin, which cost him his life, and the 
shadows which, for years, surrounded his 
birth. More than one town boasted of being 
his birthplace. After his death, in June 
1935, conflicting evidence came to light. An 
official document announced that his place 
of birth was Tacuarembd, in the Republic of 
Uruguay. Meanwhile, the Argentine Gar- 
del cult reconstructed the childhood of its 
idol in the market quarter of Buenos Aires 
and exhibited a signed handwritten docu- 
ment referring to his birth in Toulouse, 
France. 
A reproduction of the birth certificate of 
a baby boy, Charles Romuald Gardés, born 
in the maternity wing of the La Grave hos- 
/ 
pital at 2 a.m. on 11 December 1890, in 
Toulouse, finally put an end to the 
arguments. The singer was the illegitimate 
son of an unknown father and a laundry 
worker, Berthe Gardés. Like others from 
southern France, she emigrated to the Rio 
de la Plata region, taking her two-year-old 
son with her. Moreover, on the occasion of 
the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Car- 
los Gardel, the Toulouse municipal author- 
ities mobilized its cultural facilities to pay 
him an impressive tribute. The programme, 
which lasted for several weeks, included the 
unveiling of a monument, public exhibi- 
tions and the first scientific congress on the 
tango. This was convened by the University 
of Toulouse, a highly respected centre for 
Hispanic and Latin-American studies, and 
was attended by specialists from Latin 
America, Europe and the United States. 
The 1970s witnessed a partial revival of 
the tango on the European scene as a form 
of music for instruments and voice. Follow- 
ing a fairly long period of eclipse, this re- 
newal was foreseeable, in view of the 
admiration that it still commanded in the 
cities of Latin America, and, indeed, in 
such an unexpected country as Japan, 
where a huge trade in recordings is to be 
found, together with orquestas tipicas, col- 
lectors and specialized magazines. Never- 
theless, some observers would point to a 
paradox: while Cuba organizes tango festi- 
vals, and while Amsterdam and Paris are 
enthralled by the classical rigour of Osvaldo 
Pugliese, the formal audacity of Piazzolla or 
the splendid voice of Susana Rinaldi, there 
are signs in its cities of origin of a slackening 
of the fervour that gripped them from the 
1930s to the 1950s. The great tango orches- 
tras and soloists have watched their sources 
of work drying up one by one, partly as a 
result of changes in public taste, which 
seems less drawn to this art form than it was 
in days gone by. , 
It can be argued that, since the “codifica- 
tion” by Julio de Caro, in the 1920s, the 
structures which shaped the tango have 
changed in ways comparable to the changes 
occurring in the societies which produced it, 
and in the various attitudes of mind and 
. feeling which embraced it as their own. 
Perhaps for this reason, following the truce 
between traditionalists and modernists, 
creators and performers have come to agree 
that the tango can change and develop. 
Accordingly, such essential works as Re- 
cuerdo (1924) by Pugliese or Adios, Nonino 
(1959) by Piazzolla are valued in their con- 
temporary context as innovative land- 
marks, and the tango is seen to embody the 
pathos prevailing in the painting, the films 
or the poetry of the day. 
Worth noting is the enthusiasm with 
which, in the first few months of 1986, tango 
demonstrations are being greeted in New 
York. Will they, perhaps, provide the 
necessary impetus for this complex Latin 
American character to make a glorious and 
majestic come-back to the international 
stage? : [| 
LUIS BOCAZ, of Chile, is a specialist in Latin 
American literature and culture. A lecturer at the 
Sorbonne, he also directs a seminar on “Cultural 
production and society in Latin America” at the 
Institut des Hautes Etudes de I'Amérique Latine, 
in Paris. He has served as a consultant with 
Unesco'’s culture sector. 
  
With the urbanization of popular culture at 
the turn of the century, the tango appeared 
in suburban bars around the cities of the 
Rio de Ia Plata, In the so-called “low-life” 
houses, in the districts near the abattoirs 
and in the homes of the poor like these 
photographed in Buenos Aires at the be- 
ginning of the century. 
  
 Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ed
ou
ar
d 
Pe
co
ur
t 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
LLIVE 7 1A 
ta 
  
yr —— td 
  
 
   
rT 
LR TE ah J TIER 
i= X 
= 
- a 
  
   
  
  
ts Gag, 2 yd 3 
—_— 
 
  
  


### 68415: The Channel tunnel

The Channel Tunnel 
Dr
aw
in
g 
© 
Fr
an
co
is
 
Du
rk
he
im
, 
Pa
ri
s 
2 
   
Right, artist's impression of the “Euro- 
bridge” (“Europont”) concept of a fixed 
link between Britain and continental 
Europe: a suspension bridge with 5,000- 
metre-long spans. Two 6-lane motorways 
would be enclosed with the protective con- 
crete tube. 
Opposite page: section of the project for a 
Channel Tunnel which was adopted by the 
British and French Governments In Janu- 
ary 1986. Passenger trains and special 
shuttle trains for transporting vehicles 
and their passengers will run through twin 
tunnels (diameter 7.3 metres) bored 40 
metres under the sea bed. Between the two 
main tunnels Is a smaller service tunnel 
(diameter 4.5 metres). 
12 
and France, a dream nearly two cen- 
turies old, is to become reality at 
last. And this is most warmly to be wel- 
comed by all those who care for the future 
of Europe, for in all kinds of ways—eco- 
nomic, touristic, political, even psycholo- 
gical—it will serve to strengthen Britain’s 
links with the Continent, and especially 
with France. Thus it will strike a blow at that 
old insularity which has shrouded the island 
T HE Channel Tunnel between Britain 
of Britain for so long. We shall be islanders. 
no more. 
The joint decision to build the Tunnel 
was announced by President Francois Mit- 
terrand and Prime Minister Margaret 
Thatcher in a ceremony at Lille on 21 
January. The project chosen from among 
several contenders is for a twin-bore railway 
  
 
 
by John Ardagh 
tunnel. This is what the French wanted, for 
express railways are France's forte. The 
British might have preferred a combined 
road and rail tunnel, but this would have 
been more costly. However, it has been 
agreed that a separate road tunnel might be 
added some time after the year 2000. In the 
meantime, so long as the two parliaments 
ratify the plan, digging will begin next year 
on a fifty-one-kilometre tunnel from a point 
near Folkestone, in Kent, to a point near 
Calais. British and French banks are pro- 
viding the main part of the budget, which 
will be at least £2.3 billion. 
When the Tunnel opens, in 1993, it will 
be able to carry up to thirty million passen- 
gers a year. Fast trains will link London with 
Paris (some 450 km) in just over three 
hours, and London with Brussels in even 
                  
 
  
    
 
 
Dr
aw
in
g 
© 
Eu
ro
po
nt
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 68415: The Channel tunnel

  
- 
en 
A AN do SL  
Two 19th-century conceptions of a Chan- 
nel Tunnel. Above left, a scheme for a 
“submarine railway between France and 
England” by Hector Moreau (1851). Above, 
drawing of a project for a Dover-Calais 
tunnel devised by French engineer Thomé 
de Gamond In 1875. Smoke from the steam 
trains was to be evacuated by ventilation 
chimneys one of which, in mid-Channel, Is 
topped by a lighthouse. 
less time. And a rail shuttle service will 
carry freight trucks and private cars be- 
tween terminals at either end of the tunnel, 
with trains leaving every three minutes at 
peak periods. 
It was a French engineer in 1802 who first 
proposed a tunnel under the English Chan- 
nel: Napoleon was interested, for he 
thought it might assist his planned invasion 
of England. In the 1880s the scheme was 
revived, and private companies began to 
bore pilot tunnels; but the British Govern- 
ment took fright, mainly for defence 
reasons, and the project was stopped. Not 
until the 1950s did it surface again, and after 
much discussion new preliminary diggings 
began in 1974. But again the British Gov- 
ernment cancelled the scheme (in 1975), 
this time for economic reasons. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Fr
an
ce
-M
an
ch
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
 
Throughout that long period, the French 
showed noticeably more enthusiasm for a 
Channel tunnel than the British. This may 
seem curious, seeing that France already 
has many land frontiers, whereas for Britain 
a tunnel would be its first fixed link with the 
Continent, and thus more valuable. But the 
British were held back by their insularity, 
and especially by fears that an invader 
might be able to make use of the scheme. 
Happily, all that is past. Today Britain’s 
politicians and business circles have shown 
themselves as eager as the French. 
It is true that ordinary British public opin- 
ion remains sceptical. Some people point 
out that the train shuttle for cars will take 
almost the same time as the hovercraft ser- 
vice (thirty-five minutes) and will be only 
forty minutes faster than the present ferry 
  
crossings: these critics wonder whether 
enough people will use the tunnel to amor- 
tize its huge costs. The inhabitants of the 
Dover and Folkestone areas are alarmed 
for their environment, and for the future of 
jobs with the ferry services. And many ex- 
perts predict that in economic terms the 
tunnel will benefit France more than Britain 
if, as they believe, the new industry 
attracted to its vicinity opts less for prosper- 
ous Kent than for the struggling Nord-Pas 
de Calais region with its wider spaces, lower 
costs and more central position in the Euro- 
pean Economic Community. 
However, those who take a wider and 
longer-term view believe that these possible 
drawbacks for Britain will be far out- 
weighed by the advantages. Passengers by 
express train will be able to do the journey 
atleast an hour faster than by air, city centre 
to city centre, and without any tedious waits 
at airports. Also the fares will be cheaper. 
So the tunnel will probably stimulate a vast 
increase in tourism and business travel be- 
tween London and Paris and Brussels, 
much of it in the form of day excursions. It 
will also encourage new export trade by 
train and truck, and it will help to build the 
Kent and Pas-de-Calais areas into a vital 
nerve-centre of the European Economic 
Community, buzzing with new modern in- 
dustry. Above all, as Mrs Thatcher has said, 
the tunnel venture is a symbol of Britain's 
involvement in Europe and of its close ties 
with France. In my own view, it will streng- 
then the exchanges between peoples and 
thus lead to better understanding, for 
it is ignorance that breeds prejudice and 
chauvinism. [|] 
JOHN ARDAGH is a British journalist who has 
written a number of studies of French life in- 
cluding The New France (Pelican Books, 1970- 
1977) and France in the 1980s (Penguin Books, 
1982). In 1983 he was awarded the Enid McLeod 
Prize for books promoting Franco-British 
understanding. 
13 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Ro
ge
r-
Vi
ol
le
t,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 68417: His n' hers: the changing relationship between the sexes in the Western world

His n’ Hers 
by Elisabeth Badinter 
E have known for a long time that 
W the organization of any particular 
society is influenced by the defini- 
tion of the sexes and the distinction drawn 
between them. But we have realized only 
recently that the identity of each sex is not 
so easy to pin down, and that definitions 
evolve in accordance with the different 
types of culture known to us, scientific dis- 
coveries and ideological revolutions. Our 
nature is not considered immutable, either 
socially or biologically. As we approach the 
end of the century, the substantial progress 
made in biology and genetics is radically 
challenging the roles, responsibilities and 
specific characteristics attributed to each 
sex; and yet, scarcely twenty years ago, 
these were thought to be “beyond dispute”. 
We can safely say, with a few minor ex- 
ceptions, that the definition of the sexes and 
their respective functions remained un- 
changed in the West from the beginning of 
the nineteenth century to the 1960s. The 
role distinction, raised in some cases to the 
status of uncompromising dualism on a 
strongly hierarchical model, lasted 
throughout this period, appealing for its 
justification to nature, religion and customs 
alleged to have existed since the dawn of 
time. The woman bore children and took 
care of the home. The man set out to con- 
quer the world and was responsible for the 
survival of his family, by satisfying their 
needs in peacetime and by going to war 
when necessary. 
The entire world order rested on the 
divergence of the sexes. Any overlapping or 
confusion between the roles was seen as a 
threat to the time-honoured order of things. 
It was felt to be against nature, a deviation 
from the norm. 
Sex roles were determined according to 
the “place” appropriate to each. Woman's 
place was, first and foremost, in the home. 
The outside world, i.e. workshops, factor- 
ies and business firms, belonged to men. 
This sex-based division of the world (pri- 
vate and public) gave rise to a strict dicho- 
tomy between the attitudes which conferred 
on each its special identity. The woman, 
sequestered at home, “cared, nurtured and 
conserved”. To do this, she had no need to 
be daring, ambitious, tough or competitive. 
The man, on the other hand, competing 
with his fellow men, was caught up every 
day in the struggle for survival, and hence 
developed those characteristics which were 
thought natural in a man. 
Today, many women go out to work, and 
their reasons for doing so have changed 
considerably. Besides the traditional finan- 
cial incentives, we find ambition and per- 
sonal fulfilment motivating those in the 
“Passivity, patience (...) are no longer the 
salient characteristics of the female sex.” 
Right, detail of The Departure of the Volun- 
teers of 1792 (also known as La Marseil- 
laise), a high-relief sculpture by the French 
sculptor Frangois Rude (1784-1855) which 
adorns the Arc de Triomphe In Paris. 
14 
The changing relationship 
most favourable circumstances, and the 
wish to have a social life and to get out of 
their domestic isolation influencing others. 
But, for all women, work is connected with 
the desire for independence. Above all, 
they do not wish to be forced to live with a 
man whom they can no longer tolerate; they 
want to reclaim their freedom without un- 
duly harming their standard of living. 
Whether we like it or not, these shared 
experiences profoundly alter the rela- 
tionship between the sexes and the specific 
definition of each. The change assuredly 
" makes for greater equality, but also, 
perhaps, for a degree of fraternal similarity. 
 
By dint of experiencing the same situations 
as the other, one learns to react as he does, 
and although he may thereby lose some of 
his mystery, he gains in being better under- 
stood. 
Furthermore, contraception has made it 
possible to keep motherhood at bay. Now 
that it is neither a physiological necessity 
nor a moral obligation, child-bearing is no 
longer endured but chosen. It thus becomes 
something contingent and voluntary; itis no 
longer left to “chance” in the form of 
nature. 
Late twentieth-century woman is no 
longer automatically to be regarded as a 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ga
il
le
mi
n/
Be
au
x-
Ar
ts
 
Ma
ga
zi
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 68417: His n' hers: the changing relationship between the sexes in the Western world

between the sexes in the Western World 
mother. For the first time in our history, 
women are allowed to find fulfilment in 
spheres other than procreation. One reason 
for this development is probably women’s 
increased life expectancy. Active mother- 
hood no longer takes up more than an aver- 
age of fifteen years in a woman’s life, and is 
one stage among others in female existence. 
This change of attitude towards child- 
bearing has gone hand in hand with a mod- 
ification of the stereotypes of female iden- 
tity; moreover, there has been a change in 
those which, not so long ago, still defined 
male identity. Passivity, patience, devotion 
and altruism are no longer the salient char- 
acteristics of the female sex. For one thing, 
women no longer recognize themselves in 
this summary description, which conceals 
other, equally real characteristics, once 
thought to belong exclusively to the male: 
ambition, activity, selfishness and indepen- 
dence. For another, because for the past ten 
or fifteen years women have tirelessly urged 
their companions to share in the joys and 
duties of “mothering”, men in turn are dis- 
playing virtues which used to be considered 
feminine: gentleness, devotion and atten- 
tiveness to small children. It is undeniable 
that young fathers who take care of their 
newborn offspring quickly acquire a body 
language and set of attitudes, concerns and 
feelings which in the past were alleged to 
“come naturally” to women. 
In reality, and within a very short time, 
the specific characteristics of fatherhood 
and motherhood have begun to converge. It 
is no longer the mother alone who shows 
affection, and the father is no longer the 
exclusive embodiment of authority, law and 
the outside world. All these roles are shared 
between the sexes, and attitudes vary more 
according to personal temperament than in 
alignment with sexual differences. 
If women no longer define themselves as 
mothers first and foremost, nor do they 
recognize themselves any longer as wives. 
Their lives are an alternation between 
celibacy and togetherness, with the result 
that autonomy is taking precedence over 
complementarity, and women, like men, 
are coming to define themselves as beings in 
their own right and no longer, as formerly, 
in terms of another person. The bi-polar 
relationship is still sought after by both men 
and women, but is nevertheless losing 
ground, in actuality, to periods of solitude. 
~ This new lifestyle is conducive to the 
emergence of new psychological and social 
characteristics in both sexes. Men and 
“The level of civilization attained by the 
different human societies Is proportionate 
to the independence enjoyed by women in 
these societies,” wrote Flora Tristan 
(1803-1844), the pioneer French feminist 
and socialist (right) in her book Pérégrina- 
tions d'une Paria (1838). The daughter of a 
Peruvian nobleman and a Frenchwoman, 
she married the engraver and lithographer 
André Chazal and was the grandmother of 
Paul Gauguin (1848-1903). 
women are tending to express that “other 
half” of themselves which their upbringing 
in the past would have taught them they 
must repress. Archetypal androgyny has 
returned, sweeping before it the inequality 
of the sexes and their strict comple- 
mentarity. 
Another new development is eroding the 
age-old stereotype of the male warrior, an 
image that we find confronting us as far 
back as we are able to trace it in history. 
Today, the threat of nuclear war on a world 
scale renders meaningless to us the warrior 
virtues attributed to men when we try to 
imagine the future. We see ourselves, men 
 
and women, rightly or wrongly, as the im- 
mediate victims of such a war, with neither 
the time nor the ability to defend ourselves 
individually. The spectre of the atomic 
bomb emphasizes still more the idea of fate, 
passivity and the indistinguishability of the 
sexes. On the one hand, men would be as 
passive as women. On the other, the person 
to “press the button™ might equally well be 
female or male. 
Apart from this apocalyptic image of 
war, other forms of modern warfare have 
brought us pictures of women, and even 
children, carrying weapons. This image, is 
no longer startling: it shows that war is no 
  
> 
Ph
ot
o 
L. 
de
 
Se
lv
a 
©
 
Ed
im
ed
ia
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 68417: His n' hers: the changing relationship between the sexes in the Western world

Pp longer the prerogative of men and that ac- 
tion or passivity are likewise no longer the 
property of one sex rather than the other. 
Oddly enough, male identity has not so 
far given rise to as much discussion and 
controversy as that of females. And yet we 
venture to predict that male identity will be 
a major issue in the next half-century. 
Women seem to have interiorized male 
otherness without thereby abandoning their 
traditional female identity. Twentieth-cen- 
tury Western woman is truly an androgy- 
nous creature. She is both virile and femi- 
nine, and she slips out of one role and into 
another according to the time of day or at 
different times in her life. She is unwilling to 
forgo anything, and walks a tightrope—by 
no means always easy to do—between her 
female and male desires. By turns passive 
and active, devoted mothers and ambitious 
egoists, gentle and aggressive, patient and 
commanding, modern women have shuf- 
fled the identity cards that they were dealt. 
In this period of upheaval brought about 
by women, men’s resistance, not to say 
uneasiness, is immediately apparent. The 
changes occurring in their partners and the 
latter’s new demands are forcing them to 
call their traditional model in question. The 
fact that women can do everything men can 
do, and that they have claimed men’s time- 
honoured characteristics for themselves, is 
often felt by men as an experience of dispos- 
session and loss with which they are unable 
to come to terms. 
Trapped between an outdated model 
which women no longer want and a new 
model which men seem to fear, many men 
are reacting by fleeing from women and 
from family responsibilities. 
Their difficulty in fully assimilating 
female otherness and in expressing it out- 
wardly without any inhibitions stems from 
the threat that they feel to their virility. This 
dilemma does not seem to affect women in 
the same way. The most convincing ex- 
planation for this male conflict is given by 
the American psychoanalyst Robert J. Stol- 
ler. Disagreeing with Freud, he claims that 
“male” identity is not the stronger or the 
more natural of the two. Throughout the 
first few months of life, the male newborn 
“Oddly enough, male identity 
has not 80 far given rise to as 
much discussion and con- 
troversy as that of females, 
And yet we venture to predict 
that male identity will be a ma- 
Jor issue In the next half-cen- 
fury.” 
“Because for the past 10 or 15 years 
women have tirelessly urged their com- 
panlons to share in the Joys and duties of 
‘mothering’ (...) young fathers In turn are 
taking care of their newborn offspring and 
quickly acquiring a body language and set 
of attitudes, concerns and feelings which 
in the past were alleged to ‘come naturally’ 
to women.” Below, “Men’s roles as 
fathers,” a photo used by Sweden's 
National Social Security Office in a cam- 
paign to facilitate the leave of fathers to 
take care of their children. 
16 
  Ph
ot
o 
Wi
ck
ma
n 
Pu
bl
ic
it
y 
Bu
re
au
 
© 
Th
e 
Na
ti
on
al
 
So
ci
al
 
Se
cu
ri
ty
 
Of
fi
ce
, 
Sw
ed
en
 
Ph
ot
o 
An
dr
é 
Ke
rt
és
z,
 
Ma
nc
he
st
er
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
 
© 
Mu
sé
e 
de
 
I'
El
ys
ée
, 
La
us
an
ne
 
P
e
 
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 68417: His n' hers: the changing relationship between the sexes in the Western world

  
  
baby identifies strongly with his mother, 
with whom he lives in a state of symbiosis. 
Sexual differentiation, therefore, is 
achieved only as the culmination of an'in- 
tense and painful struggle to break away 
from this symbiosis. The male child must 
thus “de-identify himself with his mother” 
in order to jettison his female nature and 
develop his subsequent gender identity: 
maleness. But, observes Stoller, maleness 
is always under latent threat from the ex- 
perience of bliss with the mother. Hence 
men’s much greater fear of androgyny, 
which is experienced as a danger of 
homosexuality, i.e. a loss of virility. 
The dawn of the third millennium is co- 
inciding with an extraordinary reversal in 
the power structure. 
Not only will the patriarchal system be 
dead and buried in most of the industrial- 
ized West, but we shall see the birth of a 
new imbalance in the relations between the 
sexes, this time exclusively to women’s 
advantage. ' 
Women may at last be sharing control of 
the outside world with their male compan- 
ions as they create and produce on an equal 
footing with them. But the fact is that they 
also have absolute control over procre- 
ation. They can, at any time, refuse to have 
children. Tomorrow, thanks to sperm 
banks, they will be able to produce children 
without men’s active assistance. But the 
contrary is not true. A man still needs a 
woman’s body in order to procreate. The 
complementary relationship between the 
sexes that seemed incontrovertible where 
procreation was concerned is now being 
challenged. And when we consider that 
biologists and geneticists predict that before 
long it will be possible to fertilize a female 
nucleus without any need for a spermata- 
zoon, we can see how close we have come to 
achieving the powerful age-old fantasy of 
parthenogenesis: in this case feminine. 
Even if women in the third millennium 
refrain from using this inordinate power, it 
is probable that men will be painfully aware 
of their possible eviction from the process of 
fertilization and of the new imbalance in 
their disfavour. There are probably hard 
times ahead for men. Perhaps they will 
experience an even greater feeling of loss of 
identity, uniqueness and necessity. So it is 
by no means absurd to suppose that they 
will do all they can to win back some of their 
power. Already, biologists are predicting 
the incredible possibility that men will be 
able to “carry” a child, within less than half 
a century. The hypothesis no longer belongs 
to the realm of science fiction. It will soon 
call for some entirely new thinking about 
the relationship between the sexes, their 
identity and their equality. 
To be continued in the third millennium. 
  
ELISABETH BADINTER, of France, was trained 
as a philosopher and directs a seminar on the 
history and psychology of the family at the Ecole 
Polytechnique, Paris. She is the author of 
L'Amour en plus, of Emilie, Emilie—une Femme 
du 18e Siecle, and of the forthcoming L'Un est 
I'Autre, a study of the relations between men and 
women. The above article has been extracted 
from a paper entitled “Le Rapport des Sexes: 
Egalité, Différence, Altérité”, which Elisabeth 
Badinter presented to an international seminar 
on the new roles of men and women in private 
and public life, held in Athens under Unesco 
auspices from 26 to 29 November 1985. 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 68418: The Powers of language

The powers 
of language 
by Claude Hagege 
vide the powers of language into two 
categories: internal and external. 
The former concerns language as a system 
and its relationship with those who use it 
and whose attitudes of mind and activities 
are shaped by it. The latter has to do with 
the use of language in the activity of speech 
or parole, and the capabilities that this con- 
fers on its users. 
Language is older than the individual. 
From birth to adulthood, we have no choice 
but to learn it. True, the individual can also 
steer language in a particular direction: in- 
deed, it is he who shapes it and causes it to 
change by the way in which he uses it. But 
this process is spread over very long 
periods. In what linguists call synchrony, 
that is, the time in which the user is actually 
living, he seems to be a receptive substance 
on which language stamps its indelible im- 
print. That imprint shows itself in two 
essential ways: in representation of the real 
world, and in the sphere of psycho-social 
symbolism and nationalism. 
We can all see for ourselves, in our daily 
lives, that different languages construct 
different images of the universe. Far from 
mirroring the world’s phenomena in a way 
that is universally identical, languages tend 
to organize them according to their own 
ever-changing systems of classification, 
reinventing and even creating them so that 
they exert considerable influence over the 
way in which each community thinks about 
these phenomena. i 
Some would even claim that there is a 
causal link between language and world- 
view. Such a link, for example, provides the 
basis for the so-called Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis, named after two twentieth-cen- 
tury linguists who most openly defended it. 
“Itis quite an illusion,” wrote Edward Sapir 
(1884-1939), “to imagine that one adjusts to 
reality essentially without the use of lan- 
guage, and that language is merely an in- 
cidental means of solving specific problems 
of communication or reflection. The fact of 
the matter is that the ‘real world’ is to a 
large extent unconsciously built up on the 
language habits of different cultural 
groups.” (I) Benjamin Lee Whorf (1897- 
1941), Sapir’s pupil, believed that we cut up 
nature along “the lines drawn by our lan- 
guage (...) No individual is free to describe 
Fo the sake of simplicity, let us di- 
18 
nature with absolute impartiality; on the 
contrary, he is forced to submit to certain 
modes of interpretation, even when he be- 
lieves he is free.” ) Whorf adds that the 
Hopi Indians, who live on the desert 
plateaux of northern Arizona, are quite 
unable to imagine such places as heaven or 
hell as described by missionaries. 
The Jesuits in China ran into difficulties 
which were probably similar. Their experi- 
ence prompts a number of doubts about the 
universality of the ten grammatical categor- 
ies which Aristotle established and which 
are still used as guidelines for research by 
many linguists. “What Aristotle gives us as 
a checklist of universal and immutable con- 
ditions is merely the conceptual projection 
of a particular linguistic state (...) Beyond 
the terms of the Aristotelians, and tran- 
scending this categorization, there stretches 
the concept of ‘being’ which encompasses 
everything (...). Greek not only has a verb 
‘to be’ (which is by no means a necessity in 
every language), but it has developed whol- 
ly distinctive uses for this verb.”® 
So we find that the existence of a verb “to 
be” in Greek and the way in which Greek 
maps out grammatical categories in the uni- 
verse of the sayable have given rise to the 
grammar which is used by all Western ling- 
uists and which is artificially overlaid on the 
languages of other parts of the world. 
Father Matteo Ricci could find nothing bet- 
ter than the expression “Lord of the Sky” to 
make the concept of God acceptable to the 
Chinese. He encountered a very thorny 
problem in his attempts at adaptation, for 
“Chinese thought (...) does not deal in posi- 
tive and negative, being and non-being, but 
in contraries which follow one another in 
succession, combine and complement one 
another (...). Using the Chinese language 
brings other thought processes into play, 
and develops other abilities, than those 
which have been given pride of place in the 
West”. The same problem arose concern- 
ing the concept of substance, of the adjec- 
tive (which is a verb in Chinese), and of 
everything in language which gives form to 
representation, 
We all pay less attention to that which our 
language does not name, even if we are 
quite capable of conceiving of it. The power 
of objects and concepts over individuals is 
much greater when language gives them a 
CONTINUED PAGE 23 
  
Colour pages 
Opposite page 
Above left: On 2 July 1985, the European 
Space Agency's (ESA) spacecraft Giotto 
began an 8-month Journey that would take 
it to meet Halley's comet on 13 March 1986. 
On 18 October 1985, the Halley Multicolour 
Camera (HMC), the high-resolution Imag- 
Ing system on board Giotto, looked back at 
the earth from a distance of 21 million 
kilometres. On this Image, taken at 6:00 UT 
{Universal Time), cloud formations above 
Australia and Antarctica can be seen. 
Photo © ESA, Paris Co 
Above right: Halley's comet photographed 
on 19 May 1910 at the Lowell Observatory 
(USA). The comet, which had passed 
through its perihelion (the closest point of 
its orbit to the sun) a month earlier, was 
then at a distance of 0.9 AU from the sun 
and 0.3 AU from the earth (one astrono- 
mical unit or AU Is equivalent to around 
150 million km). 
Photo ©) ESA, Paris, by courtesy of Lowell Observatory and the 
National Optical Astronomy Observatory, USA 
Below: The Adoration of the Mag|, a scene 
from a fresco cycle executed between 
1303-1305 in the Scrovegni chapel, Padua, 
by the Halian painter Giotto di Bondone 
(1266-1337). Halley's comet appeared In 
1301 and served as a model for Giotto's 
Star of Bethlehem. The European Space 
Agency named its mission to Halley's 
comet “Giotto” In recognition of the fact 
that Glotio di Bondone made the first re- 
corded “scientific” depiction of the comet. 
Photo © ESA, Paris 
Page 20 
Carlos Gardel (1890-1935), the celebrated 
composer and singer of the Argentine tan- 
go, can be seen at top of this pastel draw- 
ing on canvas, Te Fuistes sin que Nos 
Dieramos Cuenta (You Left Without Our 
Noticing, 250 x 200 cm) by the Argentine 
painter Antonio Seguf (1976). 
Photo © Femando Chaves 
Page 21 
The Earth Is a Man, 1942, oil on canvas 
(183 x 239 cm) by the Chilean painter 
Roberto Matta. Joseph R. Shapiro Collec- 
tion, Chicago. 
Photo Bétrice Hatala © Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris 
Correction 
We apologize to our readers for the fact 
that a technical error in our February 
issue, The New World of the Ocean, re- 
sulted in the inversion of two captions 
Identifying the photos of relief maps of the 
Pacific and Atlantic ocean floors repro- 
duced on page 19 and on the back cover.

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

  
  

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

E
L
 
T
T
 
R
e
 
S
N
A
 
} 
Pi
a 
1 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
i 
| 
| 
| 
| 
i 
! 
i | 
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 68418: The Powers of language

Ph
ot
o 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
Ca
fi
ig
ra
mm
es
 
by
 
Gu
il
la
um
e 
Ap
ol
ii
na
ir
e 
& 
Ga
ll
im
ar
d,
 
19
74
, 
Pa
ri
s 
" c' e é é 
e t c Cc 
LL LEU p t Cc u u IL P T 
1 e t t 
e v 8 e e 
u 0 
t u n 8 t 
8 u i 0 
d 8 1 m 
e a B bh 
[] u e P e 
8 8 1 r 
v 8 e 
0 i [ u 1 
i a t e 
x q b . 8 
uv’ r t 
d i é a 1 
e 1 8 n i 
d e 
x P 8 i n 
e 1 e 8 8 
m e 
m u p q q 
e { r u u 
[] e e i 
m n 
¢ e n 1 i 
oO r e e © 
m ¥ n 
m e t r r 
e i * e 
1 A g t 
[] 1 r i 
i e h ‘a e 
u e t n 
& 5 n n 
1 e n e e 
1 8 4 H n 
e r i 
8 r 1 
e { 8 e 
é n 0 n 
t e u d 
a 0 t é h 
i no. d a 
e t u a u 
n r n I t 
t e n 
8 u e 
m n Pp t 
o d i 1 
r e v e e 
t e u n 
e m r r 
8 a 8. e b 
n a 
m \'4 d t s 
8 i e 
m e ‘ u 
e v n 
i} i e 
d 1 
a E I a 
n 0 e n 
8 u 8 c 
t i 
| t a e 
¢ e u n 
[ r n 
8 e H e 
0 t [J] 
u i u m 
v e i u 
e Ss a 8 
n i i 
i r q 
r e Lu 
s e 
Colour page opposite 
. Glided bronze statue of the Buddha Vajra- 
sattva (possessor of the vajra, a thunder- 
bolt or diamond) by the sculptor Zanaba- 
zar (1635-1723), one of the masters of 
Mongolian religious art. In one hand the 
Buddha Is holding a vajra (symbol of the 
male principle) and in the other a small bell 
(symbol of the female principle); his head 
Is very slightly tilted to the left. The statue 
is in the Cholfin lama temple museum, 
Ulaanbaatar. 
Photo © All Rights Reserved 
In his book L’ Homme de Paroles, Claude 
Hagége writes that “The autonomy of the 
written word establishes it as an end in 
itself. {...) Disposed on a flat surface, writ- 
Ing can exploit the possibilities of com- 
binations between directions: vertical, 
horizontal, left to right, right to left.” The 
French poet Guillaume Apollinaire (1880- 
- 1918) considered his famous Calligram- 
mes, as “an idealization of poetry (...)and a 
form of typographical precision at a time 
when the career of typography is ending in 
a blaze of glory...” Above, Apoliinaire’s 
caltigramme Il Pleut. 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18 
name than when it does not. Nevertheless, 
this power of language should not be over- 
estimated. We may feel some reservations 
at Nietzsche's enthusiasm when he writes, 
in order to explain “the strange family re- 
semblance shared by all Hindu, Greek and 
German thought”, that “when there is ling- 
uistic kinship, itis inevitable that a common 
grammatically-based philosophy (...) pre- 
disposes thought to produce philosophical 
systems which develop along the same 
lines”. All we can say, and this is already a 
large claim, is that the parallels between 
language structures and thought patterns in 
substantially differing cultures are suffi- 
ciently regular to appeal to the observer's 
imagination. 
Psycho-social symbolism and nationalism 
constitute another sphere in which the pow- 
ers of language operate. The use of a lan- 
guage is experienced by the individual as an 
umbilical cord to which he owes his identity 
and even his existence. Language is much 
more than the straightforward tool that it 
would be if we were to accept the reduction- 
ist definition which sees it as a mere instru- 
ment of communication. 
What is true of the individual is even 
more so of the community elevated to the 
status of a nation. A Hungarian linguist 
writes: “In ‘minor’ countries which are pre- 
vented by statistical and geographical cir- 
cumstances from aspiring to the rank of 
great powers, there is often a certain cult of 
the national language and of various other 
components of the national and folk heri- 
tage, on which patriotic feeling feeds and 
thrives”.® There is a Hungarian proverb, 
likewise, which says: “nyelvében él a nem- 
zet”, or “a nation lives through its lan- 
guage”, 
Language, then, has the power to rally 
support for a national cause that it em- 
bodies more effectively than any other com- 
ponent of the culture. This can be seen in 
the nationalist claims of many minorities 
which appeal for justification to their dis- 
tinctive languages: Catalans, Berbers, 
Ukrainians, Kurds, Tibetans, Bretons, 
Welsh, Basques and Macedonians. And 
nationalism which arms groups to defend 
their culture by defending their language 
can take such violent forms as military 
clashes, rebellion in the world of school 
against the obligation to teach childrenin an 
alien tongue, and demonstrations. Such 
reactions have occurred in the past in India 
and in Greece (where, in 1901, the con- 
servative uprising against the translation of 
the New Testament into demotic resulted in 
several deaths). 
Some great nations impose their lan- 
guage through the power that it derives 
from their own power. This is true today of 
the United States of America, and it is also 
true on the scale of that largest of countries, 
the Soviet Union. The Indian languages of 
North America have all yielded to the press- 
ure of American English, and those which, 
like Navajo in Arizona, are still spoken in 
scattered village groups are exceedingly 
rare and, in any case, threatened. In the 
Soviet Union, Koryak in north-eastern 
Siberia, Chechen, Ingush, Circassian, 
Abkhasian of the Caucasus, Udmurt, the 
Turkic languages such as Kirghiz or Uzbek, 
and many other languages such as Chere- 
miss of the Volga basin, the Samoyed di- 
alects spoken by the nomads of the Lower 
Ob, and Zyryan of the Pechora basin—all p 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 68418: The Powers of language

p> these languages seem helpless before the 
onslaught of Russian, which they absorb 
haphazardly, with a great many uncon- 
trolled borrowings from it. 
As they become aware of the powers of 
language, States set up official planning 
machinery. History is, as a result, studded 
with the foundation of academies for a great 
many languages: Italy (Academy of La 
Crusca, 1582), Germany (1617, 1633, 
1641), France (1635), Spain (1713), Sweden 
(1786), Hungary (1825), Romania (1879), 
Syria (1919), Egypt (1932) and Israel 
(1953). These bodies are set up in order to 
harness the power of language in a rational 
manner, by singling out national languages 
in cases of multilingualism, by publishing 
lists of officially recognized neologisms, 
thereby defending the prevailing idea of the 
purity of the language, by systematizing 
spelling or reforming it, as the case may be, 
by compiling lexicons of dialects regarded 
as the most archaic (as in the case of Turkey 
under Atatiirk), and by compiling grammar 
books and dictionaries. 
The internal power of language pertains 
not to a system but to an activity. We are 
concerned here with what linguists call 
parole. It is not a matter of chance if those 
who use speech for purposes of command, 
in all organized structures, starting with 
that of the State, are nearly always highly 
attentive to questions of language. In their 
support for or participation in scholarly re- 
search, governments are very eager for 
' standardization, and, when it suits them, 
for linguistic reform. This is no innocent 
flirtation on the part of lovers of words and 
phrases, but very definitely a political acti- 
vity. This is brought out by explicit state- 
ments of position, such as that of Stalin in 
the famous Pravda article which, in 1950, 
put an end to the reign of the linguist Marr, 
whose linguistic theories, dominating the 
Soviet scene, had long been a hindrance to 
all progress: “As regards Marxism in ling- 
uistics”, wrote Stalin in the article, “... this 
is a matter which concerns me personally”. 
Indeed, political regimes which rest on a 
particular way of manipulating parole are, 
in a way, logocracies, i.e. systems which 
build their dominion on the power of words. 
In fiction, Orwell's newspeak was the very 
essence of a “language” aimed at eradicat- 
ing all unorthodox thought by banishing the 
names which might sustain it. In the real 
world, logocracies abound. To varying de- 
grees, all political power is tempted to ex- 
ploit the force of words that have been 
drained of their meaning and moulded into 
stereotypes, in order to disguise the facts. 
Officialese provides some examples of 
special techniques. One of these, which has 
already been studied, consists of replacing 
the greatest possible number of verbs and 
adjectives by nouns, thereby manipulating 
parole to avoid the head-on confrontation 
with reality which the views of verbs would 
convey. For example, in the shift from my 
views are right to the rightness of my views, 
there is a real transition from an assertion, 
which might call forth criticism, to an impli- 
cit assumption, which purports to reflect 
something already evident. The user of this 
type of parole thereby not only sidesteps 
explicit responsibility for a claim: he also 
dodges any objections. For it is much less 
easy for a listener to disagree with the un- 
finished sentence that begins: the rightness 
of my views, than with a complete sentence: 
my views are right. 
24 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ré
un
io
n 
de
s 
Mu
sé
es
 
Na
ti
on
au
x,
 
Pa
ri
s-
Ri
et
be
rg
 
Mu
se
um
, 
Zu
ri
ch
 
  
i 
: 
: 
With his “object poems”, the Czech artist 
Jiri Kolar seeks to make poetry “imme- 
diately clear to everyone” and to fulfil his 
prediction that “one day it will become 
possible to make poetry out of anything at 
all.” As the materials of his art he uses 
small objects such as razor blades, match- 
boxes, keys, and remnants of fabrics as if 
they were the embodiment of words. In 
collages such as The Apple (1967), above, 
he incorporates all the graphic techniques 
invented by man: fragments of ancient 
manuscripts, letters, dictionaries, and va- 
rious forms of writing: Arabic, Hebraic, 
Chinese, Persian, Gothic, Cyrillic, Latin 
and Greek. 
 
  
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Br
un
o 
Sut
er,
 N
ew
 
Yo
rk
 
Ph
ot
o 
Gu
y 
La
dr
ig
re
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
 
© 
Ch
ar
le
s 
Ra
tt
on
 
Ga
ll
er
y 
an
d 
Gu
y 
La
dr
ié
re
, 
Pa
ri
s 
“The oral style is a literary genre In its own 
right. It is a cultural tradition which seems 
to justify the creation of a term, orature, 
which would be symmeirical to that of 
literature (...), in the sense that it preserves 
the monuments of a culture but leaves no 
material trace.” (Claude Hagége, 
L’Homme de Paroles). Above, 40-cm-high 
ceremonial carved axe of the Lelé people 
of Zaire symbolizes the power of language 
and the spoken word. Left, wooden stool 
adorned with an ancestor-figure (height 76 
cm) Is used by the latmul people of Papua- 
New Guinea as a ceremonial chair during 
debates about myths and genealogies.

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 68418: The Powers of language

In some languages, words say explicitly 
that they confer power, whereas, in others, 
that distinctive capacity of language tobe a 
secret power, and hence a power inevitably 
attractive to dictatorships, usually reluctant 
to be identified as such, is not explicitly 
stated. Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, 
belonged to the former category: “He who 
in Mexico City was called ‘emperor’ bore 
the title tlatoani, ‘he who speaks’, from the 
verb tlatoa, ‘to speak’; the same root is to be 
found in words connected with speech, such 
as tlatolli, ‘language’, and in words con- 
nected with power, such as tlatocan, which 
designates the supreme council, the place 
where one speaks and from which authority 
emanates. It is no accident that the 
sovereign is known as tlatoani: at the root of 
his power is the art of speaking, the palavers 
in council, the skill and dignity of those 
high-flown and colourful speeches so great- 
ly appreciated by the Aztecs”. © 
So, whether by virtue of the pressure that 
language exerts from birth on the mental 
representations of the person who speaks it 
in his natural environment, and whose 
thought it fashions, or whether by virtue of 
the use to which language-in-action can be 
put, i.e. parole, for purposes of domination, 
the powers of language are universally man- 
ifest. The human science which studies 
them, linguistics, is necessarily also a study 
of the innermost being of humanity. The 
human race, which has brought nature 
under its yoke, transforms biological data 
by making a persevering and thorough 
study of their properties and of ways of 
acting on them. 
The human race acts in the same way on 
language. What about the machines with 
which the computer revolution and studies 
of artificial intelligence are lavishly sup- 
plying the market? Will human beings find 
in these no more than a pale reflection of 
their inimitable abilities, or will they see 
new masters coming to rule them, after the 
fashion of the sorcerer’s apprentice, victim 
of his own inventions? Only time will tell. 
But the linguist who studies the power of 
natural languages has a number of reasons 
to believe that the power of artificial lan- 
guages is not something that will develop 
overnight. [| 
1. E. Sapir, “The Status of Linguistics as a Science”, 
Language, 5, 1929. p. 209 (207-214) 
2. B.L. Whorf, Language, Thought and Reality, New 
York, The Technology Press, 1956. 
3. E. Benveniste, “Catégories de Pensée et Catégories de 
Langue”, Les Etudes Philosophiques, 4, 1958, reprinted 
in Problémes de Linguistique Générale, Paris, Galli- 
mard, 1966, pp. 70-71 (63-74). 
4. J. Gernet, Chine et Christianisme: Action et Réac- 
tion, Paris, Gallimard, “Bibliothéque des Histoires”, 
1982, pp. 326-327. 
5. J. Erdodi, as reported by G. Barczi, A magyar nyelv 
életrajza (Budapest 1975), Etudes Finno-ougriennes 12, 
1976, p. 304 (304-307). 
6. J. Soustelle, La Vie Quotidienne des Aztéques 2 la 
Veille de la Conquéte Espagnole, Paris, Hachette, 1955, 
p. 114. 
 
CLAUDE HAGEGE, French university teacher, 
is director of studies at the Ecole Pratique des 
Hautes Etudes and a member of the language 
laboratory of the National Centre of Scientific 
Research (CNRS). He is the author of 10 books 
on language, the most recent of which is 
L'Homme de Paroles (1986). His linguistic re- 
search has taken him from Africa to Oceania, 
from Europe to the Arab world and from China to 
the Indian reserves of the United States.   
  
  
Cheikh Anta Diop (1923 - 1986) 
Professor Cheikh Anta Diop, who died in 
Dakar on 7 February 1986, was an out- 
standingly versatile man of culture whose 
name will always be associated with the 
renaissance of African history. His works 
revealed uncharted areas of the African 
past and filled many gaps in our knowledge 
of the evolution of humanity. Today it is no 
longer possible to write a history of ancient 
Egypt without referring to his work on the 
origins of African and pharaonic civiliza- 
tions. A man of science and a man of 
letters, Cheikh Anta Diop was anthropolog- 
ist and historian, physicist and Egyptolo- 
gist, linguist and philosopher. After working 
for several years with the French physicist 
Frédéric Joliot-Curie, he specialized in nuc- 
lear physics atthe Collége de France. Inthe 
human sciences, he was trained by two 
eminent French scholars, the philosopher 
Gaston Bachelard and the prehistorian 
André Leroi-Gourhan. He submitted a 
thesis at the Sorbonne on the comparative 
study of the social systems of Europe and 
black Africa from Antiquity to the formation 
of modern States. Professor of Egyptology 
at the University of Dakar, founder-director 
of the Radiocarbon Laboratory at the Uni- 
versity’s Institut Fondamental d'Afrique 
Noire (IFAN), Cheikh Anta Diop was one of 
the most active members of the Internation- 
al Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a 
General History of Africa. Sponsored by 
Unesco, this major work in eight volumes, 
some of which have already appeared, is 
now in the final stages of preparation. MW 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Pr
és
en
ce
 
Af
ri
ca
in
e 
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 68419: The Picasso Museum in Paris

The Picasso Museum in Paris 
The Picasso Museum in Paris, which opened its doors to the 
public on 1 October 1985, contains Picasso’s collection of works 
by other artists and the major dation of “Picasso’s Picassos” 
which was made by his heirs to the French State in 1979. The 
total amounts to some 230 paintings, 150 sculptures, 90 cera- 
mics, 1,500 drawings and 1,500 engravings. This outstanding 
ensemble is housed in one of the finest historic buildings in the 
Marais quarter of Paris, the Hotel Aubert de Fontenay, com- 
monly known as the Hotel Salé (built in 1659) which has been 
specially restored and altered for the purpose. Below, a Unesco 
Courier interview with Dominique Bozo, who played a leading 
part in the creation of the Picasso Museum. 
Courier: Can Picasso’s personal collection 
(whether of his own works which he kept for 
himself or of the works of other artists which 
he acquired) offer the art enthusiast any 
indications as to the line of direction taken 
by the artist in his work? 
Bozo: This is a difficult question to answer 
inasmuch as a personal collection is not 
necessarily intended to be either a guide to 
an artist’s work or the reflection of a con- 
frontation of ideas. What is remarkable in 
Picasso’s case is that he started to establish 
i 
i 
> 
3 
~ 
3 
TT A RY 
14.28 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
26 
 
his personal collection, by purchase or by 
exchange with other artists, very early on, 
from the beginning of the century. It has 
therefore been possible to assemble in the 
Museum works of others that he selected at 
the same time that he was producing key 
works of his own. Thus the paintings of 
Henri Rousseau “Le Douanier”, acquired 
by Picasso around 1919 and 1920 at the time 
when, after a foray into cubism, he was 
returning to the classical style, are, in a way, 
a recognition of the scope for figurative art 
that derived from the cubist revolution. 
Similarly, the thirty works by Cézanne, 
even though they did not become part of the 
collection at the time of the birth of cubism, 
around 1907, are important to the under- 
standing of space and light in the work of 
the great native of Aix-en-Provence, and, 
indeed, of the cubist upheaval. The paint- 
ings of other fellow artists—André Derain, 
Georges Braque, Henri Matisse—give rise 
to encounters which enable us to assess the 
directions being taken by Picasso in his 
work. 
Courier: Does the panorama presented by 
the collection give any indications as to 
Picasso’s ability to encompass the 
“universal” implications of art—contact 
with other cultures, continuity and rela- 
tionships with preceding artistic periods? 
Bozo: From the beginning of the century up 
until the start of the Second World War, 
Picasso collected and hung in his studio 
works of primitive art from Oceania and, in 
particular, from Africa. The bulk of these 
works are on display at the Picasso 
Museum. What we learn from them is that 
Picasso did not actually copy primitive art, 
but that he found in the reasoning that lay 
behind its creation, its colour and its style of 
cubism, a kinship, an emotional affinity 
which reinforced him in his own approach. 
Picasso was also an observer of prehistoric 
art, in particular Iberian prehistoric art, and 
these works too can teach the art enthusiast 
something about his creative development. 
Primitive art, however, never encroached 
upon Picasso’s artistic or philosophical 
autonomy. 
Seen in this way, and in so far as it brings 
together the testimony of other cultures and 
the works of contemporaries who might be 
considered as sources, the Picasso Museum 
is a place in which we can learn about and 
learn to understand an exceptional 
personality. 
One great achievement of the Museum is 
to have brought together almost all Picas- 
so’s preliminary studies, to have, as it were, 
catalogued the archives of his thought. 
Through this experimental laboratory of his 
work (the testimony of other cultures, or 
affinities with other artists), the Museum 
has developed an extraordinary pedagogic- 
al tool which enables us to select themes or 
subjects from Picasso’s work and to show 
The staircase of the Hétel Salé, home of 
the Picasso Museum In Paris. The chande- 
lier is by Diego Giacomettl.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 68419: The Picasso Museum in Paris

their continuity and development, or the 
deviations during a given period or 
throughout his work as a whole. We know 
that he always went further than he had 
expected to go, that at times his creativity 
deserted him and that he felt the need to 
pause from time to time to consider what he 
had achieved. This led him to acquire a 
certain mastery over his thought, and this 
re-ordering of his ideas took place by refer- 
ence to the works of the great masters who 
had preceded him. Regularly in his work we 
find paraphrases of the great universal 
artists; and as a consequence of these con- 
frontations there is a very great sense of 
liberty in his work as compared to other 
attitudes and methods that are fixed once 
and for all. The other great achievement of 
the Museum is that it also contains a collec- 
tion of major works and series of paintings 
leading up to or developing from them. 
Courier: Did wide-ranging considerations 
such as those we have discussed influence the 
organization of the Museum? 
Bozo: The Museum was conceived with the 
aim of showing that each of Picasso's works 
stands alone and of highlighting the master- 
pieces, while at the same time demonstrat- 
ing the strength of the artistic renewal from 
one period to another and the way in which 
each period draws inspiration from the one 
that has gone before. For example, a work 
from the 1950s may be placed beside a work 
dated 1919 to show the continuity in form or 
theme. This gives the public food for 
thought. Similarly, sculpture and paintings 
are juxtaposed, for Picasso turned to sculp- 
ture when a spatial problem arose in his 
painting. 
Courier: Is the current layout and presenta- 
tion of the Museum definitive? 
Bozo: By no means. Our attitudes to 
museums have changed since the 
nineteenth century. Nowadays, the more 
one is involved with a museum the more one 
appreciates its wealth and the potential for 
modification. The inner resources of the 
works themselves are such that it should be 
possible to present them in different com- 
binations. At the moment they are hung in 
such a way as to show off the richness of the 
collection, to make it easily accessible to the 
public and to provide a harmonious contrast 
with the seventeenth century building in 
which it is housed. 
Courier: Are there other museums in the 
world conceived and established on the same 
principles? 
Bozo: There are several museums of this 
kind in the world: the Rodin museum in 
Paris, the Matisse museum at Nice, the Van 
Gogh museum in Amsterdam and the 
Edvard Munch museum in Oslo are just a 
few examples. Almost all countries would 
like their greatest national artist to have a 
museum. This is fine if the artist in question 
is of a high standard and if the country owns 
the best or the largest collection of his or her 
work. In this case it is less a matter of 
creating a museum in the practical sense of 
the term than of an artistic “space” close to 
the place of creation. We are very fortunate 
to have the Hotel Salé as a setting for the 
Picasso collection since this enables us to 
demonstrate that twentieth-century art can 
cohabit with and indeed be an extension of 
the art of the seventeenth century. On the 
great staircase, for example, Picasso’s 
 
In this part of the Picasso Museum are 5 
sculptures from different periods of the 
artist's life: left and foreground, two 
bronze Heads of a Woman, 1931; right, the 
famous Woman with a Baby Carriage 
(bronze), 1950; in background, two cera- 
mics, Standing Flautist and Seated Flaut- 
ist Playing a Double Flute, both 1958. 
monumental sculptures from the 1930s 
mingle happily with the works of Flemish 
sculptors who came to work in France dur- 
ing the seventeenth century. Furthermore, 
during the 1930s and later, Picasso lived in 
private town houses or country residences 
very similar in style and atmosphere to that 
of the Hotel Salé and many of his works 
were created in this kind of setting. Finally, 
the fact that the furnishings are the work of 
another artist (Diego Giacometti, the 
brother of the sculptor Alberto Giacometti) - 
gives another dimension to the concept of 
artistic encounter. 
Courier: What lessons can be learned from 
such a venture? 
Bozo: Today members of the general public 
are encouraged to go to museums, but they 
often lack the necessary knowledge and the 
means of informing themselves to benefit 
fully from them. They often feel somewhat 
lost even though fascinated. Twentieth-cen- 
tury art is something of a problem. There is 
such a wide variety of seemingly contradic- 
tory trends, ranging from a continuation of 
the classical tradition to the most severely 
critical art of today, that it is easy to become 
lost in the diversity of modern thought. The 
Picasso Museum gives the general public an 
introduction to twentieth-century art. Get- 
ting to know a particular artist is a good way 
of acquiring an understanding of the cen- 
tury, especially when his work spans eighty 
years of creative activity. In short, we are 
concerned with the work of an artist who 
was also a humanist; and his relationship 
with the past, with art as part of our heritage 
and of the historical process, gives the 
Museum a universal character which is both 
instructive and stimulating. [| 
DOMINIQUE BOZO, of France, is director of the 
National Museum of Modern Art at the Georges 
Pompidou Centre in Paris. 
27 
Ph
ot
o 
J. 
Gu
it
io
t 
©
 
Ed
im
ed
ia
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 68420: Matta: a new way of looking at the world

Matta 
A new way of looking at the world 
discussed as it has since technocratic 
societies have tried to get rid of it. 
At major exhibitions in Paris, Milan, Mos- 
cow, Tokyo and New York, swarms of visi- 
tors file at top speed past ancient and mod- 
ern masterpieces on display. The success of 
these exhibitions is not measured by the 
rarity of the works displayed or by the 
quality of the aesthetic pleasure they give, 
but by the number of spectators they 
attract. 
The trend towards uniformity imposed by 
the media and by cultural mass production 
not only outlaws the works of a particular 
artist, film-maker, writer, philosopher or 
musician, but inhibits the very function of 
culture and art as a means of expressing, 
exploring and recording the world of the 
imagination. The way is barred, not to mas- 
terworks, superficial and furtive though our 
C ULTURE has never been so much 
28 
by Jean-Jacques Lebel 
perception of them may be, but to the im- 
aginative powers and the creative genius of 
each one of us. Surely the total monopoliza- 
tion of communication technologies and the 
media of creation for exclusively political or 
commercial ends is having the crushing 
effect, not only of controlling the behaviour 
of ordinary citizens, but of preventing them 
from seeing, feeling, imagining or desiring 
anything except that which it is considered 
appropriate for them to see, feel, imagine 
or desire. 
We may well wonder whether the in- 
creasingly harmful environment created by 
the media will not bring about a retrogres- 
sion: in other words, the disappearance of 
certain cultural activities that are regarded 
as too subjective or too complex. Deserti- 
fication and the steady poisoning of the 
environment have, as we know, resulted in 
the extinction of many animal species. The 
  
sole survivors are species which have 
adapted by mutation to deleterious 
changes. Does the same fate lie in store for 
those artists, poets, philosophers, musi- 
cians and film-makers who refuse to adapt 
to the equally harmful mediocrity and 
money grubbing of the cultural industry? 
These were the unanswered questions 
raised by three recent exhibitions in Paris 
which, simultaneously but from different 
points of view, tested the ability of consum- 
ers to see anything but soap operas or pop 
singers. These were the exhibitions of Rem- 
brandt’s engravings at the Petit Palais, the 
Bernard Saby retrospective at the Museum 
of Modern Art of the city of Paris, and the 
Matta retrospective at the Beaubourg Cen- 
tre. Three oases, three pockets of resistance 
to cultural desertification. 
Take Matta, for instance. Marcel 
Duchamp said of him, as long ago as 1946, 
Ph
ot
os
 
Bé
at
ri
ce
 
Ha
ta
la
 
©)
 
Ce
nt
re
 
Ge
or
ge
s 
Po
mp
id
ou
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 68420: Matta: a new way of looking at the world

  
Above, George and the Dragon, 1965. Wax 
crayon and lead pencil on paper 
(54.5 x 75.5 cm). Private collection, Paris. 
Left, The Birth of Venus, 1965. Wax crayon 
and lead pencil on paper (50 x 66 cm). Pri- 
vate collection, Paris. 
that he was “the profoundest painter of his 
generation”, and yet he calls himself not a 
painter but a seeker—a seeker of himself 
and of the Other. He is an archaeologist of 
human desire and a reorganizer of Reality, 
and has coined the term econography to 
describe his work. Here we have one of the 
most highly inventive minds to have ex- 
plored the problem of what it means to see. 
For half a century, he has kept the social 
and mental structures of the West perpe- 
tually shifting, and hence in danger of losing 
their balance and finding, subsequently, a 
new kind of balance. He is an architect who 
started out working with Le Corbusier, but 
whose Utopias have been built only in 
mythical and linguistic space, transcending 
the urban context in which the citizen of the 
nuclear age is locked. He is an exceptional 
person, a man who has crossed the Andes 
and the Atlantic and travelled through sur- 
realism and communism; who was a friend 
of Pablo Picasso, André Breton, Victor 
Brauner, Max Ernst, Henri Michaux and 
Salvador Allende; who studied with de 
Sade, Marx and Lautréamont; who has 
illustrated Cervantes, Shakespeare, Rim- 
baud and Jarry, and been acquainted with 
Marat, Gramsci and Lao Zi; who was a 
lover of Danaé, Penthesileia and the Scarlet 
Empress, and dreamed of being Genghis 
Khan, Leonardo de Vinci and Che 
Guevara. Here is an artist who wanted to 
paint what no one had painted before him: 
the living being in the process of rethinking 
the world and its place in the world. His was 
- 
one of the most important exhibitions to be 
held in this last quarter of a century. 
How can one “consume” this painting, 
which defies market forces? What did the 
endless crowds flowing through the 
Beaubourg Centre find in this major re- 
trospective exhibition, by turns dazzling 
and arcane? This polyglot Chilean nomad 
clearly cannot be reduced to fit any school, 
style or dogma—he is neither abstract nor 
figurative, neither an expressionist nor a 
social realist, nor even wholly a surrealist— 
he refuses to align himself with a fixed idea 
or specific doctrine. This creates problems 
for people who need an ideological “key” in 
order to feel that they can appreciate a work 
of art (thereby confusing art with a puzzle or 
a locked door). Matta can be bewildering in 
his playfulness and the youthful, quicksil- 
ver, changeable side of his nature. What he 
offers us is an art of seeing. 
“Potentiating space 
space in Space 
expanding space” 
wrote Henri Michaux about Matta’s paint- 
ing, which seizes on reality only in order to 
transform it. Matta makes no secret of this. 
Indeed he proclaims it: “Obviously! Art is 
revolution”. [| 
JEAN-JACQUES LEBEL, French writer and 
theatre and film director, is the author of several 
books including La Poésie de la Beat Generation 
(Poetry of the Beat Generation) 1965, Le Hap- 
pening, 71966 and L'Amour et I'Argent (Love and 
Money), 1979. 
wo. 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Treasures of Mongolia 
by Namsrain Ser-Odjav 
30

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
© 
All
 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
Granite tortoise forms part of the remains 
of Karakorum, the ancient capital of the 
Mongol ruler Ogdal, son of Genghis Khan. 
The ruins lie on the right bank of the Orhon 
river at the foot of the Khangal mountains. 
The tortoise once formed the base of a 
. Stela engraved with ancient texts. Stones 
on its back are offerings made in accord- 
ance with a still current tradition known as 
obo In Mongolian. 
scientific community learned of an ex- 
traordinary archaeological discovery in 
the valley of the upper Orhon Gol in Cen- 
tral Asia. Where this river emerges from 
deep gorges and flows in a wide curve into 
the plain, the ruins of a vast city had been 
discovered, apparently watched over by a 
giant stone tortoise, symbol of eternity. 
This was the famous Karakorum, capital 
of the Mongol Empire founded in the thir- 
teenth century by Genghis Khan. It was 
situated on the right bank of the river, 400 
kilometres south-west of Ulaanbaatar, the 
present capital of Mongolia, in an area 
which was suitable for both crops and live- 
stock and which possessed very old-estab- 
lished mining deposits, the Dalakyn-tal— 
an area which, indeed, had been the cradle 
of many Central Asian civilizations. The 
strange inscriptions found on the statues 
and stone stelae discovered in the city were 
later attributed to the “Blue Turks”; many 
writings from the period between the sixth 
and the eighth centuries describe this peo- 
ple’s glory and its tragic destiny. 
Karakorum was a settlement of several 
thousand inhabitants. Its agriculture and 
crafts were highly developed, trade 
flourished, and it boasted a sophisticated 
intellectual community. Its foundation has 
been traced back to 1220, when Genghis 
Khan's headquarters were transferred to 
I: the late nineteenth century, the world 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
the banks of the Orhon Gol, probably near 
Mount Melekhit, the “Tortoise Mountain”. 
On the heights which today overlook the 
village of Kharkorim, one can see the im- 
posing granite tortoise which probably gave 
the site its name. 
All around this stronghold, craftworkers’ 
and traders’ quarters and other houses were 
graudally built, until, by about 1230, the 
area had taken on the appearance of a town. 
Subsequently, in order to house the ad- 
"ministration that was his gift to the Empire 
and to receive ambassadors with all due 
ceremony, the great Khan Ogédei, third 
son of Genghis Khan, ordered major con- 
struction work to be carried out. 
In the various foreign sources which men- 
tion it, the capital of Genghis Khan's im- 
mediate successors is described first as a 
sort of mysterious reservoir from which 
wave upon wave of savage conquering 
hordes come pouring out; later it is seen as 
the economic, political and cultural centre 
of the united Mongol tribes in the thirteenth 
century; and, ultimately, as an archaeolo- 
gical cemetery. But the real Karakorum was 
quite different. 
An envoy from King Louis IX of France, 
the monk William of Rubrouck, who was 
received in 1256 by Méngke Khan, has left 
us a detailed description of the community. 
Twelve different religions coexisted in 
Karakorum, where mosques, Buddhist 
 The soyombo Ideogram (left) which fea- 
tures on the national flag of the Mongolian 
People’s Republic is regarded by Mongo- 
lians as their national emblem of liberty 
and independence. Each sign takes its 
meaning from ancient symbolism. For in- 
stance, the fire-sign situated above a sun 
and a quarter moon (legendary father and 
mother, respectively, of the Mongolian 
people) here signifies: “May the Mongo- 
lian people always live and prosper!” 
monasteries and a Christian church clus- 
tered cheek by jowl. The earth rampart 
which surrounded the city had four gates, 
each with its own market. 
The palace of Ogodei Khan was a master- 
piece of the architecture of the period. The 
two-storey building contained a vast central 
reception hall, supported by sixty-four col- 
umns and tastefully appointed; its walls 
were adorned with paintings and the floor 
was of green glazed tiles. All the roofs, 
made of green and red tiles, had orna- 
mentation in relief. This love of ornament 
and the inventive use of a few decorative 
motifs, characteristic of the architecture of 
the time, gave this palace a festive air. 
The archaeological excavations carried 
out in recent years in Karakorum add to the 
written records on a number of points. The 
palace and the other major constructions 
were built of sun-dried bricks, some of 
which still bear the trade-mark of the manu- 
facturer, and the houses could be warmed 
by a system of underfloor heating. The aris- 
tocratic areas extended to north and south 
along the Orhon river. The craftworkers’ 
and traders’ quarters and the administrative 
districts that have come to light have 
yielded rich finds: fragments of porcelain 
and glazed pottery, farming implements, 
craftworkers’ tools, cast iron hubs of 
wheels, domestic utensils and all sorts of 
ornaments in gold, silver and bronze. Coins Pp 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

Pp were particularly numerous, of both Mon- 
gol and foreign minting. 
In 1380, Karakorum was destroyed. But 
approximately two centuries later, on the 
same site, there arose the yurt of Avtai 
Khan, founder of the Erdeni Dzu Monas- 
tery. The great circular platform which 
formed its base is still visible today. 
The Erdeni Dzu architectural complex is 
an outstanding example of Mongol 
architecture, and its establishment by the 
Khalkha Mongol chief Avtai Khan can be 
traced precisely to the year 1586. Its layout 
was quadrangular, and in the seventeenth 
century an unusual precinct was added, 
consisting of 108 small buildings in the 
shape of pagodas, the soubourgan. On each 
of these is inscribed the name of the person 
to whom it is dedicated. Erdeni Dzu con- 
tains other remarkable monuments, either 
restored or under restoration, in particular 
the Labrang, a palace, and three large tem- 
ples. These are set side by side on an earth 
terrace raised for that purpose, and form a 
harmonious whole, despite certain dissimi- 
larities: the temple in the centre has two 
storeys, whereas those on either side have 
only one, and each has a double pitched 
roof. 
The monastery of Erdeni Dzu is a focal 
point in the history and culture of the Mon- 
gol people. Besides paintings, ornaments 
and embroideries dating from the fifteenth 
to the seventeenth centuries, it houses a 
whole library of rare manuscripts and 
wood-block printed editions. Here, too, are 
preserved the works of the seventeenth- 
century painter and sculptor Zanabazar, 
great illustrator of the Buddhist canon and 
one of the first Mongol artists to have 
attained universal stature. In his day there 
was an extraordinary flowering of the arts 
and culture in Mongolia. 
One of the most remarkable monuments 
of the Orhon valley is the funerary complex 
of the Turkish chiefs Kol and Bilge Kagan. 
Besides the tombs, it contained tall com- 
memorative stelae with runic inscriptions 
and a great many stone statues. More than 
ten centuries ago, the roofs of the sacrificial 
temple collapsed, and gradually the clay soil 
formed a protective shell over the ruins. An 
avenue lined with sculptures representing 
princes and great army chiefs used to form 
an approach to the temple from the east. 
Apart from two grey marble statues, head- 
less but still virtually intact, this ceremonial 
guard had been reduced to a shapeless mass 
of rubble. 
A section of marble jutting out of the 
ground was the sole clue to the whereabouts 
of the great stone tortoise. The stela erected 
on its back was covered with ancient, angu- 
lar Turkish characters, inscribed in regular 
lines. More than two centuries of history of 
the nomadic tribes of Central Asia were 
contained in that narrow compass. These 
CONTINUED PAGE 37 
32 
 
Statue of a warrior-guardian on the site of 
a cemetery for Turkic chiefs (7th-8th cen- 
tury) in the Orhon valley. Stones in front of 
the effigy of the valiant warrior are known 
as balabal and indicate the number of ene- 
mies he had vanquished. 
g 
g La 
=) ( 
= 
O 
8 
[4

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

e
o
 
  
L
E
 
a,
 
L
g
)
 | > »
 & 
* 
N
i
 
¥ 
we
, # 1 - 
4 » 
A
 N
S
T
 
- 1 F
A
 
o>
 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
All
 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
| 2 x 
  
            
    
T
A
R
,
 P
E
 
ET
 
T
r
 
   
TNR 
T
T
S
 
A
 
AM
 
Se
 
E
n
 
b
m
 
e
t
h
 
3
 
=
 
: 
M 
d
D
 
w
D
 
ol 
+41 
su
pa
 
B
r
e
d
’
 
© 
N.
 
Se
r-
Od
ja
v,
 
In
st
it
ut
e 
of
 H
is
to
ry
, 
A
c
a
d
e
m
y
 
of
 
Sc
ie
nc
es
 
of
 
th
e 
Mo
ng
ol
ia
n 
Pe
op
le
’s
 
Re
pu
bl
ic
 
Ph
ot
o 
The temple of Labrang (above) is situated 
in the vast precinct of the Erdeni-Dzu 
monastery, a monument of major 
architectural and cultural importance lo- 
cated some 400 km west of Ulaanbaatar, 
the Mongolian capital. The building is a 
massive Tibetan-style edifice with a flat 
roof, trapezoidal windows and walls 
whose exterior face inclines slightly in- 
wards. Dating from 1780, it was the resi- 
dence of the Lama and a place of worship. 
- Stela, (left) which once stood on the back 
of a sculpture of a tortoise at Karakorum, 
is carved with inscriptions in ancient Tur- 
kic letters which relate episodes from the 
history of the nomad tribes of Central Asia. 
One passage declares: “Listen until the 
end to what | say to you here, you who 
come after me. O Turkic people! May the 
Turkic people never perish, may they be a 
people forever!” 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
     
    
   
    
idl ov STE UE (ISET0E EEE T ENETaE | RE TER
Since 1980 Unesco and the 
Mongolian Government have : F 4 
been carrying out restoration ! 
work on the monastery of 
Amarbayasgalam, which 
stands 2,000 metres above 
sea level, 300 km north of 
Ulsanbaatar. The roofs are 
being covered with varnished 
tiles manufactured using the 
same techniques as those 
with which the original tiles 
were made. The monastery 
consists of some 30 buildings. 
Photo © Comalie Jest, Paris 
ASE FIAT, (RRL

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
        
The traditional dwelling of the Turkic and 
Mongolian nomad herdsmen of central 
Asia, the yurt is a collapsible circular tent 
in which a wooden latticed structure is 
covered with felt. In the past massive royal 
yurts were transported from place to place 
on ox-drawn platforms. In the 13th cen- 
tury, William of Rubrouck claimed to have 
seen a yurt drawn by 22 oxen. Although 
such great mobile dwellings have dis- 
appeared today, the yunt Itself (Riiil In Tur- 
kish; gher in Mongolian) is still a striking 
feature of the Mongolian landscape. 
Above, a 13th-century scene as depicted 
by an artist in the 19th century. 
Photo taken from Art de la Mongolie de I'Antiquité au Début du 
20e Siécle by Niam Ossorine and Tsulten, Plastic Arts, Moscow, 
1984 
Photography, the memory of peoples 
From 9 to 12 December 1985, some forty 
specialists attended a meeting on still 
photography held in Luxembourg (see 
page 2). Most of the leading press agencies 
from the industrially developed countries 
(AFP, Reuters, Tass, Keystone) and the 
developing countries (PANA, XINHUA) 
were represented at the meeting, the first 
organized by Unesco in this field of creative 
activity. 
The participants recommended a num- 
ber of guidelines for Unesco's action in the 
field of photography. They suggested that 
Unesco should carry out studies on the 
36 
economic and socio-cultural impact of 
modern communication techniques, includ- 
ing photography and “visual writing”, con- 
sidered as a new mode of expression. They 
also proposed that Unesco contribute to the 
publication of monographs relating to 
photography, especially in the developing 
countries. Finally they asked Unesco to 
bring together users and manufacturers of 
photographic equipment and to encourage 
the manufacturers to produce robust, reli- 
able cameras adapted to conditions in 
countries where the climate is unsuitable 
for highly sophisticated equipment, as well 
as durable photochemical and photo- 
magnetic material. 
The participants encouraged Unesco to 
contribute to the creation of photo archives, 
in which to preserve the memory of 
ples. They also expressed the wish that a 
meeting of specialists be held to bring the 
copyright conventions up to date and to 
include in them the protection of photo- 
graphic images. Unesco was also invited to 
support photography training programmes 
in developing countries. =

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

The 18th-century drawing below depicts 
the entrance of the palace of Karakorum as 
it appeared in the 13th century, when It 
was adorned with a magnificent silver tree 
wrought by a French craftsman. In his 
Travels in the Mongol Empire (1253-1255), 
the monk William of Rubrouck, envoy of 
the French King Louis IX to Méngke Khan, 
left a detailed description of this extraor- 
dinary tree, “at the roots of which are 4 
silver lions, each vomiting white mare’s 
milk. At the top, one of the four ducts pours 
forth wine; another caracomos, clarified 
mare’s milk; another bal, a drink made 
from honey; and another rice-beer. As a 
receptacle for each drink a silver bowl is 
placed at the foot of the tree. At the top of 
the tree he has made an angel holding a 
trumpet, and beneath the tree a vault 
where a man can hide.” 
Photo taken from Art de la Mongolie de I'Antiquité au Début du 
2De Siécle by Niam Ossorine and Tsulten, Plastic Arts publishing 
house, Moscow, 1984 
  
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 32 
tombs, then, are outstanding examples of 
the art and culture of the Turks of the 
Mongol steppe, but they are also an essen- 
tial link in our knowledge of the past. 
The sculpted stone warriors are power- 
fully original works of art. They are usually 
represented in a traditional upright pose, 
holding a chalice in the right hand. Their 
costumes, hairstyles, earrings and belts, de- 
corated with a variety of plaques, to which 
their weapons are attached, are depicted 
with great precision. The faces have slant- 
ing eyes set very close together, a long nose 
and a small mouth with a moustache. But 
the realism of this model is combined with 
considerable imagination in the invention 
of individual features. These statues stood 
as silent witnesses to the ceremonies and 
funeral rites which took place in the monu- 
ments raised in their honour, facing east. In 
front of the statue of the valiant warrior was 
set up a row of rough stones, balbals, which 
indicated the number of enemies he had 
killed. 
In the Orhon valley there are also an 
incalculable number of ancient rock draw- 
ings: animals, people, signs and decorative 
patterns of various kinds. When we begin to 
decipher these scriptures in stones, a whole 
world starts once again to stir into life and 
meaning. For a moment we feel the joy and 
the fear aroused at night, before the fire, by 
the sacred ceremonies. In the rock forma- 
tions of the steppe, worn away by wind and 
rain, we see the faces of divinities or terrify- 
ing idols, emerging as they were seen or 
imagined by the artists of old and by those 
of their tribe. 
  
Horses, the valiant steeds of the steppe, 
were held in high esteem. They appear in 
complex compositions, often with necks 
outstretched, caught in full gallop. Some- 
times the horse is bestridden by a horse- 
man, drawing his bow or reaching out an 
arm. The oven-hot air makes the drawings 
shimmer and seems to give them a life of 
their own, adding to their evocative power. 
The stag is another animal often portrayed. 
It was apparently an object of worship and 
an important factor in the economy of these 
tribes. : 
This rapid survey of the Mongol cultural 
heritage is necessarily incomplete. And the 
Orhon valley undoubtedly still holds count- 
less hidden riches. Such a fine historical site 
deserves a place among the treasures of the 
world cultural heritage. For here, on the 
banks of the Orhon, dwelt the people who, 
for twenty centuries, set the course of his- 
tory not only in Central Asia but in Asia 
Minor and Western Europe by mapping out 
this vast area where flourished what is 
commonly known as the “Empire of the 
Steppe”. | 
 
NAMSRAIN SER-ODJAYV is head of the ar- 
chaeology department at the Institute of History 
of the Academy of Sciences of the Mongolian 
People’s Republic, a member of the Permanent 
Council of the International Union of Prehistoric 
and Protohistoric Sciences, and principal scienti- 
fic adviser to the Mongolian National Commis- 
sion for the Study of Central Asian Civilizations. 
He has participated in a collective work on the 
history of the cultures of Central Asia currently 
being prepared by Unesco. 
 

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 68422: 1986: Year of Peace, 3, messages from young people

1986: Year of Peace / 3 
 
Messages from young people 
encourage young people to reflect on 
I “the maintenance and strengthening of 
peace”, Unesco recently asked its 
National Commissions to send in essays on 
this theme written by young people between 
the ages of fifteen and twenty-four. 
Forty-four young people from all over the 
world responded with messages expressing 
their desire for peace and their awareness of 
the fragility of peace. They unanimously con- 
demn the arms race, considering that the 
money swallowed up in arms spending should 
be devoted to the development of the poorer 
nations, and that peace is inconceivable as 
long as hunger, poverty and sickness prevail 
in many parts of the world—in short, that 
peace is inseparable from development and 
justice. They believe that armed conflicts 
mainly originate in ideological and political 
intolerance, racism and social inequality. 
They all see the conflict between generations 
as a form of social injustice, especially in a 
period of economic crisis. Misunderstood by 
older generations, young people, they say, 
often feel they are outsiders. 
Most of the young people advocate the 
same road to peace. In politics, they consider 
that solutions to disputes should always be 
negotiated, and describe the United Nations 
as the only international body capable of en- 
suring peace. Many of them feel that the 
family should instil the values of peace in 
young people from a very early age. They 
deplore literature and mass media program- 
mes that encourage violence for its own sake, 
and render human suffering commonplace. 
Most of them consider fraternity and generos- 
ity to be the fundamental values and maintain 
that the latter will only become a living force 
when they are professed by each individual. 
For them, everything begins with the indi- 
vidual. Hence the decisive role of family unity, 
the keystone of a peace that will extend to join 
communities and nations. 
Below, extracts from some of the letters: 
“I should like to be part of an organization of 
children between the ages of ten and thirteen 
which would try to influence and convince 
younger children that war is a bad thing for all 
mankind.” 
Branimir Majcica (Yugoslavia) 
“War does not necessarily mean bombing. 
Today certain dictatorships use torture or 
psychological terror. Thus people do not die . 
from bullets, but from malnutrition or pneumo- 
nia, or if the machine of State is strong and 
allows it, by ‘suicide’. lt is difficult to challenge 
this, because only falling bombs can be 
seen.” 
Christine Kasper (Austria) 
“iWhen elephants fight, the grass suffers.’ 
The struggle for military superiority between 
the super-powers has hit the Third World 
countries hardest.” 
Basanta Raj Sharma (Nepal) 
"In the developing countries there is only one 
doctor for every 3,700 people, but the figure 
for army personnel is one for every 250.” 
A.R.M. Saifuddin Ekram (Bangladesh) 
“When | ask a child who has not yet reached. 
the age of five ‘What does peace mean?’ he 
replies, ‘I don't know'.’ If | ask him what war 
means, he says: ‘People fighting, that is 
dying’. The child knows much about war, but 
nothing about peace.” 
Issam Ali Abdel Rahman (Egypt) 
“Holding out a bunch of flowers the little girl - 
said with a smile: ‘Buy flowers, sir. Flowers 
are the messengers of the heart." ‘I do not 
want to buy,’ he said. ‘| would like to ask you a 
question. Do you think selling flowers is 
appropriate in the present circumstances? 
Thousands of people are dying. Innocent peo- 
ple are being swept away. They are darkening 
children’s eyes. And you? You sell flowers! In 
a sad voice she said, ‘You are not the only one 
who is surprised about this.... All the flowers in 
the world would not be enough to decorate the 
graves of those of whom you speak with such 
pity. The dew on the flowers reminds me of the 
tears of my young brother who lay in the dark 
sucking my mother's breast smeared with - 
blood. t know why | sell flowers. Their beauty 
is the beauty of life. But it seems that you have 
not yet understood their message...” 
Gadah Al Qudsi (Jordan) 
“Mothers, when you give birth, say ‘Peace'l” 
. Alejandro Angel Puja Campos (Chile) 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office : 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 78 French francs. 2 years (valid only in France): 
144 French francs. Binder for a year's issues : 56 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly 
Individual articles and photographs not copynghted may be 
reprinted providing the credit ine reads “Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles repnnted must bear 
author's name. Non-copyright photos will be suppled on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be retumed unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed arti- 
cles express the opirons of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and headlines are written 
by the Unesco Couner staff. The boundaries on maps published 
in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance 
by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Couner is pro- 
duced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by : Unesco, 7 
Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Pans. (2) University Microfilms 
(Xerox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A; (30 N.C.R. Micro- 
card Edition, Indian Head, Inc.. 111 West 40th Street. New York, 
U.S.A; (4) Bell and Howell Co.. Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, 
Ohio 44691, USA 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in- 
Chief in Paris 
Non-Headquarters editions 
German : Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese : Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
italian : Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hind! : Rajmani Tiwari (Delhi) 
Tamil : M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew : Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian 
Dutch : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish : Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu : Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan : Joan Carreras | Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian : Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean : Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili : Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salam) 
Croato-Serb. Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese : Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian : Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek : Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala : S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish : Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish : Inger Raaby (Stockholm) 
Basque : Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai : Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
38 IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) - Dépét légal : C1 - Mars 1986 
PHOTOCOMPOSITION : Ateliers de I'UNESCO - PHOTOGRAVURE-IMPRESSION : MAURY-IMPRIMEUR S.A., Z.I. route d'Etampes, 45330 MALESHERBES.

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

. an attempt 
{he 0 tativ ntheM n 
on +. and society omen Sogether a BY, en car- 
os in family & obrnng dies © e of chang - nn of stu d rang 
Contempor®® selection over a broad e inks 
ried © S highlightie Jision Of 
sociel a the se* a old and 
betwe® within the j0-econo” 
labou the broa areas: 
that Jel. Covers interna 
mic od in inte P tert, 
wome jon; ¢ and the 
tional ES labo 1 prio nes 
(@) } . N M e- 
’ ’ iss 
Unesco { Ww . \ systems: on 
nt S 5 90 French ©? 
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
AUSTRALIA. Hunter Publicabons, 58a Gipps St., Coliingwood, Victona 3066; 
Publications : Educatonal Supphes Pty. Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 2100, 
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
Lid, Kamani Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chitararyan Ave., 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh, 
 NSW, Periodicals : Domine Pty. Subscriptions Dept, P O. Box 33, B 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent : Unrded Natons Association of Australia, P.O. Box 
175, Sth floor, Ana House, 28 Elzabeth St, Melbourne, Victoria 3000. 
AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. 
BAHAMAS. Nassau Stationers Ltd., P.O. Box N-3138, Nassau. BAHRAIN. 
The Arabian Ag and Distributing Co., Al Mut i St., PO. Box 156, 
Manama BANGLADESH. Bangladesh Books Intemabonal Ltd., ttefaq Burld- 
ing, 1, RK Mission Rd., Hatkhola, Dacca 3. BARBADOS. University of the 
West Indies Bookshop, Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bndgetown. 
BELGIUM. "Unesca Couner” Dutch edition only : N V. Handelmaatschappi 
Keesing. Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deume-Amtwerpen. French edmon and 
general Unesco publications agent : Jean de Lannoy, 202 Ave. du Roi, 1060 
Brussels, CCP 000-0070823-13. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, P.O, 
Box 91, Gaborone. BURMA. Trade Corporation No. 8, 550-552 Merchant 
Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd., 2182 St. Catherine 
St West, Montreal, Qué. H3H 1M7. CHINA. China Natonal Publications 
Import and Export Corporation, P O. Box 88, Bejing. CYPRUS. “MAM”, 
Archtushop Makanos 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA S N.T.L., Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1; Ve Smeckach 
30,P.0.B.790-111-27 Prague 1 (P display); Z: Ineratura, 11 
Soukenicka, Prague 1. For Slovakia only : Atta Verlag. -Publishers, Hurbanovo 
nam. 6,893 31 Brabslava-CSSA. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export-OG, Tids- 
skriftservica, 35 Nore Sogade, DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. EGYPT (ARAB 
REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for Unesco Publications, No. 1 Talaat Harb 
St, Caro. ETHIOPIA. National Agency for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis 
Ababa. FINLAND. Akateeminen Kmakauppa kuskatu 1, SF-00100 Hel- 
sinki 10; Suomalainen Kinab Oy. K ya 2. 01640 Vantaa 64. 
FRANCE. Libraine de Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Pans. CCP 
12598-48. GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchhaus Leipzig, Post- 
fach 140, 710 Lespzig, or from Internahonalen Buchhandlungen inthe G D R. 
FED. REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco Couner (German, English, French 
and Spamsh editions) : Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kurier Vertrieb, 
Basaltstrasse 57, D5300 Bonn 3 GHANA. Presbylenan Bookshop Depot Lid., 
P Q. Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Supphers Ltd., P.O Box 7869, Accra; The 
University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The Unsversity Bookshop of Cape 
Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. GREAT 
BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. HONG KONG. Federal Publications (HK) 
Lid., SA Evergreen Industnal Mansion, 12 Yip Fat St., Aberdeen. Swindon 
Book Co., 13-15, Lock Rd., Kowloon. Hong Kong Govt. Information Services, 
Publicaton Centre, Baskerville House, 22 Ice St. HUNGARY. Kultura- 
Bustumport-ABT, P.O.B. 149-H-1389, Budapest 62. ICELAND. $i 1 
Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd., Bangalore 560001; 
3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-depots : Oxford Book and Sta- 
honery Co., 17 Park St, Calcutta 70016, Scindia House, New Deths; Publica- 
tion Und, Minustry of Education and Culture, Ex. AFO Hutments, Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad Rd., New Delhi, 110001. INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Book- 
sellers, 29 JI. Oto Iskandardinata 111, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI Dr. Sam 
Ratulangwe 37, Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and Distnbution 
Co., 28 Vessal Shiraz St., Enghélab Ave,, P.O. Box 314/1486, Teheran; 
Iranian Nat. Comm. for Unesco, 1188 Englab Ave., Rostam Give Busding, Zip 
Code 13158, P.O. Box 11365-4498, Teheran. IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, 
Al Rashid St., Baghdad. IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd., 
Ballymount Rd., Walkinstown, Dubin 12. ISRAEL. A B.C. Bookstore Lid., 
P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd., Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Librena 
Commessionana Sansoni, S.p A), Via Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 
50121 Florence. JAMAICA. Sangster's Bookstores Ltd., P.Q. Box 366, 101 
Water Lane, Kingston; University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kings- 
ton. JAPAN. Eastem Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 3-chome Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113. KENYA, East Afncan Publishing Houss, P.O. Box 30571, Nairobi; 
Anca Book Services Lid., Quran House, Mfangano St., P.O. Box 45245, 
Nairobi. KOREA. Korean Nabonal Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 
64, Seoul KUWAIT. The Kuwart Bookshop Co., Ltd, POB 2942, Kuwait; for the 
Unesco Couner : Faralalla Press Agency, P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwart. 
LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Centre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Afnca. 
LIBERIA. Code and Yancy Bookshops tid, P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. 
LIECHTENSTEIN. Eurocan Trust Reg. P.O B. 589494 Schaan. LIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. Agency for Development of Publicahon and Distnbu- 
bon, P.O. Box 34-35, Tnpoli. LUXEMBOURG. Libraire Paul Bruck. 22, 
Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. MALAWI Malaw Book Service, Head Office, P.O. 
Box 30044 Chuchiri, Blantyre 3. MALAYSIA, Uruwersity of Malaya Co-opera- 
tive Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 22-11. MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic St., 
Valletta. MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd.. 30 Bourbon St, Port-Louts. 
MONACO, British Library, 30 Bd. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. NEPAL. Sajha 
Prakashan Poichowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Keesing Boeken B.V., 
Joan Muyskenweg, 22, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine N.V., P.O. Box 200, Willem- 
siad, Curagao, N.A. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing P.O. Box 
14277-Kilirmie, Weihngton; 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721 Chnst- 
church; Alma St, P.O. Box B57, Hamilton; Pnnces St, P.O. Box 1104, 
Dunedin. NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ife; The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.Q. 286; The Unversity Bookshop of Nsukka; The Uni ity 
os Subscription and Trade Book Service, P O B. 6125 Elterstad, Oslo 6; 
delen, Univer t, Postboks 307 Blinder, Oslo 
oy PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shatvah Quaid--azam, P.O. Box No. 
729, Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for Book De- 
velopment in Asia and the Pacific, 39 Dell Housing Society, P O. Box BS50, 
Karachi 29. PHILIPPINES. National Book Store, Inc., 701, Rizal Ave., Manila 
D-404. POLAND. Ompan-Import, Palac Kuttury | Nauki, Warsaw: Ars Polona- 
Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No 7. 00-068 Warsaw PORTUGAL. Dias & 
Andrade Lida. Livrana Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. SEYCHELLES. 
National Bookshop, P.O Box 48, Mahé, New Service Lid., Kingsgate House, 
P.O. Box 131, Mahé. SIERRA LEONE. Fourah Bay, Njala University and 
Sierra Leone Diocesan Bookshops, Freetown. SINGAPORE. Federal Pub- 
beations (S) Pte Ltd. Times Jurong. 2 Jurong Port Rd., Singapore 2261. 
SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Modem Bookshop and General, PO. 
Box 951, Mogadiscio. SOUTH AFRICA. For the Unesco Courier (single 
copes) only : Central News Agency. P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. SRI 
LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, 
P OB. 244, Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, PO. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. SWEDEN. All publicatons A/B.C.E. Fritzes Kungal, Hovbokhan- 
del, Regenngsgatan 12, Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Couner : Svenska FN Forbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 S-104, 65 Stock- 
hoim; Wennergren-Williams, Box 30004-S-104, 25 Stockholm; Essetle Tids- 
, Gamia B 26, Box 62 - 101 20 Stockholm. 
SWITZERLAND. All publications : Europa Verlag. 5 Ramsstrasse, Zanch; 
Libraine Payot, Rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C C.P, 12-236; Libraines 
Payot also in Lausanne, Basle, Berne, Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and 
Zunch. TANZANIA. Dar-es- Salaam Bookshop, P.O B. 3030, Dar-es-Salaam. 
THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, Styaeg Phaya 
Sri, P.O. Box 402, Bang S Pant, M. 9. Rad Ave., 
Bangkok; Sukst Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. TRINIDAD 
AND TOBAGO. Natonal Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St., St. Claw, 
Trinidad W 1. TURKEY. Haset Krlapew1 A.S., Istikial Caddest, No 469, Posta 
Kutusu 219. Beyoglu, Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 7145, 
Kampala. UNITED KINGDOM. H M. Statnery Office, HM S O., P O. Box 
2786, London SW8 5DT, and Govt. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Betast, 
Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol, for scientic maps only : McCarta Ltd., 122 
King's Cross Rd., London WC1X SDS. UNITED STATES. Unipub, 205 East 
42nd St, New York, N Y. 10017. Orders for books and penodicals : P.O. Box 
1222, Ann Arbor, MI 48106 USSR, V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kruga, Ul. Dymdro- 
va 39, Moskva 113095. YEMEN. 14th October Corporation, P O. Box 4227, 
Aden. YUGOSLAVIA. Miadost, lica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankaneva Zalozba, 
 
   Jonsson and Co., H.F. Hamarstraeti 9, Reyigavik. INDIA. Onent Longman 
8 op of Lagos; The Ahmadu Bello University Bookshop of Zana. 
NORWAY. Johan Grund Tanum, P.O B. 1177 Sentrum - Osio 1, Narvesen   Z eva 2, Lubfana; Noiit, Terazye 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distributon Co. of Zambia Lid, P.O. Box 2664 Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Ave., Harare.

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068421engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 