# [062393](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WORLD 
‘WC ouric 
JANUARY 1964 (177TH YEAR) - PRICE 1/-STG. (U.K.) - 30 CENTS (CANADA) - 0.70F (FRANCE) 
HE . —SE 
  
ro ———— 
v 
P
R
 
  
FAIR PLAY 
AND 
THE 
AMATEUR 
nN SPORT 
E
l
e
 
LE
 
W
a
r
y
 
   

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

SHAPES & DREAMS 
OF ASTRONAUTICS 
~ Day-dreaming on the wonders of space explo- 
BC) LAE TESTED TOES TG IEE GCE Te BLE TT LT 
BT) CLO IY BT {HET REE CUR COM CEC EL EL) 
~ at a Moscow exhibition. He holds a photo of 
~ Yuri Gagarin, the world’s first astronaut. 
- Vy L-  

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WONLO 
Th =, 
  
  [l
—
1
\
"
 
  
Contents 
No. 1 
PUBLISHED IN Page 
NINE EDITIDNS 
English 4 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 10 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 
Japanese 
Italian 
20 
24 
28 
  
COVER PHOTO 
 
Arm and leg movements per- 
fectly synchronized, three run- 
ners speed along a Moscow 
stadium track in a 5,000-metre 
race. Democratic and interna- 
tional by nature, sport has ex- 
panded enormously in the past 
half century, But its develop- 
ment has created new condi- 
tions that today call for a 
reappraisal of some traditional 
ideas and practices (seepage 4). 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
mf ouricr 
33 
34 
Scientific and Cultural 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
JANUARY 1964 
17TH YEAR 
SPORT IS EDUCATION 
By René Maheu 
WHAT MAKES THE ATHLETE RUN ? 
The meaning of athletic performance 
By Roger G. Bannister 
ETCHCRAFT ON CELLULOID 
The magic of Norman McLaren's films 
By Anne MacDermot 
COUNTDOWN FOR SPACE FLIGHT 
By E. Aksenov, E. Grebenikov and V. Dyomin 
NEW TOOLS TO MAP OUR MINERAL WEALTH 
Scientific prospecting from land, sea and air 
By J.M. Bruckshaw 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
(M.C. 63.1, 187 A) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itis bi-monthly (Ill issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, 
Arabic, Japanese, and ltalian. In the United Kingdom itis distributed by H.M. 
Stationery Qffice, P. O. Box 569, London, S. E, I. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER™, plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor, Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage, Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Yeniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim EI Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition ; Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
Periodical Literature published by H. W. Wilson Co.,, New York. 
Annual subscription rates : 10/-stg. ; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies |[/-stg. 30 
cents ; 0.70 F. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief,

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 61362: Sport is education

SPORT IS ED 
by René Maheu 
  
We publish below extracts from an address given 
by M. René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco, 
on October 28, 1963 at the conference called in Paris 
by the International Council of Sport and Physical 
Education. M. Maheu deals with the threat to the 
principles of competitive sports created by chau- 
vinism and what has been' called ‘’shamateurism®. 
These questions were debated by the Council and 
also were the subject of a long report by the former 
French tennis champion, Jean Borotra. This interna- 
tional conference met on the occasion of the 
centennial anniversary of the birth of Baron Pierre 
de Coubertin (1863-1937) who was responsible for 
the rebirth of the Olympic Games in modern times. 
Fo the revival of the Olympic Games we have 
to thank Pierre de Coubertin who, in 1892 
when he was barely 30 years of age, launched the idea 
during the jubilee of the Union of French Athletic Clubs. 
Two years later the revival was officially proclaimed at 
the Sorbonne in Paris, and the first Olympic Games of 
modern times took place in Athens in 1896. 
“Why did I revive the Olympic Games?” said Coubertin. 
“To dignify and invigorate sport, to make it independent 
and durable and thus better fitted for its educational role 
in the world today; to honour the individual athlete 
because of his real value to the community as a stimulus 
to physical exercise and to exalt feats that encourage a 
healthy competitive spirit.” 
Coubertin reiterated these ideas, though in more deve- 
loped form, in “The Philosophical Bases of Modern Olym- 
pics,” a message which he broadcast from Berlin in August 
1935, a year before the llth Olympic Games. 
If, on this occasion, Coubertin was perhaps somewhat 
too ambitious in claiming that modern Olympics should 
be considered as first and foremost a religion, the reason 
was his own fervour. But the other ideas in his Olympic 
philosophy form a logical and compact whole of lasting 
value which the most lucid minds should make a point 
of studying. 
Olympics, said Coubertin, postulate the existence and 
assembly of an élite of athletes, an élite whose ranks are 
open to anyone able to meet a single condition—supe- 
riority in sport. The process of selecting this élite itself 
implies a broad “democratization” of sport, and, conver- 
sely, the accomplishments of the élite help to popularize 
sport among the mass of the people. 
Indeed, in a now familiar axiom, Pierre de Coubertin 
declared: “If 100 people are to take up physical culture, 
50 must already be engaged in sport; if 50 are to practise 
sport there must be 20 who specialize; if 20 are to specialize 
there must be five capable of superlative feats.” 
Coubertin affirms too that we have nothing to fear from 
these “superlative feats,” but that, on the contrary, “it 
would be utopian to try to saddle athletics with a code of 
compulsory moderation.” Athletes must have absolute 
freedom to overstep all bounds. That is why they were 
given the vigorous motto, citius, altius, fortius—ever 
faster, higher and stronger, “the motto of those bold 
enough to challenge existing records,” in other words to 
4 thrust back the bounds of the hitherto unattainable. 
  
    
CONT'D ON PAGE 7 © Paul Almasy

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 61362: Sport is education

 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 61362: Sport is education

  
A UNIVERSAL SPORT 
Sports events have become the great popular spectacles of our time and of these 
the most universally appreciated is football. An ancient game, it was played by 
the Spartans as early as 500 B.C. In medieval Italy, teams of as many as 27 a side 
lined up for matches between cities. A somewhat brawl-like kind of football became 
so popular in medieval England that it was eventually banned by law, partly because 
it diverted the yeomen from archery practice. It was only restored to legality by 
Charles Il in the 17th century. The skill and excitement of football and the enthusiasm 
of its spectators are reflected in these photos. Above, Pelé, the “star” of the Bra- 
zilian team scores a goal. Below, Brazil's goalkeeper, Gylmar, dives across the 
goalmouth (the ball rebounded from the post). Right, crowd scene in an African 
stadium shows just how popular football has now become on this continent. 
© Associated Press 
  
 
 
   
  
R | 
FM 
ae | SL Sale = w 
~ nd r r - : al : 
Es — | AS:
we . - © a LAS = 
wv 
. : 
~~ - . - - 
oy = “cms PY .« mle ~ ” waded 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
i 
2 8 5 
\,   
      
 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 61362: Sport is education

  
© Keystone 
  
SPORT IS EDUCATION (Cont'd) 
Need for a careful 
reappraisal 
The moral conduct of athletes must be equal to the 
standard of their performance in the field. Plerre de 
Coubertin asks them to constitute an “order of chivalry” 
which scrupulously observes a code of honour based on 
fair play. He counts on the Olympic Games to bring this 
home so strongly that not only will the example be 
followed at all sports meetings—international, natlonal 
and local—but the spectators too will feel its impact. 
For Coubertin the idea of a “truce” was also an Ilmpor- 
tant aspect of the Olympics. Ie saw it as a modern 
evocation of the “sacred truce” of antiquity, established 
by Iphitos, King of Elis, in agreement with Lycurgus, 
which for nearly 12 centuries was respected at Olympia, 
so that all quarrels, misunderstandings, factions and 
hatreds cease during the Games. The alliance of 
enthusiasm with the spirit of fair play found in compe- 
titive sports opens, in natural consequence, the way to 
mutual respect and understanding and to friendship itself. 
“Hatred and violence,” sald Coubertin, “are attributes 
of the faint-hearted.” 
Sport is Indeed an order of chivalry, combining honour 
and a code of ethics and aesthetles, recruiting its members 
from all classes and all peoples, mingling them in concord 
and friendship throughout the length and breadth of the 
entire world. 
Sport is also a truce. In our technological way of life, 
ruled by an inexorable law of toil, In which we are only 
what we have, and have only what we carn, sport is the 
hallowed pastime, a princely gift to enrich our hours of 
lefsure. In an era of antagonlsms and conflicts, domi- 
nated by the drive for power and by pride, it is the 
respite of the gods in which falr competition ends in 
respect and friendship. 
Sport, too, is education, the most concrete and the truest 
kind of education—that of character, Sport Is knowledge 
because it Is only by patient study and self-revelation 
that a sportsman can go from strength to strength. 
Sport is culture because the transient movements it 
traces in time and space—for nothing but the sheer 
pleasure of doing so, as Plato has it—illuminate with 
dramatic meaning the essential and therefore the deepest 
and widest values of different peoples and of the human 
race itself; it is culture, too, because it creates beauty, and 
above all for those who usually have the least opportunity 
to feast upon it. 
| F there is one unchanging factor in Coubertin's 
humanistic concept of sport, from the Paris 
proclamation in 1894,—his profession of faith—right down 
to the Berlin message of 1935—his testament—it is unde- 
niably the dual bellef that sport is democratic and inter- 
national by nature and vocation. Ialf a century of extra- 
ordinary development in sport has shown how right he 
was on both these points: his words have come true and 
his spirit has triumphed. 
But is it a betrayal of his memory to point out that this 
confirmation and triumph have come about in conditions 
which call for a careful reappraisal, and even a bold 
revision of certain ideas or practices that he originated? 
I personally do not think so; I feel that he, with his 
remarkable open-mindedness, would be the first to under- 
take the necessary reappraisals. ) 
On the first point—the democratization of sport—does 
anyone nowadays not see and realize that this democrati- 
zation, the conditions of urban life and, of course, the 
raising of the level of athletic performance, have pro- 
foundly altered the conditions in which the athletic élite 
is selected? 
The famous axiom remains true: sport needs its cham- 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 61362: Sport is education

SPORT 1S EDUCATION (Cont'd) 
‘The champion is no longer an amateur’ 
pions. But, unless the circumstances are exceptional, 
it is no longer true, as it ‘was in Coubertin’s day, 
that the champion can emerge, train, establish 
himself and give the full measure of his potentialities 
—which is properly not only his individual vocation but 
also his role in society—in that state of independence of, 
and indifference to, the economic contingencies—or rather 
necessities—of ordinary life which confers what is called 
amateur status, and which at the time Pierre de Coubertin 
no doubt considered essential to the spirit of the Olympic 
Games. 
| HoucH amateurism is the right thing for the 
general run of those who practise sports, to 
try to make amateur status obligatory for the élite of the 
sports world means—with certain exceptions that prove 
the rule—imposing falsehood on that élite. In this res- 
pect, we must be honest enough to admit that the ethical 
concepts of Pierre de Coubertin relate to a social situation 
and a stage in the technical development of sport which 
are now out of date. 
Nor were they those of Ancient Greece, for apart from 
the fact that the democracies of antiquity secured leisure 
for their citizens at the price of slave labour, the Olympic 
victors were what we today should call “State athletes.” 
The social conditions and sports technique which gave 
Pierre de Coubertin his frame of reference were those of 
his time—of Victorian England and, in general, of the 
middle-class Europe of the early decades of this century. 
Today it is practically impossible for the champion to 
emerge from the rank and file of sportsmen unless special 
arrangements are made for him to become a State athlete 
or a university athlete or an athlete sponsored by some 
commercial firm. Strictly speaking, he is no longer really 
an amateur at all. 
Why should we be so reluctant to admit that he is a 
professional? Is an artist—a painter, musician or writer— 
disqualified because he receives a fee? Why should we 
  
LOPNING ILANGDISTANS 
| - 
: a wo ————————— i — 
    
‘MUSEUM, OF 
  
  
   
The development of sport down the ages is shows : 
‘in pictures and exhibits of sporting gear at Stock- 
~ holm’'s Museum of Sport which was opened in 
fy Ti 
1947. Left, the impressive “* armour plate ” worn  

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 61362: Sport is education

    
fam 
it 
4 
2 
» 
    
think that money (or some equivalent material gain) 
dishonours athletic champions when it does not dishonour 
poets? 
In point of fact, it is falsehood that dishonours: and 
it is high time, in my opinion, to admit what everyone 
knows to be the truth; that most champions and budding 
champions at best observe only the strict letter of the 
outmoded standards of amateur status. 
The problem of the champion and the future champion 
is not whether or not they are professionals. The real 
problem, in practical and social terms, is that while 
practising sport for a few years as a virtual profession, 
they must at the same time learn another for the not 
far distant day when they will no longer be physically 
able to keep up the championship standard. This 
difficulty is a very real one and deserves the fullest 
and most considerate study. Nor will it be easler to 
reach a fair solution if we deny the obvious fact that 
the champion is obliged to live the life of a professional 
athlete. 
This is what I wished to say about the first point, 
namely the democratization of sport and the training 
of its élites. As for the second point—internationalism— 
no one will be surprised, I imagine, that for Unesco this 
is a matter of vital importance. Here again we must 
LOPNING KoRTDISTANS 
a 
  
 
 
  
  
 
i aeoed 
an Te: A 
are 
oral = “dap 
have the courage to look squarely at the facts and say 
frankly what we see. 
Sport has, of course, developed on an extraordinarily 
wide scale. It is probably the aspect of modern life 
which is most widely encountered throughout the world 
—the only one, perhaps, which is common to both 
industrialized communities and developing countries. It 
Is also, in a steadily increasing degree, one of the most 
vigorous forces in international relations. There are few 
international exchanges, encounters or contacts which 
arouse so much mass feeling as sports events. 
But though it is becoming more and more international 
in fact, is present-day sport truly international in spirit, 
as Coubertin thought and wished it to be? There are, 
unfortunately, plenty of reasons to doubt that it is. 
In point of fact, nationalism, chauvinism and even racism 
are more and more apt to win—or should we say lose?— 
the day in international sports events. The passions 
and emotions that these events arouse and that are 
amplified and broadcast to the four corners of the 
earth by the powerful modern mass media of the press, 
radio, television and cinema, are but rarely inspired, 
it must be acknowledged, by the ancient moral law and 
social virtues once presided over by Zeus Philios, god 
of friendship. It is high time to act if we wish to prevent 
the Altis of Olympia from degenerating into the Roman 
Circus or the Hippodrome of Byzantium. 
L: my meaning be clear. I am not suggesting 
that we should try to curb the emotional 
appeal of the sport event, which has become the great 
popular drama of our time. This would be absurd, and 
for that matter, impossible. One of the functions of such 
events, and certainly among the most salutary, is the 
same, though at a much higher degree of intensity, as 
that assigned by Aristotle to all drama: the well-known 
catharsis, the purging of passions and instincts. Nor can 
there be any question of trylng to deprive the athlete of 
the admiration he receives, especially from his fellow- 
countrymen. Like any other form of excellence, athletle 
feats deserve to be admired, and it is natural for those 
who have most in common with the victorious athlete to 
feel this unquestionably fine sentiment more strongly 
than others. 
But just as no sports contest can fail to stimulate 
the desire for victory, so none can be without rules and 
ethics. It Is these rules and the ethics which Inspire 
them that distinguish sport from the savage struggle for 
life whose name is war. It is compliance with these norms 
that transforms a feat into a virtue, and since these 
norms are. by definition universal, it follows that although 
the feat may be ascribed to a given country, the virtue 
itself belongs to man. 
What is more barbarle than this identification of 
the public with the champion, thls appropriation by 
a nation of the victory won by an individual or by 
a team? These flags, these anthems, these banner 
headlines in the newspapers, screaming “We won..." 
or “National defeat,” must surely seem to us a monstrous 
exaggeration of the spontaneous reactions of the crowd, 
even a shameful exploitation of its most generous 
impulses. In any case, this is the opposite of catharsis: 
it is nothing less than a return to a primitive outlook. 
I think the time has come for an energetic reaction, 
including the abandonment of certain practices which 
have become part and parcel of the Olympic Games, 
either with the consent of Coubertin—such as the singing 
of national anthems—or in spite of him—such as the 
classifications by nations, which, as we know, is not 
officially recognized. Only in this way can we hope 
to restore sport, and by this I mean sport as a whole, 
including athletes, organizers and spectators, to its 
international vocation of promoting friendship among the 
peoples. 
Is this too much to ask? I am certain that Coubertin 
would be the first to denounce the deviations from his 
creation and the chauvinistic exploitations of it. In 
1935 writing about international sports events, he 
affirmed: “We must reach the stage where applause on 
such occasions—and with even greater reason at the 
Olympic Games—Iis given purely for the feats themselves, 
to the exclusion of any national preference. There 
should be a truce to all exclusively national feelings: 
these should be, as it were, ‘temporarily suspended'.”

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

G. Bannister 
AT   
POLE VAULTER Dave 
Tork (above) set up a 
new world record in 
1962 when he cleared 
a height of 4.92 metres. 
ra $B ar : : vl Ne This photo of Tork dur- 
Tt Followifis. article is 5 reals ing a trial jump shows 
3 “abridged from the ad- R i. 2 him at the instant he 
~ dress entitled “ The “2 ad By J swings over the bar. 
  
~ formance" given le} Dr.. i 
~ Roger G. Bannister at 
~ the recent international 
~ conference called in 
~ Paris by the International 
: Council of Sport shee 
BELLIS CIEE SR GEIS 
~ athlete in the world to 
run one mile in under 
~ four minutes (in 1954). 
A medical doctor, LCS h 
  
Four Minutes” publish- 
ed in 1955. Right, a 
Seon shot of Roger 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

  
Ho Is it possible to describe the meaning of 
what we enjoy, whether it be Mozart, Cézanne 
or sport? One would need to be a soclologist and philoso- 
pher as well as a doctor to do justice to this subject. At 
the centre is the problem of a mind-body relationship, 
and considering our relative ignorance about the workings 
both of the body and the mind, it is hardly surprising 
that the relationship between the two of them should 
stretch us to our limits of comprehension. 
I can still remember quite vividly a time when as a 
child I ran barefoot along damp, firm sand by the sea- 
shore. The air there had a speclal quality, as If it had 
a life of its own. The sound of breakers on the shore 
shut out all others, and I was startled and almost 
frightened by the tremendous excitement a few steps 
could create. It was an intense moment of discovery of 
a source of power and beauty that one previously hardly 
dreamt existed. 
Now a scientist may attempt an objective explanation 
of all this. The sense of exerclse ls an extra sense, or 
perhaps a subtle combination of all the others. It Is one 
which many ignore; although the Englishman has always 
had the reputation abroad for playing games with an 
Intensity he seldom devotes to real life. 
When we exercise, small electrical impulses pass all the 
time between our contracting muscles, our moving joints 
and our brains. The pattern of the electrical disturbance 
Photos © Assoclated Press 
in the brain is presumably a source of pleasure, because, 
like that caused by music, it has some interplay with 
rhythms inherent In our own nervous systems. But no 
explanation Is satisfying that does not take account of 
subtler feelings. I think the scientific attempt is just 
about as successful as trying to describe a rose to someone 
who has never seen one. 
For an athlete the mystery of this simple situation 
always remains. He cannot explain it further, or if he 
could, he probably would not run well any more. He 
would not need to. The paradox is as simple as that. 
It Is now some years since I competed in any track race, 
and so perhaps now I can make a little more sense out 
of it all. Like life, the problems of sport and a sporting 
career only make sense in retrospect. What significance 
does sport have for the individual? I think, carly on, 
adolescence can often be a time of conflict and bewilder- 
ment, and these years can be weathered more successfully 
if a boy develops some demanding activity that tests to 
the limit his body as well as his mind. 
Each adolescent has to find this demanding activity 
for himself. It may be mountain-climbing, running or 
salling, or it may be something quite different. It may not 
even be sport at all. But by absorption in this pursuit, 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
1"

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

12 
ATHLETE (Cont'd) 
Where the losers 
are also 
the winners 
he forgets himself and it fills the vold between the child 
and the man. And later, when he finds a career or some 
other loves, he will be surprised at the extent to which 
he has grown. By then, he is no longer in a position to 
make the sacrifices which he previously hardly noticed. 
The meaning of games as opposed to simple physical 
exertion Is an even more difficult problem. Our satisfac- 
tion from games is a complex one. We enjoy struggling 
to get the best out of ourselves, whether we play games of 
skill requiring quickness of eye and deftness of touch, or 
games of effort and endurance like athletics. There is a 
desire to find In sport a companionship with kindred 
people. Friendships which are formed under this 
baptism of fire, if I can use that phrase, have a curious 
permanence. I know that I have found all these things. 
The sportsman can certainly enjoy his sport even if 
he has no prospect of becoming a champion. In fact, it 
may be thought of in the sense that an unsuccessful 
sportsman is perhaps the truest sportsman of all, because 
his love of sport Is for its own sake and untarnished by 
any thought of success. 
But the formative Influence of sport on character does 
not end there. Sooner or later in sport, the serious striver 
after some sort of excellence will meet a situation that is 
almost too big for him to master. Such situations occur 
in ordinary life, and can often be dodged. We can play 
hide-and-seek with reality, avoiding facing the truth 
about ourselves; but In sport we cannot do this. It shakes 
our roots with its confusing pattern of success and failure. 
As a result, sport leads to the most remarkable self- 
discovery, of limitations as well as of abilities. This 
discovery is partly physical—one learns, for example, that 
feeling tired does not mean that one is reaching the limit 
of exhaustion. But mainly the discovery is mental and 
brought about by the stresses which sport imposes. The 
self-discovery is most rapid if we set out on the early 
stages of this journey alone. 
In time we learn how far from belng self-sufficient we 
are, we realize the value of co-operation and assistance 
from others. But unless we start out alone, we never learn 
the questions others can best answer and those which we 
must answer for ourselves. 
0 many of us, action may not come easily. 
We can allow ourselves to be blown along 
like leaves In a wind, or on the other hand, we can try 
to impose our own will on external events. For all of 
us there comes sometime a moment when we are called 
upon to face the metaphorical equivalent of a starting 
pistol. Trying to bring the finishing tape nearer us, which 
we sometimes may do in later life, is the alternative and 
direct contrast to what the athlete is attempting to do, 
attempting to reach a rather idealistic goal more swiftly. 
These are my reasons for relterating in a modern 
context Baron de Coubertin’s views of the educational 
necessity of sport, as he concelved it, on a universal scale. 
There is no section of any community that cannot benefit, 
except the most socially impoverished one, and even under 
these circumstances the prospect of international compet!- 
tion may act as a spur to enlightenment and progress. 
Physical deformity is not a barrier, as Dr. Guttmann has 
shown by his Olympic Games for men and women who 
have lost the power and use of their legs, so-called para- 
plegics, giving the Games the name “the Para-Olympics.” 
Sport is a vital part of maturity too. There may be 
deeper reasons for its satisfaction that we hardly dare 
  
a» —- As “af 
  
Y 
hy Maan ore CTW nm 
¥ ini na sy¥ FIER IEEE 
Svenska Turisttrafikforbundet 
SNAKE OF SKIERS. Last year a record number of 3,886 
skiers took part in Sweden's Vasa Ski Race, an annual 
commemoration of an incident in the country’s struggle 
for independence led by Gustav Vasa in 1521. Right, skiers 
from seven nations set off on this 55-mile race while a 
mass of others (top of photo) wait their turn. The record 
time for the course (4 hours, 45 minutes, 10 seconds) was 
setup in 1961. Above, the ramp of the ski jump at Ornskol- 
dsvik in Sweden is so close to the town that this skier seems 
to be gliding over the roofs. Ski-ing is said to have originated 
in Scandinavia and from being simply a means of transport 
has now become one of the most popular of winter sports. 
admit to ourselves; some reasons that lie locked away in 
the more primitive part of our minds. Thoreau once 
commented “the majority of men lead lives of quiet 
desperation.” We may strap-hang in the morning 
travelling to work to reach our polished world of desk-top 
size, or 'we may tighten endlessly nuts on a new motor- 
car, but we all of us must still seek instinctively some of 
the freedom our far-off ancestors knew. 
The meaning of physical exertion to the individual is 
difficult to disentangle from its sociological meaning. The 
need for adventure may at first have been satisfied by the 
struggle for survival. But now that natural dangers have 
been mainly conquered, we all of us seek further trials. 
And unless men find them, is It not possible that they 
may rebel with some form of shocking violence? Is it not 
possible that a drift towards crime may be the result of 
the thwarting of these impulses? Breathes there a man 
with soul so dead that he has lost the urge to impress on 
the world some Indelible mark of his personality? 
In sport man finds a trial for life which Is more active 
than a game of chess, more exciting than digging his 
garden. We have used machines to conquer land, sea 
and alr. Athletes realize that if this quest for speed is 
worthwhile, it might as well take place too on the 
running-track. There we can still feel our bodies have a 
skill and energy of their own, apart from the man-made 
CONT'D ON PAGE 14 
   

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

- 
y 
¥   i 
© Associated Press 
el hd 
Ee 2 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

ATHLETE (Cont'd) 
For the favourite 
the heat is always on 
  machines which they spend their time driving. There 
we can fight a pitched battle agalnst the claustrophobia 
of our time. The new Don Quixote can tilt a vaulter’s 
fifteen-foot pole at the crazy windmill of modern life, or 
defiantly hurl his fifteen-pound shot. 
I believe that a collective restlessness, even violence can 
safely extinguish itself In the games ‘we play. Sport 
provides an alternative to the drag of passive leisure. It 
provides an outlet for the craving for freedom, an outlet \ 
which will become more important, the more restricted, / 
artificial and mechanized our society becomes. 
And of all sports, I think, athletics has great advantages. 
You can do it in your own time, whether you work during 
the day or night. You can choose your own event among 
the many which suit different physiques, the long and 
thin, the broad and strong. While most ball games 
demand great natural aptitude, this, I think, is less Im- h ) 
portant than industry and perseverance. Except in terms the vast Lenin Stadium 
of energy and effort, athletics costs no more than a palr at Loujinki, Moscow. 
of running-shoes, and no one can say you may not run Brumel is world cham- 
faster than this or jump higher than that. The track is . +h a record break- 
yours and there is no limit. plonw 
ing jump of 2.28 metres. 
HIGH JUMPER. Va- 
lery Brumel seems to be 
floating effortlessly over 
the bar as he clears a 
height of 2.27 metres in 
  
S- far I have talked about the meaning of 
physical exertion and of competition as a 
form of self-trial. The excellence of the performance In 
absolute standards is hardly relevant to its value in 
character building. It is a relative matter, the victory 
being over self and previous performance or over fellow- 
competitors of comparable standard rather than against 
an arbitrary standard or a record. What is it like to 
have the excitement of competitive struggle grafted on 
the natural freedom found in movement—to champion 
the cause of club or country and to have their honour 
as well as your own at stake? 
What effect does the roar of a crowd of 50,000 people 
  
in a stadium have, crying out for more effort and identify- 
ing themselves with each runner's success or failure? 
What does it mean to wait weeks or months for a race 
which may last only a few minutes or even seconds—to 
travel thousands of miles for a few seconds of supreme 
exertion. For me, and I think for all athletes, the Olympic 
Games have a special place on a plane apart from all 
other races, all other competitions, national or inter- 
national. In past, this stems from the authenticity of the 
games and from thelr roots in prehistory. 
The ancient Olympic Games, historians have suggested, 
emerged from a primitive anxiety lest with winter the 
earth might never come to life again. With soll bare 
and food scarce, who could give an assurance that another 
year would bring a fresh harvest? The saviour of the 
harvest was the person with the magic of victory in him, 
the athlete born of Zeus the Sky God. And, for a time, 
the simple foot race was the way to choose this man. 
Later the search broadened for the man who embodled the 
Roman word “virtus,” goodness or excellence. 
The modern Olympic Games have still tended to pro- 
duce a champion of champlons—a Numi, a Zatopek, an 
Elliot—a modern hero, not altogether shorn of magic, 
emerging as a symbol of the Games. We still need him 
as a reminder that both body and mind can fuse in this 
highest athletic achievement. 
INFIRMITY NO HANDICAP 
Physical infirmity is not necessarily an insuperable barrier to sporting activity. 
Sportsmen and sportswomen, so incapacitated by accidents or serious illness that 
any possibility of their entering competitions seemed out of the question, have 
regained their physical powers and even improved on their previous performances. 
An example of this was seen at the 1952 Olympic Games in Helsinki where a silver 
medal for equitation was awarded to a woman rider, Lis Hartel, who eight years 
before had suffered a serious attack of polio. It took her years to re-educate the 
muscles of her paralyzed legs. Ignoring advice she had herself lifted on to her 
horse to recommence her training. Her participation in the Olympics was in every 
sense a challenge to adversity and her success was an example and an encourage- 
ment to all physically infirm people. Another example of courage in the face of 
physical handicaps are the “Para-Olympics”, the sporting events which have been 
organized for paraplegics—those who have lost the power and use of their legs. 
  
R. Caloz

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

  
  
  
For a moment I want to consider what Olympic competi- 
tion itself means to athletes who are taking part, and to 
do this, I divide Olympic athletes, arbitrarily, but I hope 
not unkindly, into three groups. The first, those who have 
barely secured a place in thelr national team and are 
certain to be outclassed; secondly, those who have a 
sporting chance of a medal, and thirdly the favourites for 
victory. 
The first group with no chance of a medal are, strange 
to say, in a way to be envied, for to him whom least, in 
a relative sense, has been given, least is expected. Not 
that they are Indifferent athletes—far from it, they have 
fought hard to win a place in their team. Though they 
are free to experience the Olympic competition, these 
athletes perhaps do not savour the real quintessence of 
the Olympics. 
] HE athlete with a chance of a medal is happily 
placed. He is In a position of strength: he has 
nothing to lose and everything to gain. He can respect 
and know close rivals. He has suspense, climax and 
reactions and will never forget the experience. The public 
at large hears about the risks, the international skirmishes 
and silly nonsenses. It never hears of the unspoken 
understanding that exists between such athletes whose 
skill as craftsmen can compel a mutual respect no matter 
what thelr eccentricities of character or disparity in 
politics. This has been said often but it can be sald again. 
At the apex of the pyramid comes the favourite. His 
public and press expect a gold medal through him. But it 
Is a matter of simple arithmetic that most favourites will 
return home without one. I think a favourite who does 
  
  
APN 
not win knows as much as anyone about Olympic spirit. 
A favourite for an Olympic title needs stolclsm and self- 
confidence to bear his burden lightly and shed humour and 
good advice over a team that may look to him for 
leadership. Perhaps it Is understandable If his joviallty 
on departure seems a little forced, his light-heartedness 
a plece of play-acting as he waves from the aeroplane 
steps. 
In the short space of two weeks his experience is going 
to be stretched to the limit of what is tolerable. He will 
reveal to himself and perhaps to others unsuspected 
weaknesses, but perhaps discover too a new secret 
strength. For once in his life he is utterly alone. This 
situation is all Important, immediate and irrevocable. A 
lifetime's intensity seems to be packed into a few 
moments. The favourite, win or lose, can never be the 
same agaln. And likely as not it may help him to do 
something else better. 
By the time he has reached this point, if he happens 
to be a track middle-distance runner, he will already have 
come tantalizingly close to achieving a mastery over 
himself which it is the aim of every athlete to achieve. 
He will have learnt to channel hls whole energy, mental 
and physical Into a few moments. He will perhaps have 
mastered the art of finding In himself more than he has 
got. 
This, like the knack of riding a bicycle, involves a mental 
trick. The secret Is to lose for a moment one’s sense of 
proportion. This process, In the greatest athlete, un- 
leashes a will to win that remains locked away In his 
rivals. The presence, or absence, of this is one factor 
that sets the razor's edge between victory and defeat. 
The other is some mystical fortune that smiles on a victor 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

ATHLETE (Cont'd) 
The athlete who is paid 
is no less a sportsman 
and which makes those who were defeated curlously 
happy for the victor. 
For a moment now I want to turn to another aspect of 
sport which has I think changed considerably since de 
Coubertin’s day. This is the extent to which sportsmen 
should be encouraged or permitted to risk thelr lives. 
Qualities of decision and boldness are necessary in all 
sports, but boldness can easily become recklessness, even 
ruthlessness, and this change spells disaster. 
] opAYy In some sports risk seems to me to have 
overshadowed skill. Eighty-three people were 
killed at Le Mans In 1955. A few days before his death 
in the Mille Miglia, the Marquis of Portago summed up his 
racing philosophy: “Racing is a vice and as such extre- 
mely hard to give up. One can be at the top one second 
but all it requires is a very small error and one ls very 
embrassingly dead the next.” 
I think such sportsmen are terrified by what they do, 
but their fear, instead of paralysing them, galvanizes them 
to fresh action, as sometimes occurs on the battlefield. 
Climbing accidents present another problem. A few years 
ago, two French students were stranded near Chamonix. 
Sixteen climbers risked their lives in rescue attempts 
costing more than £150,000. 
In searching for a definition of legitimate risk in sport, 
certain distinctions must be made. In many sports there 
is near criminal negligence by braggarts who underrate 
the dangers of fast driving on unknown roads or swim- 
ming beyond warning flags. In Britain there are more 
than 3,000 people a year killed in car accidents and 1,000 
are drowned. People try to climb mountains equipped 
with a bar of chocolate and an orange, or sail tiny craft 
they cannot manage. This is folly not sport and should be 
condemned. 
There is an unhealthy element among spectators in 
many of these sports too that is disturbing. In motor- 
racing, how many spectators are attracted as much by 
the morbid anticipation of disaster as by the skill of the 
driver. On a different scale, a small boy once expressed 
his profound disappointment after the finish of one of my 
races. “He’s no good today, he hasn't even fainted,” he 
said. Was it morbid interest or merely ignorance that led 
a woman spectator at Melbourne to exclaim on seeing the 
Olympic marathon runners stagger home “the final of this 
should be worth watching?” 
Having said all this about unnecessary risks, let me 
confess that I have respect for sportsmen who, having 
Although American colo- 
nists played a kind of 
baseball as early as 1762, 
it is only just over 120 years 
since it became a popular 
game with a standard set 
  
enthusiastic crowds 
Though swimming is a 
sport as old as the most | 
ancient records of history, 
it was not one of the events 
in the ancient Greek Olym- 
pic Games, though it was 
included in the first Olym- 
pic Games of modern times 
in 1896. It has been said 
that all living creatures ex- 
cept men and monkeys can 
swim by instinct. Men, 
however, have learned as 
an art what they lacked by 
instinct and have developed 
many ways of swimming, 
including the backstroke 
(left). Olympic events 
include free style, back, 
breast and butterfly strokes. 
APN 
of rules. Today it draws 
Cuba as well as Japan.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 61364: What makes the athlete run?

excluded danger as much as possible, nevertheless risk 
their lives In an attempt to extend the boundaries of 
human achievement. No one but a fool risks his life 
lightly, but thinking men with daring, even if they do not 
always advance our practical knowledge of machines or 
nature, raise the standard of individual vigour and enter- 
prise upon which the survival of mankind as a species 
depends. 
The factors which lead a man to stake his skill against 
his life must include factors which are far beyond his own 
self-interest. Thoughtful courage cannot and should not 
be eliminated from life, and those of us with children must 
accept that they will be the better for having faced 
danger, and we must If necessary be prepared to see them 
do so. 
The last decade has covered a strange period in the 
history of sport. It has been the emergence of the new 
professionalism, not only in the sense of direct and indi- 
rect payment for sports, but also in devoting unlimited 
time and energy to sport, to the total exclusion of any 
other career—which Borotra has rightly deplored. 
E: country seeks to enhance national pres-, 
tige by physical achievements. It may be in 
establishing new jet plane records of speed or altitude, 
penetrating the depths of the sea, or scaling the world’s 
highest mountains. Too few questions seem to be asked 
about the means and the motives, provided the end of 
national glory is achieved. 
Running, less than any other branch of track and field 
athletics, perhaps less than any other sport refuses to be 
distorted to fit into a pattern of this kind. Eighteen years 
ago, when Zatopek first ran 60 quarter miles in 60 seconds 
in a single training session, I wondered whether it was still 
    
» 
ki 
“
.
a
 
kh
 
USIS 
possible to be an international athlete any more and do 
anything except training. But odd as it may seem, no one 
has yet proved to my satisfaction that middle-distance 
running cannot still be an activity upon which it is neither 
necessary nor desirable to spend unlimited time and 
energy. 
Fitting sport into the rest of life until one's work 
becomes too demanding—this is both the burden and joy 
of the old-fashioned amateur, a path which any athlete 
is still free to choose, however difficult or rare it may be. 
The athlete who chooses to be pald for sport is no less 
truly a sportsman. He too has a cholce and often 
exchanges some short-term advantages for many long- 
term problems. I think it is our duty to see that he 
realizes this. 
I think sport will survive the ethical and administrative 
problems that now beset it. And the reason is this. Sport 
has an Individual basls and an individual meaning, and 
is not a national or moral affair. We run not because our 
country needs fame, nor yet because we think it is doing 
us good, but because we enjoy it and cannot help our- 
selves. It gives each of us the chance to release a power 
that might otherwise remain locked away inside ourselves. 
I am sure that this urge to struggle les latent in 
everyone, and the more restricted our lives become in 
other ways, the more necessary it will be to find some 
outlet for this craving for freedom. No one can say 
“You must not run faster than this or jump higher than 
that.” The sportsman Is consciously or unconsciously 
seeking the deep satisfaction, the sense of personal 
dignity which comes when body and mind are fully co- 
ordinated and they have achieved mastery over them- 
selves. 
For a young man there are still few flelds in which such 
perfection can be approached and with such momentary 
If transient finality. For the athlete the human spirit 
is indeed indomitable. 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

© Associated Press 
 
 
18 
E
B
 
 
 
¥ 
wn
 
v {
 
kL
 
 
 
. -¥ 
c 
w
u
 
a
 
o
u
d
 
a
d
 
| 
ME
 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EE 7% 
J] 
oC
 
o
A
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9) a. 
. 
a 
- 
YW h di 
foo 
“LRN TEL NE Loud 
 

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

"$908 £'L| Ul Seow QOL Ue -oym uoidweyd SidwAlQ 
0961 ..0119zeb yaep,, Oy3 SE UMOU) ‘JIOPNY BWIA “3}07 
‘340ds ul eoeab usepow jo uonow pejsesse oy ebed 
C SIY} UQ JeUUNS UOYIRIBW OY) PUR JOlNY SNISIP 
ol “aemouy3 uljeael ay3 jo sjusweaow ay3 Bujijuolb 
 S|eOWeW SSOPIUNOD SN 3j9| eAey Si03dNOS eH 
; *Ayneeq pue edseib s3) 10} Ju0ds pano] Aey3 siy3 puokeq : 
pue eaoqe 3ng “-Aejd Jie} jo sjesp] pue iajoeieyd | 
s,uew ‘Apoq uewny ay3 dojeAep 03 sueew © 31 ul 
mes Aey3 esnedseq jiods onejyle ul pejseseyul Ajeje 
 ~uoissed esom sown J1dwA|Q JO $xeeuD Jusioue By) 
-~ 
- 
- 
. & 
  
   
   
   
- 3 J 
a al 
- VAI wt 7 “a. 
    
  
i W , -. . . 4 - i 
\ . a . -~ bl ~~ oh 305m - > 
bo of a Vo oA mPa 
"re 2 
: rl ral ot A A ey Na | 5 EL - A RA dt a . y 
rE A Si i A tt a A i Cn PT ph, 0 
’ ) | 
. 
suieyg ‘Asew|y [ned Q soloyd 
  

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 61366: Etchcraft on celluloid

by Anne MacDermot  
20 
We a shrinking world and a growing desire 
on the part of all of us to “learn the other 
man’s language” so we can communicate with each 
other, many people look at a shy film-maker who speaks 
to people in 53 countries and wonder how he does it. 
For more than 20 years Norman McLaren has been work- 
ing out of Canada's National Film Board. In this time he 
has produced a stream of short films that have caught 
the attention of film audiences all over the world. No- 
one can ignore a McLaren film. You are either delighted, 
startled, or enraged. And yet their impact is not in 
words—McLaren speaks without using words—and not 
in length—the films are seldom more than five minutes 
long. He does not preach. The purbose of his flims? 
“To give the intellect a rest,” McLaren says. And yet 
these little films do have a message of beauty, of humour, 
 
    
C
N
I
N
I
I
B
O
O
B
O
N
A
A
T
T
 
  
    
of peace. More than that, they betray their creator as 
“one of the film world’s gentlest people.” 
It all started when he was a young student. Born 
in Scotland, in 1914, McLaren went to Glasgow for art 
training. Like others at that time, he became fasci- 
nated with the possibilities of a comparatively new toy 
called film. He could not afford a camera so one day 
he got hold of an old print, washed off the emulsion 
and, taking a brush and coloured inks, painted his own 
strip of films directly on the clear celluloid. The re- 
sult, “Colour Cocktail,” was awarded a prize by the 
acknowledged doyen of British documentaries, John 
Grierson. McLaren went to London and with the General 
Post Office Film Unit produced a series of short, vivid 
films: “Hell Unltd,” “Book Bargain,” “Mony a Pickle,” 
“Love on the Wing.” : 
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 61366: Etchcraft on celluloid

DIRECT ANIMATION 
With their direct appeal to 
eye and ear, the cartoons 
of Norman McLaren have 
cut clear across language 
barriers in all parts of the 
world. In his works, 
Mclaren speaks, but with- 
out using words, and 
draws his cartoons directly 
on to the film itself. Left, 
the animator at work. His 
technique is one of direct 
animation for he uses no 
camera but simply an ordi- 
nary pen and Indian ink. 
Right, McLaren's apparatus 
which holds the film while 
he draws. It reflects the 
image of the figure just 
drawn on to the frame on 
which he is now working. 
The sheet in the background 
with numbers indicates the 
length of each sequence 
of action in the film. 
He moved to New York and there turned out “Allegro,” 
“Sherzo,” “Loops,” “Rhumba,” and “Boogie Doodle.” In 
1939, John Grierson once again stepped into his life. He 
was asked to go to Ottawa where the dynamic Grierson 
was building up what is today the Film Board. McLaren 
accepted the job as head of the Animation Department, 
on condition that he be given freedom to go on experi- 
menting with hand-painted films. In the decade that 
followed he was to turn out some of his best-loved films. 
What are they like? As the Film Board began to 
distribute McLaren’s films dozing theatre-goers in such 
distant points as Rome, Johannesburg, Washington were 
jolted out, of their seats by a small explosion on the 
screen in front of them. Showers of sparks, stars and 
whirling snowflakes rained down and the audience hardly 
had time to catch its breath before the film stopped, as 
abruptly as it began, like a giant Roman candle dropping 
its last star into the night. 
“Fiddle-de-Dee,” for instance, is a cavalcade of riotous 
colour. The images McLaren has painted on each film- 
square, dance and streak across the screen to the wild 
accompaniment of an old-time fiddler. “Begone Dull 
Care” is a beautiful blues evocation set to the music of 
jazz planist Oscar Peterson. “Hen Hop” is a joyful little 
film in which a hen motif leaps and bounds in a tricky 
jive step. 
McLaren made all of these by working on the film 
base, frame by frame, etching, painting, counting squares 
to synchronize them with the soundtrack. People inside 
and outside the Film Board began coming to see how 
Photos : Nationa! Film Board of Canada 
he did it. He would show anyone ‘who wanted to learn. 
In fact his generous help, even during periods of frantic 
production, have made him a legendary figure of thought- 
fulness among colleagues (It was Grierson who called 
him one of the film-world’s gentlest people.) Few have 
managed the concentration of hand and eye that go 
into McLaren's intricate films. One thing, however, be- 
came apparent. 
McLaren's films had a direct and immediate appeal 
to the eye and ear, regardless of language. Also this 
one-man film producer had succeeded in turning out 
films without the need of cameras, scripting, cutting and 
all the other complicated processes that go Into most 
cinema production. 
In 1949, his abilities were called upon by Unesco. Me- 
Laren joined a team to work on an experiment {in visual 
education in West China. Called “The Healthy Village,” 
the project was designed to teach people who couldn't 
read or write some of the rules of health. 
From a cupboard in the Montreal offices of the Film 
Board where I visited him, Norman McLaren pulled out 
some of the work his pupils did at that time. 
“The Chinese have a fine feeling for form,” he sald, 
holding up a strip of film. “They are good draftsmen. 
Here's a film strip, for instance, on 'Safe Water - Safe 
Food.” ” 
He held it up to the light and showed the delicate 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 61366: Etchcraft on celluloid

  
ETCHCRAFT ON CELLULOID (Cont'd) 
One-man film unit 
etching against the black surface. In another film, there 
were beautiful colours, rich plum and royal blue. 
He dug into the box he was holding. “These are 
animated drawings, done on rice paper. They show 
how a log of wood is cut, carved and made into a plough, 
step by step,” he explained. 
In China, McLaren had supervised 12 artists and 
showed them the graphic teaching value of poster, pic- 
ture books, mobile devices, filmstrips, slides and finally, 
animated movies. While McLaren was in China the 
big change In government occurred, but he did not leave 
the project before a good number of Chinese who had 
never seen a film before were given the key to make 
their own productions. 
Four years later, the government of India called upon 
Photos: National Film Board of Canada 
    
A SAD, MYSTERIOUS 
scene taken from the film, 
“ A Little Fantasy on a 19th 
Century Painting”. The 
film brings to life a well- 
khown work, “ The Isle of 
the Dead” by Arnold Bo- 
ecklin (a 19th century Swiss 
painter). [t was made on 
the basis of a single black 
and white drawing which 
evolved as different elem- 
ents were added or removed 
as shooting progressed. 
him to give the same kind of lessons. In co-operation 
with Unesco, McLaren spent three months in Delhi and 
three in Mysore. This time, the emphasis was on prac- 
tical problems and in his Montreal office McLaren 
showed me some more samples: “The Rearing of Silk 
Worms,” ‘‘Compost Manure,” “The Treachery of the 
Money-Lender.” 
He remembers his students as serious and hard-working. 
One of them, a lad named Obaid-al-Haque, later came 
to Canada and spent a year with the Film Board. 
It was after his trip to India that Norman McLaren pro- 
duced what many consider his most powerful film. 
“Neighbours” is not the first film he had made using 
a camera (a series of delightful French Canadian folk- 
songs, C’est UAviron, La-Haut sur les Montagnes and 
FOLKSONG in the French- 
Canadian tradition, *“La- 
Haut sur les Montagnes © 
was one of a number of 
folklore cartoons produced 
by Mclaren. These were 
made by photographing a 
series of pastel drawings.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 61366: Etchcraft on celluloid

. 
pod 
TR er 
  
0 or E 1 > 
LA 
‘a daisy growing between their gardens and end up by 
killing each other. The daisy blooms in the grass between 
‘their graves. This is McLaren's longest film, lasting nine. 
~ minutes. He made it using a camera and live actors, but 
photographed them in puppet-like movements. These 
~ shots show the neighbours dancing round the daisy which 
for hatred land" er e. 
4 = 
iv 
. 
h dECDe a futile moti 
A. ee i tl gh a = 8 og 3 
 
Ee 5 AAA LE aE plat Ratan Y ET 
NEIGHBOURS. Norman McLaren's film, “Neighbours” is 
~ a powerful satire on war. Two neighbours quarrel over 
Poulette Grise had been made by photographing a suc- 
cesslon of pastel paintings) but it was a new technique 
for McLaren in that he used live actors and photographed 
them in puppet-like movements which give the effect of 
very violent pantomime. 
The film is McLaren's longest. It runs nine minutes 
and tells the story of two neighbours, sitting out in 
their back yards, chatting and reading the newspapers 
from their respective deckchalrs. The mood changes 
when one glances down and notices a pretty little daisy 
growing In the grass between them. The other follows 
his glance. They both wonder to whom it belongs. 
Suspicion, hatred and fear flare up. The men grapple, 
attack each other's households, murder the wives and 
children and finally kill each other. In the end the 
dalsy is blooming in the grass between their graves. 
The flim is undoubtedly the powerful comment on 
war McLaren Intended it to be. It aroused a storm of 
International controversy, taking prizes at international 
film festivals but horriylng some audiences. 
The next time McLaren used the “pixillation” method 
(live figures photographed as for an animated cartoon) 
the film was “The Chalry Tale.” Audlences once again 
chuckled with glee. There was no fighting in this one. 
“Rhythmetic” is another favorite and here McLaren 
uses cut-outs. Made to Introduce school children to the 
business of learning numbers, and perhaps take some of 
the bogey out of “Now it's time for our arithmetic lesson”, 
“Rhythmetic” is a rollicking little film in which numbers 
slide together, add, subtract, meet each other and 
re-group to make sums, until suddenly all is upset by a 
run-away zero which won't keep in line, sighs, deflates 
like a flat tyre, tips lke a dizzy egg In an egg-cup. 
For La Merle McLaren once again uses a traditional 
French folk tune (as in the popular “Fiddle-De-Dee”) 
and the elegant little film has taken its share of prizes. 
M usic has always been as important to McLaren 
as the visual side. It is natural, perhaps, that 
he should have found a way of bringing it too under the 
supervision of the individual making the movie. IIc began 
experimenting with two little films, “Dots” and “Loops.” 
By drawing with pen and Indian ink along the margin of 
35 mm. film, where the soundtrack usually runs, he produc- 
ed his own “music”. 
“This was a primitive method”, McLaren explained 
some years ago. “After thls we developed a system for 
producing a more refined kind of animated sound.” 
What he had designed was called a “composertron” 
and consisted of a complete set of cards representing the 
chromatic scale. When the cards were photographed to the 
left side of the film, where the soundtrack runs, they 
added up to a new kind of “music”. The technique had 
been evolved to some extent by the Russians, Avzaamov 
and Rimsky-Korsakoff, the German, Rudolf Phenniger 
and two Englishmen, Jack Elliott and C. E. Buckle, 
McLaren used it for several passages in the film, “Blinkity 
Blank”, and another Film Board producer, Maurice Black- 
burn, used animated sound as the fourth instrument in 
an ensemble for the McLaren film, “Phantasy.” 
By thls time, McLaren's name had become known all 
round to the world in fllm circles. However, he hates 
personal publicity and found being famous a drawback. 
Like every true artist he is happlest at his own drawing 
board. There he continues to touch the imagination of 
people all around the world by sending out dancing little 23 
films that cross all boundaries.

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 61366: Etchcraft on celluloid

hé M v eyes watched the clock. The hands pointed 
to seven minutes past nine. I heard a loud 
whistle and then a steadily Increasing ‘whine; the hull 
of the huge ship shuddered as slowly, very, very slowly, 
it rose from the launching pad. The struggle between 
the rocket and terrestrial gravitation had begun. The 
whine was actually no louder than the one you hear In 
the cockpit of a jet fighter but in it ‘were countless musical 
notes and timbres that no composer has ever written 
down and that no human voice and no musical instru- 
ment have yet produced. The giant rocket motors ‘were 
creating the music of the future...” 
That is Yuri Gagarin’s description of the take-off of 
spaceship Vostok I as it was boosted into orbit in outer 
space. 
During the past five years dozens of artificial earth 
satellites have been put into orbit, automatic interplane- 
tary stations have been launched in the direction of the 
Moon, Venus and Mars, and the first flights have been 
made in outer space by eleven men and one ‘woman. 
All these flights by manned and unmanned space 
vehicles would never have been successfully accomplished 
without complex and thorough planning and an astrono- 
mical number of calculations by thousands of engineers, 
chemists, mathematicians and other specialists. 
A spaceship Is boosted into an orbit around the earth 
by a powerful multi-stage rocket, each of the stages 
being itself an Independent rocket. The multi-stage 
system has many advantages over a single-stage rocket 
which wastes some of its energy since it has to boost not 
only itself and the ship it carries but also continue to 
carry fuel containers that once they have been emptied 
become useless ballast. The most suitable type would 
be a huge one-stage rocket that casts off the containers 
as the fuel is used up, but technical difficulties have so 
far prevented the design of such a rocket. The one which 
comes closest to it is the multi-stage rocket used by the 
U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. It consists of a series of rockets 
placed one behind the other; each of them is discarded 
when the fuel is exhausted, either automatically or by 
a signal sent from the ground. : 
On the initial stage of its journey the rocket rises verti- 
cally from the pad; then its direction gradually changes 
in accordance with a pre-set programme. After a flight 
that may last from eight to fifteen minutes the rocket 
attains a velocity of about eight kilometres a second; by 
this time its flight position is practically horizontal and 
thus parallel to the earth's surface. 
B OOSTING 2 space vehicle into orbit involves loss 
of energy in overcoming the force of gravity. 
| Average velocity losses at this stage amount to two or 
24 
three kilometres a second. For a rocket-carried vehicle 
to be put into orbit, therefore, it must develop a speed 
which, in the absence of an atmosphere and of gravity, 
would be ten or eleven kilometres a second. The power 
the rocket must develop to reach this velocity naturally 
depends on the weight of the vehicle it is to put into orbit. 
For instance, Spaceship Vostok I weighed 4,725 kilogram- 
mes and ‘was put into orbit by rocket motors that deve- 
loped 20,000,000 h.p.—ten times the capacity of the Boulder 
(Hoover) Power Station in the U.S.A. and three times 
that of the Bratsk Power Station in Siberia. 
Once the carrier rocket has reached the computed velo- 
city its last stage Is automatically detached from the 
spaceship. The ship is now in free fall and from then 
on becomes a celestial body whose motion is determined 
By the laws of celestial mechanics. It is then said to be 
[1] n or » 
For a space vehicle to remain in orbit around the earth 
it must travel at “orbital velocity” (or “first cosmic velo- 
city” as Russian engineers term it) which is the minimum 
speed at which a body may move without being pulled 
back to earth by the force of gravity. Theoretically this 


### 61368: Countdown for space flight

COUNTD 
FOR SP 
FLIGHT 
by Evgeny P. Aksenov, 
    
Evgeny Grebenikov 
and | 
Vladimir Dyomin 
THREE, TWO, ONE, ZERO... The Soviet 
spaceship, Vostok |, leaves the launching 
pad in this shot which comes from the film, 
"The First Voyage Towards the Stars.” 
APN 
velocity is 7,909 metres per second, computed at the earth’s 
surface. If the programme requires a circular orbit, the 
speed of the vehicle will be constant and will depend on 
the altitude, as orbital velocity varies inversely with 
altitude. 
We know from the laws of celestial mechanics that the 
greater the radius of the orbit along which a body travels, 
the lower its velocity will be. At the same distance from 
the earth as the moon (an average of 384,000 kilometres) 
a body in circular orbit would only need to travel at one 
kilometre a second. Thus the time taken for each orbit 
increases as the distance from the earth’s centre increases. 
At an altitude of 500 kilometres above the earth the 
orbit takes 90 minutes but an orbit equal to that of the 
distance of the moon would take roughly a month. If 
the velocity of a body moving in space exceeds the orbital 
velocity but does not reach the velocity of escape (which 
Russians engineers call the “second cosmic velocity,” and 
which is approximately 11,200 metres a second at the 
earth’s surface), it will move in an elliptical orbit. 
Spaceship Vostok I, launched by the U.S.S.R. on April 12, 
1961, had an elliptical orbit with its lowest altitude (peri- 
gee) at 181 kilometres and its greatest (apogee) at 327 kilo- 
metres from the earth. One orbit was made in 89.1 min- 
utes. From these data the velocity of the spaceship is 
found to be 7.837 metres per second at the perigee and 
7,688 metres per second at the apogee. In other words, 
engineers can now design rockets that travel at speeds 
seven or eight times greater than the muzzle velocity of a 
ig gun. 
Does the orbit of a space vehicle change as it encircles 
the earth a number of times? Many factors do, in fact, 
affect the variability of the flight paths, the chief among 
them being the shape of the earth. Our planet is not a 
true sphere but an oblate spheroid, the equatorial radius 
being 18 kilometres longer than the polar radius; its mass 
is not homogeneous since densities are unevenly distri- 
buted and gravitational pull, therefore, is not uniform. 
The atmosphere still offers a noticable resistance to 
the motion of a body, even at altitudes of between 250 and

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 61368: Countdown for space flight

   
300 kilometres where the density of the atmosphere is no 
greater than that of the “vacuum” of a good radio valve. 
The continued effect of even such a rarefied atmosphere 
causes some changes in the dimensions of the orbit—the 
ship at such heights loses about two kilometres in altitude 
on each orbit so that after circling the earth 80 to 
100 times it is brought back into denser layers of the 
atmosphere. 
Probably the most important factor in the successful 
boosting of a space vehicle into orbit (and still more so 
for its landing in a pre-determined area) is the exact 
observance of the planned flight programme. Mathema- 
tical accuracy must be nothing less than prodigious. The 
slightest deviation of the vehicle in flight from the para- 
meters in the programme would lead to errors that cannot 
be corrected in outer space—a rocket aimed at the moon, 
for Instance, might shoot past it, or a spaceship re-entering 
the atmosphere at too high a velocity might burn up. 
LL automatic devices carried by the vehicle 
must function perfectly. The following exam- 
ple shows the degree of accuracy required. A satellite is 
to be boosted into an orbit elliptical in shape with a peri- 
gee at 6,640 kilometres and an apogee of 7,140 kilometres 
from the earth. If the velocity differs only by 10 metres 
per second due to the malfunctioning of the rocket 
motors—that is, by only twelve hundreths of one per cent 
of the velocity—there will be a difference of 39 kilometres 
in altitude at the apogee. 
If, at the time the last stage burns out, the vehicle 
differs by one degree from the computed direction, the 
perigee will be 25 kilometres less and the apogee 25 kilo- 
metres greater than programmed; this would bring about 
vastly different flight conditions and might shift the orbit 
from a perfectly safe region into a radioactive zone or 
Into the denser layers of the atmosphere. 
The many artificial earth satellites that have been 
launched by the U.S.SR. and the U.S.A. have enabled   
c
u
o
m
d
e
d
 
a 
a 
a
 
5 
- 
we 
$
3
5
 
engineers to design high precision systems of piioting 
and delicate control devices that ensured the successful 
flights of the first spacemen. These ploneers of space 
flights are: Yuri Gagarin, Herman Titov, Adrian Nico- 
layev, Pavel Popovich, Valery Bykovsky and Valentina 
Tereshkova (the first space woman) in the U.SS.R.: Alan 
Shepard, Virgll Grissom, John Glenn, Scott Carpenter, 
Walter Schirra and Gordon Cooper in the U.S.A. 
When a spaceship returns to earth it has to be brought 
out of orbit and to do this means that its speed must be 
reduced. The methods evolved for this purpose are a 
combined application of the laws of celestial mechanics and 
the aerodynamics of a body moving at supersonic speeds. 
As the vehicle descends it enters the denser layers of the 
atmosphere that act as an “air brake”. The orbital velo- 
city is reduced by a system of braking rockets (retro- 
rockets) whose action combines with the effective use of 
atmospheric resistance. 
The retrorockets have a thrust opposing the direction 
in which the vehicle is moving; the moment they are 
switched on, therefore, the spaceship must be oriented 
so that the rocket nozzles point in the direction of flight. 
Re-entry at an altitude of eighty to a hundred kilometres 
and at a velocity many times greater than that of sound, 
subjects the vehicle to tremendous stresses. 
There are two possible types of landing—hard and soft. 
The rocket ship sent from the USSR. to the moon in 
September 1959 made a “hard” landing—it made contact 
with the lunar surface at such a high velocity that it 
was destroyed by the impact. Even a hard landing 
involves many intricate calculations and must be made 
with steering, stabilizing and orlenting devices of great 
reliability. A matter of a few metres deviation at the 
beginning of the vehicle's flight, or a slight variation in 
its speed could be fatal and the vessel would never reach 
the planet at which it was aimed. 
The landings of spaceships with cosmonauts on board 
launched since 1961 are examples of “soft” landings. 
Most difficult of all is the soft landing of a space vehicle 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

26 


### 61368: Countdown for space flight

SPACE FLIGHT (Contd) 
A shower of meteorites 
In a pre-determined area which depends on the retro- 
rockets belng switched on at an exact moment with the 
vehicle In exactly the right position. 
The distance travelled by the vehicle during descent Is 
very great. Yurl Gagarin’s spaceship continued in flight 
for half an hour after the “brakes” had been applied; 
the U.S. vehicle. Friendship-7, landed in the Atlantic 
Ocean after the “brakes” had been put on over the 
Western seaboard of America. The actual position of the 
vehicle and its exact velocity at the time the decelerating 
process is put Into operation must be determined with 
absolute precision. An error of one metre per second 
in computing the velocity or of one kilometre in computing 
the altitude, would land the vehicle dozens of Kilometres 
from the appointed spot. 
| N the days before the first Sputniks were laun- 
ched, the possibility of encountering meteo- 
rites ‘was considered one of the greatest potential obsta- 
cles to space flight. As Is well known, the earth (or rather 
Its atmosphere) Is under constant bombardment by a 
“cosmic shower”, consisting of various-sized particles of 
matter coming from outer space. 
American scientists have estimated that something like 
30,000 meteorites with a diameter of one centimetre enter 
the atmosphere daily. The shower of meteorites of one 
millimetre in diameter is estimated at 75,000,000 a day 
while the smallest particles of all, those less than 
0,006 mm., arrive daily in such quantities that it would 
require an elghteen-figure number to express them. 
Thus it seems not only probable but absolutely inevitable 
for a spaceship to encounter meteorites on its journey. 
These generalized figures, however, do not present a true 
picture. Calculations have shown that a spaceship in 
flight might meet a meteorite with a diameter of half a 
millimetre once in fifteen years and one half a centimetre 
in size about once in 25.000 years. Although it is theo- 
retically possible for a space vehicle to meet a dangerous 
meteorite, this probability Is about as great as that of 
someone on earth being struck on the head by one. 
Despite the unlikelihood of the danger, spaceships are 
nevertheless equipped with “shock absorbers” against 
meteorites. 
Before a manned flight could be attempted, the Intensity 
of cosmic, ultra-violet and corpuscular radiation had to 
be studied so as to estimate the degree of danger from 
them. Cosmic rays possess very great penetrative powers. 
If the walls of the pilot's capsule were thin, cosmic rays 
would penetrate and produce secondary radiation that 
would be harmful to the man inside. 
] HE nature of solar radiation In outer space Is 
also different from that experienced on earth; 
a space flight is made outside the terrestrial atmosphere 
that forms man’s natural protective screen from the sun 
by absorbing most of its ultra-violet rays. Studies of 
different kinds of radiation made by artificial earth 
satellites put into orbit by the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. 
have glven engineers enough data to design space vehi- 
cles with structural features best calculated to protect 
them from harmful radiation effects. 
It must be sald, however, that the existing rockets are 
unfit as yet to protect the spacemen from radiation of 
high intensity and thus the proper choice of space routes 
is still of vital importance. 
Rocket flights into outer space enabled the American 
scientist James A. Van Allen and the Soviet sclentist 
S. N. Vernov to study areas close to the earth In which 
high-energy particles abound. These regions form several 
radiation belts in ecircumterrestrial space at various dis- 
tances from the earth. Though deadly to man, these 
belts, are not, however, continuous, but contain “holes” 
over the earth’s North and South Poles. 
The particles in these radiation belts are of such high 
energy that effective protection from them would add 
tremendously to the welght of a space vehicle trying to 
penetrate them. It has not yet been found practicable 
to design such a ship and manned flights have been 
confined to orbits between the nearest radiation belt and 
the earth. Manned flights to other planets will have to 
follow a trajectory that leaves the earth close to one of 
€ poles. 
Another danger that existed has now been overcome by 
space vehicle designers. We know that our atmosphere 
Is a rellable shield that protects us from meteorites—they 
burn up or disintegrate when they crash into the atmo- 
sphere at high velocities. A space vehicle could also 
become a “meteoric body” if its re-entry were made at 
too high a speed; the vehicle’s mass is relatively small 
and the resistance of the atmosphere could easily 
destroy it. 
The mechanism of atmospheric resistance is this: any 
body moving in the atmosphere pushes particles of air 
before It. This “push” is transmitted by molecules of air 
from particle to particle, thus providing a signal of the 
moving body’s approach—a signal which travels uniformly 
at the speed of sound. 
If the body is moving at a subsonic velocity, the signal 
spreads more rapidly than the body moves. Waves like 
those caused by throwing a stone in a pond spread 
through the atmosphere ahead of the moving body ; they 
consist of alternating condensed and rarefied layers 
of alr. 
These rapidly spreading waves provide the alr particles 
with what might be described as a “warning signal” 
about the moving body so that they open up a path for 
it as it approaches and flow round it. The body moves 
forward, meeting little resistance. Though this descrip- 
tion Is somewhat simplified, it comes close to reality when 
the body concerned is streamlined. 
HEN a body moves at supersonic velocities an 
entirely different situation is created. In this 
case the signal announcing Its approach is delayed 
because the body moves faster than the waves can spread. 
A region of densely compressed alr forms a cushion in 
front of the moving body. On a space vehicle's re-entry 
an impact wave forms ahead of it and the air cushion 
builds up between the wave and the vehicle. 
The compression of the air brings about a tremendous 
increase in the pressure and temperature of the atmo- 
spheric gases. If the velocity of the vehicle is twice that 
of sound the temperature reaches 250° C., and if it is six 
times that of sound the temperature will rise to 1,800° C. 
Describing his re-entry into the atmosphere, Her- 
man Titov spoke of “a mass of fire of the brightest 
colours seething round the ship.” The kinetic energy of 
the rapidly moving body is expended on the formation of 
the impact wave and on heating the air cushion—in other 
words, it loses velocity. The heat generated in the air 
cushion is only partly dispersed In the surrounding 
atmosphere, most of it is used to heat up the vehicle. 
A spaceship, therefore, must be provided with a protective 
shell and the velocity of Its entry into the denser layers 
of the atmosphere must not exceed a certain limit. 
Such is the overall picture, greatly simplified, of the 
flight of our present spaceships, the first vehicles to open 
up a path into outer space. Spaceships will not retain their 
present form, they will be improved and developed as 
science and technology progress. It may well be that 
spaceships will soon be as different from those we know 
today as modern motor cars differ from their prototypes 
of the late nineteenth century. 
The authors of this article—EVGENY GREBENIKOV and 
ViapIMIR DyoMIN, of the Patrice Lumumba University, 
Moscow, and EVGENY AKSENov of the Sternberg Astrono- 
mical Institute, Moscow—are all specialists in physics and 
mathematics.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 61368: Countdown for space flight

        
  
  
» lL 
4 
4 ! 
) 
- - 3 . 
A ¥ 
| :  S , y 
: : As ’ ) 
» : . : LT i 
ra, .\ Th HS 
ok TA od “ | y 
5 “ 
_—T . Fi . £24 » 
Ww No a LS | ’ | WY 
J | . 
oc ad hE RA ) sang A an 
ERR LE “phe AY : M JA 
bs Ls Sey y y At, Foy ge 
E700 Wa Lv ’ | SR rel re 
: rr ¥i1% - : ‘ Sw Ae hf » 
EA LEY TAY dm ene LVR 0 4 
aL) > - a eh N ATA be NL 
| 
- JE et >A of Lal BEL 25 
wi AN Lb wA SW AJ vl : 213 - : 
Nas wl Sr RVR LF A Re pri £ Lp 
Ral 28 MS EGU Gl SAN pam 4 eA 
AR, il Prd M Se SVR SOS Pas FL A Ay 
LE NE RTI FA RR LA A) 4a °F 4 
thy 7 CT Al BA NR 1A bn) od 
JPN JT NTT 5 PR ’ <4 . 
Py r ads ET 4 Y ax : . - YW . pe §, A : or 8 A : -re 15. ~ - » a ) > 
es is Pa ee WY AF mT Tay i! of », x iu pI SII PRINS Cheon 
    
 
    
         
Co
d?
 
- . W
w
 
a4
 
a)
 5 . p _ 
. x A . »! 
- y w > 
ST
o%
 
EA
 
2% 
L
e
)
 
g
d
 
v 
o
h
 
n 
S
e
 
. 
: 
w
e
 
EE
 
==
 
=
 
r
T
 
“x
 pe 
Ne
 
a
 
p
a
n
 
I B
i
 
.
 
»
 
- 
> 
“3
 
L
Y
 
A
S
 
-*
 - 2a
 
“
a
 
>
 
x 
o
N
 
. 
» 
-
 
.
 
R
A
 
P
o
s
s
 
RETURN FROM SPACE. Soviet technicians recover capsules containing live animals parachuted 
from research rockets after their re-entry into the earth's atmosphere. Thanks to the giant parachutes 
used for these operations the animals come down to a soft landing after their flight into outer space. 
APN photos 
  
A PR Fe le IT BAA, | <r NNER A 
(9 oJ on A 1 
t ¥ 
r ' . : 
4 » 
» » - op 
“ ) 
X 5 
= 
» 
| he ¥ 
» . ’ 
. : ’ ! 
ss ¥ J 5 4 A 
. 
- ’ 
. : » 
. 
» 
» 
' 
- 
’ . b 
NR a 
A » A . ¥ - 
- a FS ’ > > se op 
' . \ y 
2 3 2 | Bd He 4 
Cider De ned Rg AA 
ce a a] 0 - J 
- 
> 
i. : 
: Fey, Li {4 5 * 
ve ~t - - oy “ - 
v's a : 4A . .    
ry < opine, oat. ante od 
4 = . ad a i 
a i dn 
. 
ae 5 3 - - p < fa is y fe -

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 61370: New tools to map our hidden mineral wealth

NEW TOOLS 
70 MAP 
OUR HIDDEN 
. % MINERAL WEALTH 
by J. M. Bruckshaw 
L
A
P
 
a
t
 
3 
or 
BD 
e
e
n
 
S
E
G
R
E
 
2
 
C
E
s
   F
<
 
L
y
 
LL 
i
d
e
s
 
A
T
 
MAN - MADE GEYSER 
A column of water 
boiling shoots sky- 
wards from a newly- 
drilled well in Reyk- 
javik, capital city 
of Iceland. The 
water will be con- 
trolled and fed into 
the city’s hot water 
system for commer- 
cial and domestic 
heating. From the 
Poles to the Tropics, 
geophysical and geo- 
logical knowledge 
and techniques have 
been mobilized to 
aid the prospection 
for minerals and 
: other valuable na- 
ng tural resources hid- 
den underground. 
Their success in de- 
tecting underground 
water resources has 
led to many areas, 
particularly those in 
Africa, being opened 
i up for development.   
Petur Thomson-World Bank

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 61370: New tools to map our hidden mineral wealth

AIRBORNE SURVEYS 
The increasing de- 
velopment of in- 
struments enabling 
magnetic, electro- 
magnetic and radio- 
active prospection to 
be carried out from 
the air has given 
vast new scope to 
the world-wide 
search for hidden 
mineral deposits. Air- 
borne geophysical 
surveys have achiev- 
ed outstanding suc- 
cess in the search 
for oil. The boom 
trailing behind the 
survey aircraft (right) 
contains a magneto- 
meter which is used 
to locate and map 
the distribution of 
rocks with magnetic 
properties, such as 
strongly magnetic 
iron ores like magnet- 
ite, which is often 
associated with other 
mineral deposits. 
Litton Industries, U.S.A. 
T= search for minerals of Importance to the 
community has always confronted man with 
major prcblems. The earlier discoveries, many of them 
accidental, were generally of ore bodies outcropping at the 
surface or those with a very thin superficial cover which 
could be penetrated at little cost by trenching or by shaft 
sinking. But once the shallower deposits had been located 
and exploited, it became far more costly and difficult to 
discover those at greater depths. 
Thus it soon became evident that some guidance was 
necessary to reduce this cost. Initially this guidance was 
obtained from geological knowledge of the characteristics 
of the deposit and its environment and from theories of 
its genesis and mode of formation. This information and 
the detailed study of the surface geology, which could be 
extrapolated downwards, indicated the most likely sites 
for the discovery of ore deposits, thus resulting in in- 
creased discoveries and reduced costs. 
Unfortunately with Increasing depth the projection 
downwards of the surface geological picture became less 
reliable, This Is especially the case in the presence of 
an unconformity—a break in the geological sequence— 
which can result in there being little or no relationship 
between the deeper rocks and those near. the surface. 
Following earlier sporadic investigations a real effort 
was made about 1920 to discover if some of the geophysi- 
cal techniques, which had been found so successful in the 
study of the structure and properties of the earth as a 
whole could be used on a small scale to reveal similar 
information about local geology. 
The very promising results obtained, particularly in the 
search for oil in the Texas-Loulslana Gulf Coast of the 
  
United States, encouraged further field exploration and the 
development of specialized Instruments and led to yet 
another application of science that has been of economic 
benefit ever since. 
The methods which were employed in the Initial stages, 
and which continue in more sophisticated guise up to the 
present day, may be regarded as the classical techniques of 
geophysics: the study of the earth's gravitational field, of 
the earth's magnetic fleld and of earthquake waves. To 
these must be added those methods which employ the flow 
of direct or alternating current through the earth and—a 
more recent development—the study of the radioactive 
properties of rocks. 
The first of these methods has led to a knowledge cf the 
shape and size of the earth and also to modern Ideas of 
the structure of continents and oceans. Its use in the 
prospection for minerals Is based upon the fact that the 
presence of rocks denser than their surroundings leads to 
a locally high value of gravity. Thus the ability to 
measure in detail very small variations in gravity from 
place to place permits deductions concerning the distri- 
bution of densities in the upper few miles of the earth's 
crust. In the early days the gravity fleld was investigated 
by the Eo6tvds torsion balance, but this has now been 
superseded by modern gravity meters capable of detecting 
variations in gravity of two or three parts in 100,000,000. 
The existence of local anomalies In the earth’s magnetic 
fleld had long been realized and attributed to the distor- 
tion of the regular fleld by the presence of rocks of marked 
magnetic properties. Indeed, the magnetic method of 
prospection was the first to be exploited for economic ends: 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 61370: New tools to map our hidden mineral wealth

30 
MINERAL WEALTH (Cont'd) 
Underground exploration from the skies 
shortly after it had been demonstrated that the earth 
behaved as an enormous magnet, crude Instruments, such 
as the miner's dial and the miner's compass were brought 
into use In the search for strongly magnetic iron ores such 
as magnetite. 
The Influence of large magnetic deposits on the magne- 
tic fleld may sometimes be spectacular, as at Kursk in 
Russia where the strength of the fleld is increased by a 
factor of about five. Many rock formations are slightly 
magnetic generally because they contain low concentra- 
tions of magnetite and they also can modify the local field. 
Modern field magnetometers are sufficiently sensitive to 
detect and measure these effects and to indicate the dis- 
tribution of magnetic material underground. 
T= study of earthquakes, particularly of the 
time of different shock waves through the 
earth, has glven us a picture of the structure of the earth 
as a whole and, In the case of near earthquakes, of the 
structure of the continental and oceanlc crusts. This has 
been possible because, as the shock waves are transmitted 
through the earth thelr paths are changed by reflection 
and refraction at boundaries between rocks through ‘which 
the waves travel with different velocltles. 
In selsmic prospecting, the earthquake is simulated by 
the detonation of a burled explosive charge. The shock 
waves travel through the various rocks, undergolng 
refraction and reflection as they cross boundaries separat- 
ing rocks of different properties, and are detected at the 
surface by carefully placed instruments which, amongst 
other things measure the time of transit of the shock 
waves from explosion to detector. A suitable analysis 
of the data allows the position of the boundaries between 
the rocks to be located, revealing the general geological 
structure with its patterns of dipping beds, faults, anti- 
clines, synclines, unconformities and other characteristic 
formatlons, 
The electrical methods depend for their success upon the 
wide range of the electrical conductivities found in rocks 
and minerals. When a current is passed through the 
ground it distributes itself in such a way that the resis- 
tance to Its flow Is minimum, i.e. there is a concentration 
of current In rocks of high conductivity and a reduction 
of current in those of low conductivity. Thus an examina- 
tion of the current distribution allows deductions 
concerning the variation of electrical conductivity in the 
ground. 
The radioactive method was originally developed for the 
search for radioactive deposits, but the varying content of 
radioactive minerals in rocks enables us to differentiate 
between rock types under certain conditions. 
The methods already described may be applied in a 
variety of ways to search for mineral deposits. Some 
minerals have exceptional physical properties which pro- 
duce local distortions of the gravitational or magnetic 
fleld. Examples are the high density of minerals such as 
galena, chromite, barytes, ete., which modify locally the 
gravity fleld. The case of magnetite which has large 
magnetic properties has already been mentioned, while 
many base metal sulphides have excellent electrical con- 
ductivity, which distorts the flow of current through the 
ground. 
More frequently the mineral sought may have no 
exceptional physical property which permits direct loca- 
tion, but it may be associated with another suitable 
mineral. Thus many mineral deposits have magnetite or 
other magnetic mineral associated with them which can 
be detected by magnetic prospectlon methods. 
Agaln, gold often occurs in quartz reefs and the low 
conductivity of quartz may be used to trace the reefs. In 
such cases a geophysical indication is no guarantee that 
ore is present but it at least narrows down the number 
of sites to be examined. 
Frequently ore deposits are genetically related to certain 
geological formations, as for example, those resulting from 
igneous activity. In this case, and depending on the pro- 
perties involved, one or other geophysical method may be 
used to determine the position, size and inclination of the 
formation and so limit the potential zone of min- 
eralization. 
Finally the deposition of ore may be controlled by local 
geological conditions. Ore may be confined to certain 
formations, or he associated with rock contacts or with 
faults. The local structure is often revealed by the geo- 
physical investigations and thus indicates the most 
promising drilling sites. Indeed the search for oll is 
reduced to a search for structures with which oll may 
be associated, such as an anticlinal trap, a fault trap, etc. 
Naturally in this indirect approach more than one 
method may be employed as, in the search for oll where 
the magnetic, gravitational and selsmic methods all play a 
~ part. Similarly the magnetic ‘and electrical methods are 
frequently combined in the search for ore bodies. 
Geophysical techniques were developed for use on land 
under a variety of conditions ranging from those of the 
Louisiana swamps to those in the Arctic. However, the 
extension of geological studies to the offshore continental 
shelves, and the vast mineral potential of these areas, 
encouraged the development of methods for use at sea. 
Thus gravity measurements can now be made by means 
of underwater gravity meters lowered to the sea floor, and 
today, experiments with ship-borne gravity meters giving 
a continuous record of gravity along the ship's track are 
in progress. 
In spite of the great difficulties caused by the motion of 
the ship, the sensitivities achieved already approach those 
necessary for prospecting. 
I: marine seismic prospecting the situation is 
even better since the mobility of ships allows 
greater areas to be covered in a given time with a similar 
accuracy to that obtained on land. In fact on land the 
speed of operation may be severely restricted by rough 
topography and by vegetation and the inaccessibility of 
some areas. 
Accordingly, instruments have been developed for 
magnetic, electromagnetic (one of the many electrical 
-methods) and radioactive prospection from planes. 
In addition to the greater speed with which an area 
can be surveyed by air, these methods have the further 
advantage that a continuous record of the variations in 
the fleld is obtained, whereas on the ground the measuring 
instruments are set up at a series of discrete stations 
between which estimated values have to be used. 
Alrborne geophysical surveys have heen made exten- 
sively in all parts of the world and will continue for very 
many years. Their outstanding success has been achieved 
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 61370: New tools to map our hidden mineral wealth

) 
B
i
.
 
  
pe 
"8 
  OIL GUSHER 
ingui y costly and hazardous Operations led by 39 
G 0 ES ILD one or other of the handful of men in the world i flaming geysers s of oil have gone Up in smoke and flame.

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 61370: New tools to map our hidden mineral wealth

  
Litton Industries, U.S.A. 
“ok 
. » po 
Rn Fa 
  
SEISMIC PROSPECTING. By studying the behaviour of shock waves set up by earthquakes 
as they are changed by reflection and refraction at boundaries between different layers of rocks, 
geophysicists have obtained a picture of the internal structure of the earth. In seismic prospecting 
the earthquake is simulated by a series of explosive charges and the time of transit of the resulting 
shock waves to detecting instruments is measured. From the data obtained, a record of the 
contour of the earth below with its geological structural patterns is obtained. Here, columns 
MINERAL WEALTH (Cont'd) of earth spout upwards as a series of explosions are set off by seismic prospectors. 
Fewer drill holes, more oil 
in the search for oil, and the oil industry was responsible 
for thelr development. A very high percentage of all oil 
used has been found by the use of these techniques. 
The mining industry has taken over the tools developed 
for oll exploration but since the war methods especially 
adapted to its own needs have been developed. Geo- 
physical prospecting methods find an important use in the 
search for underground water resources, and many areas, 
particularly in Africa, have been opened up for develop- 
ment as a result. 
Recent composite surveys (frequently sponsored by the 
United Nations) have included airborne, magnetic, electro- 
magnetic, and radioactive surveys and photogeology. All 
available geological and geophysical data have been used 
in the search for mineral wealth. The speed with which 
these surveys can be carried out makes the system of 
extreme value to new countries where an essential part 
of establishing a sound economy is the discovery and 
exploitation of natural resources. In the completely 
different fleld of civil engineering geophysical methods 
have been used for site Investigation of dam emplace- 
ments, bridge foundations and tunnels and naturally have 
32 added to the certainty of planning. 
The main economic advantage of geophysical methods 
stems from the fact that their use cuts down the number 
of drill holes necessary to examine an area. Drilling gives 
by far the most positive information, but it is without 
doubt the most expensive method of exploration. By the 
use of geophysics the most promising areas are delineated. 
It is unfortunate that many formations of no economlic 
value can produce results identical with those of an 
economic area, and it is obvious that a suitable structure, 
revealed by the methods already described, may be barren 
of mineral. Some, but not all uncertainty may be 
removed by geological and geochemical considerations and, 
supplemented by these disciplines, the methods form a 
very potent tool. 
In the case of oil, wells based upon non-technical 
considerations have a success rate of 1 in 30 compared to 
1 In 5 or 6 when based on geological and geophysical 
investigations. But, as even today the quantity, the qua- 
lity and frequently the nature itself of ore cannot be 
determined, there are still some important problems of 
exploration to be solved. 
 
J. M. BRUCKSHAW is head of the Geophysics Department 
and professor of Applied Geophysics at the Imperial 
College of Science and Technology, London.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

Lette 
MEDICAL SCHOOLS OF 
ANTIQUITY 
 
Sir, 
In your June 1963 issue, Sir 
Leonard Woolley mentions the inter- 
nationalization of medicine in the 
ancient Middle East, as well as the 
free circulation of medical books 
from one country to another. But 
he does not mention where the medical 
schools were located. 
D. Chowry Muthu in his book 
“The Antiquity of Hindu Medicine”, 
1931, writes that the Rig Veda (4000 to 
2500 B.C.) gives the names of a 
thousand and one medical plants, 
as well as [details of] surgery, mid- 
wifery, therapeutics and sanitation. 
Sir William Jones is quoted as 
having found an “entire Upanishad 
on the internal parts of the human 
body, with an enumeration of the 
nerves, veins and arteries,” etc. The 
Ayur Veda was said to have been 
given from the god Indra to Atreya 
who then began a college of physicians, 
“whose work, the Atraya Samhita is 
the oldest existing work on medicine, 
containing 46,500 verses in all.” 
Susruta was the head of a school 
of surgeons in his “Ayur Vedic 
University in the city of Benares.” 
using “101 varieties of blunt instru- 
ments and twenty different kinds of 
sharp (instruments)”’ that have only 
been slightly modified in modern 
times, also using anaesthetics, steriliz- 
ation etc. 
The University of Taxilla was 
famous for its medical school. And 
the “University of Nalanda had 100 
lecture rooms, where 10,000 students 
received instruction; it had six 
immense blocks of residential 
buildings, each being four stories 
high...” 
Arthur Johnson 
Chicago, U.S.A. 
SCORPION MAN OF SUMER 
 
Sir, 
The identification of the figure 
shown on page 7 of your June 1963 
issue as a scorpion man is in my view an 
error. He is merely a priest or perhaps 
a dancer wearing a garment with a 
train. One of my reasons for saying 
this is that Sumerian art only produced 
anthropomorphic figures or combined 
human-animal figures in the lions at 
the Louvre Museum or in Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s kudurru in the British 
Museum, in which cases all the con- 
trasting features are clearly indicated. 
It is clear that the artist responsible 
for the lyre or harp ornaments you 
reproduce had a good knowledge of 
animal anatomy as your illustrations 
show. Your “scorpion man” stands on 
human legs and this, to me, is a most 
rs to the Editor 
telling detail. It is quite possible that 
the woven material of his Sumerian 
garment consists of a series of thick 
braids which to the writer of the 
caption suggested the likeness of a 
scorpion. 
José Gonzalez Gracia 
San Carlos de Bariloche, Argentina 
Ed. note : Representations of combined 
human-animal figures are a charac- 
teristic feature of Sumerian art. 
Purely animalistic art in Sumer was 
in itself remarkable but animals— 
sometimes in a natural form and 
sometimes in fantastic guise—are 
also combined in a variety of decor- 
ative arrangements. One of the 
earliest known examples is the tress 
pattern used to form the body of a 
figure as in the case of the scorpion- 
man from the tomb of the King of 
Ur, described by Jurgis Baltrusaitis 
in his work, “Art Sumérien et Art 
Roman” published by Leroux, Paris. 
INTERNATIONAL LANGUAGE 
CONCLAVE 
 
Sir, 
Professor Peis article, “One 
Language for the World?"”, in the 
Nov, 1963 Courier was excellent, but 
I missed his usual urgency for 
immediate action. Now, with the 
United Nations’ proposal for an 
International Co-operation Year, what 
better time for the universal accept- 
ance of an international language 
which could be one of the major 
efforts during this special year? 
Perhaps we could emulate the Roman 
Catholic Church. Instcad of the 
Cardinals, let's lock up represcntative 
linguists from every nation until they 
can agree upon an existing language, 
whether natural or artificial, that the 
world's peoples can start learning 
immedijately in order to get better 
acquainted with one another while 
there is still time! 
W. W. Ruby Rapsey 
Willowdale, Ont., Canada 
FIRMER THAN IT SEEMED 
 
Sir, 
Well done again, Courier! I mean 
the Oct. 1963 issue (Probing the Interior 
of the Earth), It was terrifically 
interesting to us in Japan, the most 
“shaky” country in the world. 
I would like to make one record 
straight, though. The caption of the 
picture on page 27: “photograph of 
a swaying building only seconds 
before it collapsed” in the 1948 
Fukui earthquake is grossly incorrect, 
Actually the building didn’t collapse 
at all. It managed to survive the 
earthquake in the same state as 
shown in the picture, though badly 
scorched, It was later torn down for 
reconstruction. 
You ask for my qualification of 
the statement? My father, Dr. lhideo 
Tamama was responsible for the 
reconstruction. 
Tetuo Tamanna 
Sompachli, Tkeda 
Osakafu, Japan 
AID TO LANGUAGE TEACHING 
Sir, 
As an English teacher I would be 
very pleased to hear from you whether 
the articles of the French and English 
editions are alike, being in fact 
translations from one language into 
the other. 1 should like to use them 
in my top forms where learning how 
to translate properly is of main 
importance. | have a very modern 
classroom for language teaching so 
could any articles be made available 
on tape, in French, German and 
English ? 
Rev. J. I’. Mooljman 
Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Ed. note : All our language editions 
are indeed alike, being  trans- 
lations from one language into 
another. They therefore can be used 
in language classes and are so used 
in schools of many countries througlt- 
out the world, hut we do not have 
tapes of any of our language cditions. 
VISITING EDUCATORS IGNORED 
 
Sir, 
Sir Herbert Read, distinguished art 
critic, writer, poel, aesthetician and 
philosopher, visited Australia in June 
last year, He arrived in Sydney 
unheralded and departed in obscurity, 
and apart from a few small adver- 
tisements in the newspapers giving 
notice that two of his lectures would 
be open to the public, he received 
so little press publicity that only a 
comparalively few people were aware 
of his presence. 
It is deplorable that public relations 
failed to grasp this previouly 
unequalled opportunity to culturally 
alert the Australian public and give 
them the opportunity of benefiting by 
the visit of so distinguished a man. 
I hope Tne UNeEsco COURIER, with its 
world coverage and its cultural 
dedication, will publish this letter and 
so alert administrators in other 
countries to herald the presence in 
their communities of visiting inter- 
national educators, so as lo give 
benefit to the broadest mass of in- 
habitants, rather than to the sclected, 
established few. 
Oscar Edwards 
Sydney, Australia 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco Newst 
USTRALIAN SOLAR HOUSE, Scien- 
tists from the University of Queens- 
land., Australia, have successfully experi- 
mented with a one-third normal size solar 
house which provides hot water, refrigeration 
and air-conditioning from its water-filled 
copper-tubing roof and cooking facilities 
from solar concentrators which focus rays 
of light and heat on to a container of oil. 
Further research will now be made with a 
family living inside a similar, but full-size 
house. 
JJ® ROTECTING KENYA’S WILDLIFE: 
The Government of Kenya has pledged 
itself to conserve the country’s natural 
resources. A declaration signed by the 
Prime Minister, Mr. Kenyatta, states: “The 
natural resources of this country—its wild- 
life which offers such an attraction to 
visitors from all over the world, the beauti- 
ful places in which these animals live, the 
mighty forests which guard the water 
catchment areas so vital to the survival of 
man and beast—are a priceless heritage for 
the future.” 
TAMPS GALORE: The world’s largest 
philatelic collection composed of over 
100,000 mint postage stamps issued during 
the past 90 years by some 500 countries, 
states and postal administrations is being 
presented on permanent loan by Britain's 
Post Office to the British Museum in 
London. 
LL STAR FESTIVAL: A unique pho- 
nograph record brought out by the 
Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for 
Refugees offering music and songs by 13 of 
the world's top recording stars is helping 
refugees in many parts of the world. En- 
titled “All Star Festival” this long-playing 
  
  
record is available through normal trade 
channels and all net proceeds are used to 
help U.N. refugee programmes including 
those run by the U.N. Relief and Works 
Agency for Palestine refugees. This 12” 
record is priced at $3.98 (mono) and $4.98 
(stereo). 
¢ JL NGLIsH BY TRAIN: Swedish 
commuters on the local morning 
train from Uppsala to Stockholm can now 
take English language lessons arranged by 
Uppsala University on two days a week. 
Riding in a special coach during their 40-mile 
journey, the commuter students converse 
in English and are taught useful phrases 
for business correspondence. 
{: UROPEAN SOCIAL SCIENCE 
CENTRE: Austria and UNESCO have 
signed an agreement regarding their respec- 
tive contributions to the European Social 
Science Centre set up in Vienna by a 
decision of the UNEsco General Conference. 
The centre will carry out programmes of 
comparative research into social and eco- 
nomic structures in European countries. 
Themes to be dealt with include the social 
consequences and legal aspects of indus- 
trialization and the underdeveloped areas 
that exist in economically developed coun- 
tries. 
SECOND ‘BEAGLE’ FOR THE 
GALAPAGOS: A research vessel 
fitted out in England for the Charles Darwin 
Research Foundation set out in November 
for the Galapagos Islands off the coast of 
Ecuador. It was here that the Charles 
Darwin Research Foundation was set up 
by UnEsco in 1959 (see THE UNESCO Cou- 
saving the Nublan temples of Abu 
efforts of Unesco and its member states 
Republic has been able to sign 
that will handle the operation of cutting 
them 210 feet above their present hillside 
Unesco's campaign to save the Nubian 
The Unesco Courier, Feb. 1960) has alrea 
national programme of excavations, 
the dismentling and removal to safety 
had been proposed, including a plan to sli 
were built 3,000 years ago, encase them in 
$32 million plus a reserve of $4 million, 
by nearly 50 
During the first six months of the ope   
ABU SIMBEL TO BE SAVED 
REPARATORY work will soon be under way on the immense operation of 
waters of the Nile when the new Aswan Dam is completed. Through the 
a contract with an international group of firms 
archaeological research and surveys and 
Various solutions to the outstanding problem of saving the Abu Simbel! temples 
over 200 feet by giant Jacks (see The Unesco Courier, Oct. 1961). 
finally adopted—to cut up and then re-erect the temples—will cost an estimated 
The United Arab Republic asked Unesco to obtain at least $20,500,000, and 
the outstanding difference between this figure and contributions announced 
countries is expected to be covered by the campaign In the future. 
The U. A. R. has pledged itself to make good the gap between the sum called 
for by the International appeal and the total cost of the operation. 
yards upstream from the temples, and roads and housing for workers constructed. 
Only then will the actual cutting of the temples into sections begin. 
Simbel from being engulfed by the 
the government of the United Arab 
up the temples and reconstructing 
site. 
monuments of the Nile Valley (see . 
dy made possible an extensive inter- 
of smaller temples and monuments. 
ce them from the hill into which they 
concrete boxes and raise these boxes 
The project 
ration a river port will be built 900   
  
RIER, Sept. 1961) to conserve and study 
the unique flora and fauna of the islands 
which started the train of Darwin's thought 
leading to the famous Origin of Species. 
The new research vessel has been named 
“Beagle” after the ship in which Darwin 
visited the Galapagos in 1835. 
TONE AGE LIFE IN 1963: History 
students from Moscow and Leningrad 
universities have been finding out exactly 
what it was like to live under stone age 
conditions. Camping in the East Sayan 
Mountains of the Soviet Union, they used 
only stone implements, made fire by friction 
and hunted animals with crude weapons. 
They found it took three hours to light 
a fire by rubbing two sticks together and 
nine days to make a flint knife. But once 
they had made a flint axe, they felled a 
. pine tree 40 cms thick in 30 minutes. 
00 FEW NURSES: “It’s a fine job but 
there should be more of us.” This 
was the view of all the nurses interviewed 
by “World Health,” the monthly magazine 
of The World Health Organization, which 
devoted its December 1963 issue to Nursing 
in the World Today. Out of 2,500,000 quali- 
fied nurses in the world today, 750,000 
work in the Americas, 780,000 in Europe 
and 600,000 in the Soviet Union. Thus 
there are only 400,000 for the immense 
populations of Africa, Asia and Oceania. 
A ORLD BOOM IN TV: One of the 
most spectacular developments in 
mass media during the past decade has 
been in TV. In 1953, North America had 
90% of all operating transmitters. Europe, 
including the U.S.S.R., had only 7% and 
South America and Asia together had only 
3%. By 1960, Europe had risen to 55%, 
and North America had dropped to 32%. 
Asia had 7% and South America 4%. 
WEDISH AID TO AFRICA: Sweden 
has offered nearly $500,000 to Unesco 
to finance projects for extending educational 
opportunities for women and girls in Africa. 
Projects envisaged include a secondary 
school in Tanganyika, scholarships for 300 
girls in Ghana, a teacher training college 
and a mobile cinema unit in Sierra Leone 
and mobile library services in Kenya, Tan- 
ganyika and Uganda. 
   
Flashes... 
  
BW Despite large-scale malaria eradication 
schemes, the World Health Organization 
estimates that close on 380 million people 
are still exposed to the risk of infection by 
this disease. WHO also estimates that 
400 million people suffer from trachoma, 
which can cause blindness, and that over 
10 million are victims of leprosy. 
Bm Gastronautics, the science of space | 
feeding, is becoming a real problem as < 
men are being launched into space for i& 
longer periods of time. An astronauts Z 
menu now includes 23 different bite-size - 
products and 37 different dehydrated 
products. 
R
A
N
C
E
 
  mpi 
Wm Unesco will set up a centre in Mexico 
for the planning and construction of school 
buildings to aid Latin American countries 
which are to spend $4,000 million in ten 
years in this field. 
Bm During the past eight years the number 
of the world's daily newspapers has 
declined, although total circulation has 
increased by 20%; in the same period 
radio receivers have increased by 60% 
and TV receivers by 200%. Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S.
 
|

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

XV 1964-66 
études 
a I'étranger 
estudios 
en el 
extranjero 
  
unesco 
study abroad 
    
the latest 
Just published 
STUDY ABROAD 
New 1964-1966 Edition 
The fifteenth edition of "Study Abroad” brings you 
information on 130,000 fellowships 
offered in 1964 and 1965 by governments, univer- 
sities, foundations and other institutions in over 
100 countries and territories. 
Fellowships and scholarships are available for 
work in virtually all fields of learning and research, 
and can be held in almost all parts of the world. 
The duration of studies varies from several weeks 
to six or seven years. 
An invaluable manual for anyone contemplating 
study in a foreign country. An indispensable refe- 
rence book for all libraries, universities and infor- 
mation centres. 
educational contacts throughout the world. 
N. B. “Study Abroad” will be published only once 
every two years. 
A useful instrument in promoting 
The next edition will appear 
at the end of 1965. 
$4, 20/-, 14 F 
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency ; the rates quoted 
are for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
* 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul. — AUSTRALIA. 
Tradco Agencies, 109 Swanston Street, G. P. 
Box 2324 V, Melbourne C. |. (Victoria) ; United 
Nations Association of Australia, Victorian Division, 
8th Floor, McEwan House, 343 Little Collins St. 
Melbourne C. |. (Victoria). {A. 15/-). — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 19, Yienna ¥ 
(Sch. 60.) — BELGIUM. Editions '* Labor ", 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NY Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgiélei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis De Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA. Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon. (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont, (§ 3.00). — CEYLON. Lake House 
Bookshop, 100 Parsons Road, P.O, Box 244, Colombo, 
2. (Rs. 9). — CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (For- 
mosa). — CUBA .Cubartimpex, Apartado 6540, La Ha- 
vana. — (2.25 pesos). — CYPRUS, Cyprus National 
Youth Council, P.O. Box 539, Nicosia. — CZE- 
CHOSLOVAKIA. Artia Ltd., 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 
2. — DENMARK. Ejnar Munksgaard, Prags Boulevard 
47 Copenhagen S (D.kr. 12). — ETHIOPIA, Interna- 
tional Press Agency. P.O, Box 120. Addis Ababa. — 
FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, 
Helsinki, (Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de ['Unesco, 
Place de Fontenoy, Paris-7* C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.). — 
GERMANY. R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosenheimerstrasse 
145, Munich. 8, For the Unesco Kurier (German ed 
only) Bahrenfelder-Chaussee 160, Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, 
C.C.P. 276650 (DM 8). — GHANA Methodist Book 
Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial St., POB 100, 
Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See United King- 
dom. — GREECE, Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, rue du 
Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon Book Co., 64, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. =~ HUNGARY. Kultura, P. O. 
Box 149. Budapest, 62. — ICELAND. Snaebjorn Jonsson 
& Co. H.F., Hafnarstraeti 2, Reykjavik — INDIA, Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Nicol Road,, Bellard Estate, Bombay 1; 
17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13: Gunfoundry Road, 
Hyderabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; Kanson House, 
1/24 Asaf Ali Road, P.O.Box386, New Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 Park Street, Calcutta 
16, Scindia House, New Delhi, Indian National Commission 
Co-operation with Unesco, Ministry of Education, for 
New Delhi 3. (Rs. 7). = INDONESIA, P. N, Fadjar Bhakti 
Djalan, Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — IRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. — IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin, (10/-). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores 35, Allenby Road 
and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv {1£ 5.50). 
— JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road. P.O.B. 66 Amman. — 
KENYA. E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 30167, Nairobi, — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central é4, Seoul. — LIBERIA, Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYSIA Federal Publications Ltd. 
Times House, River Valley Rd., Singapore (M. § 500) — 
MALTA. Sapienza’s Library 26 Kingsway, Yalletta. (10/-). 
— MAURITIUS, Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30Bid 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF). — NETHERLANDS. 
N. VY. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). ~— NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G.C.T. Yan 
Dorp & Co. (Ned Ant) N.V,, Willemstad, Curacao. NA, 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 20, 
Molesworth Street (Private Bag) Wellington, C. 1 Govern- 
ment Bookshops,: Auckland (P.O. Box 5344), Christ 
church (P.O. Box 1721), Dunedin (P.O. Box 1104 (10/-). 
NIGERIA. C.M.S. Bookshops, P.O, Box 174, Lagos, 
{10/). — NORWAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Granse, 
7 Oslo For the Unesco Courier only: AS. Narvesens 
Litteratur Tjeneste, Stortingagt. 2 Oslo, Postboks 11§ 
(kr 13.20) — PAKISTAN, The West-Pak Publishing Co. 
Led., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore. — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamefa, Avenida 7s, No, T1-49, Apartado de 
Correos 2018, Panama, (D.F, Balboas 3-). — PHILLIPI. 
NES. The Modern Book Co. 508 Rizal Avenue 
Manila, — POLAND. “RUCH" ul, Wilozs Nr, 46x 
Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon, — 
PUERTO RICO, Spanish English Publications, Eleanor 
Roosevelt 118, Apartado 1912, Hato Rey. ~RHODESIA 
& NYASALAND. The Book Centre, Gordon Avenuas, Sa- 
lisbury, Southern Rhodesia. — SUDAN. Al Bashir Book- 
shop, P. O,Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN, A/B C.E. 
Friczes Kungl. Hovbokhandel Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm 16, 
— For The Unesco Courier: Svenska Unescoridet, Yasaga- 
tan 15-17, Stockholm, C (Kr. 7.50); SWITZERLAND, 
Europa Verlag, 5 Rimistrasse Zurich, Payot, 40. rue du 
Marché, Geneva C.C.P, 1-236. ** Courier” only: Georges 
Losmaz, 1, rue des Yieux-Grenadiers, Geneva, C.C.P. 
1.4811, (Fr. S. 8). — TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam 
Bookshop, P.O.B. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. —= THAILAND, 
Suksapan Panit, Mansion 2, Rajdamnern Avenue. Bangkok. 
{3S ticals), — TURKEY, Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, lstanbul. —- UGANDA. Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala, — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, 
Church Street, P.O. Box 724 Pretoria. For tha Unesco 
Courier (single copies) only : Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg. (10/-). — UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte. 9 Sh. 
Adly-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M, 
Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l. (10/.). — 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
317 East 34th Se, New York, N.Y. 10016, ($5.00) 
and (except periodicals): Columbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27, N.Y, — U.S.5.R, Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200, — YUGOSLAVIA 
Yugoslovenska Knjigs, Terarzije 27, Belgrade,

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/062393engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
    
  S
E
 
—
—
 
r 
| 
A | 
| 
y 
! 
1 
| 
    L
n
 
l
e
 
 
—
—
—
 
—
—
 
aa aT 
a — 
 
  
  
       
dw 
  
 