# [072098](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

VOLUME IV — N° 3 
  
Prix : 20 frs. — 15 cents (U.S.). — 6 pence (U.K.) 
| oy " Lo ey Te = - 
| ; a | 
| ho | 
' — k Koc fu] 
iN Fh . - 
| & el 
- 
Publication No. 1 OT 
MARCH 1951 
i]  pa Wd RR Wr 
3
 
  
     
EVISING their notes in a bomb-damaged lecture hall at the Uni- 
R versity of Vienna, these two medical students symbolize the post- 
war difficulties faced by this and many other universities. Even 
where classroom walls have been rebuilt or new roofs put over labo- 
ratories, much missing or out-dated equipment remains to be re- 
placed. Libraries too must be restocked, but many institutions cannot 
today afford the foreign exchange to buy books from abroad. 
In countries set back by human conflict and in others left behind by 
human progress, devoted men and women are striving to restore or to 
i 
» 
create the facilities required for training doctors, scholars, artists and 
technicians whose skills and creative powers are essential to world 
development and human well-being. 
In other countries favoured by progress or spared by war, people 
ask, “What can we do to help?” Unesco has answered this question 
by launching a programme that enables goodwill to be transformed 
into practical aid; through which men, women and children can make 
a direct, personal contribution to the cause of international under- 
standing. For a report on this new programme—the UNESCO GIFT 
COUPON PLAN—see pages 6 and 7 of this issue.

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 MARCH 1951 


### 72250: Associated projects: an international fundamental education advisory service

“ASSOCIATED PROJECTS” — An International 
Fundamental Education Advisory Service 
N international advisory and 
information service for na- 
tions carrying on campaigns 
against illiteracy and low living 
standards has now been put into 
operation by Unesco. The recent 
opening of this “associated pro- 
jects system”, as it is termed, 
places on a formal basis the assis- 
tance which the organization has 
been rendering agencies and pro- 
grammes dealing in fundamental 
education over past years. 
Fundamental education pro- 
grammes in seven countries of 
Asia, Latin America and Africa are 
now recognized as “associated pro- 
jects”. As such, they are to 
receive assistance from Unesco in 
three forms. 
Firstly, the organization will 
supply them with documentation 
on most recent developments in 
their fields — an important service 
for educators who must often work 
in isolated regions. 
Secondly, Unesco has opened an 
enquiry service to work on any 
problems they encounter in their 
own work. And, thirdly, six Unesco 
field advisers are available for 
service in projects requesting their 
help, for periods up to six months. 
One of the most important 
aspects of the system is its “two- 
way” flow of knowledge. It is 
expected that data furnished by 
educators in the field will be of 
extreme importance in seeking the 
answers to such fundamental 
education problems as teaching 
literacy in countries where peoples 
speak a vernacular often complete- 
ly different from the official lan- 
guage taught in schools. 
Better Ways Of Life 
A GENCIES and programmes 
which were the first to be 
included in the associated pro- 
jects system emphasise its already 
wide scope. 
In the Union of South Africa for 
  
  
  
cation, science and culture. 
French Francs *, 
get them to suscribe too. 
town. 
lombo .I 
Czechoslovakia : 
.Frané¢e : Maison du 
Hungary 
Malaya and Singapore : 
Netherlands : N.V. 
Peru : 
Union of South 
Artigas 1320, Montevideo. 
*Qutside of the United States, $ I.   
The UNESCO COURIER is an -international ‘periodical devoted to the work 
of UNESCO and to activities and developments throughout the world in edu- 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.50 US., or 5/- or 200 
SUBSCRIBE NOW ! Tell your friends about the UNESCO COURIER and 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to UNESCO 
House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris-16, France. 
Argentina : Editorial Sudamericana, S.A., Alsina 500, Buenos Aires. 
Australia : HA. Goddard Ltd., 255a George Street, Sydney. 
Austria : Wilhelm. Frick Verlag, 27 Graben, Vienna. 
Barbados : S.P.C.K. Bookshop (Regional Office Caribbean Area), Broad Street, Bridge- 
Belgium : Librairie Encyclopédique, 7, rue du Luxembourg, Brussels IV. 
Brazil : Livraria Agir Editora, Rua Mexico 98-B, Caixa postal 3291, Rio de Janeiro. 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, Rangoon. 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 299 Queen Street West, Toronto. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon, Lid.; Co- 
Chile : Libreria Lope de Vega, Moneda 924, Santiago de Chile. 
Colombia : Emilio Royo Martin, Carrera 9q, 1791, Bogota. 
Cuba : La Casa Belga, René de Smedt, O'Reilly, Havana. 
Orbis, Narodni 37, Prague 1 
Deamark : Einar Munksgaard, 6 Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Egypt : Librairie James Cattan, Fournisseur de la Cour, 118, Rue Emad el Dine, Cairo. 
Ecuador : Casa de la Cultura Ecuatoriana, av. Mariano Aquilera 322, Casilla 67, 
Quito. © | 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskata, Helsinki. 
Livre Frangais, 4, rue Félibien, Paris (6¢). (Booksellers only.) 
UNESCO, Sales Service, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris (16¢). 
Greece : Elefthéroudakis, Librairie Internationale, Athens, 
: “Kultura”, Akademia-u, 10, Budapest V. . ‘ 
India : Oxford Book® and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi. 
Israel : Leo Blumstein, Book and Art Shop, 35 Allenby Road, Tel Aviv. 
Italy : Messaggerie Italiane, Via Lomazzo, 52, Milan. 
Lebanon and Syria : Librairie Universeile, Avenue des Francais, Beirut, Lebanon. 
Peter Chong and Ce, P.O. Box 135, Singapore. . 
Mexico : Libreria Universitaria, Justo Sierra 16, México D.F. 
Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout 9, The Hague. 
New Zealand : Whitcombe and Tombs, Ltd., G.P.O. Box 1526, Wellington, C.I. 
Nigeria : C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 174. Lagos. 
Norway : A/S Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass 7, Oslo. 
Pakistan : Thomas and Thomas, Fort Mansions, Frere Road, Karachi 3. 
Libreria Internacional dal Peru, S.A., Giron de la Union, Lima. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., Inc., 1104 Castillejos Quiapo, Manila. 
Portugal : Unico Portuguesa de Imprensa, 198 Rua de Sao Bento, 3¢ Esq., Lisbon. 
Sweden : A.B. C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2; Stockholm. 
Switzerland : French speaking cantons : Librairie de l'Université, 22-24, rue de Ro- 
mont, Fribourg. German speaking cantons : Europa Verlag, 5 R&mistrasse, Zirich. 
Turkey : Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. . 
Africa : Van Schaik’'s Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. 
United Kingdom : H.M. Stationery Office : York House, Kingsway, London (Retail 
Counter Service), or P.O. Box 568, London, S.E.l1. (Orders by post). 
United States of America : Columbia University Press, 2960 Broadway, New York 27, 
N.Y 
Uruguay : Centro de Cooperacion Cientifica para la America Latina, Unesco, Bulevar 
 
example, there is the Division of 
Soil Conservation and Extension of 
the Department of Agriculture. 
This division, which has been 
modelled after the extension 
service of the United States 
Department of Agriculture, advises 
farmers and conducts test demon- 
  
(Individual sales). 
  
 
One of the * Associated 
Projects” aided by Unesco 
is the Deini State Pilot 
Project In Rural Adult 
Education. Above, stu- 
dents at the Alipur School 
for Village Leaders study 
iatge-acale models of ma- 
arial mosquitoes as part 
of their course In health 
and sanitary precautions, 
* 
The Vian! fundamental 
education project in Co- 
umbia was one of the 
firat Unesco “Associated 
Projects™. At Viani, 1 
was recognized that 2a 
programme must be desi 
gned primarily for rursl 
youths Detween the sges 
of 12 snd 15, such a» 
those shown on left af 
work n N veQeable 
garden. 
strations of techniques aimed at 
increasing food production, such 
as irrigation, crop rotation and 
terracing. 
India is represented so far by the 
Delhi State Pilot Project in Adult 
Education. Here, an Indian state 
has begun the task of improving 
living conditions in all 305 of its 
villages by training a corps of 250 
teachers to begin teaching approxi- 
mately 125,000 illiterates. The 
teachers, drawn from the villages 
themselves, are being trained at a 
college where surrounding villages 
are used for field work. Unesco 
has already provided aid for the 
programme. 
In the Philippines, the agency 
concerned is the National Federa- 
tion of Parent Teachers Associa- 
tions. The Federation is conduc- 
ting literacy classes for some 10,000 
pupils and, at the same time, it 
is striving to introduce better 
facilities for health, sanitation and 
recreation in rural villages. 
A Variety of Weapons 
RAZIL’S nation-wide adult edu- 
cation campaign is also inclu- 
ded. This campaign is attacking 
adult illiteracy with a variety of 
weapons — literacy classes, radio 
programmes, portable film projec- 
tors (there are 1,600 of these in 
operation) and mobile libraries 
mounted on motor vans, 
Another Latin American project 
is that of Viani in Colombia, 
which already has received the 
services of Unesco advisers. At 
Viani, education is being put to 
work to find solutions to the pro- 
blems of farming on mountainous 
land subject to erosion 
In Colombia’s neighbouring state, 
Ecuador, the rural cultural exten- 
sion service, organized in April, 
1950, is also included. Here, again, 
mobile missions are being used to 
bring educational facilities to 
regions with insufficient schools, 
always driving home the benefits 
the rural dweller will derive from 
his new knowledge in his daily life. 
Finally, there is the night school 
programme of the Dominican 
Republic, which is aimed mainly at 
reaching adult illiterates in towns 
and cities. 
These programmes are only a 
beginning. At present, there are 
75 more requests for inclusion in 
the “associated projects” system 
on hand and Unesco is in a posi- 
tion to service up to 100 projects 
this year. It has been pointed out, 
however, that requests for inclu- 
sion must be received by April 15, 
if the project is to be considered 
under the 1951 programme. 
publications | 
POLITICAL SCIENCE TO-DAY . 
Three years of painstaking 
research, analysis of surveys, dis- 
cussions and meetings with social 
scientists from almost every region 
in the world have resulted in pu- 
blication by Unesco of one of the 
most comprehensive studies in the 
field of social science : “Contem- 
porary Political Science". 
The 48 essays and surveys in 
this volume are grouped according 
to their content and deal with 
methodological questions, general 
reports of political science works 
in different countries, studies of 
literature devoted to a single poli- 
tical theory, surveys of writing on 
particular branches of research. 
everal essays on the teaching of 
political science in universities are 
also included. 
‘* CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL 
SCIENCE, A Survey of Methods, 
Research and Teaching '. 
(E.) 713 pages. (F) 740 pages $5.00, 
£1.5.0, F. 1.200. 
* 
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS 
IN EDUCATIONAL 
BROADCASTING 
“My brother have bought a new 
wireless, I and my brother have 
learnt a great deal of things we 
never knew before during our poor 
life — through it.” 
This testimonial, written by an 
African listener to the Lusaka 
radio station in North Rhodesia, 
sums up exactly what educators 
hope to achieve with radio in adult 
education. A recently-issued 
Unesco publication entitled “Radio 
in Fundamental Education” descri- 
bes how radio techniques have 
been adapted to meet varying con- 
ditions in 16 under-developed areas 
of the world. Sample scripts are 
included which show the right and 
the wrong way of aiming radio 
programmes at audiences in such 
countries, as well as a sample bud- 
get for an educational broadcasting 
service. 
“RADIO IN FUNDAMENTAL 
EDUCATION". 
(E) 152 pages $0.65, 4/-, F. 200. 
FOR EDUCATORS 
Recommendations passed by 13 
International Conferences on Pub- 
lic Education convened by the In- 
ternational Bureau of Education 
and Unesco are reproduced in a 
recent publication issued by the 
LB.E. Comprising in all some 350 
clauses, this volume thus consti- 
tutes a kind of international char- 
ter or code of public educafion. 
The recommendations were ap- 
proved by delegates of almost 
70 governments. 
“ INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES 
ON PUBLIC EDUCATION : COL- 
LECTED RECOMMENDATIONS ". 
(E. F.) 90 pages $0.85, 5.-, F. 250. 
* 
HEALTH AND WELFARE 
OF CHILDREN 
Thirty-eight countries recently 
responded to appeals for informa- 
tion on films produced in the fleld 
of health education. Unesco and 
the World Health Organization 
have now issued a catalogue of 
these films, produced either by pri- 
vate or public institutions, which 
deal with matters of child health 
and welfare, ; 
“CHILD WELFARE FILMS : An 
International Index of Films and 
Filmstrips on the Health and Wel- 
- fare of Children". 
(E) 213 pages $1.00, 5 -, F. 250. 
  
    

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

MARCH 1951 
WELSH SHARE IN STRUGGLE 
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS SHOWN 
BY TRAVELLING EXHIBIT 
  
people of Wales for human 
rights is the theme of an 
exhibit which will be part of 
the Welsh contribution to the 
Festival of Britain opening this 
May. 
The exhibition, which will tour 
major Welsh cities during the 
Festival, was organized by the 
Welsh Committee of the United 
Kingdom National Commission for 
Unesco and was recently inaugu- 
rated at the Temple of Peace in 
Cardiff. 
The first section of the exhi- 
bition shows the early history of 
Wales as a small nation struggling 
against internal difficulties and 
external threats. The distinct- 
ive form of Celtic Christianity 
emerges in photographs and mod- 
els of Welsh cathedrals, churches 
and monasteries, and visitors are 
shown how humane Christian 
values influenced peoples’ lives. 
It also shows how with the spread 
of mediaeval culture came the 
writing down of laws, the growth 
of Welsh scholarship and the par- 
ticipation of Wales in the pattern 
of Western European culture. 
T HE historical struggle of the 
Equality Before The Law 
HE next section describes so- 
| cial conditions existing in 
16th Century Wales, at the 
time of the political union with 
England. Starting with the strug- 
gle of men to establish their rights 
as persons before the law, which 
lead to the passing of the Habeas 
Corpus Act, it traces the history of 
this fight to the 18th Century and 
the declaration of the Rights of 
Man in France and America. The 
original draft of the Declaration 
of 1789 has been loand to the exhi- 
bition by the French Government. 
Through the work of Welshmen 
like David Williams and Richard 
Price came recognition of the 
principle that man has rights not 
as a citizen of a certain country 
but as a member of the human 
family. The section ends with 
illustrations of the fight for free- 
dom of speech and association, 
and the part played by such men 
as Robert Owen. 
Freedom Of Religion 
SECTION on religious tole- 
A rance traces the stages in the 
battle against religious dis- 
crimination, starting with the early 
Roman Catholic and Protestant 
martyrs of Wales, illustrating the 
use of the Welsh language in reli- 
gion, the growth of Non-Con- 
formity in Wales and the 19th 
Century struggle for Roman Cath- 
olic emancipation. 
World events are dealt with in 
another section devoted to the 
abolition of slavery, which tells 
the story of the negro slaves and 
  
the campaigns waged by Wilber- 
force and Abraham Lincoln. This 
is related to labour conditions in 
Wales at the time — the long 
working days, the use of children 
and women in coalmines, quarries 
and iron foundries under degrad- 
ing conditions. Examples are 
also given of primitive prison 
conditions in the 19th Century. 
Right To Education 
iE section on education illus- 
trates the work of the Welsh 
pioneers. The old monitorial 
schools and early teaching me- 
thods are compared with photo- 
graphs of modern schools, and the 
work of notable institutions in 
Welsh educational life to-day is 
described. 
The last section of the exhibi- 
tion shows the effects of intole- 
rance and persecution in modern 
times, and traces the steps leading 
to the acceptance by 48 nations of 
the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights just over two years 
ago. 
Welsh educational authorities 
have decided to use the material 
assembled for the exhibit to make 
film strips suitable for schools, and 
to publish an illustrated hand- 
book which will tell the story of 
the growth in Wales of the prin- 
ciples enshrined in the Declaration 
of 1948. 
UNESCO'S DIRECTOR- 
GENERAL TO VISIT 
SOUTH - EAST ASIA        
Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco’s 
o Director-General will leave Paris 
on March 7, on a three-weeks 
tour of Ceylon, Pakistan and India, as 
a State guest of these three countries. 
During his journey, he will address 
meetings of Unesco National Commis- 
sions at Colombo, Karachi and Delhi. 
In Ceylon, the Director-General will 
also inaugurate a Fundamental Educa- 
tion Centre at Minneriya, which is being 
started by Unesco under its Technical 
Assistance Programme. 
After attending the meeling of the 
Pakistan National Conunission for 
Unesco, M. Torres Bodet will probably 
visit Lahore, one of the country’s leading 
university centres. 
In India, M. Torres Bodet is to visit 
Unesco’s Field Science Co-operation 
Office, the Indian Government’s Rural 
Adult Education Centre near Delhi, and 
other cultural centres. Two days will 
then be devoled to meetings of the Na- 
tional Commission and its sub-commis- 
sions. 
M. Torres ‘Bodet will be accompanied 
during his visit by Professor Lionel 
Elvin, Ilead of Unesco’s Department of 
Education. 
  
    
  
  
          
  
MOBILIZING PUBLIC OPINION AGAINST RACIAL DISCRIMINATION : Dr. Paul Rivet, 
founder and honorary director of the Musée de I"'Homme, Paris, speaking at a debate on racial 
problems organized by the French National Commission for Unesco, at Limoges, last month. 
Shown in this photograph are (from left to right): Louis Francois, General-Secretary of the 
French National Commission for Unesco; M. SA Leiris, of the Musée de I'Homme ; Reverend 
Father Dubois, Director of the International Institute of Studies and Research in External Relations ; 
Dr. Paul Rivet, M. Fily-Dabo Sissoko, Deputy for the French Sudan ; Mr. Douglas Schneider, Head, 
Unesco's Dept. of Mass Communication ; Dr. Alfred Métraux, of Unesco's Dept. of Social Science, 
and M. Roger Caillois, Unesco's Dept. of Mass Communication. 
raf 
1869-1951 
HE death of André Gide on 
February 19, at the age of 82, 
has robbed world literature 
of one of its most distinguish- 
ed contemporary contributors. 
World-wide recognition of his 
works was expressed not long ago 
through the award of the Nobel 
prize. More recently, Paris paid 
tribute to the great writer when 
the presentation of his “Caves du 
Vatican” was given at the Comédie- 
Francaise. 
Sixty years ago, Gide's first books 
revealed to a discerning few, the 
restless searching of a mind {hat 
was to travel along many roads and 
absorb the most varied experiences. 
From his stimulating travels in 
North Africa he drew inspiration 
for his “NOURRITURES TERRES- 
TRES” (1897), followed by “L’Intmo- 
RALISTE” (1902) and “LE RETOUR DE 
L'ENFANT PRODIGUE” (1903). His 
unorthodox ideas stimulated many 
young artists at the beginning of 
the century, and two movements in 
particular which were to bring new 
life both to literature and the 
theatre the “NOUVELLE REVUE 
Francaise”, launched in 1909, and 
Jacques Copeau's Vieux-Colombier. 
After the first world war, Gide 
began to study social problems. 
The travel diaries written in 1927 
from material gathered during his 
travels in the Congo and Chad, 
created a stir because of his 
outspoken condemnation of certain 
abuses of that period. In 1936, he 
published two books on his expe- 
riences in Soviet Russia — “REe- 
TOUR DE L'U.R.S.8.” and “RETOU- 
CHES A MoN RETOUR” — both of 
which inspired widespread contro- 
versy. 
Gide strove endlessly to preserve 
the purity of the French language, 
but his ideas and philosophy were 
constantly enriched by contact with 
the works of foreign authors. He 
was proud to have introduced 
Kierkegaard to French readers. In 
addition to a voluminous output of 
creative writing, he wrote commen- 
taries on Dostoievsky and Oscar 
Wilde, and translated Rilke, Shakes- 
peare, Conrad, Blake, Whitman 
Tagore and Kafka. 
From the “Journal”, begun in 
1889 to his latest works, the 
writings of André Gide were a 
mirror of the constantly changing 
values of man’s social and moral 
evolution during these sixty odd 
years. 
At the Nobel prize-giving cere- 
mony on December 10,1947, M. Os- 
terling, permanent secretary to the 
Swedish Academy of Literature, 
described the personality of this 
“much discussed writer” in these 
words : 
“A very significant period in 
Europe’s spiritual history is reflect- 
ed in his works. More than any of 
his contemporaries, he was a man 
of contrasts, a Proteus whose ideas 
and opinions were in a continual 
state of flux. Hence, his writings 
are like an uninterrupted dialogue 
in which faith wages a ceaseless 
war against doubt, ascetism against 
un abundant love of life, discipline 
against a deep urge for liberty... 
“...Gide comes from a Protestant 
family, and although he revolted 
against his Puritan upbringing, he 
has remained all his life in contact 
with the fundamental problems of 
religion and at times, he has been 
able to express with a rare purity 
the message of Christian love... 
“His “immoralism”, so frequert- 
ly misunderstood by his critics is 
in reality mo more than the 
expression of his fervent desire for 
freedom [from any restraint of 
conscience... 
Page 3 — UNESCO COURIER 
VA 
  
Re ii 
“His philosophy is a ceaseless 
search for “the new”. He wants lo 
awaken and instil new ideas, to set 
new problems. Above all, the 
effect is to challenge his readers to 
be wholehearted supporters or 
opponents of his ideas. This 1s 
the secret of his greatness.” 
UNESCO CONFERENCE 
AGREES ON UNIFORM 
BRAILLE FOR BLIND 
OF ASIA AND AFRICA 
STANDARDIZED Braille al- 
phabet to serve five million 
blind persons in the Middle 
East, India, South-east Asia and 
Africa has been agreed upon at a 
Unesco Conference just concluded 
in Beirut, Lebanon. 
The alphabet, which was deve- 
loped by delegates, some of them 
blind, of eleven nations, is desi- 
gned to replace more than twenty 
local Braille scripts now in use 
in these regions. It closely follows 
the script which was worked out 
by Louis Braille in 1829, a system 
of 64 combinations of raised dots. 
The enlarged basic alphabet 
agreed upon at Beirut uses the 
original Braille symbols for cor- 
responding sounds in Asian and 
African languages, but adds signs 
for, extra letter-sounds in such 
languages as Arabic, Hindustani 
and Malay. In Asia it will cover 
all Braille writing with the 
exception of the ideographic lan- 
guages used in China, Korea, 
Indo-China and Japan. 
One of the effects of this 
agreement will be to increase the 
amount of literature available to 
blind readers - in these areas, 
according to Sir Clutha Macken- 
zie, Unesco’s Braille consultant. 
Sir Clutha, a New Zealander who 
was blinded in the Gallipoli 
campaign of World War I, ex- 
plained that previously publishers 
were reluctant to produce books 
in local Braille scripts which 
could reach only a limited au- 
dience. 
The Beirut conference, whose 
decisions are subject to final 
ratification by the Governments 
represented, follows nearly 18 
months of discussions and prepa- 
ratory work by Unesco with the 
object of creating a world alpha- 
bet in Braille for blind readers in 
all languages. The eleven na- 
tions taking part in it were : 
Ceylon, Egypt, French North 
Africa, Hashemite Jordan, India, 
Iraq, Lebanon, Malaya, Pakistan, 
Persia and Syria. 
Another conference will be held 
later this year to iron out local 
differences in the Braille scripts 
used by Spanish-speaking coun- 
tries.     

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 4 MARCH 1951 


### 72092: Art in a country schoolhouse

ART IN A COUNTRY SCHOOLHOUSE 
by Margaret GARDNER 
N a tiny Italian village, so 
obscure that it is not even 
listed in one standard Italian 
atlas, a country schoolteacher has 
developed the native capacity for 
artistic expression among. the 
children of peasants to so high a 
degree as to interest the educators 
of many countries. Their interest 
is not limited to the artistic 
productions of the children, though 
these are in some cases remarkable, 
for Maria Maltoni has used art 
primarily to encourage the total 
development of her pupils, to help 
make them good citizens and 
self-confident, well-adjusted adults. 
Signora. Maltoni, a gracious 
white-haired woman, has been 
teaching the peasant children of 
the Tuscany village of San Gersolé 
for some twenty years, with an 
inspired disregard for conventional 
teaching methods. 
Although it is only a few miles 
from Florence, that great art 
centre that still lives in the 
glorious past of the Renaissance, 
San Gersolé is far removed from 
the sophistication of the Florentine 
civilization. 
An exhibition held in Milan 
recently of the drawings and 
diaries of Signora Maltoni’s pupils, 
none of whom is over 12 years of 
age, drew wide attention in a 
country where artistic talent is 
taken almost for granted. These 
drawings and diaries were compiled 
into a book, edited by Signora 
Maltoni, “I Diari di San Gersolée” 
(Casa Editrice, “Il Libre” Florence 
1949), that has received such 
acclaim by educators and peda- 
gogues that it is being translated 
into many languages. 
Books Have Their Place 
IGNORA Maltoni has used 
drawing, not as an end in 
itself, but as a means to the 
self-development of her pupils. 
She believes that education which 
depends almost wholly on book- 
learning fails in its purpose, that 
an instructor must lead his pupils 
on to the path of a true knowledge 
of himself, of his abilities, and the 
best use of them. 
   
  
Books certainly find their place 
in her teaching, and when the time 
comes the books are perused with 
eagerness and not reluctantly. In 
the case of science teaching, for 
example, the children begin by 
observing the phenomena around 
them — the action of a see-saw, 
the formation of a flower. Search- 
ing deeply into the fascinating 
realities about them, learning for 
them begins with discovery. When 
a child discovers something, he has 
an impulse to share it with others 
— ito tell ‘what he has found-and 
what it means to him. Signora 
Maltoni’s pupils tell their stories 
about the world they are dis- 
covering largely the 
medium of drawing. 
In this combined process of 
observation and expression, the 
children also experience what has 
been called the divine discontent 
of creative workers. They must 
learn more, not on orders of a 
task-master, but ‘because their 
own drive for learning has been 
released. Thus they come to their 
through 
 
* 
The * Signora Maestra” 
pauses beside one of her 
pupils who is engaged in 
writing and illustrating his 
diary. To Signora Maltoni, 
the children’s drawings and 
writings reveal their degree 
of development and attain- 
ment. 
* 
San Gersole was one of the 
places visited last year by 
the Unesco Radio Caravan 
which toured France, ltaly 
and Switzerland to record 
the story of life in a number 
of children's educational 
and rehabilitation centres. 
Below, Signora Maltoni 
(right) is being interviewed 
‘through an interpeter by 
Marjorie Banks (centre, 
holding microphone) of the 
British Broadcasting Cor- 
poration. 
Signora Maltoni 
aims to train a 
child's concentra- 
tion, observation 
and expression. 
Sometimes she 
gives a child or a 
group of children 
such a subject as 
“birds”. After ob- 
serving nests and 
the movement of 
birds, the children 
draw them and 
write about them. 
These observations 
are then discussed 
in class (left). 
   
  
  
  
  
    
   
   
  
books with passion and to their 
teacher as a kindly guide. 
Thought, Hand And Eye 
N a letter explaining her 
approach, Signora Maltoni 
says : “Drawing more quickly 
produces attentiveness because, in 
a short time, one can have a 
——— - 
complete vision of the results 
while, in regard to written compo- 
sition, this is harder to achieve. 
The spontaneous description of 
what the children see and know 
precedes the study of their books 
and lessons; and the schoolteacher 
only intervenes when necessary to 
broaden ‘and correct what the 
children have set forth from their 
own knowledge. 
“The stories of the most. impor- 
     
With rockets roaring into the air and wheels bursting in a shower of coloured stars, this drawing 
by a child in the fifth grade shows the successful methods of teaching used by Signora Malton. 
All the essential details have been clearly observed and, as usual in children's drawings of this 
kind, the figures drawn in profile precisely depict purpose and action, while the whole picture 
conveys the excitment of the brilliant and noisy fireworks display. 
tant daily happenings that each 
child tells me every day permit me, 
as every ‘teacher must, to learn all 
about them, their minds and 
surroundings, and also make it 
possible for me to influence them 
in their family situation. Thus 
educational activity can be carried 
out tactfully on the basis of the 
precise facts rather than that of 
general theories. Both drawing 
and composition are effective 
means of expression that permit 
me, among other things, to learn 
the nature of individual characters 
and the degree of mental develop- 
ment in every phase of its forma- 
tion. By means of drawing, I am 
able to teach precision and sureness 
of thought, hand and eye.” 
Learning is more of a game than 
a task in Maria Maltoni’s one-room 
schoolhouse. Situated upstairs in 
her own home, the room is bright 
and cheerful, its shelves laden with 
books and children’s classics, its 
walls covered with her pupil's 
drawings. 
No Rigid Schedule 
ESPITE her preoccupation with 
art, other subjects are not 
neglected in her programme, 
History, as she teaches it, becomes 
a fascinating story. Her teaching 
of the classics has made them alive 
and popular. Despite her scorn 
for standard textbooks, she uses 
them when necessary. There is no 
rigid schedule in her school day. 
Each pupil pursues his individual 
tasks, undisturbed by his comrades. 
While one is occupied drawing 
from live models such as insects or 
plants (the children are taught 
that all living creatures must later 
be released to freedom), another 
will be intent upon writing his 
observations and thoughts of the 
previous day; while still another is 
reciting poetry. 
This concept of education which 
stresses the moulding of individual 
character, as opposed to that based 
upon a conglomerate accumulation 
of bits of knowledge, has long since 
been adopted in the most advanced 
schools of great urban centres. 
 Signora Maltoni has proved that it 
is workable in the villages of the 
world, even in poor ones where the 
schooling period is limited. She is 
convinced that it is the only system 
whereby peasant children, whose 
average formal schooling is res- 
tricted to five years, can achieve a 
foundation of learning, and a 
lasting love for “education” as a 
part of their lives. 
* 
UNESCO RESEARCH MISSION 
STUDIES EDUCATION NEEDS 
OF NEAR EAST VILLAGES 
D R. Harold B. Allen, Director of 
Education of the Near East 
Foundation in New York, has been 
appointed leader of an Unesco mission 
now conducting research in three 
villages — two in Egypt and one in 
Iraq — to develop simple textbooks 
and other reading matter, films, film- 
strips and other educational maferials 
for literacy training in Arabic-speak- 
ing countries. 
Dr. Allen will head an international 
mission whose members also include 
Iraqi and Egyptian educators and a 
representative of the World Health 
Organization. The main objective is 
to help literacy teachers increase their 
stock of Arabic materials for teaching 
Platgrares ard improve these materials 
y introduction of new techni 
and methods. 4 ques 
ew reading materials must be pro- 
duced on the basis of a simple ca. 
bulary and simple construction and 
must be such as to arouse the interest, 
and satisfy the curiosity and need of 
the reader. 
The mission to Egypt and Iraq is 
co-operating with campaigns already 
begun by the governments of these 
two countries to raise living standards.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

MARCH 1951 Page 5 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 71748: International team sets up work camp for Assam's educational reconstruction with aid from UNESCO

International Team Sets Up Work Camp 
For Assam’s Educational Reconstruction 
With Aid From 
  
and means of communication. 
  the following article. 
Unesco 
n August 15 last, the worst earthquake of modern times ravaged 
0 the province of Assam in north east India. 
floods that followed caused tremendous damage to homes, schools 
As a token of sympathy for the plight of. Assam’s earthquake victims, 
Unesco's Executive Board voted $15,000 for educational relief assistance. 
Two-thirds of this sum is intended for the relief fund of the Governor 
of Assam, earmarked for textbooks and other school supplies. The 
remaining $5,000 is being used by the Service Civil International Organ- 
ization to help in the organization of voluntary work camps for the repair 
of damaged schools and educational buildings in the devastated area. 
The aims and work of the Service Civil International, and in particular 
the efforts now being made by one of its international teams of volun- 
teers to aid the rehabilitation programme in Assam, are described in 
  
Earth tremors and the 
  
Ast month, a middle-aged 
building worker named Léon 
Bensimon left his home in 
Morocco to take up a new job 
6,000 miles away in north east In- 
dia. As a member of the Service 
Civil International organization, 
Bensimon had already put his 
experience as a worker in reinfor- 
ced concrete to use at work caraps 
in France and Switzerland, but the 
job awaiting him in India is undou- 
btedly the biggest he has helped 
to tackle so far. 
When he arrives in the hill 
country of Assam, he will join a 
Service Civil International team 
which has already begun helping 
in the reconstruction of homes 
and schools damaged by the devas- 
tating earthquake which occurred 
there last August. 
Like Léon Bensimon, other volunteers 
are due to leave different parts of 
Europe for Assam shortly, to join the 
international team which already in- 
cludes a Swiss, a Dane, an American, 
and two British as well as Assamese 
members. 
The task facing the authorities in 
Assam, with whom the team is co- 
operating, is a formidable one. ‘When 
the earthquake occurred on August 15, 
hills crumbled, and giant boulders 
crashed down slopes carrying away 
houses and blocking roads. Riverbeds 
heaved up and rivers changed their 
courses. 
For two or three days, the river Su- 
bansiri was blocked by boulders high 
up in the mountains. When the rocks 
gave way, a great wall of water swept 
down the river, flooding the region of 
North Lakhimpur. Thousands of people 
in the low-lying areas were caught by 
the flood, and their houses were wash- 
ed away. 
Educational Losses 
ANY educational institutions were 
damaged or destroyed. Dr. A. 
Wolsky, Principal Scientific Of- 
ficer of Unesco's Science Co-operation 
Office for South Asia, in Delhi, reported 
after visiting the area that he had per- 
sonally seen between 40 and 50 damag- 
ed schools. cultural and religious in- 
stitutions. 
For several days after the earth- 
quake communications were comple- 
tely cut with the rest of India. ra- 
dually, relief supplies began to arrive 
and the Indian Government, together 
with relief organizations, began to dis- 
tribute food, milk, clothing and tools. 
At that time, a small team of Euro- 
pean Service Civil International volun- 
teers was working in another part of 
India. Its members were later sent up 
to Assam where they at first assisted 
with the emergency relief. 
Today, they have begun work on two 
reconstruction projects near Pathali- 
pam, where a relief camp of bamboo 
huts and tents has been established for 
homeless people. 
The first work camp project is the 
construction of a primary school in a 
newly opened reserve forest about three 
miles from the camp. As villagers are 
re-settling the area, a school building 
is badly needed. 
A second project, in the same area, 
will provide a home for widows and 
orphans at present living in the tem- 
porary camp. Plans provide for a per- 
manent centre to include living quar- 
ters, a dispensary, an office, a school, 
a workshop, kitchens and bathrooms, A 
third will probably be the rebuilding of 
the Girls High School at Lakhimpur, 
some 25 miles to the South West, which 
was completely destroyed. 
Working Against Time 
HE urgency of reconstruction tasks 
T in northern Assam is increased 
by the approach of the monsoon 
which is due in March. With the huge 
displacements of land caused by the 
carthquake, fresh landslides may be 
started by the rains and other commu- 
nities endangered. Villages have had 
to be moved from the plains to new 
areas on higher ground where sites 
must be cleared In the forests and 
construction begun as rapidly as pos- 
sible. 
The Service Civil International team 
which is co-operating in this work, is 
now being joined by. Indian volunteers, 
both from Assam and other parts of 
the country. 
This vital task in Assam provides the 
Service Civil International with a new 
opportunity for furthering its primary 
aim—the aim of all international work 
camp organizations—which is to create 
goodwill between peoples through the 
  
  
    
   
   
   
  
   
 
- 
medium of voluntary manual work. 
The Service was founded on this basis 
soon after the First World War, when 
French and German volunteers and 
other natjonals worked together to re- 
house peasants in the district of Ver- 
dun. As the idea spread, camps were 
set up in Switzerland, France, England, 
Norway and other countries to help the 
  
{) The school that "sank ™ 
escaped senous damage The light 
away hundreds of trees from the © 
All that remaing of the schoolhouse 
patches on the 
Chly-forested slopes 
—- 
Mills 
(centre) at Denning, in the Mishmi Hills 
Nn he Dachground mark the places where rementdous landsiides lore 
#2 The school that *' walked": At! North Lakhimpur, young students rebuild 
The teachers’ house (left) 
their school with malerial they carried from he former site one mile xway 
  
Ranganadi Bridge, (above) 
near the town of North Lak. 
Nmpur, was swept! away by i 
a giant wall of walter alter 
he river, Diocked by Doyl- 
ders In the hills. had burst . 
ts way frees This 1.100 l 
foo! bridge was of vial ; 
importance, being the long- 4 
est in Assam 
* 
Great Hasures (eft) appears | 
od In felds after the first 
Aseam earthquake shocks 1 
' 
MM * 
Emergency rele! mensures 
for the people of Assam 
mciuded the disinbution 
! 
of 100d, clothing and tools, 
The United Nations Interna- ‘ 
tonal Children's Emargen- u 
cy Fund (UNICEF) set ‘ 
supplies of milk, being R 
distributed here by relief 4 
Workers 
VNR 
The Second “World victims of disasters, 
War limited work camp activities, but 
since 1945 the movement has expanded 
rapidly. ) 
¢¢ Education For Peace” 
HE guiding spirit for such activities 
was recently expressed by the 
Organization's Joint International 
Secretary in a letter to Unesco’s Re- 
construction Service. She wrote: “Be- 
sides the contributions which these 
camps can make to the material rehabi- 
litation of Assam, wwe believe they have 
another value, more difficult to define 
and to assess... 
“The small S.C.I. team which has 
heen working in India since February 
1950 has already had a number of 
Indian volunteers working with it; all... 
have stressed the same two ideas: first 
the value to them personally of this new 
experience of voluntary manual work 
undertaken in a spirit of disinterested 
service together with men and women 
of other nationalities, other creeds; and 
secondly, the effect that the presence 
and the work of the team had on the 
people among whom they were work- 
ing, the new sense of a human solidarity 
which has no regard for differences of 
race, nationality religious or polilical 
creeds, profession or social class. 
“It is because we are convinced that 
work camps can have a very real edu- 
cational value and that they can be a 
positive and effective ‘education for 
peace’ that we are particularly happy 
to have the support of Unesco for the 
work camps in Assam.”

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 6 
  
  
TEACHERS SPEAK...Professor Beatrice Hyslop, (left) Chairman of the Committee 
on Educational Reconstruction, Hunter College Chapter of the American Association 
of University Professors, receives Gift Coupons from a Unesco Reconstruction liaison 
officer. The Hunter College Chapter sent these coupons—the first to go abroad—to 
the University of Vienna. 
N oblong piece of red and green paper, with the serial number, 
A-00001, was airmailed recently from New York to Sardinia, Italy. 
- Symbolically, it marked the opening of a new bridge designed 
to span the gap between the world’s generosity and the world’s need. 
This initial “bridge crossing” took place when the first national 
" campaign to put the new Unesco Gift Coupon Plan into effect was 
Unesco Gift Coupon Number One, 
purchased as a token by a staff member, went to Father Solina’s Boys’ 
Town, on the island of Sardinia, and one of the best known of Italy’s 
The unusual “currency” will enable the war- 
orphaned young citizens to buy $10 worth of books, laboratory appa- 
ratus or other much needed school equipment. 
The “generosity” approach to the new bridge has been opened 
to all organized groups who are prepared to share in international 
launched in the United States. 
children’s communities. 
educational assistance. Such groups 
will become the medium through which 
many people, young and old, will be 
able to make their personal contribu- 
tions to Unesco assistance projects. 
The bridge itself is “constructed” of 
two simple elements: a Gift Stamp and 
a Gift Coupon. Gift Stamps, printed 
in small denominations — such as 
25 cents in the United States — are 
issued in booklets containing 40 red, 
perforated stamps. Individual Stamps 
are sold by organizations to members, 
friends and neighbours. Organizations 
then convert the proceeds from each 
booklet into a Gift Coupon of equal 
value. 
Gift Coupons, in denominations of 
$10 — or the equivalent in other cur- 
rencies — are a special kind of interna- 
tional “cheque” or money-order. They 
can be used instead of scarce “hard” 
currency to pay for urgently needed 
materials and equipment of an educa- 
tional, scientific or cultural type by 
placing orders with authorized suppliers 
in any of a dozen countries. 
Partners In Aid 
N the United States, voluntary groups 
and organizations establish contact 
with the Unesco Gift Coupon Office in 
the new United Nations building on the 
Manhattan bank of New York’s East 
River. An important aspect of the plan 
is the provision by Unesco of informa- 
tion on special needs in the general field 
of education. In thus pinpointing their 
objective, groups become active partners 
in a Unesco assistance project and 
thereby help to educate members and 
friends in the purposes of the United 
Nations and Unesco. 
Once a particular group sells iis 
consignment of Gift Stamps, it ser.ds 
the proceeds by cheque or money-o:tder 
to the Unesco New York Office; it 
receives in return Gift Coupons %o the 
when they have the money, they are 
too often blocked by currency restric- 
tions. More than half the children of 
the world are without the opportunity 
for schooling, or where there are 
schools, there is only the most primitive 
equipment. 
“Again, apart from the ordinary 
school room,” said Dr. Evans, “there is 
little or mo equipment for vocational 
training. No metal or wood-work tools, 
no sewing machines, no balances, glass- 
ware or other laboratory material, no 
audio-visual aid, often, no textbooks. 
  
     
same value. The group forwards 
the Coupons directly to the person, 
group or institution that it has selected 
from Unesco’s lists. The recipient then 
purchases the needed equipment. 
To Do A UN. Job 
HE national campaign to enlist 
American generosity in Unesco’s 
programme of educational rehabilitation 
by means of the Gift Coupon Plan, “got 
off to a fine start,” according to Dr. Lu- 
ther Evans, head of the United States 
Library of Congress, and member of 
the Executive Board of Unesco. 
“The programme is, in my view,’ 
said Dr. Evans, “one of the most prac- 
tical and workable plans yet devised to 
bring the man in the street right into 
the work of a United Nations agency. 
It is simple in its conception and in its 
operation, “It makes me really proud 
that the United States is the pioneer 
country in undertaking the plan”. 
“For Americans, I think the Gift 
Coupon is a wonderful opportunity, 
not just to send gifts to war-torn 
and wunder-privileged countries”, said 
Dr. Evans, “but to do it in a way that 
brings people together across oceans 
and frontiers to do a United Nations job 
together. It is really. tailor-made for 
many kinds of group activity and 
provides a first-class mediun whereby 
We can achieve Unesco’s ideal of 
enlibling peoples to speak to peoples, 
wherever they may be. 
“Apart from the vast areas of the 
“world devastated by World War II, 
there are, as we know, large groups of 
people in overseas areas, who might 
certainly be described as under-privi- 
leged, to put it mildly. 
“These people want to help them- 
selves, but they cannot do that unless 
they have the tools for the job. Even 
 
This kind of deficiency goes on right 
up to the university and research levels. 
“But mow, by means of the Gift 
Coupons, we can all help. Above all, 
it is the personal contact made pos- 
sible by the Plan, which is so important. 
There are certainly millions of persons 
in the United States who want to help 
others in a personal way —it is what 
one might call international goodwill on 
the individual level as distinct from the 
government level. And, from my talks 
on the subject with my fellow members 
of Unesco’s Executive Board, I know 
there is a good deal of interest in the 
plan on the part of other nations.” 
New York to Vienna 
T= honour of selling the first Gift 
Stamps in the United States and 
sending the first Coupons abroad went 
to the Hunter College Chapter of the 
American Association of University 
Professors. Ten $10 Coupons were 
addressed to Dr. Franz Faltis, of the 
Pharmaceutical and Chemical Institute 
of the University of Vienna. In a letter 
accompanying the 8100 worth of 
negotiable Coupons, Miss Beatrice 
  
EVERYTOWN Highuchool Science Clb decided 
to help o college In Burma which seeded to 
3150 microscopes. Unesco sent photos and 
information ples 30 bookies of Gift Stamps. 
MARC; |¢ 
Unesco’s Gift Coupon Plan — ‘A Bridge 
Peoples” — Successfully Launched in 
  
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
  
..TO TEACHERS. The Universit ol 
benefit from the launching of the lnes 
still faces tremendous post-war recenst 
American teachers will provide equipmel 
the Universi 
& gs 
WO 
THE SCIENCE CLUB wert inde schion 
bought of least 
1200 had Been wold 
Hyslop, of the Hunter Col- 
lege Chapter, wrote: 
“We are glad that Unesco 
has provided us with a way 
to help professional people 
secure much needed equip- 
ment without having tc 
purchase and ship it our- 
selves. You have listed 
laboratory glassware as a 
priority need with Unesco. 
We would be more than 
willing for you to use the 
Coupons for such a purpose. 
“It would give us added 
pleasure if you would, when acknow- 
ledging receipt of the Coupons, tell us 
something about the participation of 
your own Faculty in efforts of Unesco 
to ‘build peace in the minds of men’. 
We teachers have great responsibilities, 
have we not? Pershaps we can better 
discharge them by all of us working 
together. We wish you happiness and 
success in this, our common cause.” 
A number of important American 
organizations are giving their support 
to the plan, Among them are the Gen- 
eral Federation of Women’s Clubs, the 
American Friends Service Committee 
and, first to adopt it on a state-wide 
basis, the New York State Association 
of Classroom Teachers. 
One of the important organizations 
participating in the United States is 
the World Student Service Fund. The 
Fund has announced the adoption of 
the Gift Plan as a fund-raising medium 
for a national campaign in American 
colleges and universities this Spring. 
The Fund is an activity of the World. 
Student Relief, an international non- 
governmental organization with its 
headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, 
which has long co-operated with 
HOW THE 
| = 4 yh 
i wi { 
ey 
| #5 
  
one of Whe rediandohite Gr Stamps. 
Mort yhodents of vars 
In an $v 
The Cheb sant Unesco oa 5100 moneyordir yn 
mad received 30 510 Ussice GF Coupons made out to the Buri

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

RC: 1951 
ie Between 
the U.S. 
sift of Vienna, first educational institution to 
> Lnesco Gift Coupon Plan in the United States, 
‘ecenstruction problems. Gift coupons sent by 
|uyment needed by staff and students (above) in 
niersity laboratories. 
Unesco and its Reconstruction pro- 
gramme. : 
“A Human Scheme’ 
HE United States is the first member 
nation of Unesco to launch a natio- 
nal campaign in support of the Gift 
Coupon Plan, but Unesco expects the 
plan to be operating in several other 
member countries before the end of the 
year, . 
The plan, as Dr. John W. Taylor, 
“Unesco’s Deputy Director General points 
out “is a human scheme where every 
little helps.” 
“The business of building a world in 
which all men can enjoy a full and 
happy life,” he says, “is the respons- 
ibility of specialists and experts who 
must of necessity think in terms of very 
broad plans stretching over a long 
period of time. The people who are 
engaged upon this important task cannot 
hope to deal with all individual needs. 
“That is where the Unesco Gift Cou- 
pon Plan comes in. By taking part in 
it through mormal group activities, an 
individual — any individual — can do 
something personal for someone less 
fortunate—something which will make 
the buyer of Stamps or Coupons, feel 
that he is contributing in a direct, pers- 
onal and practical way to the cause of 
international understanding.” 
  
E UNESCO GIFT COUPON PLAN 
  
=\ 
pylons Mighuhoo! 
bb Tow weeks oY 
ror and by mtg 
r Barmese college. 
ams together with oo letter 
THESE the Science Club sant an to 
    
§ S
i
l
a
 
ath 
ag he 
wekoawn fellow students sro he world they 
wold er have he microscopes they lecied 
world-wide appeal on behalf of 
340,000 Greek children, whose 
lives have been uprooted by nine years 
of war, occupation and civil strife. 
People in many countries responded 
generously, and thousands of dollars, 
pounds and francs swelled Unesco’s 
reconstruction fund, ear-marked for 
Greece. 
E ARLY last year, Unesco made a 
In Denmark, however, a large volun- 
tary relief society called Mellemfol- 
keligt Samvirke decided to give more 
than money. With Unesco’s support, 
a team of Danish students, all skilled 
builders, was dispatched to Greece as 
a living symbol of postwar co-operation 
between peoples. 
Last September, this team of ten 
young Danes arrived in the Greek vil- 
lage of Agnandero, near Mount Olym- 
pus. With spade and mattock, trowel 
and hammer, they went straight to 
work on the schoolhouse —the school- 
house which had been started long 
before the war and never finished. 
To finance this direct contribution, 
Mellemfolkeligt Samvirke joined hands 
with Denmark’s National Commission 
for Unesco to launch a unique fund-rais- 
ing project among the school children 
of the country. The Danish Minister 
of Education opened the campaign with 
a radio address at Christmas. 
Brick-Buying Marathon 
N Denmark, some 130,000 boys and 
girls are buying a brick a week to 
build the school at Agnandero. The 
bricks are made of paper, marked 
“UNESCO”, and each costs 20 ore 
—about two cents. When a Danish 
pupil buys a brick, he pastes it on a 
diagram of the real school his fellow 
Danes are building in Greece. 
By selling something like one million 
paper “bricks”, Mellemfolkeligt Sam- 
virke aims to raise 125,000 kroner by 
the first of May, 1951. The Danish 
government has promised to match this 
sum, making a total target of 250,000 
kroner (over $25,000) to cover the cost 
of real bricks —and tiles and wood and 
other supplies— for the school in 
Agnandero. 
Since the drive began over 500 pri- 
mary and secondary schools all over 
Denmark have joined the brick-buying 
marathon. As late as mid-February, 
an average of half a dozen new schools 
daily were applying. 
Building a schoolhouse in Greece is 
all in the year’s work for Mellemfol- 
keligt Samvirke, whose name roughly 
translated means “Working-Together- 
Among-People”. 
itself was still Axis-occu- 
pied in 1944, when a number of civic- 
Denmark 
  
 
TWO WEEKS LATER the thick envelope arrived 
oto mall hatchronfed laboratory sear Rangoon, 
ager popls malled Be coupes te 
avthorised Unesco  wppiier of  microscopm 
liberation. 
minded groups came together to lay 
plans for helping Europe rebuild after 
Hardly had the fighting 
stopped in spring of 1945 when the 
newly-formed Mellemfolkeligt Samuvirke 
sent 35 nurses up to the far north of 
Norway to aid returning refugees. Then 
it began sending out teams of volunteer 
 
Page 7 — UNESCO COURIER 
& 
A 
aE 
gether-Among-People” group began 
looking for longer-range reconstruction 
tasks. Unesco’s appeal for Greece gave 
the cue that led to Agnandero school- 
house. 
As they paste their paper “bricks” in 
place, Danish children not only help 
Unesco’s work; they learn about the 
&* PAPER BRICKS 
bought by Dan- 
ish school 
children (left) 
will provide the 
children of 
Agnandero, 
Greece, with a 
much-needed 
school. 
REAL BRICKS 
being laid by a 
team of young 
Danish stu- 
dents at Agnan- 
dero (below) de- 
monstrate the 
practical results 
of postwar co- 
operation bet- 
ween peoples. 
 
workers for actual pick-and-shovel 
reconstruction. 
¢¢ First-Aid >’ Action 
Sues the war ended, this organization 
has sent over 900 young Danes 
abroad to do practical relief. work 
in devastated areas —including former 
enemy countries. In Finland, they 
built emergency housing; in Holland 
they helped patch up the fearful war 
damage. In Austria and Poland, they 
fed thousands of destitute children. 
After several years of such “first 
aid” action, the Danish “Working-To- 
WORKS 
- 0) 4 
» 1 ya 
\ - g \ Ih oo» 
rr —— va St 
» ” _— 
Fa a a 
— - ab 
ry | 5 ar r 
R | 
all oi \ 
te ~~ 4 
ONE DAY ¢ large poaching case arrived... When 
he Burmese viudents recovered fram the hell 
of hale sew gift, they wrote letters of 
hare LN) Everytown St ence Cleb, 
United Nations and the building of a 
peaceful world. 
“Why must we Danes help Unesco?” 
reads a question under the schoolhouse 
diagram. And the answer : “ Because 
our well-equipped schools put us in a 
better position than millions of other 
children in the world”. 
Judging by the rate Unesco “bricks” 
are selling in Denmark today, Danish 
children must already know this lesson 
by heart. And from Greece, the 
Danish team writes home: “It won’t be 
long before the schoolhouse we're build- 
ing here in Agnandero is (finished. 
Now we're wondering, where can 
we go next..?” 
  
EVERYTOWN guchly repled and 0 Degen 
¢ Flourishing correpordence from which will 
vipen lating  friendihipn ameng future ool 
nage In the ove world” of science

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 8 
MOTURIKI: 
decision taken around a conference table at Noumea, 
New Caledonia, in May 1949 has wrought a peaceful 
revolution in the lives of the 500 or so inhabitants of 
Moturiki, a speck of an island in the Fijian archipelago. 
At that time, the Research Council of the South Pacific 
Commission approved a plan, later approved by the Com- 
mission itself, to single out communities in each territory 
within the Commission's area of action for intensive expe- 
rimentation in methods of raising living standards with 
the human and natural resources at hand. 
The South Pacific Commission set up in 1947 by the 
governments of Australia, France, the Netherlands, New 
Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States, is a 
regional organization whose aim is to promote the econo- 
mic and social welfare and advancement of the peoples 
of non-self-governing territories in the South Pacific 
Region. 
To launch its community development plan, the Com- 
mission approached the Government of Fiji and asked it 
to select a community where a pilot project could be 
As a result, the Director of Education for 
Fiji visited the island of Moturiki to explore the possibi- 
lities of centering the scheme there. 
carried out. 
  
AN ISLAND 
» 
THE PEOPLE: Typical islanders of the Fijian Archipelago, these two men are crossing in a punt 
from Moturiki to the larger island of Ovalau, the nearest market and centre of communications. 
The man holding lhe tiller is the boat's captain. 
After the purpose of the project had 
been explained to them, the people of 
the island expressed their apprecia- 
tion of the opportunity thus offered, 
and promised full co-operation. 
ALL-FIJIAN TEAM 
OTURIKI, which thus became 
the first area to be selected 
under the regional programme, 
proved to be an ideal site. Only five 
and one-half miles long and never 
more than two miles wide, it lies off 
the Fiji island of Ovalau. There were 
only 527 persons in its ten villages, 
and its small area and population 
enabled it to come under the 
educator’s “microscope” without any 
great difficulty. 
This “pilot project in community 
development”, as it was termed by the 
Commission, began slowly. Its prin- 
“cipal objective was not to “develop” 
Moturiki, but to test methods of 
improving facilities for education, 
health, sanitation, house - building, 
agriculture, land - utilization 
general self-help, so that they could 
be put to work more. efficiently and 
on a larger scale elsewhere in the 
South Pacific region. 
~ Although an advisory group was set 
and 
up, consisting of the Directors of 
Education, Medical Services and Agri- 
culture for Fiji, the Southern District 
Commissioner and a representative of 
the Fijian Affairs Board, the actual 
work on the island was done by a 
team made up entirely of Fijians. 
In February, 1950, the team arrived 
on Moturiki. Headed by Eliki Seru, 
a 32-year-old supervising teacher, it 
consisted of a nurse, a forest guard, 
two instructors to teach handicrafts 
and house building, and a health 
inspector. 
ISLAND LIFE RECORDED 
TS first task was to survey all 
aspects of life on the island. 
With painstaking care, the team 
examined in great detail the health, 
housing, agriculture, education, forest- 
ry, women’s occupations and social 
conditions on Moturiki. 
The housing survey, for example, 
included the dimensions of each house, 
the number of occupants, the condition 
of foundations, flooring, walls, ceiling, 
drainage and ventilation, and the 
nature of the water supply. In all, 
27 aspects of life on the island were 
analysed and recorded. 
MARCH 195i 


### 70940: Moturiki: an island "laboratory" for community development in the South Pacific

" LABORATORY " FOR COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC 
 EA ae t Wa ti. il Ta 
ISLAND HOMES: Native houses in Nasesara, the principal village on Moturiki. Under the 
development project a set of dwellings is being rehabilitated as a model for housing improvement 
on the island. 
Communications between Moturiki 
and the outside world — formerly, the 
island’s only link to the mainland 
was an oar-powered ferry which took 
one hour-and-a-half to make the trip 
— were facilitated by the installation 
of radio telephone apparatus. Within 
ten hours, islanders had cut two 
40-foot masts from the bush, raised an 
aerial, and the radio was installed in 
working condition. 
By June, the survey was completed 
and the team returned to the main- 
land to report to the commission’s 
advisory group. For two months, a 
programme of village development 
was hammered out and then, in 
August, the actual work began. 
These are the main points of the 
programme designed to make Moturiki 
a better place to live in : 
1. A village development fund, 
financed by an interest-free loan of 
£500 from the South Pacific Commis- 
sion, has been set up after the 
islanders voted its acceptance. 
2. To increase Moturiki’s efficiency 
as a food producer, cocoanut groves 
are being rehabilitated, a crop of yams 
has been planted and three young 
men from the island have been sent 
to the mainland to learn livestock 
management. In addition, a plough, a 
harrow and a pair of bullocks have 
been sent to Moturiki for experiments 
in rice-growing. 
3. The team’s forest guard has 
begun a campaign to stop islanders 
from burning their land to clear it, 
and, at the same time, a cutting and 
thinning system has been begun to 
turn the forests into a profitable 
source of firewood. 
4. The Fiji government’s medical 
department has agreed to provide 
material needed to build a combined 
maternity home and clinic at the 
village of Nasauvuki. Moturiki’s 
population was also examined for 
tuberculosis and 19 of the islanders 
were sent to a mainland hospital for 
further observation. 
5. Experiments are now under way 
to test reed insulation as a means of 
protecting dwellers of iron-roofed 
houses from the sun. At the same 
time, work has started on the digging 
of bore-hole latrines to improve 
sanitation. 
ACTION BY THE PEOPLE 
Te re: its work, the de- 
velopment team has taken care 
to observe local customs and not 
to force any changes which the people 
themselves did not want. The team’s 
work is discussed by a Moturiki De- 
velopment Committee headed by the 
island’s chief. : 
While progress is being made in 
Moturiki, the South Pacific Commis- 
sion has other projects geared towards 
raising the standard of living, health 
and education of the inhabitants of 
other Pacific islands under way. 
Some are purely for research pur- 
poses; others are pilot projects. In 
general, they are co-operative ende- 
avours between the Commission, the 
various governments concerned and 
the people themselves — with the 
accent on action by the people. 
These projects range from the con- 
trol of tropical weeds and insect pests 
to the development of new educational 
techniques and facilities, and from the 
development of island fisheries to the 
control of tropical disease and tuber- 
culosis. 
Such work is opening up a new 
phase in regional co-operation to raise 
living standards in an area where 
differences between cultures, relative 
economic and social development and 
economic potential although often 
wide, are few enough to permit a 
regional approach to many of the 
problems of development. 
  
NATIVE LEADERS: Members of the team of trained native leaders working on Motu. In A HEALTH PROBLEM: Neman: Drig. the Pilot Project team's hygiene and health leader 
(left) pointing out the breeding places of Hlarlasis parasites in a drain close 10 the Nasauvuki 
village school. As part of the health programme for Motusiki, the isam’s assistant nurse 
is also making special efforts 10 deal with ska disease problems on the Island. 
this photo (from left 10 right) are Nemani Dry, Fllarlasis Inspector ; Palaresia Vosavalarau 
Mandicrafts and HomecraMt Instructress : Eiki Seru, Team Leader; Lusiana Bola, Nurse ; 
Aporosa Duwal, House Buliding Instructor ; and Salas Seryu, Agricultural assistant.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

MARCH 1951 Page 9 — UNESCO COURIER 


### 70941: Giving science a voice

GIVING SCIENCE A VOICE 
IBS Ei 1 
Rt AE 193) & E 
HERE was launched recently in 
Paris a French Association of 
Science Writers—the fifth such 
national group of special writers in this 
fleld. The oldest is the National Asso- 
ciation of Science Writers in the U.S.A.; 
the second is the British; and then 
follow the Danish and Austrian. 
In welcoming the French Association 
to Unesco House, where it held its first 
public meeting, Unesco's Director- 
General, M. Torres Bodet, reminded the 
writers that the scientist, whatever his 
discipline, is today at the heart of all 
progress. There is hardly a fleld of 
human activity unaffected by scientifle 
advance. During the last few decades, 
the consequences of this scientific mo- 
vement have not only remodelled our 
whole lives, but have also obliged us 
to restate and to reconsider all our 
problems. Religion, morals, our con- 
ceptions of the world have been largely 
reshaped. 
Scientific =~ knowledge, continued 
M. Torres Bodet, has therefore a key 
part to play in the formation of modern 
man and in the most urgent problem of 
our day: the reconciliation of men and 
the protection of peace. Science, 
through the riches it creates, can con- 
tribute in a fundamental manner to 
satisfy the basic needs of mankind and, 
in so doing, it works for peace. Further, 
the universality of the scientific mind, 
the generality of its methods, and the 
unbiassed enthusiasm that research 
work engenders, all these help to build 
a common bridge between men. 
Eyes For The People 
CIENCE writers therefore have a key 
task to perform in society. It is not 
an easy one, for there is much ill- 
will, mistrust and fear of science to 
overcome. This fear is a symptom of 
the malaise of our age. The reason 
for it is obvious. People no longer be- 
lieve in the inevitability of progress 
through scientific achievement. 
The science writer has the difficult 
ANAS NI NS NS Nt NNSA wat dN af PS NNN WN 


### 73507: Broadcasts from the stars

BROADCASTS FROM THE STARS 
SSENTIALLY all of our 
  
The French Association of Science Writers holds its first public meeting at Unesco House. This 
photo shows (from left to right): M. Briand, of the French Ministry of Information ; M. F. Le Lionnais, 
president of the Association ; M. Torres Bodet, Unesco’s Director-General ; M, P. O. Lapie, French 
Minister of Education and M. Louis de Broglie, of the Académie des Sciences and the Académie 
~ B Francaise. 
task of pointing out that science is not 
an end in itself, but a means to an end. 
It is a search for truth. The final de- 
cision about what is to be done with the 
practical application of scientific 
research rests with society. Therefore, 
a democratic society requires an in- 
formed public : not the least part of 
which information must 
  
  
pile, and he watches the surgeon with 
pioneer hands ats his pre-frontal leuco- 
tomy. Science writers are eyes for the 
people. : 
In 1934, at the Pittsburg meeting 
of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, Professor 
Einstein was to give 
  
   
be an adequate know- B his first lecture in Eng- 
ledge of progress and y lish discussing his 
achievement in the fleld Maurice mathematical proof 
of the Sciences. The that mass and energy 
limitations as well as GOLDSMITH are equivalent and 
the possibilities of interchangeable. Mr. 
science must be under- Herbert B. Nichols, 
stood. In all countries, whatever their 
state of economic development, the 
importance of the role of science is 
recognized. The Technical Assistance 
programme would be meaningless 
without this. 
The science writer is the link 
between the scientists and the people. 
This is no mere mechanical role : he 
has a living function io perform. He 
makes clear to the people the signifi- 
cance of the seemingly esoteric work 
in the laboratory : he penetrates into 
the secrets of the test-tube, he examines 
the radio-active wonders of the atomic 
natural sciences editor of the Christian 
Science Monitor, tells how the newly- 
formed National Association of Science 
Writers tackled the problem of inter- 
preting this important communication 
to the public Professor [Einstein's 
single paragraph abstract was abso- 
lutely hopeless so far as getting 
any quotable quotes was concerned. 
His address was scheduled for 
« most inopportune time for the 
majority of our deadlines. He 
was held incommunicado by well- 
meaning friends. He could not see re- 
porters. So we drafted a request that 
ASPECTS OF MODERN 
  
he meet with us all at a time convenient 
to him, but in advance of his scheduled 
lecture. 
Professor Einstein agreed : That day 
we all had good, front-page stories in 
which we were able to interpret for the 
public what Einstein’s theories actually 
meant, why the theory of relativity is 
important to almost every branch of 
science, and a forecast on the possibility 
of some day harnessing energy within 
the nuclei of atoms as a useful source 
of power. 
Stimulation For 
Scientists 
o science can flourish as an iso- 
late : and the science writer helps 
to make apparent to the scientists 
‘some of the problems that need expert 
investigation. He is an aid to the vision 
of the scientist. I rather think, 
comments Mr. Nichols, that our activi- 
ties in playing up certain stories like 
Urey’s work with heavy walter, Meitner’s 
discovery of the meaning of fissionable 
uranium, Anderson and the cyclotron, 
Van de Graaff and the electrostatic ge- 
nerator, early work with projected X- 
rays, and many others, actually 
stimulated other scientists reading our 
accounts to further thought and action, 
and actually hastened both scientific 
progress and personal recognition for 
the pioneer scientists themselves. 
This is certainly true of the writings 
of British science writers like J. G. 
- Crowther and Ritchie Calder, who have 
pinpointed current research and its 
social implications so ably that new 
lines of development have been opened 
up. 
UNESCO wishes to help the forma- 
tion of associations of science writers 
throughout the world. ‘When there are 
sufficient groups, the plan isto consider 
the establishment of an international 
federation of associations of science 
writers. 
information concerning the 
surrounding universe comes 
to us through the medium of 
light waves. Astronomy thus 
began as a visual science, with 
observations made directly by the 
eye alone or in conjunction with 
the telescope. With the develop- 
ment of photography, more per- 
manent records became a possi- 
bility, but visible and near-visible 
light waves were still carrying the 
message. Later, when photogra- 
phic plates could be made sen- 
sitive to Infra-red radiations 
much too long for the human eye 
to detect, additional information 
was gathered from the skies— 
information about stars too cool 
to send out appreciable amounts 
of visible light, but still lavishly 
pouring forth the longer waves 
beyond the red. 
When the physicist speaks of 
“radiation” he intends the term 
to include not only visible light 
but all the ranges of shorter 
waves (including the ultra-violet, 
X-rays and the even shorter and 
more penetrating rays from radio- 
active materials), and longer 
waves too (such as the infra-red 
and radio waves). An incan- 
descent body, such as a star, must 
radiate some of all of these 
varieties of waves, the relative 
A CROSS-SECTION 
     
  
The galax 
— By 
Ira M. FREEMAN 
 
    
amounts depending upon its tem- 
perature. There is little hope of 
much of the shorter range find- 
ing its way through the earth’s 
atmosphere; but longer waves, 
including the radio range, could 
find their way to earth and so 
tell us things about the stars and 
the spaces between them that 
would never be revealed to the 
eye. 
BIRTH OF RADIO 
ASTRONOMY 
HE pioneer British physicist, 
Sir Oliver Lodge, suspected 
this over half a century ago, 
but was unsuccessful in detecting 
such radiations. It wag in 1932 
that Dr. K.G. Jansky of the Bell 
Telephone {Laboratories in the 
United States first tuned in cos- 
mic radio signals while attempt- 
ing to detect “static” from a 
thunderstorm. He used a radio 
antenna which could be swung 
about to pick up signals from one 
OF OUR GALAXY 
The sun and is planets are 
here 
am. 
‘ - - a. 
ne. . : . Vir FEY . 
oR TE SORE ER 
hte 
LAE RET 
Ra sme mn 
he Light takes about 100.000 years to cross imine 
of nearly a million million stars that constitutes our own star 
enuous matter stretching Detween the stars is probably the source 1080 
the mysterious radio ‘noise’ we receive from outer space. Hundreds 
of millions of other galaxies (“spiral nebulae’) are known, 
or another direction in the sky, 
and he noticed that even when 
atmospheric disturbances were 
absent, weak signals could be 
detected, apparently coming from 
various places in the direction of 
the Milky Way. Thus was the 
science of radio astronomy born. 
The Milky Way is the central 
plane of our galaxy, or local 
group of stars, visible on a clear 
night as an irregular, faintly 
luminous band- stretching across 
the sky. The stars that abound 
in our region of the universe are 
spread through a region of space 
that is shaped like a watch, with 
our solar system located some 
distance to one side of the centre 
The Milky Way represents simply 
the appearance of these stars as 
seen from the earth. If we look 
out in a direction toward the 
edge of the watch we see many 
more stars than if we look in 
some other direction. 
About five years after Jansky's 
first observations, Grote Reber, 
an American amateur scientist, 
built a huge hollow reflector for 
sweeping the sky, and a group of 
English workers took up the 
search as well. It was soon found 
that strong radio signals were 
received from eeveral concen- 
trated points in the Milky Way 
- region, but that these centres did 
not coincide with any of the 
brighter stars. Rather, the source 
seems to be the vast clouds of gas 
and dust that are known to 
occupy the huge spaces between 
the hundreds of millions of mil- 
lions of stars in our system, and 
the origin of radiation is thought 
to be the motion of electrons in 
these regions. 
SIGNAL FROM THE 
‘““ ISLAND UNIVERSE ”’ 
Y tuning the radio receiver 
attached to the radio teles- 
cope, the experimenters are 
able to make maps of the distri- 
bution of the radiant material in 
space. Thus far, with observa- 
tions In both the northern and 
southern regions of the sky, 
 
A RADIO “TELESCOPE': Rebear's apparatus for picking up cosmic ray 
signals is this large hollow reflector, which can be turned to any direction 
in the sky. A detecting device is placed at the point where the radio waves 
are concentrated by the reflector. 
about one hundred localised 
sources of radio waves have been 
discovered, but only two or three 
seem to be connected with any 
visible stars. Australlan workers 
have observed that one interest- 
ing radio source coincides with 
the famous Crab Nebula, a prodi- 
gious mass of hot gases resulting 
fron & nova, or stellar flare-up, 
that occurred in 1045 AD. Mean- 
while, just a few months ago, 
British observers were able for 
the first time to detect radio 
emission from an object outside 
our own galaxy, the great Andro- 
meda Nebula. This “island uni- 
verse”, our nearest neighbor in 
space, is so distant that ‘light— 
which travels 300,000 kilometres 
per second—takes nearly three- 
quarters of & million years to tra- 
verse the distance. Andromeda is 
not only a neighbour but a close 
copy of our own galaxy in many 
ways, and 80 it must be concluded 
that we, too, broadcast a stream 
of radio waves into surrounding 
space. 
The sun, which supplies us so 
lavishly with visible radiations, 
also sends out barely detectable 
amounts of radio waves. On 
certain occasions, this output 
flares up to a hundred or a 
thousand times its normal value, 
and these bursts are sometimes 
connected with sunspots and 
with brilliant solar eruptions 
known as flares. Because these 
sudden bursts of radiant energy 
may affect long-distance commer- 
cial radio reception on earth, they 
are being studied intensively; but 
what radio astronomers learn 
through such investigation will 
undoubtedly tell us much about 
the fundamental physical nature 
.of the sun as well. 
if you are Interested in further 
reading material on radio astro=- 
nomy, write to the Division for 
the Popularization of Science, 
Unesco, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris 
(16¢), France, requesting a free 
bibliography.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNESCO COURIER — Page [0 
“PA 
HE first book to tell the dramatic story of what the 
United Nations and U.N. Specialized Agencies are doing 
for the young people of the world has been written by 
Eleanor Roosevelt, chairman of the U.N. Commission 
on Human Rights, in collaboration with Helen Ferris, 
American writer and editor. 
Entitled “ Partners: The United Nations and Youth” 
(Doubleday & Co., Garden City, New York, $§ 3.00), the 
profusely illustrated volume recounts the warm, human 
stories of those who have been benefited in all parts of the 
world by the activities of such organizations as Unesco, the 
World Health Organization, the United Nations International 
Children’s Emergency Fund, the International Relief Organiza- 
tion and the Food and Agriculture Organization. 
“ Young people are important in the United Nations”, the 
authors say. “In the years ahead, building a better world for 
youth would be a part of all the United Nations does. U.N. 
teams would travel far and wide, working with the many 
governments so that young people and children might have 
more food, better health, more schools, more fun”. 
The account of what has already been done for youth is 
presented in a series of moving and exciting stories about 
individual children in 35 countries, based on actual reports 
submitted by U.N. personnel. For example, there is Hana 
of Lidice, lost for five years, then brought back to her mother 
through the help of LR.O.; Arturo, the Italian boy, who 
helped teach his grandmother about the skim milk furnished 
by UNICEF ; Abed, the Egyptian boy, who found out how 
WHO fights and conquers dread ailments as old as his 
homeland ; and Kyria, the teen-age Greek girl, helped to face 
the problems of a new life by Unesco. 
The stories, illustrated by scores of photographs, tell how 
these and hundreds of thousands of other young victims of the 
world’s calamities have been helped to help themselves ; how 
they learned to sew, cook, build homes, camps, roads ; how 
they have vaulted the barriers of geographical, political and 
social distance to become friends ; how they develop their 
friendship by meeting at youth conferences and living together 
in work camps and children’s towns. 
A substantial amount of the account of the U.N.’s partnership 
with youth in the period since the end of the war is devoted 
to the many and varied activities of Unesco, such as the steps 
which led to the organization of the International Federation 
of Children’s Communities and to the organization of Inter- 
national Voluntary Work Camps. Several chapters describe 
in vivid detail Unesco’s efforts in such fields as extension and 
intensification of education facilities ; the stimulation of 
popular interest in the scientific development of the world 
to-day and tomorrow ; the removal of barriers to fruitful 
cultural exchanges ; and, perhaps most important of all, the 
continuation of the age-old struggle for fundamental freedoms 
and human rights.   
  
     
MARCH 1951 


### 73508: Partners: the United Nations and youth

RTNERS : THE UNITED NATIONS AND YOUTH” 
Eo 
EVERYONE HAS THE RIGHT TO GOOD HEALTH -a Pakistan World Health 
Organization (WHO) doctor vaccinates a student In a Karachi Girls ‘School, 
 
SINGING TIME in an International Refugee Organization boys’ and girls’ camp near 
Nuremberg, Germany 
  
EVERYONE MAS THE RIGHT TO ENOUGH FOOD it was thelr fiends of the 
United Nations International Children’s Emergency fund (UNICEF) and the government 
who gave these Indian girls In Guatemala this nourishing milk 
the advice of his counsellors, he sent these 
instructions to all provinces where serfdom 
exis‘ed. Committees were formed every- 
where to solve the numerous problems of 
interests and rights raised by the emanci- 
pation of men of the soil. Finally on 3rd 
March, 1861, Alexander II proclaimed the 
historic law, abolishing serfdom. 
* 
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES. 
— Oliver Wendell Holmes was born of a 
lamous literary family, son of the author 
of “The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table”, 
at Boston on 8th March, 184]. Through his 
writings on law he fired the imagination 
  ABOLITION OF SERFDOM IN 
— To those St. Petersburg and 
RUSSIA. Moscow students, whom a 
horrified Europe called “nihilists”, Czar 
Alexander II was at most a vacillating 
autocrat. To the nobility and the army he 
was a “liberal”, under the unfortunate in- 
fluence of Western ideas. It was proba- 
bly because of his hesitation that he came 
to an untimely end. He was assassinated 
on the same day that he signed a decree 
of reforms — a decree which his son imme- 
diately revoked. 
But 20 years earlier, his liberalism had 
at least suppressed one of the most dis- 
tressing survivals of the Middle Ages — 
serfdom. In answer to a petition by Polish 
property owners in Lithuania, the Czar 
authorized the formation of “committees to 
improve peasants’ conditions”. Against 
 of generations of students and a book he 
wrote on jurisprudence sold like a novel. 
He was a member of the United States Su- 
preme Court for more than thirty years. 
Above all, he was a liberal judge; some 
even called him a “radical”. He fought 
against trusts and for the workers’ trade 
unions. American socialists regarded him 
as one of their own. But Justice Holmes 
remained “the distinguished Bostonian”, 
and showed no taste for hasty and popu- 
lar réforms. He believed, however, in 
justice and would have died for the liberty 
of others. “If people”, he said, “want to 
experiment, they should be allowed to do 
it”. He was no pacifist, but when a court 
refused American citizenship to a pacifist 
immigrant, he protested: “If there is any 
principle of the Constitution that more im- 
peratively calls for attachment than any 
other it is the principle of free thought — 
not free thought for those who agree with 
us, but freedom for the thought we hate’. 
And, as the immigrant was a Quaker, 
Holmes added: “The Quakers have done 
their share for the country... I had not 
supposed hitherto that we regretted our 
inability to expel them because they 
believe more than some of us do in the 
teachings of the Sermon on the Mount", 
PIETER CORNELISSEN HOOFT. 
The most bril- 
liant of the Dutch 
writers of the 17th 
century was born 
at Amsterdam on 
16th March 1581. 
He was barely 17 
years old when he 
was admitted to 
the literary circle 
“In Leifde Bloeien- 
de” (Love in 
Bloom), to which 
he presented his 
first tragedy. The 
second, entitled 
“Theseus and Ariadne”, did not appear 
until four years later. In the meantime 
Hooft had travelled to Paris, Florence and 
Rome — the indispensable journey of which 
all young poets dreamed. On his return 
he became a protégé of the Prince of 
Orange, with paid duties and seemed to 
be definitely devoted to comedies and 
idylls. But suddenly in 1618, he abandon- 
ed poetry for history. Twenty-five years 
of dogged efforts produced his monument- 
al works consecrated to Henry IV of 
France, to the Medicis, and above all to 
the history of the Netherlands. It was 
these works which not only made him 
“the best Dutch prose writer”, but also 
one of the first really European writers. 
* 
— Heinrich von Ofterdingen, 
NOVALIS. hero of an unfinished ro- 
mance, sought, by means worthy of «a 
knight of the Grail, a mystic flower, whose 
symbolism was more than poetic. 
The author of the romance, writing under 
the name Novalis, had also set out on a 
quest for beauty beyond that expressed in 
his "Geistliche Lieder” and “Hymns to 
the Night”, which he had written on the 
death of his fiancée. Pioneer of German 
   
 
romanticism, he wanted to accomplish 
what Wagner in his turn dreamed of later 
on: the creation of a new art, in step 
with the world, which would harmonise 
poetry and life, science and religion. He 
ad scarcely time to rough out the ideas 
for this tremendous work. On the 25th 
March, 1801, the town of Weissenfels heard 
of the death of one of its officials, Fried- 
rich Leopold von Hardenberg, “known in 
literature under the name of Novalis”. He 
was 29 years of age. } 
* 
BELA BARTOK. 
Béla Bartdk was 
Ww o born on 25th March 
1881 in the Hun- 
garian village of 
Nagyszentmiklos. 
At the beginning 
of the Century, 
composers in Eu- 
from Russia 
to Spain, were 
using folk music 
as themes for their 
compositions, and 
when Bartdk was 
20 he composed 
rhapsodies on Hun- 
garian airs at the Royal Academy of Buda- 
pest. The young Hungarian composer soon 
saw, however, that his “magyar” themes 
were mostly Slovakian or Roumanian. He 
therefore decided to study folklore more 
deeply than his contemporaries and to deal 
with the subject from an international ra- 
ther than a national view. These studies 
which took him as far as Algeria, did not, 
however, end by making him a composer 
of folklore music only. Baridk became one 
of the great musicians of our time. His 
art, drawn from world treasures of rhythms 
and moods may at first seem a little cold, 
but above all it is serenely lucid.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

MARCH 1951      
         
   
Rs 4a 
— A SERVICE TO 
E Ba 
Bey 
HITT 
» 
l
l
 
i 
: 
      
- 
Six years after the entire University of Caen was destroyed during tne Allied advance through 
Normandy, University Rector, Pierre Daure {extreme left) watches the construction of the first new 
building.” The University's temporary library, housed in a former school, recently received a 
consignment of CARE-UNESCO books donated through the help of the War Dads Auxiliary of 
i Kansas City, Missouri. 
end of 1949, a six-year-old girl was 
brought into a doctor's surgery, 
feverish, vomiting and complaining 
of a severe headache. The doctor dia- 
gnosed the case as meningitis and sent 
her to the nearest hospital. 
Here, the case was confirmed as one 
of tuberculous meningitis, and the 
child was rushed to Athens where, the 
hospital doctor had read, similar cases 
had been successfully treated with 
streptomycin. . 
The use of this drug saved the child, 
but for this one fortunate case where 
the doctor knew of recent advances 
in medicine, there are many others 
where children do not get the same 
chance. 
Knowledge is slow to spread particu- 
larly in under developed countries and 
in others that were cut off by the 
war from information on advances in 
medical skill and treatment. It was 
to resume and increase the diffusion of 
knowledge in this and other fields that 
the CARE-UNESCO Book Fund Pro- 
gramme was begun just over 18 months 
ago. 
Paul Comly French, executive direc- 
tor of the Co-operative of American 
Remittances to Europe (CARE), open- 
ed the programme. Shortly after, on 
July 15, 1949, 18 new technical books 
were presented to the University of 
Louvain in Belgium. 
But as the programme got under 
way, the University of Louvain—twice 
destroyed in the two Great Wars—re- 
ceived a second gift of $1,000 worth 
of books. And other shipments went 
to other institutions around the world. 
|& a small Greek town towards the 
One Year — 50,000 Books 
N the first year of operation, the 
Fund made 530 shipments, totalling 
nearly 50,000 books and periodicals 
to 24 countries. Greece alone—which 
had 91 per cent of its schools de- 
stroyed or rendered unusable during 
the war—received 31 shipments of new 
technical books, 
Contributions for books and medical 
equipment tallied up to nearly one 
million dollars. 
During the year, the programme has 
been expanded to take in not only 
war-torn countries, but also nations 
with development problems. The coun- 
tries which have participated in the 
programme include: Austria, Belgium, 
Burma, Ceylon, Czechoslovakia, Fin- 
land, France, the Western zone of 
Germany and Berlin, Great Britain, 
Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Jordan 
Korea, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, 
Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Thai- 
land and Yugoslavia. All except 
Czechoslovakia and Poland are still 
‘participating. 
At this moment new contracts are 
being negotiated in the South Ame- 
rican countries which have expressed 
an interest in the Book Fund. 
The categories available have been 
enlarged too. Now, they include medi- 
cine, health and welfare, dentistry, 
nursing, pharmacy, agricultural science, 
veterinary science, biology, mathema- 
tics, physics, chemistry, engineering, 
English language instruction, teaching 
and education, geology, library admi- 
nistration, psychology, sociology and 
statistics. 
This expanding programme under- 
lines both CARE’s and UNESCO’s de- 
sire to do something in the service of 
peace that is both concrete and lasting. 
Tools Of Progress 
ARE is the welfare agency that 
has delivered approximately 
$100,000,000 in food and textile 
packages to Europe and Asia since 
1945. Its p aim was, and is, to 
provide an efficient, reputable channel 
by which individual Americans could 
sent gifts to their friends and relatives 
abroad. But, simultaneously, the or- 
ganization decided: “Relief sustains, 
but we must also progress.” 
Books and scientific equipment are 
obvious tools of progress. CARE has 
delivered medical equipment, bought 
by the U.S. State Department, to 
11 West German universities. The 
schools each received an iron lung 
(costing about $1,500, to be used 
for treatment as well as training pur- 
poses), oxygen tents, radium (for can- 
cer treatment), anaesthesia apparatus 
and medical literature. 
Carefully designed hand ploughs are 
now being sent to India and Pakistan 
so that these people can “grow their 
BRING K 
* 
At Goethe Uni- 
versity, Frankfurt, 
Germany, gifts of 
some of the new- 
est American sci- 
entific and tech- 
nical books don- 
ated through the 
CARE - UNESCO 
Book Fund Pro- 
gramme, are exa- 
mined by (left to 
right) : Professor 
of Medicine Ar- 
nold Lauche ; Dr. 
Boris Rajewsky, 
Rector of the Uni- 
versity, and Pro- 
fessor Herbert 
O' Daniel, of the 
Department of 
Physical Science. 
   * 
The first step in developing the Book 
Fund was UNESCO's survey of need. 
It was discovered that 1016 of the 
world’s important libraries were, in- 
deed, in desperate need. 
Priority listings were made of insti- 
tutions. Then UNESCO and CARE 
queried the libraries and universities 
as to which books they needed most. 
At that point, CARE took over. It 
approached the American people. 
“Here is the need”, CARE said. “Here 
are the means to fill the need. But, 
between the need and the fulfilment 
stand dollars we do not have.” 
A $ 1,000,000 Answer 
HE one-million dollars that came 
“Page |! — UNESCO COURIER 


### 73510: The CARE-UNESCO Book Fund Programme: a service to bring knowledge up to date

THE CARE-UNESCO BOOK FUND PROGRAMME : 
NOWLEDGE UP TO DATE 
 
belled, “For the Book Fund", have 
come from every state in the Union, 
Hawaii, Alaska, the Canal Zone, Co- 
lumbia, Mexico, Venezuela, Canada, 
Turkey, Germany, England and France. 
To-day, the need continues. CARE 
recently announced that the Depart- 
ment of Geology at Seoul! National 
University in Korea has received a top 
priority rating. The reason: although 
mining is one of Korea's major in- 
dustries, the geology library had only 
a few old Japanese books on this vast 
subject even before the recent bombing 
and fighting in Seoul. In fact, not 
until four years ago did Korea even 
have a department of geology as it 
had been under Japanese occupation. 
As soon as it is practicable, CARE 
plans to send at least the nucleus of 
an up-to-date library on geology to 
own packages”. 
UNESCO for help and direction. 
its local 
In the book field, CARE looked to 
to CARE’s New York office and 
offices—in the United 
States, Canada and South America— 
were the answer. 
able. 
Contributions la- wounded country. 
Seoul, providing the funds are avail- 
Thus CARE-UNESCO aim to 
help in the reconstruction of another 
  
New Guide Book Contrasts Riches And 
Needs Of French Provincial Libraries 
  
Volunteers restoring a war-damaged library in France: Two members 
of a team of Danish and Swedish students working in the library at 
Valognes, which was damaged by bombing. Their efforts saved 
a collection of 20,000 books, including many rare volumes, from 
further damage and decay. 
IBRARY services, bibliography, documentation and the 
L supply of publications have had from the start an 
important place in Unesco's programme hecause 
they are realistic and necessary services to help scholars 
and scientists in their work. Their development is the 
responsibility of Unesco's Libraries Division. 
Last November, as part of its efforts towards making 
such services more readily available to research workers 
and students, Unesco co-operated with the French Li- 
braries Administration in the publication of the first part 
of a Libraries’ Guide covering the libraries of Paris. 
The second volume of the Guide which has just been 
published is devoted to the French Departments and 
resents a situation report on the resources of 1,028 
institutions. 
Besides reporting on the main French provincial, 
university and municipal libraries, this second volume 
also covers the national libraries of Algiers and Stras- 
bourg, as well as those of professional societies, private 
institutions and collections attached to archives, giving 
information on personnel, times of opening, conditions 
of book borrowing, as well as statistical and historical 
data of the collections. 
TWELVE MELONS FOR DUMAS 
ERHAPS the most striking fact revealed by the Cuide, 
however, is the richness of the French provincial 
libraries. Almost every small town possesses a 
treasure trove of old manuscripts and rare books, as their 
libraries were founded with material confiscated from 
  
monasteries and religious colleges after 1790. Others 
have already celebrated their second cenienary, their 
founders including such famous men as the Marquis de 
Méjanes of Aix-en-Provence and Monseigneur d'Inguim- 
bert of Carpentras. 
The Guide lists many libraries which have been set up 
to meet a continual growth of industrial areas, as well as 
others with curious origins. For instance. Cavaillon’s 
library, which is proud of its remarkable collection of 
18th century Hebrew books, was founded in 1864 by 
Alexander Dumas, who offered it the complete collection - 
of his works for an annual fee of a dozen melons. 
A much younger library is that of Chenebier, a village 
in the Franche-Comté, which owes its existence to the 
Indian Government. India endowed it in recognition of 
the aid given by the people of the town to Indian soldiers 
who escaped from a German prison camp in May 1944. 
Leading provincial and university libraries publish 
catalogues, but too often little is known of the smaller 
institutions. The Guide, however, has now helped to fill 
this gap. Few people know, for instance, that Carpen- 
tras possesses many autographed scores of J. S. Bach, 
that Chateauroux preserves the manuscript of the Song 
of Roland, and that there are excellent facilities for 
studying the Byzantine authors at La Fléche, or the 
religion of Swedenborg at Bourg-en-Bresse. 
TREASURES OF VALOGNES 
HE Guide also shows the other side of the picture by 
T revealing instances of need. The irreparable losses 
suffered during the last war by such formerly rich 
libraries as Caen, Brest, Beauvais and St-Malo have been 
widely publicized. But little has been said of the fate 
of certain abandoned collections, unused and uncared for 
and slowly deteriorating. 
An example of what can be done to help such libraries 
was recently shown at Valognes, whose library treasures 
were saved through the efforts of young Danish and 
Swedish volunteers responding to an appeal by Unesco. 
" This, however, was only one example, and one of the 
most valuable services rendered by the Guide is that it 
makes known the cases of many other needy libraries. 
Such notices as the following, which refers to a town 
in South West France, are sufficiently eloquent: 
“LIBRARIAN: None. 
OPENING: Temporarily suspended. 
HISTORY: Founded during the Revolution with works from 
local convents, augmented in the 19th century by gifts 
and works of the Champollions and government 
assistance obtained through the intercession of these 
scholars. Library collections transferred about 1880 
to the attics of the town hall, where they have remain- 
ed neglected for a long lime. 
yet contemplated.” 
The second volume of the Libraries’ Guide therefore, 
serves a double purpose. Although primarily intended 
for students and scholars, it is of equal interest to those 
who wish to help public libraries make a vital contribu- 
life. 
Re-organization is not 
tion to education at every phase from childhood to adult   

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/072098engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER — Page 2 
  
INCE its creation in 1947, the Inter- 
S national Refugee Organization 
(IRO) has helped to resettie hun- 
dreds of thousands of refugees and 
displaced persons in all parts of the 
world. There are others, however, 
for whom it has not been possible 
to find new homes, because of their 
age or infirmities. For these men 
and women the IRO has taken special 
measures. 
Just a year ago, on February 28, 
1950, M. Robert Schumann, French 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, and 
Mr. J. Donald Kingsley, Director- 
General of IRO, signed an agree- 
ment. By its terms, France accepted 
responsibility for all refugees living 
within its frontiers while the IRO 
agreed to devote funds towards the 
setting up of special refugee centres 
which would later be tumed over to 
France. . 
The article below describes the 
work of one such centre opened 
recently in France, where physically 
handicapped refugees are equipped 
for a new start in life.     
cc I 'd probably have got along 
all right, but for this old 
peg”, said the man tapping 
his artificial leg. 
“I ask you”, he went on, “who'd 
choose a man with onc leg when 
the world is full of healthy bipeds? 
For chaps like us — maimed, 
wounded, sick — the chances of 
emigrating are nil.” 
“Yet”, he added, “there are 
trades where you don’t have to walk 
a hundred yards. But no selection 
board will consider us. [I myself 
am game to tackle anything, but 
I've had absolutely no cxpericnce 
of the sort of job where you're 
glued to a desk all day. So, there 
just didn’t seem to be any way out. 
Then, one day, I heard about the 
centre at Valence. Now, crery- 
thing’s going fine”. 
He laughed and handed me a 
watch that he had been regulating 
while he talked; its regular ticking 
seemed to give him enormous sat- 
isfaction. 
He was a man of about 40, with 
one of those unpronounceable names 
bristling with contradictory conso- 
nants. He spoke fluent French, in 
which the slang of Paris was mixed 
with the accent of Warsaw. 
Other men were busy at work 
around him. I learned that the Balt 
had been in a sanatorium, that the 
Slovak had heart trouble, that all 
these men without a country were 
victims of some physical disability 
which precluded them from return- 
ing to their old way of life. Then 
came this chance to learn a new 
trade adapted to their capabilities 
in the rehabilitation centre opened 
by the International Refugee Organ- 
ization (IRO) near Valence in south 
east France. 
Finding The Right Men 
ITH men of so many national- 
ities and professional back- 
grounds, of varying physical capa- 
cities and assorted ages, it’s no 
easv task to seek out those capable 
of becoming technicians in the 
watch-making industry. Selection 
 
Couricr 
UNESCO HOUSE 
19, Ave. Kidber, PARIS. I 4 
»* 
Acung Editor RS FENTON 
» 
All reproductions authorized 
*     
 L. - | 
  
is made through a series of tests. 
“Adaptation follows, care being 
taken to guide the newcomer 
towards that specialized branch 
By Plerre Louis MALLEN, Head, 
Information 
to which he is most suited. It re- 
quires plenty of tact and a great 
* deal of patience. 
One must know when a begin- 
ner, who might otherwise be dis- 
couraged by the magnitude of the 
task in front of him, should be in- 
troduced to his particular training 
at some intermediate stage; an in- 
tellectual, on the other hand, must 
be persuaded that there is nothing 
demeaning in the idea of “thinking 
with his hands”. 
In planning the Centre, the pro- 
moters considered that it was ne- 
cessary to create not merely a re- 
classification centre like others 
that have been established by the 
IRO near its German and Austrian 
camps. They therefore decided 
to treat these reclassification acti- 
vities as the first step towards the 
formation of a vital permanent 
community centre, a small self-gov- 
erning city, where the refugees, 
finally settled and equipped with a 
trade, could enjoy conditions of 
work and a degree of self-respect 
to which everyone aspires. 
A Community Affair 
A FrexcH organization, “Mutual 
Community Assistance” 
tr'aide Communautaire), accepted 
the task of carrving out the plan, 
using the experience it had gained 
in its successful community work 
centre at Boimondeau. Thus, on a 
International 
Service, 
(En- - 
THE REFUGEES 
MARCH 1951 


### 73511: The Refugees who learned to "think" with their hands

WHO 
LEARNED TO “THINK 
WITH 
!        
THEIR HAN 
  
DS 8 
  
    
NEW SKILLS -AND HOPES: Men of many nationalities and professional 
Dachgrounds les 0 become 
conte near Valence, Frang 
proto ssionn walchmahers in the IRO rehab. 
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION is given in the making of main walch parts 
Here ™e Are being 1 
REFUCEKES ARE TRAINED © 
nachine whieh IR UMng a Dressing 
MEN WITHOUT A COUNTRY develop a new confidence in 
am uwiure as thei 
community basis, the Centre for 
Vocational Rehabilitation (Centre 
de Rééducation Professionnelle) 
came into being near Valence. 
Refugee Organization 
Paris. 
At present the refugees are given 
technical training in the making of 
main watch parts from gold watch 
cases to dial faces. The latter re- 
quires skilful use of a pressing ma- 
chine which, with delicate preci- 
sion, prints the watch face. Later, 
when they have completed their 
training the school will become a 
community undertaking, the mana- 
gement becoming the responsibilily 
of the ex-pupils, with the excep- 
tion of those who have chosen to 
employ their new found trade 
elsewhere. 
The school is established in a 
fine old estate just outside Valence. 
The main building contains the 
offices, reading room, bar and 
sleeping quarters of those pupil- - 
guests whose health needs the most 
care. The others have sunny, in- 
dividual rooms in buildings front- 
ing on a lawn. At the other end 
of the park, hidden by high trees, 
are the workshops. 
It's a pleasure fo see pupils so 
contentedly and indusfriously at 
work with their modern equip- 
ment. The teachers, accustomed 
to younger and often less attentive 
pupils, are delighted with their 
keenness and enthusiasm. 
I stopped in one of the workshops 
to talk to an elderly Swiss 
watchmaker. “The way we teach”, 
he told me, “makes allowance for 
the fact that our students are 
med on 
mang « 
permanent community in whose management 
- given a 
athes i he centre's mode workshops 
each stage of watchmaking, This pupil 
with dehicale precision piinig the waich 
themselves 
quips them for a specwiired trade The 
adults. We are not (raining them 
as apprentices bul as fully qualified 
technicians who will later be 
chance to take part 
in the workshop management. 
And we don’t follow the usual 
practice of watchmaking schools : 
here, mo' onc works for nothing 
during the training period, for this 
can give the idea that it’s of no 
consequence if a walch part is 
bungled. Each pupil passes 
through successive stages of all 
branches of watchmaking; and 
when all the parts are finally as- 
sembled, he secs how individual 
bad workmanship can spoil the 
work as a whole”. 
“Just One Week” 
I® another outbuilding I saw pu- 
pil-watchmakers being given a 
lesson in elementary French. In 
the most advanced class of all, talks 
are given on literature, so that 
those with intellectual tastes and 
backgrounds can re-discover the 
same cultural level in this new life 
to which they must now adapt 
themselves. 
“Would you like to meet someone 
in your own line of work”, asked 
my guide. He led me in front of 
one of the machine-tools and intro- 
duced me to the man who was 
working it — a former Polish 
journalist. 
“At first it was pretty hard”, the 
journalist told me. “I thought I 
would never get the hang of it. 
But it comes, little by little...” 
“Youre too modest”, replied my 
guide, “too modest and too impa- 
tient”. Then to me: “Look at this 
adjustment he's just done. It's abso- 
lutely accurate. And do you know 
how long he's been working with 
his hands? Just one week!”