# [064724](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
                  
  
   
  
A 
\ 1 J 
Bouba 12 years 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

VETS 
JRoHIVES 
+ winsow orn ou Tue worto SEPTEMBER 1960 The ~~ ° 
mCourier 13 TH YEAR 
Contents 
No. 9 
Page 
5 PITOA—PILOT SCHOOL IN A CAMEROON VILLAGE 
~ By René Caloz 
8 BOUBA AND JACQUES 
Birth of a dialogue between Africa and Europe 
13 CHILD AESOPS OF THE CAMEROONS 
14 DESERT OR DELUGE AT THE FLICK OF A SWITCH 
France builds the world’s first ¢ecotron’ 
By Daniel Behrman 
16 THE STAIRWAY OF THE GIANTS 
Ricefields reaching up to the sky 
By Paul Almasy 
20 FINE ARTS ON POSTAGE STAMPS 
By David J. Jacobs 
25 A CENTURY OF ‘BLACK GOLD’ 
The story of two million oil wells 
By W. H. Owens 
  
30 IN THESE WASTES WHAT VISIONARY PASTS... 
Airplane and spade uncover treasures of the Sudan 
Head of an African girl drawn By W. B. Emery 
by Bouba, a 12-year-old boy 
from the pllot-school at Pitoa 
In the Cameroons. For the 
remarkable story of Bouba 
and his class-mates and how 33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
they have bulit a chaln of 
friendship and understanding 
wlth schoolchlldren In 34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Europe, see pages 4 to 13. 
COVER PHOTO 
Drawing, Centre d'Art 
Africain, Prtoa Ea 
: THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly (12 issues a year) in English, 
Published monthly by fi d Cul | French, Spanish and Russian. In the United States of America it 1s distri- 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific an ultura buted by the UNESCO Publications Center. U.S.A. 801 Third Avenue, New 
Organization York 22, N.Y., Plaza 1-3860. Second-class mail privileges authorized at New 
York, N.Y. (M.C, 60.1.150 A). 
Editorlal Offices ] Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER”, plus date 
" . . of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
Editor-in-Chief printed must bear authors name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
Sandy Koffler unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
Assistant Editor the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
Alexandre Leventis 
Annual subscription rates: § 3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 New 
Associate Editors + . h 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton rig or Suivaent. Single copies l/-stg. 30 cents 
French Edition : Célia Bertin Js Y- 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Carrera Andrade Sales & Distribution Offices 
Russian Edition : Yeniamin Matchavariani Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.    

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 64723: Pitoa; pilot school in a Cameroon village

  
- 
—— I {oli Re ER FET APT STL 
b 
| 
a 
. 
y 
Y 4 
p 
ad y 
«2 
ry 4 
9 £78 1 
4 
FE = 
. 
\ & 
A 
q FV 
ho 
bp wu 
4 > 
oo 
3 
2 Lo 
7 
4 1% 
&y iy 
y ’ 
3 # “ 
5 £ Y = 
yy = j 
\ A 
Yr y 
/ 4 F , 
yo, 
Vy 
; 
A) 
. of 
: es — am ar BR a 
/, 
Ls 4 4 
r 
Remarkable creative skill and imagination are expressed 
in this drawing from the Art Centre at Pitoa (Cameroons) 
made by a youngster from one of the bush villages 
ade es
 
a 1 a a ie 
pone 
oe PRE) 4 a 1S, aa PEN 
       
 
EE
 
B
L
U
S
B
U
I
I
E
S
-
H
S
 
w
i
i
 
oo 
wt
 
E
l
i
e
 
T
l
e
 
i
 
C
e
 
S
A
N
 i
 
8 
S
d
 
a
 
C
R
B
S

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 


### 64723: Pitoa; pilot school in a Cameroon village

PITOA — PILOT SCHOOL 
IN A CAMEROON VILLAGE 
by René Caloz 
ERCHED on an upturned packing case 
in the centre of the classroom, Bou- 
kar, the little Cameroon hoy, hesitatingly read out the 
story he had written: 
“While I am playing I find a little snake. I hit it with 
a stick. My father comes up. “What are you doing ?, 
he asks me. ‘I am hitting this smake.’ My father takes 
the stick and he hits the snake too.” 
When Boukar had finished, he looked up from the paper 
from which he had been reading. Judging from the faces 
around him the impression he had made, he proudly 
began to read it a second time. But the teacher told 
him to go back to his place, and called a liftle girl, Isma, 
to come out to the blackboard. 
Isma jumped up, took a piece of chalk, rubbed her head 
reflectively for a moment, and then began to draw. As 
the chalk grated on the blackboard, Boukar gazed 
dreamily at the packing case. This old box had become 
a kind of tribune on which all the ambitions of a little 
world were centered. Each morning the teacher would 
ask ; “ Who is going on the box ?”. Only those children 
who had been able to make up and write out a short 
story on their own were eligible for this honour. The 
rest, the majority of the class, were still only able to 
describe orally what they had drawn, 
At last Isma put down her chalk and turned a roguish 
eye towards the teacher, who asked her to explain the 
drawing. Looking at the blackboard with her head on 
one side, she said: “A woman is walking along the road. 
A bird comes along and steals some of her hair. With 
the hair the bird makes its nest.” Smiling broadly, Isma 
turned around as the class roared with laughter. 
Both Boukar and Isma go to school in the Cameroon 
village of Pitoa. This mountainous, northern region is 
inhabited by the Fulbés and the Kirdis, two tribes which 
were once enemies. At Pitoa, 200 little Africans from vil- 
lages in the bush live in at the school where they receive 
a primary education. 
During the past few years, the school at Pitoa has 
become a real pilot centre for education in the African 
countries thanks to the perception and devotion of its 
staff and its teacher-director, Roger Lagrave. Here, like 
a bridge spanning differences between centuries and races, 
the most up-to-date methods are used to teach children 
who have come straight from remote villages in the bush. 
In any country, the first day at school makes a big 
psychological impression on a child. It is his first real 
break with the warm, sheltered atmosphere of home life. 
On the African child who has just left the far-off tribal 
village where he was born, the effect is even greater. 
From one day to the next he is plunged into a totally 
strange civilization and way of life. 
Added to the impact of this disturbing change are the 
feelings created by the long separation from family and 
friends. At Pitoa, therefore, the teachers need to use 
special methods and even to devise new ones capable of 
overcoming these inner conflicts and of opening up young 
minds to a different world. 
In solving these problems, nothing has worked as 
well as painting and drawing. When they reach school, 
the children speak only their tribal languages. They 
 
After drawing this picture on the blackboard, Isma explains: “A bird 
comes along and takes strands of a woman's hair to make its nest.” 
quickly and instinctively accept drawing as a means of 
expression and communication. 
At the very first lesson, the teacher asks the children 
to make drawings of anything that comes into the heads. 
The first efforts are always clumsy and disorganized—a 
jumble of things which the child sees around him every 
day : gourds, huts, animals, trees, etc. The names of these, 
the children quickly learn to translate into French under 
the teacher’s guidance. 
Gradually the drawings become more orderly. As their 
skill with pencil and brush grows, the children—encourag- 
ed to use their imagination—begin to draw scenes from 
village life. Graphic expression precedes and then 
stimulates oral expression, bringing the first verbs to 
  
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 64723: Pitoa; pilot school in a Cameroon village

  
PILOT SCHOOL 
(Cont'd) 
enrich a growing vocabulary. They start to make up their 
first simple phrasés in French. Only then do writing les- 
sons begin. 
Mr. Lagrave, educational director of the Pitoa School, 
has noted that by the end of the first term the most 
advanced children are able to write their first words in 
French. By now a few others are speaking it, but the 
majority of the class is still at the drawing stage. By 
the end of the first school year most children have started 
to write in French, 
Drawing and painting have become the key to a new 
world. They have helped children, already somewhat 
perplexed by the rudiments of the new language, to adapt 
their outlooks from those of children in an African tribal 
village, while giving them full scope for individual ex- 
pression. 
The teachers at Pitoa found to their surprise that when 
these children were left to draw on their own sources of 
inspiration and were not given any technical advice, they 
showed a natural creative aptitude and a sense of colour 
harmony even more truly spontaneous than those with 
which young Europeans, for example, are apt to surprise 
one. 
From an early age, European youngsters come under 
all kinds of formative influences, The children from the 
bush, however, start almost from scratch. They have to 
seek everything within themselves, just as did our early 
ancestors. With uninhibited powers of inspiration, a pow- 
erful urge to express themselves, a brush and some paints, 
they have drawn from within themselves an youthful 
African art style that is both original and rich. 
This style is expressed in certain, often repeated themes. 
There are, for example, the birds of the bush—herons, 
marabou-storks, ducks and cormorants—all offering 
colourful visions which impress themselves on the minds 
of youngsters who have spent their childhood along the 
banks of Africa’s rivers. Here, as in other lands, a 
youngster will set down on paper what he knows, and not 
just what he sees. In depicting the cormorant he also 
shows the fishes it has swallowed and, in admiration for 
its angling skill, he sometimes pictures it with several 
beaks and long, supple necks. 
Ten here is the serpent; the enemy, an ever-present 
threat to small bare feet scampering in the bush. So it 
is punished in effigy, shown pinned down by that killer 
of snakes, the secretary-bird. Or sometimes it becomes 
the animal totem, a symbol of taboo. But in all cases, 
the harmony of colours transforms these representations 
of reality. Thus, from the art centre in Pitoa has flowed 
a rich harvest of original and audacious works, full of 
suprising power and delightful freshness. 
‘What becomes of these artists whose ages range from 
nine to fourteen ? Unfortunately, as is often the case, this 
childhood genius fades as maturity approaches, Only a 
few of the fortunate ones manage to retain it. The school- 
children of Pitoa will become doctors, teachers and eng- 
ineers. But it has all been worthwhile ; painiing has been 
the magic charm to exorcise the spells besetting their 
6 
childhood, helping them to take the giant leap from the 
African bush into the mid-20th century. 
‘When the schoolchild at Pitoa has completed the three 
stages of this primary basic education (drawing, spoken 
language and writing) he has still not escaped from 
his isolation. He knows how to write in French. But to 
whom can he write ? He can read. But what will he find 
to read ? Unlike youngsters in European countries, for 
example, these children of the Cameroons until recent- 
ly had no books suitable to their knowledge and capabili- 
ties other than school textbooks. Thus they came to look 
on reading as a purely classroom activity. 
To these two problems of isolation and reading material, 
the Modern Education Group of the Cameroons has also 
found ingenious solutions—and has put them into prac- 
tice. These educators provided reading material corres- 
ponding to the educational level and background of this 
young public, by producing collections of short stories: 
“Fables of the Bush,” “Mamadou, the little Shepherd,” 
“At the World's End,” which are lively, documentary texts 
telling about such things as the millet crop, the mangrove 
tree, monkeys, the river, fishing, and so on. 
Roger Lagrave went even further and, using some of 
the methods developed by the French educator, C. Frei- 
net, he got his pupils to help him in writing these new 
books. Out of this grew the “African Book Club”, whose 
publication fund is partly covered by the sale of children’s 
drawings and also through radio broadcasts. 
Each year, the boys and girls in one or more of the 
classes set to work on a new book whose preparation is 
also the occasion for a concentrated study of the French 
language. The themes chosen for these books reveal a 
progressive broadening of horizons. The first, “Malik 
Child of the Bush,” described the life of a typical child 
and his family in a Cameroons village. “Two Children in 
the Northern Cameroons” told the story of a child as 
he left his village and began to experience the realities 
of the larger life of his country. 
The third book, “Bouba and Jacques” had a special 
significance for it brought the children in contact with 
another country, France, and a way of life very different 
DRAWING THEIR 
Bi}. 
Q 
my 
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
  
1 DRAWING is used as a bridge leading to reading and writing 
« by the children from the bush who attend the school at 
Pitoa, Cameroons. First efforts with pencil and brush are usually 
a jumble of familiar objects—huts, gourds, trees, animals. From 
the names of these, the children learn their first words in French.

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 64723: Pitoa; pilot school in a Cameroon village

    
  
from their own. All the material for this book came from 
a pen-friends’ exchange between the boys and girls of 
Pitoa and those of Costes-Gozon in the Aveyron Depart- 
ment of southern France, 
Each week, in the form of questions and answers bet- 
ween a French boy, Jacques, and his African friend, Bouba, 
villagers in France and African bush dwellers nearly 
4.000 miles away got to know more about each other 
(see page 8). 
The fourth book in the series, completed this year, is 
entitled Nous de partoul (We from everywhere). Having 
got to know his own country, the child sets out to explore 
other parts of the world and discovers that modern tech- 
niques can help to free him from his isolation. 
Suggestive of the future possibilities of this admirable 
educational venture born in Africa are the words of the 
preface to this latest book : 
“In gaining its independence, the Cameroons has taken 
its place among the nations. 
The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 
  
- ry 
“In this book we would like you to meet some of these 
nations—our friends. But this is not a geography book, 
and you will not find in it the names of rivers and their 
lengths nor the names of mountains and their heights. 
Instead, every page shows children, many children and 
their ordinary day-to-day lives in these far-off countries. 
“They have sent us their school newspapers in which 
they have described their life, their work and play, their 
problems and their hopes. 
“Reading what they have written, we have been very 
touched for we have found there our friends, as they 
really are, from every continent—our friends from 
everywhere. For wherever they come from, from hot 
lands or from the cold ones, whether they eat wheat, or 
millet or rice, they are all our friends and this is 
something that no frontiers can change. 
“And we need this friendship so that we may work 
together to build a vast and a brotherly world. This 
friendship makes us very happy.” 
WAY TO FRENCH WITHOUT TEARS 
  
  
    
  
  
  
  ~~ SS 
S
N
 
  
GROWING SKILL of young artists pius freedom to use 
» their imagination quickly brings a change. Scenes from 
village life replace the “jumble” drawings. Vocabularies expand, 
and soon the children are able to write down in French the names 
of the objects and persons they have depicted in their drawings. 
HARVEST SCENE with the family at work in the fields 
= was drawn by a young child from the bush after attending 
school for two months. Through his first drawings he learned 
words like father, mother, millet and gourd. Group scenes 
introduced verbs, and now he begins writing his first sentences.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

BOUBA AND JACQUES 
THE BIRTH OF A DIALOGUE 
BETWEEN AFRICA & EUROPE 
Over the signature of Bouba, the schoolchildren of Pitoa (Cameroons) 
began an exchange of letters a few years ago. with Jacques and the 
schoolchildren of Costes-Gozon, a tiny village in southern France. They 
wrote of their work, their games, and their everyday life. The letters 
became part of the reading and writing programmes of both schools 
(See page 5). Each week they were read, explained, discussed and reco- 
pied. In this way the Boubas of Africa and the Jacques of Europe 
contributed to a better understanding of each other. Their efforts have 
resulted in a delightful and informative little book Notre Ami Jacques 
(Our Friend Jacques) published by the Club African du Livre, at Pitoa, 
from which thea passages on the following pages have been selected. 
mo —gi 
M hes ‘ 
Pitoa (Cameroons), October 1. 
\ | 
ly J 
) y 3 : My dear friend Jacques, 
Ro : I am very happy to be writ- 
; ing to you. My name is Bouba 
and my father’s name is Cadji. 
He grows millet. I chase away 
the birds and the monkeys 
from his crops and I tend his 
herd of goats. I have a sister called Djénabou and a little 
brother whose name is Oumar. My mother grinds the 
millet, crushes the ground nuts and sweeps out the hut. 
I hope you and your parents are well. Goodbye for now 
and I hope to hear from you soon. 
Your friend: BOUBA. 
      
   
  
™w 
4 
   
Costes-Gozon (France) 
October 1. 
My dear friend Bouba, 
My name is Jacques Lacroix. 
My father is a farmer. He has 
a flock of 30 sheep and four 
pigs. My mother looks after 
the house, cleans it, prepares 
Ene : Jneals does the washing and helps my father in the 
ields. 
I have a brother called Maurice and two sisters, 
Jeanette and Léonie, 
I'm glad I can write to you and I hope you are well. 
Your friend: JACQUES.  

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. = September 1960 
THIS 1S MY HOME 
BOUBA: In June, when the school closes I shall 
walk down the hill towards my village, very happy to 
see my home again. 
All around it are young cotton plants, corn and 
millet. It has a straw roof which keeps it fresh and 
cool. The side which looks out on the road has a veran- 
dah. The second side has a window but as it is unpro- 
tected, it is always drenched during the rainy season. 
The third side also has a verandah held up by two open 
brick walls. This is where my father quietly sits sewing 
his clothes. We also eat our meals there and sleep out 
‘at night during the hot season. 
I shall be glad to sleep in the house where I was born. 
JACQUES: My home seems to hang on a red and 
green hillside: brick-red soil and green alfalfa and 
young corn. The house is built of stone covered by 
rough-cast plaster. The walls are pink and the tiled 
roof is covered with moss. Some grey and white pigeons 
circle overhead and with a fluttering of wings land on 
the stone-edged pigeon-house. 
NY
 
I
C
S
S
 
In another building on the far side of the stone 
courtyard are the barn, the sheep-pen, the stable and 
the pigsty. 
X
O
 
“J
 [     In an open shed leaning against a wall my father 
keeps his cart and his binder. In the same shed is the 
sling in which we put the ox when it is being shod. 
Al  
BALL AND WHISTLE 
     
    
BOUBA: We've decided to make a ball. Armed with 
A knives we go off to the river bank. The sap from the 
S trees here is like the latex of rubber trees. We make 
Ol A a gash in a tree and the sap starts to flow. I cover 
one of my thumbs with the sap which starts to harden. 
ay To get a thicker layer we add some manioc flour. Then 
—=/ we let some of the sap run on to Abbo’s stomach. The 
[ Q sap spreads out and solidifies. I go and fetch a hollow 
(20) reed stem. I take off the latex from my thumb and 
VES) have a small cylinder. With the hollow stem I blow 
Aux into it and the latex swells up until it makes a sphere 
—H about eight inches across. To give it-a thicker sur- 
face, I spread on it the sap which covers Abbo’s sto- 
. mach. Finally the skin of the bladder we have made 
is nearly half an inch thick. We go back to the village 
very pleased with ourselves and in the evening we play 
with the ball. 
N
T
]
 
3   
JACQUES: I am guarding the pigs in the chestnut 
grove. I pick out a new, straight, smooth branch and 
I cut a piece from it about sit inches long and about 
as thick as my thumb. Halfway down I cut into the 
bark just down to the wood. With the handle of my 
knife I tap very lightly on the bark and with a twisting 
movement I slide it carefully from the wood. About 
half an inch from the end of the bare wood and in the 
centre, I cut a triangular notch, and from here to the 
end of the wood I cut out a narrow shaving. I wet the 
wood with saliva and slide back the tube of bark over 
it. Now I cut out of the bark a piece half an inch long 
and a quarter of an inch wide above the first hole I 
made in the wood. My whistle is ready. I blow it and 
keep blowing, blowing, blowing. 
  
 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

NIGHT FISHING 
WITH STICK 
AND TORCH 
BOUBA: When it has got dark 
Nohou, the man with the powerful 
voice, cries: “Let all those who have 
eaten their fill, who are full of 
strength and courage, come fishing 
with me; let all those who are still 
hungry stay here to wash the 
cooking pots of their mothers and 
their brides-to-be.” 
Picking up sticks, matches and 
torches of dried grass, we run to 
join him. 
At the river's edge we light our 
torches and wade out until the 
water is up to our thighs. 
Mamadou and I fish together. A 
fish, lured by the light, comes close. 
It seems dazzled and stays quite 
still. With a quick blow from his 
stick, Mamadou stuns the fish. I 
grab it easily and put it into a 
gourd. 
Suddenly I see a big catfish. This 
time I hit out and stun the fish. 
But my stick breaks in two. 
Then I see another big fish and 
am just about to grab it when 
Mamadou hits my hand. I start 
crying and to comfort me, Mama- 
dou gives me half his catch. 
"A H) 
% 
= 
3 Ss 
uy 
   
     
  
  
HARVEST TIME 
BOUBA: In the field the ears of 
millet are drooping towards the 
ground and the stems are bent. It is 
harvest time. 
My father gives 15 bowls of millet 
to my mother. She grinds it into flour 
and makes a meal for the labourers. 
My father kills a goat. When these 
preparations are finished, my father 
goes to borrow some machetes. He 
warns the neighbours that there is 
work to be done and then he goes to 
see the witch-doctor. The next day 
work begins. With their machetes, 
the men cut the stalks a few inches 
above the soil. They lay them out 
on the ground in parallel rows. It is 
hard work, but the rhythm of a tom- 
tom helps to keep them at it. 
We children follow the harvesters, 
chewing millet stems as though they 
were sugar cane. 
Three days later, the women cut off 
the ears from the stalks and carry 
away the ears in large baskets to the 
place where they will be threshed. 
JACQUES: The oxen are pulling 
the harvester-binder. I grease it well, 
put in a good supply of string and 
prepare a reserve supply and a spare 
blade. 
My father leads the oxen. Robert 
is in the driving seat; with a lever he 
can raise or lower the blade according 
to the cut he wishes to make. 
The oxen pull hard. The cutting 
blade rattles in its frame, the drum 
squeaks as it turns, the belts carry 
the wheat up to the binder which 
gives a bang as each sheaf is tied; 
the sheaf carrier tills as Robert pres- 
ses a pedal, and the sheaves fall. 
Mother and I stack the sheaves in 
lines. The thistles prick our fingers. 
ANGLERS WITH A TRIDENT 
JACQUES : When my father and my uncle were 
schoolchildren, they would leave home early in the morn- 
ing so as to be able to go fishing before classes began. 
Usually about a dozen boys went down to the stream 
to fish with a trident. 
A few of the boys kept watch in case the gamekeeper 
should pass that way. Two others had an iron trident 
attached to a long stick. They went carefully towards 
the water and when they saw a trout motionless just 
above the bed of the stream, their trident flashed into 
the water. Impaled by the prongs, the fish fought madly. 
But they quickly had it out on the bank and in a twink- 
ling it was hidden in a satchel between the schoolbooks 
and the sandwiches. 
Then these young rascals went to a place well hidden 
by thick bushes and made a fire on which to cook their 
catch. How good it tasted. 
Sometimes they were late for school and when the 
teacher scolded them, they replied, timidly: “We had to 
help with the chores at home.”

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courter. — Scptember 1960 
MAGIC RIDERS AND CYCLISTS 
BOUBA: I went to visit my brother Oumarou, one of the 
chief’s warriors. Moussa and Zoussoufa told me: “Tomorrow 
you will see Djaoro Sanda, the magic horseman.” 
The next day in the centre of the village Djaoro Sanda is 
there beside his horse. A large crowd had gathered to watch 
he show, 
First Djaoro stuck pointed sticks into the ground in a 
straight line. “Hup, hup,” he cried to his horse which at 
once set off at a gallop. When they reached the first stick, 
Djaoro slid under the horse’s belly until] he was hanging by 
his legs. Without slowing down he snatched up one stick, 
then another and another until he finally had them all 
in his hand. Then he twisted himself back up into the 
saddle. 
“Bravo! Djaoro Sanda,” cried the spectators. Some people, 
who will believe anything, say that Djaoro can turn himself 
into a panther or a snake without frightening his horse. His 
horse is like any other horse, but it has been trained for a 
long time by its master. ‘ 
JACQUES: One Sunday I went to see a motor-cycle cross 
country race. In the afternoon cars began to arrive, pulling 
small trailers on which the motor-cycles were fired. 
The circuit was marked out. It went down the side of a 
little hill, up another hill, with a sharp turn at the top, and 
down into the bed of a dried-up lake. Then it went over a 
springboard and back up the first hill to the starting point. 
The riders brought their machines to the start line and 
when the signal was given they roared off in a cloud of 
dust. First away was No. 5 which shot down the hill at full 
speed. It went over the springboard, shot into the air and 
came down five yards further on. The machines went round 
the course ten times and No. 5 was the winner. 
THE DAY WE WERE HERDSMEN 
BOUBA: My father calls me. “Go into the hut and take 
down the stick and the gourd that are hanging from the 
roof,” he says. “Now go after your big brother,” he tells me 
“you are going to look after the herd.” 
I am pleased at the idea of taking care of the animals. 
With the gourd in my hand and the stick over my shoulder I 
run after my brother and take his place. At the water's 
edge our beasts drink their fill. .I cut a stem of wild millet 
and make a little flute. While the goats are nibbling at the 
young grass, I join the other little herdsmen, who are also 
busy making flutes. We blow our flutes together and make 
some fine tunes. 
Then we send the smallest children back to the village. 
“You, Oumarou, bring us some millet flour, and you, Dji- 
brilla, some dried fish.” ‘We do our cooking and drink the 
water in our gourds. In the evening we sing as we go home. 
JACQUES: Julian and I have been told to watch over the 
ozxen. We leave them to graze and we run to the cherry 
tree. Julian climbs it, cuts off branches loaded with cherries 
and throws them to me. We eat lots of cherries and we 
even swallow the stones. 
An hour goes by and Julian comes down from the tree. 
When we go back to the field the oren have disappeared. 
We look for them in the other fields and finally we go back 
to the village. 
Father is waiting for us on the stairs. “The oxen came back 
on their own at full gallop,” he tells us severely. 
We feel vexed and foolish. We hardly eat any supper and 
we don’t sleep much that night—we both have stomach ache.  

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

WHEN 
| GROW UP 
BOUBA: I shall raise cows, sheep and 
goats. I won't grow any crops, but with 
the milk from my cows I shall buy a 
big gourd of millet. 
with the meat of a goat or a ram 
killed each month we shall eat well. 
Clothes will be no problem. I shall 
take a Ssix-years-old bull to market 
and with what it brings I shall buy 
fine clothes. 
My son ‘will guard my sheep, my 
daughter will look after the goats and 
I shall take the cows out to the pastu- 
res. There I may have to endure rain 
and storms, but the delicious, creamy 
milk will soon make me forget these 
discomforts. 
When I grow old I shall employ paid 
shepherds. In the shadow of the 
“danki”, I shall stretch myself on my 
sleeping mat, a glass of coffee by my 
side. “Bouba has more than a hundred 
head of livestock; he is one of the rich- 
est among us,” the villagers will say. 
When I am 80 years old I shall sell 
some of my animals and I shall spend 
the money on a pilgrimage to Mecca. 
JACQUES’ FRIENDS. — When I am 
20 I shall have a tractor and I shall 
use it to work the land. I shall plough 
up all the fields. (Roger.) 
— I shall be a hairdresser. I shall 
cut peoples’ hair, beards .that have 
grown too long and sometimes... an ear 
or two. (Paul.) 
— Perhaps I shall be the Member of 
Parliament for my region. (Alphonse.) 
— I shall be a postman. I shall go 
from house to house delivering letters, 
telegrams and parcels. (Antoine.) 
  
ww 
SER 
L- 
  
    
     
 
PORTRAITS FROM PITOA, — All drawings on pages 4. 
to 13 are by children from the Pitoa school, Cameroons. 
a
 
N
G
 
. 
LE
TI
SR
 
h
i

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 64725: Child Aesops of the Cameroons

CHILD AESOPS OF 
THE CROCODILE AND THE BULLOCK 
The bullock is thirsty and goes to the river to drink. 
He goes into deep water. A crocodile seizes him by 
the hoof and pulls him towards the bottom. The 
bullock pulls hard too . 
The crocodile is very strong. But so is the bullock. 
Who will win? 
The bullock says to the crocodile: “Cayman !, just 
look at the sun.” 
While the crocodile is looking at the sun, the bullock 
gores him with his horn. 
The bullock is the winner. 
Dairou Issa (Tcholiré School) 
The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 
THE CAMEROONS 
THE HORSE AND THE DONKEY 
The donkey goes into the horse's stable. He says to 
the horse: 
“I'm stronger than you. Let's have a fight.” 
The donkey gives the horse a kick, The horse grabs 
the donkey’s ears with his teeth and pulls hard. 
Now all donkeys have long ears. They don't fight 
horses any more. 
Isma, aged 10 
THE FAWN AND THE FLY 
The fawn and the fly lived together in the forest. 
“Let's play at hide-and-seek”, said the fly. “She who wins 
will be queen of the forest. You go and hide and I will look 
for you.” Then the fly settled on the back of the fawn’s head. 
The Joy hid herself inside a thick bush and called out: “Where 
am L3 
“There you are, there you are”, cried the fly. “I've won. 
Now I will go and hide.” A 
Then she flew back and settled again on the fawn’s head. 
“Look for me,” she called. The fawn looked everywhere, but 
never found the fly. 
At the end of the day the fly came out from her hiding place 
and said: 
“You never found me, so I am queen of the forest.” 
Richard Kamga (Gauganté School) 
THE MOUSE AND THE BIRD 
~The mouse and the bird are friends. They decide to build a 
house in the bush. The mouse says to the bird: “You go and 
collect the wood and I'll go and fetch the grass.” 
While the mouse looks for the grass a snake catches if and 
eats it up. While the bird is fetching the wood a man catches 
it and gives it to his child to play with. 
The mouse and the bird did not build their house. They are 
not even friends now. The mouse lives in the ground. The bird 
lives in the sky. 
  
  
Hamadou Daboré, aged 9 
  
THE CORMORANTS 
One day I go with my mother to fetch water from the 
river. 
I see a cormorant fishing. I take a pebble and throw 
it at him. 
The cormorant rises with a big fish in its beak. Then 
it flies along just skimming the water. 
Another cormorant appears. He says fo the first: “Walt 
for me.” Then he dives into the water and comes up 
with a fish. He shares it with his friend. 
When they have finished eating the fish, the two birds 
fly away, singing as they go. 
Wabili, aged 9 (Pitoa School) 
Texts on this page are taken from Bibliothéque de I'Ecolier Africain, 
published by Editions du Groupe Camerounais d'Education Moderne. 

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

AR RTT = TS RS LP I a PR SI REE i HR § RCE A oR £3 Sp A A RS TR Gi EL 


### 64739: Desert or deluge at the flick of a switch

DESERT OR DELUGE AT 
THE FLICK OF A SWITCH 
by Daniel Behrman 
  
ow do plants adapt themselves and 
survive during a torrid summer in 
the Sahara or a long spell of heavy rain in Provence. 
Scientists hope that they will soon learn the answers to 
some of the puzzling problems of plant behaviour from a 
special laboratory, an “ecotron” which is to be built at 
Montpellier in southern France. 
By simply flicking over a switch they will be able to 
obtain precise data on plants growing in “climates” 
artificially created in the ‘“ecotron” whose work will 
reinforce the offensive launched by science against some 
of the worst problems afflicting the world’s arid zones— 
one third of its land surface. 
Now in the planning stage with half its total budget of 
$1,200,000 already alloted, the ecotron will be the newest 
chapter in the four-centuries-old history of Montpellier as 
a hothouse of botany. It will be the laboratory of the 
University of Montpellier’s Institute of Botany, headed by 
Prof. Louis Emberger. 
Professor Emberger is one of the world’s leading au- 
thorities on plant ecology—the study of relationships of 
plants to their environment—and it was he who christened 
the “ecotron.” Part of its name comes from ecology and 
the other part from the cyclotrons used in nuclear physics. 
Appropriately enough, the ecotron will enable measure- 
ments of plant behaviour to be made with a precision 
usually associated with nuclear physics. 
The Institute at Montpellier is already something of a 
mecca for scientists from countries in the world’s dry belt 
who study there under Unesco fellowships enabling them 
to specialize in plant ecology. 
The “"ecofron” will be a powerful weapon in the fight 
science is waging against aridity and the misery it en- 
genders for hundreds of millions. Here, a climate will not 
only be reproduced with its exact conditions of light, 
temperature and humidity (as ecologists themselves say, it 
would be ridiculous fo spend more than a million dollars 
to duplicate what nature offers at no cost), but it will 
be “taken apart” so that the ecologist will be able to 
learn which of these conditions is essential to plant life. 
The plant scientist can turn his findings over to the 
agricultural engineer whose task is to raise food produc- 
tion. For example, if soil is over-irrigated a plant often 
“transpires” too much and wastes water. At the same 
time, too much water can actually lower its absorption of 
carbon dioxide in the process of photosynthesis, whereby 
plants create living matter from carbon dioxide, water and 
mineral] salts. 
In other words, the study of how a plant behaves in the 
ecotron will allow scientists to determine precisely how 
much irrigation water it should receive and how often— 
thereby both raising its productivity and reducing its 
consumption of scarce water. 
14 
SSE SR 
How will these studies be carried out ? Recently, we 
had an opportunity to take a tour of the Montpellier 
ecotron—on paper, of course—with Profesor Emberger and 
Dr. Frode E. Eckardt, who is in charge of its construction. 
Once it is completed as a wing of the brand-new 
building of the Institute of Botany, the écotron will 
outwardly be a long, low construction of abstract, zigzag 
design in the shade of the ancient trees of Montpellier’s 
botanical gardens, founded in 1593. 
Inwardly, it will be a world of its own, so much so that 
its staff will have to pass through an “airlock” to go to 
work. In special rooms, research workers will change their 
clothes, shower, and then put on sterile smocks and, for 
certain tasks, gloves and boots. The purpose of these 
precautions is to prevent the introduction of insects and 
viruses from the outside world into the ecotron. 
The heart of the ecotron will be its control room. Here, 
a single man with panels of switches and rheostats will be 
able to set the weather in the laboratory rooms. To be 
exact, he will mainly oversee the setting of the weather 
by automation. For example, it will be possible to take 
graphs of temperature, humidity and sunlight from re- 
corders in, let’s say, central Tunisia and then feed them 
into this electronic equipment which will reproduce the 
same conditions within a given room of the ecotron. 
T may very well be one of four rooms 
in the laboratory’s most highly auto- 
mated section. There, an experimenter will be able to 
vary, at will, light, temperature and humidity, and the 
carbon dioxide content of the air. Like a stage manager, 
he will create a setting where plants can act their parts. 
In fact, the lights for these rooms are to be made by the 
same firm responsible for stage lighting in Paris theatres 
and for illuminating castles in the “sound and light 
shows” all over France. 
Next to each room will be a small laboratory where 
readings can be taken without entering the room. This is 
extremely important because the mere presence of a 
human being in such an experiment can seriously modify 
its conditions. 
This is also one of the maln respects in which Mont- 
pellier’s ecotron will differ from “phytotrons” already in 
use in the United States, France, the Netherlands and the 
U.S.S.R. There, the growth of plants over a long-term 
period is studied in large rooms where the temperature is 
held constant. To observe how a plant reacts to a change 
in temperature, the experimenter wheels it into a different 
room kept at a different temperature. One of the 
objectives of the phytotron is to make a highly precise

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 64739: Desert or deluge at the flick of a switch

study of the physiology of plants with a view towards 
raising yields. Experiments are often conducted on a 
large scale. 
Montpellier is more concerned with such delicate pro- 
cesses as photosynthesis and transpiration and, in general, 
learning how plants react to changes in their environment. 
Smaller rooms, in which the climate can be varied, will 
be used. 
Both in the phytotron and the ecotron, botany is 
emerging from what might be called its “hand 
craftsmanhip” stage. The scientist will be freed from 
such chores as hourly readings which will be registered 
and co-ordinated automatically. At the same time, the 
ecotron’s electronic brain will “remember” experiments on 
perforated tape and will be able to duplicate them at any 
time. 
The ecotron will also include a cold room where tem- 
peratures as low as 5°F can be created, and four green- 
house rooms where plants will “perform” under natural 
light while other conditions are varied. Temperatures in 
these rooms ‘will be controlled: in the hottest of the four, 
‘they will be “Saharan.” In another room, plants will be 
subjected to small doses of radioactivity. 
   
  
   
 
     
  
    
      
   
   
i 3 : ve 
q } BRAS ; S FEIN ] . y 1 
: i p44 \ A A : 
A | t Sy Ul TLR 
4 y X yo Fu i 7% NC YU 
\ A og & . i A Rv ; \ oA Shalndy Ry 
  
VT rRNA : Lo et RE tls Ll pl ay 
Unesco-Aubert de la Rue 
The world's arid zones cover one-third of its land surface, Not all of 
this area is as badly afflicted as this wasteland in Latin America — due 
to total erosion of the soil followlng excessive deforestation and bad 
agricultural practices. Today, science has taken the offensive against 
some of the worst problems of the arid zones, aided by research carried 
out in specialized laboratories like Montpellier's Institute of Botany. 
  
11 this will take place only a few 
hundred yards away from what Pro- 
fessor Emberger calls “the birthplace of plant ecology.” 
Opposite the institute in the botanical gardens stands 
“La Montagne” created by Richer de Belleval, the 16th 
century founder: of the gardens. The “mountain” is a 
ridge about 100 yards long and 5 yards high, running from 
East to West. On its southern slope, Richer de Belleval 
planted sunloving Mediterranean vegetation which thrives 
in dry soil, On its shady northern slope, the pioneer in- 
troduced more northern varieties. 
The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 
Today, the rest is almost hallucinating. One side of the 
tiny ridge is a Provencal hillside with perfumed rosemary, 
spurge and other low sturdy plants baking in the sun. 
The other is a thick forest, mysterious and romantic with 
ivy winding around massive trunks. 
That was the beginning of botany in Montpellier during 
the reign of good King Henri IV who wanted every 
Frenchman to have a chicken in his cooking pot. Since 
then, Richer be Belleval’s successors have reigned there in 
unbroken line down to Louis Emberger. The list is 
studded with the greats of botany. Here, in the early 
18th century, Pierre Magnol (who gave his name to the 
magnolia) held the chair of botany. Here, Augustin Pyra- 
mus de Candolle pioneered a new system of plant classifi- 
cation in the early 19th century and planted a garden still 
piously preserved in its original form. Another great link 
in this chain of botanists was Charles Flahault who died 
in 1945 at the age of 84. 
Professor Emberger, the present head, has been fighting 
for his ideas almost since the day when he first became 
interested in botany as a child in his native Alsace. He 
once wrote : “Often we are asked about the usefulness of 
an institute of botany in the atomic age. The fact is that 
plants have the power to make a synthesis of life. Then 
do they not have anything to teach us? We go into 
ecstasy over the power of the atom but plants have the 
power of life.” 
0 help scientists from countries in 
the arid zone itself to read the story 
of vegetation, Unesco has been offering a series of fellow- 
ships in plant ecology at Montpellier, 
Recently, a group of six young scientists made the pil- 
grimage to Montpellier from Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Morocco, 
the Sudan and Turkey, and fellowships are now being 
awarded to eight more for a two-year course. When we 
visited Montpellier, four of the first group had already 
completed their stays in which they worked in plant eco- 
logy, including mapping, for periods running from nine 
to eighteen months. Their fellowships also covered stays 
at a leading soll science laboratory near Paris. 
But ‘we did have an opportunity to meet two UNEsco 
fellows who had stayed in Montpelller for intensive study, 
Dr. Ali Zargari of Iran and Mr. Elmi Taher Amireh of 
Jordan. 
Dr. Zargari is a professor of botany at the Higher Tea- 
cher Training College of the University of Teheran and 
director of the herbarium at Iran’s arid zone research 
institute. At forty, he is also the author of a three-volume 
work on Iranian medicinal plants which has been honour- 
ed by a royal prize in Teheran. 
His work at Montpellier, he told us, has changed his 
own viewpoint from that of the “pure botanist” collecting 
specimens to that of the ecologist, who is interested in 
soil and weather as well as in species of plants. In this 
respect, ecology sums up rather happily the goal of UNEs- 
co’s arid zone programme, to unite various branches of 
science into a common front against the desert. 
Mr. Amireh told us he was an inspector of horticulture 
in Amman. At Montpellier he is studying the water eco- 
nomy of Quercus coccifera, the hardy kermes oak of 
Languedoc. On sunny days, he gets up at 4 a.m. to be 
at his testing station twelve miles outside the city in the 
maquis by cunrise. There he measures the plant’s eva- 
poration and transpiration, cutting off a sample every 
fifteen minutes and then weighing it five or six times at 
intervals of one minute. This is repeated at fifteen- 
minute intervals until sundown when Mr. Amireh returns 
to Montpellier and puts his sample into an oven to learn 
its weight when completely dry. 
Upon his return to Jordan, Mr. Amireh wouid like to 
attempt similar experiments on local plants to find out 
just how much precious water they consume, 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 64744: The Stairway of the giants

THE 
SIAIRWAY 
OF THE 
GIANTS 
by Paul Almasy 
    
  
  
    
Photos © Almasy, Paris 
Some 2,000 years ago, the tribes of the Upper Bontok Valley 
on the Philippines’ island of Luzon completely transformed 
their wild mountain fastnesses by a grandiose feat of agri- 
cultural engineering. Taking between 1,500 and 2,000 years 
to do so, they had terraced the mountainsides into a series 
of ricefields that look (above right) like a stairway for giants. 
To retain these narrow fields they built some 15,000 miles of 
high stone walls and laid down innumerable bamboo pipes to 
irrigate the rice. Tattooed on arms and chest, peasant 
(opposite page) is a descendant of the men who built these 
innumerable terraces. These mountain-dwellers, men and 
women alike, smoke cigars made from homegrown tobacco. 
Above, housewife relaxes with cigar of Churchillian dimensions. 
16 
        
BP vw aT ot 
n - Ray TY ae — p— + 
hg i | Lak 
m——. Sore a 
x — . --- LAT. 
et 
  
        
  
N diverse lands and throughout history man, 
the settler and the farmer, has often challeng- 
ed a hostile Nature, transforming desert, 
jungle or steppe to draw his sustenance from 
the soil. Yet rarely has he ever changed a landscape as 
profoundly as in the Bontok Valley on the Philippines’ 
island of Luzon. 
Here, in the heart of a wild mountain range, the famous 
terraced ricefields of the Ifugaos, spreading over several 
hundred square miles, are a green and living testament 
to the ingenuity of this people in devising agricultural 
techniques—a masterpiece of human patience and endu- 
rance. 
Describing this region is impossible—only pictures can 
give an idea of the scope of this achievement—one of 
history’s most remarkable examples of agricultural deve- 
lopment. In the Banaue Valley alone, terraces cover 
400 square kilometres and the walls supporting them total

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 64744: The Stairway of the giants

EP
R!
 
"7 
Ck 
Bo a
K
,
 
Ww
 
i,
 
VI
 
E
R
 
TA
L  
some 15,000 miles in length. Archaeologists and historians 
who have studied the Bontok riceflelds estimate that the 
islanders must have worked from 1,500 to 2,000 years to 
build the terraces and their systems of irrigation. There 
are terraced riceflelds in China, Japan and Indonesia,.but 
these ricefields of the Ifugaos in the Luzon mountains are 
by far the biggest in the world, with the highest and the 
best-constructed stone walls. 
It is believed that a small tribe which emigrated from 
Indonesia taught the Ifugaos how to construct riceflelds 
in terraces. This must have happened some 4,000 years 
ago. Remains studied by specialists suggest that the 
Upper Bontok Valley took on its present-day aspect only 
at the beginning of the Christian era. 
We know very little about the Ifugaos who, 4,000 years 
ago, took on this gigantic task which the people of the 
Philippines call the “eighth wonder of the world.” They 
probably came from the Asian mainland and they reached 
The Unesco Courier, — September 1960 
1 
. 
J A 
- 
Te
 
M
i
a
 
Luzon while seeking a new land in which to settle or after 
fleeing from a powerful enemy. 
Today, the Upper Bontok Valley and the neighbouring 
valleys are inhabited by various tribes, one of them still 
known as the “Ifugaos.” Their neighbours are the Bon- 
toks and the Kalingas. All these mountaineers are excep- 
tionally gifted farmers and they maintain the terraces 
of their ancestors with great technical skill. They are 
continually improving irrigation systems and ways of 
growing rice and raising livestock (their two main occu- 
pations). 
There is no better proof of their ingenuity than the 
scarecrows they construct to protect their seeds from the 
birds. These scarecrows resemble those found in other 
lands, but are kept perpetually moving, operated by the 
brooks and the many little streams in the region. A 
mechanism as ingenious as it is simple transmits the 
energy of the streams to the scarecrows through a system 
CON'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 64744: The Stairway of the giants

STAIRWAY OF THE GIANTS (Continued) 
_ 
  
» 
LL RSE EER, ey 
  
a eo ag 
- 
of cords. In some cases, the moving scarecrows may be 
as far as 800 yards from the water. 
While the Kalinga ricefields are not as spectacular as 
those of the Ifugaos and the Bontoks, they are also 
remarkably well maintained. The homes and villages of 
these mountaineers are among the cleanest and best kept 
in the world. Yet it is not uncommon to hear certain 
city-dwellers refer to these tribesmen as “savages.” It 
Is a pejorative and unjustified label for people who are 
among Asia's most highly skilled farmers and who 
have been able to create and to preserve such gigantic 
works of engineering. 
Its origin may lie in the fact that for centuries, Kalin- 
gas, Bontoks, Ifugaos and other tribes were perpetually at 
war and, as a sign of victory, the men returned to their 
villages with the heads of enemies slain in battle. This 
gave them the name of head-hunters. However barba- 
rous a custom it may have been, it certainly was not 
unique in the annals of warfare and it has been aban- 
doned for many years. 
2 ALR Sat LEE 
a, 
 
. 
itt 
It is even said that the introduction of baseball and 
football among the Luzon mountaineers broke them of 
their habit of collecting heads. This seems to correspond 
to the theory of an American administrator of fifty years 
ago who wrote that head-hunting was not always an 
integral part of tribal warfare but, more often, a sport 
where two rival teams deliberately accepted the supreme 
risks of this combat. At the end of the “match”, heads 
were counted in the same way as goals at a football match. 
If these mountaineers are still called “primitives” and 
“savages” it may be because of the regrettable habit of 
certain “civilized” people in thus describing others who 
wear only a minimum amount of clothes. The farmers in 
the Upper Bontoc Valley have to work in extremely tough 
conditions under a blazing sun. They believe—and they 
are logically correct—that there is no need to wear 
trousers and shirts which could only hinder them in their 
work. But it is ridiculous to use the term “savages” in 
referring to peoples capable of such achievements. 
A TTT ne 
gone Bn

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 64744: The Stairway of the giants

The Unesco Courier, — September 1960 
WE gl 
  
    
  
   
4 I Al a-ha 
Rn ies A Shen g | er 
—r Tr 
r my pd g 
A me od 
  
Photos © Paul Almasy 
CENTURIES OF PATIENT WORK went into 
the making of these ricefield terraces which climb 
up the mountainsides from the valley floors to 
heights of nearly 7,000 feet. Hardworking and 
skilful farmers, the mountain dwellers of Bontok 
are also expert masons—they need to be with 
literally thousands of miles of terrace walls to 
maintain. Kalinga village home (right) with its 
plaited facade testifies to their skill in yet another 
craft. Above right, with his bow and his axe, this 
young man of Bontok has a rather forbidding 
appearance. These mountain people are, in 
fact, very friendly and hospitable to strangers. 
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 64746: Fine arts on postage stamps

FINE ARTS ON 
POSTAGE STAMPS 
      
A Aree A ER GT 
"WOMAN RETURNING FROM THE BATH eh 
IN THE RAIN. This work by Kiyonaga, is 
$ ol N 
” 
v Al 
one of a series of woodcuts from the 18th cen- 
tury which now figure on Japanese stamps. 3 
Ch 
FIGURES FROM ANDROMED 
~ set of stamps issued in Greece last year to 
commemorate the ancient Greek theatre. 
It reproduces vase decoration (4th century 
~ B.C.) now in Acropolis Museum, Athens. 
  
WE 
by David J. Jacobs 
EPAYING the tax on the delivery of a 
letter with a stamp wasn’t even 
dreamed of when Raphael brushed 
into life his lovely Madonnas or when Goya etched his 
angry nightmares into seething commentaries on the 
ugliness of man. And yet, there, on tiny, gummed and 
perforated rectangles, are “The Sistine Madonna” in her 
magnificent calm and “Volaverunt”, Plate 61 in the Capri- 
chos, showing three crouching witches carrying the 
Duchess of Alba through the clouds in three different 
directions at once. 
These are just two of the more than 1,100 paintings, 
prints and drawings that more than 125 governments 
have had translated into stamp designs. But why stop 
at painting? Sculpture, architecture, musie, ceramics, 
printing, tribal carvings, weaving, the dance, theatre, lite- 
rature—almost every form of art from antiquity to yester- 
day—has been represented on postage stamps from Aitu- 
taki to the Virgin Islands. 
More than 85 governments have issued about 500 stamps 
featuring ceramics. Thousands more have been based on 
sculpture—a Polynesian club, the “Charloteer From Del- 
phi”, an exquisite Ife bronze from Nigeria's Yorubaland, 
a head of Nefertiti or a detail from the work of the con- 
temporary Yugoslav, Ivan Mestrovic. A history of archi- 
tecture could be illustrated with postage stamps, from the 
cave (Lebanon issued a good example) to the skyscraper 
(the new York City skyline appears on a Monaco stamp). 
The designers of the first postage stamps never dreamed 
of such subjects as an etching of Diirer’s mother or a 
carving of the great Congo king, Shamba Bolongongo. 
But they did turn to the arts from the very beginning 
for their motifs. The portrait on Great Britain's Penny 
Black of 1840, the world’s first adhesive postage stamp, 
was based on a carving of Queen Victoria's head designed 
by William Wyon for a medal struck in 1837. Another 
portrait of Victoria, by Alfred Edward Chalon, became the 
basis for many beautiful stamps among the early issues 
of Grenada, Queensland and New Zealand. 
Some nations based the designs of their first stamps on 
the seals and stamps used on deeds, tax documents and 
other papers. These were simple ciphers, crests and other 
symbols. But most nations, following Britain’s example, 
used portraits of the rulers. This was an outgrowth of 
the ancient practice of using the ruler’s head on coins. 
From the beginning, stamps have been manufactured 
by the makers of money. Early designs of the United 
States, for instance, were produced by engravers employed 
by banknote printers. They used portraits of Franklin 
and Washington which had appeared on notes printed by 
the same firm. It was not long before the designers went 
beyond the portrait. In 18689, the United States issued 
stamps based on historical paintings such as Vanderlyn’s 
“Landing of Columbus” and Trumbull’s “Declaration of 
Independence”. 
And so it is with other nations. As the 19th Century 
ended and the 20th began, they were drawing more and 
more on their artistic riches. In 1896, Greece issued a set 
which included Praxiteles’ “Hermes”, Paeonius’ “Victory”, 
Myron’s “Discobolus”, and a view of the Acropolis and 
Parthenon. In 1905, Spain commemorated the 300th 
  
 
_ CONT'D ON PAGE 23 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 64746: Fine arts on postage stamps

The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
      
a2 The remarkable delicacy antl detail of a Hostage stamp version of — 
 brandt's “Persian Wearing Fur Cap "is revealed by the enlargement, 
above. Stamp itself, (right) is one of a set showing ET ER EET TE of 
= this Briss etchings, issued | in 1956 on his 350th binhday AnAiversary, 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 64746: Fine arts on postage stamps

FINE ARTS ON STAMPS (Continued) 
22 
      
- J 
’ g 
hl 
2 Hind 
A ie h 
ge 
| —, 
ar 
2 
4 a rel 
- *} {™ 
bE 
- \ 
> He 
+ 
> y E ets £ 
7 Fiend 3 
© 12 > 
on , /) ’ ~ 
j £ A To pane] ¢ 
. E i DAMA 7. EASICTEA 
; § g 
: | 5 IPC < 
a S 
> 3, | 
3 4 18 BRANDT 56 p 
WAT NW OWL SCN WW WWW WW Wow 
HOMAGE TO DA VINCI. “Lady with 
the Ermine” was engraved by a Pelish artist 
from Leonardo da Vinci's painting. It is one of 
a number of stamps issued in 1956 to pub- 
licise Unesco’s International Museum Week. 
A GOYA SELECTION. In 1958 a set of 
Spanish stamps was issued depicting the works 
of Goya, Shown here are “El Pelele” and 
“The Drinker”, two of the genre works now 
in the Prado Museum collection, Madrid. 
LO
LO
L 
O
A
 
D
A
A
 
SA
 
A
A
O
 
  
ETCHINGS BY DURER. These works by the great German, painter, engraver and 
designer, Albrecht Ddrer— praying hands and his mother—were issued by the Saar 
in 1955. The remarkable precision of the originals has been carefully preserved. 
- a TA 7 L 
Fo 
ESS A aa aa 
C
N
N
 
R
R
N
 
$1 PELE (SOYA 
% oh Fh A I Bow NL R efinnihons 
  
  
S
A
N
A
 
AN
IN
E 
G
O
N
 
O
N
I
N
 
Lah a 
   FL AEREOCR SOYA 
3 ONS AAD AA PN SR La A KD mm 
THREE FACES OF VAN GOGH. Two Dutch engravers and one from France used differing styles to interpret a Yan Gogh self-portrait 
Yet in transposing the painting, all three have faithfully reproduced the haunted look 
s 
J 
El
 
n
f
 
d
E
 
N
I
N
E
 
  
\g — 
RUA a ana ae a a Ta Ua a ae Ue Cy 
REPUBLIQUE FRANGAISE 
S11 LS    
    VAN GOGH 
a 1853 1890 isd 
# 
which Vincent Van Gogh gave to his own features. 
  
A) 
I
N
N
A
 
NA
IA
 
P
m
 
RFS RAF ITI IIIS 
CENT YAN coeH 
m
e

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 64746: Fine arts on postage stamps

       
# Nr ¥ % rt WS 
> é 
i J rs ; '9 SS -. p hd ¢ 
Wily a / rd’ 7 A y, . 
a 7/7 2 Ge { 
Y fA “ a ange - & 
; > if 
> Fig ¢ 
> ys ¢ 
> ; > i ¢ 
oS FY 
» 7 & Ed 
: bh 
> 4 Ri 
{ oT ig 3 
> GN é 
« . } yy 
2 E \ Ro * OM « 
' £ REPUBLIQUE TUNISIENNE 
WW Wa EW WN A WoW WN 
THE CRAFTSMEN. The Tunisian postal service chose crafts 
as the theme for a series of stamps representing embroiderers, 
weavers and potters. This one shows the weavers at work, 
AN IMPRESSIONIST Py 
- Ogata Korin, one of * OIATAKOPHH i ; 
mda 
Japan's most famous ar- 
tists, is honoured by this 
Soviet stamp issued in 
1959, ‘showing a detail 
of one of his paintings. 
This 17th century artist 
broke with tradition and 
developed a style dis- 
tinctive by its bold im- 
pressionism, both in 
painting and in the 
decoration of lacquer. 
      @f
 
D
A
M
A
 
J 
X
S
I
X
0
O
b
h
<
x
 
S
S
A
N
I
O
I
D
 
N
M
 
ML
, 
M
a
g
 al
 
i
i
 
I 
A 
Bi 
  
3 
 
WORK AND DETAIL. Czechoslovakia has honoured through 
its stamps the painter Josef Manes, celebrated for his historical 
and genre works. In 1936 astamp for aid to children reproduced 
Manes’ “Infancy,” showing a midwife presenting a newborn 
baby to its father. Left, the complete work; right, a detail. 
ers 
2 Fo DAA Cd Sle SEAT 
re SRA TE i i awe a PR AR RL REE Hc A er E ErR aE, Cs a EL Le 8 ek COT Ne a EE oe - 
The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 
anniversary of the publication of “Don Quixote” by issu- 
ing ten stamps, each based on an illustration by Gustave 
Doré of a different episode of the story. 
The first stamps of Egypt in 1866, then under Turkish 
suzerainty, showed Turkish inscriptions, but the paper 
was watermarked with a pyramid, The next year the 
Sphinx and pyramids appeared as the central motif. By 
1914, Egypt was displaying the Colossi of Thebes, the Pylon 
of Karnak and the Rock Temples of Abu Simbel. 
Over fhe years, the postage stamp has assumed addi- 
tional functions, quite apart from the prepayment of a 
tax. It commemorates national events, it raises funds for 
charity and it disseminates propaganda. The designers 
have found the arts a natural—and rich—reservoir of 
ideas. And many governments have found this tapping 
of the national heritage a thrifty way of broadcasting to 
the world a desirable cultural image. 
The hobby of stamp collecting, as old as stamps, has 
also tended to influence stamp design. Few products of 
the graphic arts are scrutinized so carefully by so many 
critical eyes, Advertisements, book and magazine formats, 
money, tax forms and thousands of other familiar pieces 
of printed paper—from menus to market bags—are, in a 
sense, invisible. We are influenced by them, we read them, 
we spend them, we carry home the fish in them, but few 
of us are conscious of how they are constructed and 
decorated. 
Well designed printing does not wish to call attention 
to itself. The message is paramount, the messenger un- 
seen. Of course this is true, too, of stamps. To many, 
they are just colored blurs on the corners of envelopes. 
But millions of collectors the world over study them in 
great detail, often preferring stamps that haven’t even 
performed their function because the cancellations 
obscure some of these details. 
MAGNIFYING glass Is a basic tool and 
the catalogues are full of blown-up 
illustrations of minute changes in 
line, shade or design. Many collectors are concerned pri- 
marily with studying perforations, watermarks, paper, 
gum, ink and printing varieties and pay little heed to 
design. Some are interested only in cancellations. But 
over the years there has been a growing sensitivity to the 
elements of design. 
It is common practice for many nations to hold annual 
contests among artists to determine stamp designs. 
Some stamp journals run regular columns on the subject 
and one conducts an annual “Design Derby” in which 
thousands of readers vote for the most beautiful and the 
most ugly stamps produced each year. 
This intense interest in what appears on the face of 
a stamp has been even further stimulated by the increas- 
ing popularity of “topical” or “thematic” collecting in 
which stamps are collected by subject, rather than by 
country or some other conventional discipline. The topi- 
calist chases after butterflies, maps, railroads, ships, water- 
falls, flowers, doctors, dogs, fish, poets, mathematicians, 
nudes or whatever else strikes his fancy and also appears 
on a sizeable number of postage stamps. About 300 of 
these topicalists from more than 20 countries have formed 
an organization known as the Fine Arts Unit of the Ame- 
rican Topical Association. The unit publishes a journal 
containing detailed and highly informed articles about 
works of art depicted on stamps. 
Along with this widespread and critical awareness of 
stamps has evolved the peculiar art of stamp designing. 
Among the handful of steel engravers and the highly 
skilled photographers, retouchers, etchers and other tech- 
nicians are the .men who have established stamp design 
as the rebirth, on a mass level, of the art of the minia- 
turist. They work from designs created for the stamp or 
from motifs that were created for other purposes but are 
now being used as the theme or a stamp. 
The objective is not to reproduce the original, but to 
translate it—not just into another language, but into 
another medium. It is like rendering Dante’s “Inferno” 
into a comic strip in a Chicago newspaper while still 
retaining a suggestion of the spirit of the original, The 
  
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 64746: Fine arts on postage stamps

FINE ARTS ON STAMPS (Continued) 
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
of Montfort, six centuries earlier. Details of one of these stamps, 
a Homage to the Prince '', in magnification (above) reveal stamp <r Gk 
~engraver's remarkable skill, especially apparent in variety of facial fetes seven, 
ES Lr CL ET CUT LeU EL BU DTD TE CTE ERR CIT TET LET + FORNTENTUY-LIFEITE) 
LE EURETTV TE REL ED BS has its v postage stamp issue. a Ft 
] Io. | be 
- B hy Sk [i Tr 
original may have been a fresco from the Cinquecento, a 
triptych for an altar, a window on a mosque or a mask 
for a tribal chieftan. But the stamp design must be a 
vignette, usually in one or two colours, occasionally more, 
and it must share its tiny home with the country’s name, 
the denomination and often, a descriptive legend. It is 
sometimes quite remarkable to see how these limitations 
are overcome—sometimes, even exploited—to produce not 
only a translation, but a nugget of graphic art with vir- 
tues of it own. 
But to many the appeal of the design must remain 
secondary to the subject. To see the way the increasing 
number of issues based on works of art are grabbed up 
is to realize the everdeepening interest in the arts. As 
one collector, writing in the journal of the American 
Topical Association, put it: 
“I never possessed either the means or the wall 
ful space to form a picture gallery in the proper sense. 
= 8 That is why my choice... fell upon “Pictures and 
(POUR LE MUSEE POSTAL! Painters.” Now I have an art gallery in miniature, 
eae TTA TEIINE Ca Sama embracing... a selection of the outstanding master- 
fl 5 pieces enshrined in the world-famous collections of 
London, Paris, New York, Berlin, Vienna, Florence, 
TRIBUTE TO FRAGONARD. The celebrated French Madrid and the like, all reduced to postage stamp 
painter Jean-Honoré Fragonard has been honoured on : size and displayed upon a hundred or so ordinary 
stamps issued in Poland and France. In this reproduc- stamp album sheets... I have amassed, in about four 
tion of “The Letter,” French engraver, |. Piel, has captu- years, rather more than a thousand different stamp 
red the grace with which Fragonard imbued his subjects. pictures and the cry is ‘still they come! ... 
Sculpture and Architecture, he wrote, will come next. 
        
24

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 


### 64747: A Century of black gold

A CENTURY OF ‘BLACK GOLD’ 
The gigantic oil industry which today 
keeps billions of wheels turning through- 
out the world and which, within a 
century, has changed the pattern of 
life and work for much of mankind, 
opening up many new fields of ende- 
avour, sprang from very small begin- 
nings in 1859. Yet, since then, some- 
thing in the region of two million oil 
wells have been drilled, occasionally 
to as great a depth as four miles. 
  
The modern oil industry was born just one hundred years 
ago at Titusville, in Pennsylvania, U.S.A., where Edwin 
L. Drake sank the first well ever to be drilled for the purpose of 
finding oil. A strike was made at a depth of about 69 feet and 
oil gushed forth at the initial rate of eight to ten barrels a day. 
  
by W.H. Owens 
LTHOUGH the large-scale exploitation of 
crude oil is a fairly recent industrial de- 
velopment, the Earth's “black gold” has 
nevertheless been used by peoples in many 
different parts of the world for thousands of years. The 
Bible tells how pitch, or bitumen, was used for the 
waterproofing of Noah's Ark and the basket of the infant 
Moses. This pitch came from surface seepages of crude 
oil which were bitumenized by the weathering action of 
the sun and wind. The “eternal fires” around the shores 
of the Caspian Sea, which were the object of worship in 
ancient times, were simply oil and natural gas seepages 
which ignited as they reached the air. 
Bitumen was an article of commerce in the Tigris and 
Euphrates river basin, which is now Iraq, in the days 
before Babylon was built. The Babylonians and 
Sumerians, like the Inca rulers of Peru, valued it as a 
building mortar. The Chinese used the same sticky, black 
substance in their shipbuilding trade to make vessels 
seaworthy, and as fuel in their salt works. Among the 
many purposes to which crude oil exudations were put 
by the Indian tribes of North America and Patagonia was 
for medicine and embrocations. 
It is interesting to recall that only eleven years before 
Edwin Drake drilled his well, oil had been struck 
accidentally while borings for brine were being made 
along the Allegheny River in Pennsylvania. This “rock- 
0il” which contaminated the water was skimmed off and 
sold in chemists’ shops as an embrocation for the relief 
of rheumatism, gout and similar ailments. 
"The rapid and continuous growth of the modern oil 
industry, and the dominant role it has assumed in world 
affairs in so comparatively short a time, is without any 
parallel in history. This growth has been most striking 
since the First World War. In 1914 world production of 
crude oil was 55 million tons. In 1938 it was 280 million 
tons. Last year’s world output exceeded 900 million tons, 
and the demand is still growing. 
That the present demand for oil is likely to be doubled 
within the next twenty years is hardly surprising. 
Besides the daily increase in the millions of motor vehicles 
(which now consume more than one-third of the world’s 
supply of petroleum products) and the enormous growth 
of aviation, there is the rapid spread of industrialization 
and the change to mechanized agriculture throughout the 
world. And now the young, but potentially vast, 
petroleum chemical industry is producing the raw 
materials from which synthetic fibres, synthetic rubber, 
plastics, resins, carbon black and fertilizers are made— 
materials, in turn, of a wide range of consumer goods. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 64747: A Century of black gold

BLACK GOLD (Continued) 
This is why, in spite of the huge output of the world’s 
producing oil wells, the search for new sources of crude 
oil is being steadily intensified. Geological teams are 
scattered far and wide hunting for oil—in Arctic Canada 
and Alaska, in the steaming jungles of Latin-America and 
the Far East, in the Australian Bush and on the burning 
sands of the Sahara Desert. Exploration for more under- 
water oil is in progress too. There are incalculable 
quantitles of this sub-ocean oil to be won under the 
relatively shallow waters of the Continental Shelf, large 
areas of which adjoin some of the richest producing 
oilfields, notably in the Gulf of Mexico. 
‘While oil is produced on a commercial scale in a large 
number of countries, there are five main regions in which 
the chief proven oil reserves of the world are contained. 
These are North America, the Caribbean, the Middle East, 
the U.S.S.R. and the Far East. The bulk of ‘world 
production comes from what have been aptly termed the 
two “Petroleum Poles.” One is situated around the 
Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico; the other about the 
Black Sea, the Caspian and the Persian Gulf, 
- 
HE United States, which Is the most highiy 
developed country so far as oil is concern- 
ed, is still the world’s chief producer. In 
the past hundred years, the U.S. alone has 
provided some sixty per cent of the world’s total 
cumulative production, and except for a brief period 
around the beginning of this century when the Baku 
oilfields of Russia had the largest output, she has always 
remained in the lead. Today, in spite of the growing 
production of other countries, the U.S. produces more 
than two-fifths of world’s total supply. More than half 
the forty-eight States are oll producers, and in 1957 just 
two of them, Texas and California, together supplied more 
oil than the combined output of the Middle East and Far 
East. 
Venezuela is the world’s second largest oil producer and 
by far the largest oll-exporting country today. She still 
accounts for about ninety per cent of South America’s oil 
production, although the other countries of that 
potentially rich contlnent—and also some in Central 
America—have recently become the scene of widespread 
exploration for the mineral. 
Lake Maracaibo, the great sea inlet of Western 
Venezuela, 1s one of the most successful areas of under- 
water drilling, Very prolific oilfields are worked around 
the Lake shores, and in places these extend beneath its 
bed where the oll is recovered by means of under-water 
drilling from special platforms mounted on concrete piles. 
Some of the drilling rigs are several miles out from the 
shore and stand in water up to 100 feet deep. Offshore 
drilling has also been carried on for many years in the 
Gulf of Mexico, where the rich oil-bearing formations of 
the States of Texas and Louisiana stretch beyond the 
coast swamps far under the sea. 
Third place among the world’s oil-producing countries 
is held by the U.S.S.R. whose output of crude oil has been 
rising rapidly and continuously ever since 1945. A year 
ago Mr. Khrushchev announced long-term plans for a 
huge production increase from the record 98.3 million tons 
In 1957 to around 400 million tons by 1972. This would be 
achieved mainly, though by no means exclusively, through 
the further development of the rich reserves of the Volga- 
Ural region, 
26 
Russia’s oldest oilfield is centred on Baku, on the 
Caspian Sea, which is perhaps the earliest known oil area 
in the world. But since the Second World War the 
Caucasian production has been steadily supplanted by 
that of the immensely rich region between the River Volga 
and the Ural Mountains, which, it is believed, may contain 
as much as eighty per cent of the total Soviet reserves. 
ITTLE attempt was made to develop this so- 
called “Second Baku” fleld until the 1930's, 
owing to the remoteness of the region from 
the malin oil-consuming districts of the 
western part of the Soviet Union. But development was 
stimulated by the wartime movement of many industrial 
plants into the area from the more vulnerable west. It 
will be the main centre of Soviet oil expansion in the 
future. 
When It comes to proved oil reserves, the countries of 
the Middle East are in a dominant position with no less 
than two-thirds of the world’s total. For this reason the 
Middle East will become more and more important as the 
years pass. Although its total output of crude oil is now 
more than ten times the pre-war level, the contribution 
of the Middle East to total world production (20 per cent 
in 1957) Is still disproportionate to its enormous reserves. 
But this is expected to be doubled in the next decade. 
It is in this fast-changing part of the world that some 
of the most remarkable oil developments of the present 
century have taken place. The first important oil 
discovery of modern times in the Middle East was made 
in 1908 at Masjid-i-Sulaiman, in Persia—a most prolific 
oilfield which has since produced over 100 million tons. 
That discovery stimulated the oil search in other parts, 
and in the years between the world wars new oilfields 
were found in Iraq, Bahrein, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and 
Egypt, as well as in Iran itself. 
Many of them are exceptionally prolific; for example, 
the Burgan oilfield in Kuwait now produces more than 
any other single oilfield in the world, and in Saudi Arabia 
the average production per well is several hundred times 
as great as, for example, in the U.S.A. where there are 
many large producing wells. 
NE of the great factors in oil production, 
especially in such a region as the Middle 
East, is the economic transportation of 
crude oil from the wells to the refineries 
and ports. The land pipeline systems, linked with the 
tanker fleets on the high seas, are the arteries through 
which this life-blood of our civilization is distributed. 
Pipelines carry crude oil, and also refined petroleum 
products, over long distances and across rivers, mountains 
and deserts, and pipeline engineering is today a major 
activity of the oil industry. In the United States the 
pipeline transportation of liquld fuels and natural gas has 
reached the highest development, for in that country the 
entire oil movement from well to marketing terminal is 
often made wholly through linking pipelines. 
Until about ten years ago the only direct outlet for 
Middle East oil to the Mediterranean was by means of the 
CONT'D ON PAGE 28 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 64747: A Century of black gold

The Unesco Courter. — September 1960 
    
  
“ py T- - xy 
wr on A rei he = - A a yt rd Ea om 
  
   
 
Photes © Paul Almasy  
Iraq, one of the largest oil-producing countries in the world is also the home of what might properly be called the world’s oldest oil “distillery”, Its owner—he is also its one-man staff—digs holes about six feet deep in the ground and taking from them the oil-soaked earth, he heats it in his home-made oven, and thus obtains a crude oil which he sells locally as lamp fuel. Petroleum, once called “rock oil”, is not a new discovery, Two thousand five hundred years ago, Alexander the Great was greatly intrigued, when in this same region of Iraq, by the “eternal fires” which flared up ‘day and night in the desert. 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 64747: A Century of black gold

BLACK GOLD (Continued) 
long, forked pipeline from the Kirkuk wells in Iraq to 
Haifa and Tripoli. The construction of this pioneer 
desert oil route—across desert, rock, mountain and four 
great rivers of Arabia—was a considerable feat. At one 
time more than 14,000 men were working on the project. 
Since the war a number of other large pipelines have 
been built across the desert lands, including a second 
route from Kirkuk to Tripoli and one from Kirkuk to 
Banias, on the Syrian coast. The 1,000-mile pipeline from 
the Saudi Arabian oilfields to the Mediterranean port of 
Sidon, which cost about £80 million, plays a major part 
in supplying oil to Western Europe refineries. 
Just how important these desert pipelines are can be 
seen by a comparison with the alternative of sea transport. 
To carry Middle East oil all the way to Europe by sea 
means a round trip of some 7,000 miles between the head 
of the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean end of the 
Suez Canal, in addition to the voyage onward from there. 
The world-wide movement of oil supplies involves the 
operation of large, modern tanker fleets. Today oil is 
the most valuable of all seaborne cargoes, and oil-tankers 
account for approximately one-quarter of the ‘world’s 
entire merchant fleet. On any average day of the year 
some 15 million tons of petroleum and its products, 
valued at well over £100 million, are afloat on the seas. 
At the beginning of this century there were only 
109 tankers, representing a world tonnage of a little over 
half a million, in service. Today the number is more 
than 3,000—twice as many as before the Second World 
War—with a total tonnage approaching 50 millions. 
AFETY is naturally the most important 
factor in the operation of oil-tankers. 
In the earliest days of the oil indus- 
try, crude oil was shipped in wooden 
barrels, and this was a highly inflammable cargo for the 
wooden ships of the time. Oil is still a dangerous cargo 
to handle, but it is now carried in bulk and the risk of 
fire or explosion has been minimized both by the special 
design and the safety precautions taken in construction, 
and by a rigid system of rules which have to be observed 
by the crews. (The crew accommodation, intidentally, is 
among the best found in any merchant ship.) In case 
of any emergency the cargo compartments of the modern 
tanker are equipped with a steam-smothering system 
which operates effectively in a matter of seconds. 
Everybody knows that petrol, gas oil, diesel’ oi], 
lubricating oils, kerosine (or paraffin), bitumen and so on 
are the products from refined petroleum. But today there 
are, in addition, more than a thousand products from the 
same raw material which have become part of everyday 
life, very often in unsuspected ways. 
Among the most important of them are white oils which 
are highly purified grades of lubricating oils. These are 
used, for example, in the manufacture of popularly-priced 
cosmetics, perfumes, hair oil, sun-tan lotions, embrocations 
and ointments. Fruit such as oranges are thinly coated 
with white oil to prevent them drying up, and eggs are 
dipped in it to preserve them. 
White oils are similarly used for the preservation of 
other foods, for example, cheese, meat and dried fruits. 
They also play a part in the manufacture of coloured inks, 
flaked soaps, polishes, and in the lubrication of bakery 
machinery to prevent bread from sticking to the rolling 
slabs. 
28 
 
Another group of petroleum products is the petroleum 
waxes, which are now used in a great number of 
industries. Candle-making is a well-known example, 
Cartons for milk and soft drinks, cake boxes and 
wrappings for bread and confectionery, are treated with 
paraffin wax, which is tasteless and odourless, to keep the 
contents fresh. Wax is also used in the manufacture 
of polishes of all kinds. 
Other petroleum products include white spirit, which is 
used in paints and for dry cleaning, and special types of 
spirits used for extracting perfumes from flowers, natural 
oils from plants and seeds, and glue from bones. Carbon 
black—a fine powder manufactured from petroleum—is 
an ingredient of rubber tyres, typewriter ribbons and 
carbon papers, and printing and Indian inks. And in the 
field of medicine, apart from products already mentioned,

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 64747: A Century of black gold

   
petroleum supplies the solvents used in preparing such 
life-saving drugs as penicillin and insulin, and in 
anaesthetics. 
It is in the past few years that the growing range of 
synthetic materials produced by the wonders of petroleum 
chemistry have begun to play an important part in our 
lives. A few substances like artificial silk, synthetic dyes 
and artificial fertilizers, of course, have been established 
for quite a time now. But the profusion of plastics, 
synthetic rubbers, detergents and so on, in the consumer 
market is a post-war development. 
Today we know of such extremely versatile substances 
as polymerized ethylene, or polythene, and polyvinyl 
chloride which appear in so many everyday guises in 
homes, shops, offices and factories. Detergents, or soap 
The Unesco Coutiet. — September 1960 
  
  
substitutes, have revolutionized domestic washing and 
cleaning. A number of widely used synthetic fibres are 
also produced partly or wholly from petroleum, and also 
a variety of drugs and certain artificial flavourings. 
Indeed, the list is endless. 
Yet this is really only the beginning. With one of the 
most fascinating and versatile raw materials in its hands, 
the oil industry is spending more time and more and more 
money on research. More and better plant, involving 
heavy capital investment, is being built to implement the 
new discoveries of the research teams in many lands. 
Although it has achieved so much and bestowed such 
benefits on mankind in its first 100 years of existence, the 
modern oil industry embarks now on its second century in 
a youthful, pioneering spirit, confident of a future that 
promises still greater rewards. 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 64748: In these drear wastes, what visionary pasts revive

oA 2 an ad +L re 
Jy FONE Na py ENE ye a ~~ A _ SYR > 
So x 
ens vy eS ad 
  
~ 
= 
ie 
R
E
N
E
 &
 
ER
 
£ 
- 
F
O
E
 
T
P
E
S
 
~ 
ols 
L
S
 
a
l
d
 
» 
a 
3
 
7 
. 
: 
f 
(
g
a
 
p
d
 
'v
 
5 
. 
. 
I
 
~ 
E
l
 
N 
s
e
e
 
y 
A
P
R
 
1
%
 
d 
! 
o
e
 
, 
T
A
 
L
i
e
 
5
 
I 
ol
 
a,
 
r 
. 
M 
A 
5. 
J 
> 
T,
 
Y
N
 
p
p
d
 
» 
5 
5 
- 
3 
: 
i 
. 
F
o
 
a - . . . 
. . » - - . - - . . PA 
- La - hal -— - : — -~ - 
- . ~ - 
© Almasy, Paris 
Part of a bas relief decorating the temple dedicated to Knoum, god of the First Cataract 
of the Nile and to Sesostris lll and founded by King Tuthmosis Hl (1504-1450 B.C.) 
at Semneh in the Sudan on the left bank of the Nile, about 250 miles up river from 
Aswan. Today, this temple is threatened with inundation by the Aswan Dam. 
30 ' 
N the area of the 
northern Sudan 
which will be 
submerged by the waters of the new 
Aswan Dam, undoubtedly the most 
important sites which will be 
destroyed are the series of ancient 
fortresses built by the Egyptians 
about B.C. 2000 and situated at 
stretegic points on both banks of the 
Nile between Wadi Halfa and Semneh. 
The Pharaohs of the 12th Dynasty 
built these strongholds to protect the 
southern borders of Egypt and to 
hold down the subject populations of 
their newly conquered dominions in 
Nubia. 
Some of them were also trading 
settlements and dispatch posts to 
Egypt of the products of the south, 
such as gold, ivory, etc. They are 
thus treasure houses of information, 
not only on ancient military architec- 
ture, but on the manners, customs 
and general conditions of life in colo- 
nial Nubia over a period of nearly a 
thousand years. 
The exploration of these important 
remains of ancient civilization has 
been largely neglected because of 
their immense size and inaccessibility; 
consequently our knowledge of Egyp- 
tian military architecture is extremely 
limited. Egyptology is now faced 
with the necessity of immediate 
research in a subject which, unless 
undertaken at once, will be beyond 
the reach of a student in less than 
four years’ time. Once the rising 
waters of the new reservoir reach 
their specified level of 133 metres, 
nothing can save these ancient monu- 
ments, and, built as they are of mud 
brick, within a few months not a 
vestige of them will remain. 
ite this know- 
ledge, the Egypt 
Exploration So- 
ciety in 1958 undertook, with the 
approval of the Sudan Government, 
the complete excavation of Buhen, 
  
- ‘situated on the west bank of the Nile 
opposite the modern fown of Wadi 
Halfa. Buhen was the largest of the 
chain of trading stations and for- 
tresses built by the Pharaohs of 
Dynasty 12 (2000 B.C.) to block the 
difficult passages by land and river 
through the Second Cataract. 
It was the G.H.Q. for the admi- 
nistration of the military garrisons 
of all the strongholds in the area, 
and at the time of its foundation it 
was probably the seat of the Egyptian 
Viceroy who ruled Nubia in the name 
of the Pharaoh of Egypt. Atl that 
time the fortress consisted of an 
elaborate series of fortifications built 
on a rectangular plan 172 metres 
by 160 metres, which enclosed a 
town containing domestic habitations, 
barrack buildings, workshops, a tem- 
ple and the Governor's palace. 
As far as the Egypt Exploration 
Society's excavations have gone, they 
have revealed a carefully laid out 
example of rectangular town planning 
with paved arterial roads, each with 
its own independent drainage system. 
On the river side of the fortress, two

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

IN THESE DREAR WAS 
The Unesco Courier. — September 1960 


### 64748: In these drear wastes, what visionary pasts revive

TES 
WHAT VISIONARY PASTS REVIVE... 
  
5 Sahai » , ’ A : - 
  
by Professor W. B. Emery 
Department of Egyptology 
University College, London 
f
a
 ) r
v
 
pas RE 
J. Vercoutter 
Aerial photo of the great fortress of Buhen, near Wadi Halfa in the Sudan. The 
fortress was built in the early Middie Kingdom, as one of a series of trading posts 
and strongholds erected nearly 4,000 years ago to defend the strategic area of the 
Second Cataract of the Nile, dividing Upper and Lower Nubia. It has been excavated - 
and explored by expeditions led by Professor Walter B. Emery of the University of 
London. Among details seen in this photo are traces of streets running at right 
angles to each other, the earliest ramparts with their circular bastions, the temple 
(top centre, closest to the river) and the great gate in the centre of the west wall 
facing the desert. Faintly visible too are the outlines of the larger defence system 
dating from the reconstruction of the fortress, after its sacking about 1650 B.C. 
great gates in the walls lead directly 
to stone built quays from which ships 
were loaded with the tribute and 
products of trade from conquered 
Nubia. The contents of tombs 
discovered outside the town and the 
condition of houses within it give 
ample evidence of a rich and even 
luxurious standard of living in this 
outpost of colonial Egypt. 
The elaborate defence system which 
enclosed this small town consisted of 
a massive brick wall, 4.8 m. thick and 
11 m. high, relieved at intervals on 
its outer face with projecting rectan- 
gular towers. At the foot of the 
wall was a brick paved rampart with 
a fire-step, protected by a loopholed 
parapet overhanging the scarp of dry 
ditch, about 9 m. wide and 7 m. deep. 
The counterscarp on the other side of 
the ditch was surmounted by a 
narrow covered way of brickwork, 
beyond which was a glacis rising from 
the natural ground level. Projecting 
into the ditch from the scarp were 
round bastions with a system of triple 
loopholes with single embrasures, 
through which archers could direct 
a deadly cross-fire which would 
completely cover the ditch. 
The most strongly fortified part of 
the structure was the great gate built 
in the centre of the west wall facing 
the desert from which came the long 
trade roads leading to the mines and 
quarries. The gate was closed by 
great double doors, beyond which was 
a wooden drawbridge which could be 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 64748: In these drear wastes, what visionary pasts revive

pulled back on rollers. The gate and 
bridge were flanked by two spur walls 
which extended over the dry ditch, 
forming a narrow corridor, through 
which an attacking force would have 
to battle its way exposed to a rain of 
missiles from the battlements on 
three sides. Even when the storming 
party had broken through the gate, 
their difficulties would not be at an 
end, for they would find themselves 
in an enclosed square with exits 
giving access to the town only 
through narrow roads immediately 
under the inner walls of the fortifi- 
cations; thus coming under fire once 
again from the defenders. 
HE discovery of 
these complex 
and elaborate 
fortifications at Buhen shows that 
the Egyptians of that time were hold- 
ing their newly won territory against 
a well organized enemy ‘whose mili- 
tary prowess was by no means 
negligible. Strong as they ‘were, 
these great defences were not suffi- 
cient to preserve the town, and with 
the weakening of Egyptian power 
following the Asiatic invasions of 
their homeland, the people of the 
South stormed and sacked the 
fortress about 1650 B.C. 
Thereafter it remained a gigantic 
and partly burnt ruin for many 
years, until the advent of the warrior 
Pharaohs of the 18th Dynasty (1555- 
1350 B.C.), who after the expulsion 
of the Asiatic usurpers in Egypt, 
turned their attention once more to 
their last possessions in the south. 
Buhen was reoccupied and its original 
fortifications were rebuilt and streng- 
thened to form a citadel in the centre 
of a much larger town with a new 
defence system of over a mile in 
extent surrounding it. A fine temple 
was built by Queen Hatshepsut (B.C. 
1495), the town expanded and 
apparently remained secure, occupied 
by a thriving community, until the 
final eclipse of Egyptian power at the 
close of the 20th Dynasty (B.C. 1090). 
A large part of this great outpost 
of Egyptian civilization has already 
been excavated by the Egypt Explo- 
ration Society's expeditions, and 
valuable new material and knowledge 
has been made available for the 
historian’s research. Two more sea- 
sons of exploration will be necessary 
before the whole area is revealed; 
but sufficient is now visible to show 
that here at Buhen we have a unique 
example of Egyptian military archi- 
tecture splendidly preserved. 
* 
Remains of bas reliefs covering walls of one 
of two temples built inside twin fortresses of 
Semneh and Kumma, dating from 1500-1400 
B.C. An air survey carried out in the Sudan 
has revealed the existence of more than 100 
ancient historical sites which still need to be 
at least partly explored, excavated and recorded. 
© Pau! Almasy, Paris 
32 
Unesco-Paul Almasy 
Elaborate defence system enclosing the 
ancient Nubian town of Buhen included 
a massive brick wall 36 feet high with 
projecting rectangular towers, At the 
foot of the wall was a brick paved ram- 
part with a fire-step (inset, right}, 
protected by a loopholed parapet, 
overhanging a dry ditch 30 feet wide.   
   
WB Emery-London University 
  
R E 
“
 . 
: 
oy
 
SL
UM
 
ho
, 
R
N
Y
 
Xo 
LI
EN
,

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — September 
Letters to the Editor 
A ‘TERRA INCOGNITA’ 
Sir, 
In THE UNEsco Courier for Feb- 
ruary 1960, (special issue dealing with 
the antiquities of Nubia and the need 
to save them before they are flooded by 
the waters of the Aswan Dam), I 
found the material published by you of 
considerable interest. I must, how- 
ever protest at the small amount of 
space given to the antiquities of the 
Sudan as compared with those of Egypt... 
It is necessary to point out... that the 
whole of Egyptian Nubia has been very 
carefully surveyed on two occasions. 
The first occasion was when carried out 
by Dr. Reisner and others when the 
Aswan dam was first built and the second, 
the survey by Professor Emery in the 
1930’s when the dam was heightened. As 
a result of this, Egyptian Nubia is one 
of the best studied areas in the world 
from the point of view of archaeology, 
and although it is certainly of great imp- 
ortance that everything possible should be 
done to save the existing monuments, 
the area can in no way compare for 
present archaeological importance with 
that part of the Sudan that is to be 
flooded. 
Since Egyptian Nubia has been very 
carefully surveyed and excavated it has 
little left in the way of new information 
to give us. The area to the south of 
the frontier in the Republic of the Su- 
dan has only had a few and sporadic 
archaeological investigations carried out 
and here almost everything is to be 
done ab initio. In the northern Sudan 
no full archaeological survey has ever 
been carried out; several hundred sites 
are known and there is a vast amount 
of new archaeological information wait- 
ing to be gleaned. There can be no 
question at all but that for additions to 
knowledge the Sudan side of the fron- 
tier is of the greatest Importance. 
Dr. Vercoutter himself in the article 
you print speaks of Sudanese Nubia as 
terra incognita and this is in the most 
literal sense of the word true. It is 
here in the Sudan that the greatest ar- 
chaeological effort is required; it may 
well be that the cost of carrying out 
an archaeological survey here will be 
less than the enormous sum required 
for preserving the monuments of Egypt, 
but in view of the extreme importance 
of this area for the history and archaco- 
logy of the whole of the African conti- 
nent it shows a remarkable lack of sense 
of proportion to relegate it to one short 
article of only two pages of texts in an 
issue of your journal of 60 pages. I 
very much hope that you can redress 
this incorrect balance by issuing a future 
number largely concerned with the an- 
tiquities of the Sudan. 
P. L. Shinnie 
Professor of Archaeology 
University College of Ghana 
Ed Note: See page 30. Further articles 
on Sudanese Nubia are also foreseen. 
WHAT ARE WE WAITING FOR ? 
Sir, 
In vour April “Letters to the Editor” 
column, M. L. de Guesnet expresses 
doubts about the number of people who 
are said to use Esperanto. You pub- 
lish an editorial reply and the subject 
now seems to be closed. However, 1 
don’t think that the problem has been 
outlined correctly. It is not a question 
of knowing how many people speak 
Esperanto, but rather how many would 
use it if they were sure of finding a 
correspondent or if the need to use it 
became obvious. 
This will not be possible as long as 
idealists and dreamers alone learn it and 
try to propagate its use. Official organ- 
izations must include it in their 
programmes of general education and in 
those concerned with the commercial, 
touristic and technical fields. 
Half a century of international 
congresses have proved that Esperanto 
is very much alive and capable of re- 
maining so. Today we must make use 
of it. Nor is it a question of deciding 
if Esperanto is perfect or if, by chan- 
ce, Esperantido, Interlingue or any 
future improvement is to be preferred. 
These points of view should, I feel, 
be acceptable to partisans of any of 
these languages. Finally, every nation 
should choose one or another of them. 
The hope expressed by UNEsco hav- 
ing already pointed the way, why 
don’t we accept it without delay? 
Jean Debest 
Arcueil, France 
MILLIONS MORE MOUTHS TO FEED 
Sir, 
The istue of THE UNEsco COURIER 
of April 1960 (World Mobilization 
Against Malaria) instigates some reflec- 
tions. One thousand million persons 
in danger, you wrote. The projected 
mobilization against anopheles is meant 
to pull them out of the malaria danger, 
but, so far as I can see, only to put them 
into the hunger danger. What is wor- 
se for parents: to see their children die 
of malaria or of a chronic empty sto- 
mach? I wonder if it wouldn't be bet- 
ter to .start a programme of family 
planning instead of an irreversible cam- 
paign against the mosquito and its 
deadly implications. How long will 
the economic advantages you wrote of 
in impressive numbers remain an ad 
vantage 7 It would be a horrible pa- 
radox, indeed, if the activities of the 
WHO canceled out the activities of the 
FAO. These problems are worth 
thinking about, so, would it be possible 
to dedicate an issue of THE UNESCO 
CouriER to the prospects of family 
planning, and the ethical problems 
which bring the activities of the UNESCO 
along with them? 
P. Kloos 
Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Ed. note: An issue on the world's 
population problem is being planned for 
a later date. An issue on the world's 
hunger and steps to combat it is fore- 
seen for 1962. See also page 2. 
ROOM FOR ALL RELIGIONS 
 
Sir, 
As a Christian, as an American, and 
as a citizen of the world. I have read 
THE UNesco COURIER for years. When 
my wife was alive, I always read the 
articles aloud to her. One which 
interested her deeply was on under- 
standing between East and West. 
I agree with the principle, as set 
forth in the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights of the U.N, that 
“recognition of the inherent dignity 
and of the equal and inalienable rights 
of all members of the human family 
is the foundation of freedom, justice 
and peace in the world.” 
It is a shame before mankind and a 
sin before God that as yet the high 
principles of freedom and equality, 
subscribed to by so many nations in 
the Declaration, are not lived up to 
fully by any nation in the world and 
are flagrantly violated by some. 
The question, then, is how best may 
we serve the cause of human freedom? 
1 feel what THE UNEsCo COURIER is 
doing to educate regarding other 
nations, races, and peoples is very 
important. I subscribe to the COURIER 
because I believe in education for 
human understanding—international, in- 
tercultural, Interracial, and inter- 
religious. But I do not believe that 
education is enough. We will not 
achieve recognition of the rights of 
others unless recognition is taken of 
the fundamental fact of the Fatherhood 
of God, as well as the brotherhood of 
man. 
As a Christian I believe Christ was 
and is unique—the Son of God, the 
Light of the World, the Prince of Peace. 
Yet, as a Christian, I believe, also, that 
God revealed Himself through other 
religious leaders, Buddha, Mohammed, 
Confucius, Moses. The Golden Rule 
and many other religious principles are 
common to all the great religious. 
If due respect were paid to the worth 
and validity of all religions, I do not 
see why there would be serious objection 
to articles in the COURIER by out- 
standing Christian thinkers and practical 
leaders of the faith—for example the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, Pope John, 
Stanley Jones, Martin Luther King. 
Palmer Van Gundy 
Los Angeles, U.S.A. 
1960 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
From the Unesco Ne 
A warp FOR CALDER ‘MOBILE” 
The Architectural League of New York has 
awarded its 1960 Gold Medai of Honour 
to Alexander Calder for his “mobile” 
sculpture “Spiral” at UNEsco Headquarters 
in Paris. Last year, the same work by 
Calder was awarded the Carnegie Institute 
First Prize for Sculpture, and Joan Miro 
received the Guggenheim Prize for his 
ceramic walls at the UNesco H.Q. 
mW ARID LANDS ON THE SCREEN: 
“Arid Lands” a UNEsco documentary 
film describing a problem which afflicts 
one-third of the land surface of the 
earth, has been given its premiére in 
Panis. Turning its lens on specific prob- 
lems, the film also shows some of the 
solutions offered by science: de-salting 
water so it can be used for irrigation, 
modern techniques of water prospecting 
and harnessing the power of the sun. 
The film shows how UNESCO's efforts 
—dating from 1948—have grown into 
a major international project, co-ordi- 
nating research and bringing it to bear 
on the dry belt running from North 
Africa, through the Middle East and 
across Asia. 
A NTI-'PIRATING’ AGREEMENT: 
A draft convention for the protection of 
performers, recorders and broadcasters was 
adopted unanimously by a meeting of legal 
experts who met recently in The Hague 
under the auspices of the International 
Labour Organization, UNEsco and the 
Berne Union. The new agreement, to be 
signed a conference early next year, will 
prevent the “pirating” of performance dues, 
which has become more frequent since the 
development of new techniques for record- 
ing sound and image . 
mw FILMSTRIPS HONOUR DARWIN 
& CHEKOV: The life and work of 
Anton Chekov, the centenary of whose 
birth is being celebrated this year, is 
illustrated in a 40-frame filmstrip now 
released by UNEsco. [ts sub-titles are 
given in a booklet edited by Ma- 
dame Marie-Madeleine Rabecq, Curator 
of the Pedagogical Museum in Paris, in 
which a preface describes Chekhov's life 
and work. Madame Rabecq is also 
author of the commentary for another 
filmstrip which is devoted to Charles 
Darwin, the publication of whose “Ori- 
gin of Species” in 1859 was marked by 
centenary celebrations last year. Full 
information. on these filmstrips can be 
obtained from the Audio-Visual Media 
Division, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 
Paris 7°. 
34 
  
  
     EN 
 
malaria eradication programme.   
U. S. AID FOR WORLDWIDE 
MALARIA ERADICATION 
UT of one thousand four hundred million people either affected by malaria 
O or living in areas exposed to it, close to 280 million were freed from the 
threat of the disease by the end of last year thanks to widespread eradica- 
tion campaigns. Reporting this to the recent meeting of the World Health Assem- 
bly in Geneva, Dr. M.G. Candau, Director-General of the World Health Organi- 
zation, warned that the WHO Malaria Eradication Special Account was seven 
million dollars short of the amount needed for the activities planned for 1960-61. 
“With the exception of one country [the United States] which alone has provided 
more than 90 per cent of the funds available, actual contributions still continue to 
lag far behind good intentions and assurances of support.” 
the U.S. Government show that for the 1960 Fiscal Year $32 million of special 
assistance funds has been programmed for U.S. participation in tbe worldwide 
This includes $3 million for WHO and $2 mil- 
lion for the Pan American Sanitary Organization. 
directly to support malaria eradication in 25 countries in the Far East, Near East, 
South Asia, Africa and Latin America. 
Figures released by 
The balance is being used   
WwW ORLD REPORT ON ELEC- 
TRONIC COMPUTERS: Machines can 
now control other machines, predict the 
weather, memorize all the world’s know- 
ledge, compose music, translate languages 
and solve in a few seconds problems on 
which mathematicians might spend a life- 
time. These remarkable powers of present- 
day computers are described in a recently 
published UNesco report, “Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Informa- 
tion processing” which brought 2,000 elec- 
tronic computer experts from 39 countries 
to Paris last year. This 520-page, multi- 
lingual report which gives a complete pic- 
ture of current research in information 
processing, is published by Unesco, Paris, 
R. Oldenberg, Munich, and Butterworths, 
London. Its price is $25.00; £7-7-0; 
100 NF or DM 84. 
mm TOP FILM COUNTRIES: For the 
past five years, Japan has regularly 
been outproducing the U.S.A. and has 
become the world’s largest maker of 
feature films (331 in 1955 and 352 in 
1956 compared with 305 and 307 res- 
pectively in the U.S.A) Even tiny 
Hong Kong produces more feature 
length films—227 in 1956—than France 
and Italy combined. These are but two 
of the many surprising facts given in 
“Orient—A Survey of Films Produced 
in Countries of Arab and Asian Culture” 
published by the British Film Institute 
in London at UNESCO's request and 
with its help. This 92-page survey, of 
which a limited number of copies are 
available, can he obtained by writing 
directly to the Mass Communication 
Clearing House, UNESCO, Place de Fon- 
tenoy, Paris 7°. 
C ENTRE FOR SAFETY: The In- 
ternational Labour Office recently establish- 
ed an International Occupational Safety 
and Health Information Centre in Geneva, 
in collaboration with the International So- 
cial Security Association. The Centre will 
provide information on various aspects of 
safety and health in many fields including 
mining, industry, building and civil engi- 
neering, transport, public services and agri- 
culture. Details and information can be 
obtained from CIS. c/o International 
Labour Office, 154, route de Lausanne, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 
ATOMS FOR PEACE: A mobile 
exhibition illustrating many of the uses 
of atomic energy has recently been 
touring the principal cities of Mexi- 
co. The display was organized by the 
Mexican National Nuclear Energy Com- 
mission with the assistance of the In- 
ternational Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) which provided a mobile radio- 
isotope laboratory. This was used by 
Mexican universities to initiate young 
scientists in basic isotope techniques and 
has resulted in several universities de- 
ciding to start regular training courses 
in this field. The laboratory, a gift to 
the IAEA by the United States, is now 
to visit Argentina. IEA’s first mobile 
radioisotope unit, also a gift from the 
U.S.A. has been used for training in 
Europe and is now going to the Far 
East, IM
P.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
LA
NG
, 
PA
RI
S 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

WINDOW ON 
THE WORLD 
: nce a month THE UNESCO 
COURIER presents to its 
readers a panorama of the 
modern world. Without being 
either too learned or too “popu- 
lar” in its approach, its well- 
illustrated articles give a vivid 
picture of the endless diversity 
of peoples and countries. There 
is no facet of the present-day 
world on which it does not 
touch—the sciences man has 
developed, the cultures he has 
created, the knowledge he has 
amassed. 
THE UNESCO COURIER, now 
in its thirteenth year, does more 
than—merely satisfy the desire . 
for information about contem- 
porary problems; it throws 
light on every aspect of human 
endeavour, strengthens the links 
between the peoples in every 
corner of the globe, fosters 
international understanding and 
advances the cause of peace. 
You can help by telling your 
friends, colleagues and business 
associates or your local libra- 
rian about THE UNESCO COUR- 
IER. It also makes an ideal 
birthday or Christmas gift. As 
a gift for your friends abroad, 
you can subscribe to the French, 
Spanish or Russian editions. 
A YEAR'S SUBSCRIPTION 
COSTS ONLY 10/-stg.; $ 3.00; 
7.00 New Francs or equivalent. 
(See list of National Distribu- 
tors, below.) 
     
  
1 
Prien + fag {UA ORS) 
TAN 
 
A WINDOW OFFM ON THE WORE 
BC qurict 
    
  
  
f : 7 A WINDOW Drax #1 INE WORLD 
‘mW onrier oa a) . f 
padi 
“ANTON 
V * CHEKHOV 
‘Genius in 
{a nutshell’ 
      
% Some of the issues shown here may be out of print 
a a ll i 
WHERE TO OBTAIN UNESCO PUBLICATIONS 
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country. (See list below; 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) 
Payment is made in the national 
currency; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN, ~~ Panuzai, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Miniscry of 
Education, Kabul. 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. |, Victoria. (A. 13/-). 
AUSTRIA. — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& Ce., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (Sch. 
37.50.) 
BELGIUM, — For The Unesco Courier: 
Louis de Lannoy, 22, Place De Brouckére, 
Brussels, C.C.P. 338.000. (fr. b. 100.) 
Other publications: Office de Publicité, 
16, rue Marcq, Bruxelles, C C.P. 285-98; 
N.V. Standaard-Boekhandel, Belgielei 51, 
Antwerp. 
CANADA. — Queen's Printer, Ottawa 
Ont. {($ 3.00). 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
CHINA. — World Book Co, Ltd, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa). 
CUBA. =~ Librarfa Alberto Sanchez Veloso 
O'Reilly y Villegas, Havana. - Libreria Eco- 
nomica, Pte Zayas 505-7 Apartado 113, 
Havana. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. = Artia Ltd, 30 
Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. 
DENMARK. — Ejnar Munksgaard Led, 
6 Norregade, Copenhagen K. (D.kr. 12). 
ETHIOPIA, — International Press Agen- 
cy, P.O. Box (20, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND. — Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (F.mk. 540). 
FRANCE. — Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris, 7°. C.C.P. 12598-48 
(7 NF.). 
GERMANY. — R. Oldenbourg K.G., 
Unesco-Vertrieb fur Deutschland, Rosen= 
heimerstrasse 145, Munich 8, (DM. 6). 
GREAT BRITAIN. — See United Kingdom. 
GREECE. — Librairie H. Kauffmann, 28, 
rue du Stade, Athens. 
HONG-KONG, — Swindon Book Co, 25, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
HUNGARY. — Kultura, P.O. Box [49. 
Budapest, 62. 
INDIA. — Orient Longmans Private Ltd. 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay |; [17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyde- 
rabad, I; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. 
Box 386, New Delhi, |; Sub-Depots: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., Scindia 
House, New Delhi; Rajkamal Prakashan 
Private Led.,, Himalaya House, Hornby 
Road, Bombay |. (Rs. 6.70). 
INDONESIA. — Bappit Pusat *‘Permata” 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Djakarta 
IRAN. — Iranian National Commission for 
Unesco. Avenue du Musée, Teheran, 
IRAQ. — Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
IRELAND, — The National Press, 2, Wel- 
ington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin, (10/-) 
ISRAEL. — Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 
35, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja. 
min Street, Tel-Aviv (IL 4.-) 
JAMAICA. =~ Sangster’'s Book Room, 91 
Harbour Street, Kingston. 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings.(10/-) 
JAPAN, — Maruzen Co. Ltd, 6 Tori» 
Nichome, Nthonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokye. (Yen 500). 
JORDAN. —~ Joseph iL. Bahous & Co. 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, 
Amman, 
KOREA. — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. 
LUXEMBOURG. — Librairie Paul Bruck, 
33, Grand-Rue, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. — Federal Publications 
Ltd., Times House, 135, River Valley Rd., 
Singapore. 
MALTA. — Sapienza’s Library, 26 Kings 
way, Valetta. (10/-) 
MONACO. — British Library, 30 Bld des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF.) 
NETHERLANDS. — N.Y. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl 6) 
NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. — 
C.G.T. Yan Dorp & C* (Ned Ant.) N.V. 
Willemstad, Curacao. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Christ- 
church. (10/-). 
NIGERIA, — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O, Box 
174, Lagos. (10/-) 
NORWAY. — AS. Bokhjornet, Stortings- 
plass, 7, Oslo. (N. kr, 10) 
PAKISTAN, — The West-Pak Publishing 
Co, Lltd., Unesco Publications House, 
P.O. Box 374, 56-N Gulberg Industrial 
Colony, Lahore. 
PANAMA. = Cultural Panamena, Avenida 
7a, No. Tl-49, Apartado de Correos 2018, 
Panama, D.F. 
PHILIPPINES, — Philippine Education Co. 
Inc., 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O. Box 
620, Manila, 
POLAND, — **RUCH™ ul. Wiloza Nr. 46 
Warsaw. 10 (ZI. 50.) 
PORTUGAL. — Dias & Andrada Lda, 
Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carme 70, 
Lisbon. 
SOUTH AFRICA. — Van Schaik’s Book- 
store, Libri Building, Church Streec, P.O. 
Box 724, Pretoria. (10/-) 
SWEDEN. For The Unesco Courier: Sven= 
ska Unescoradet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); other publications 
A/B C.E. Fritzes, Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. 
SWITZERLAND. — Europa Verlag, § 
Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva. C.C.P, 
1-236. 
“Courier” only: Georges Losmaz, |, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P. 
1-4811. (Fr. S. 7). 
THAILAND. — Suksapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
TURKEY. — Librairie Hachette, 469 Isti- 
klal Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. 
UNION_OF SOUTH AFRICA. — Van 
Schaik’s Bookstore, Libri Building, Church’ 
Screet, Pretoria (10/-). 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). —~ 
La Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Pasha, 
Cairo. 
UNITED KINGDOM. — H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O, Box 569, London, S.E.L.(10/-). 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 801 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y. ($ 3.00.) and (except periodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. 
U.S.S.R. ~— Mezhdunarodnaja 
Moscow. G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA, = Jugoslovenska Knjlga, 
Terazije 27/11. Belgrade. 
Kniga,

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/064724engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
ON STAMPS 
tion, a don : 
Art from antic 
Ia
 DL
LN
OJ
AT
IZ
 
L      
    
        
A 
NV
. 
        
i A 
  
    
         de 7s a if 
TSE HE - 7 
. f ™ . - b iin \H : 
SNEDERLANDS § 
J : ’ 
o¥ gy N Wik ¢ 
h ~ 4 Ss r 
. 
    
 
    
        
T
R
E
 
P
a
n
 F 
S 
= 
  
SH
E 
     
   
R
E
 
4 
a % 
5 
Co
de
 
fy!
 
! 
   
nd > 
RO