# [112053](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

of
 
| L
k
 
od
 
re 
R
T
E
 
MA
NT
A 
TREN
T 
F
R
R
 E
O
.
 
TR
E 
TH
R 
T 
IT
E 
S
A
S
 
    
 
  
      
                    
. 
Y RN 
: 
. | , 
. Al 
. 
» 
. 
4 
\ 
. . Jog 0 ‘ gy . 
: A A IL a) Fa” . yp. 3 > . Al 3 " { » fa} > 
: 
’ » > 
ri LF ob » 
y fr~18%3011 " 
dD . : . 
“ 
A 
- . » 
. > 
5 
y 
. 
» 
; 
: 
; : 4 8 : 
-. 1 
’ 
\ 
’ 
. 
” : 
i 
» 
- 
: 
ee 
42 4 
» 
» 
5» 
: x : & 
OS ~ 
. ‘ 
: 
H we 
. . 
- 
. 
: 
. . 
» 
; : 
3 
. 
5 - . 
ret 
3 
: fi 
» 
" 
. LS 
’ 
» 
. 
a 
. . 
: . 
. : 
. 
. 
8 
» 3 
Te 
X 
. r 3 
4 
’ 
a 
| 
A ; . . 
: 
-N 
. L 
¢ 
: 
» 
» 
» 
. 
4 
4 
5 : 
ON 
; 
A 
: 
» 
y 
re 
» 
: 
» ' y 
. 
: 
‘ 
» 
  
                        
M 1205 -9806-22,00 F 
UID HO 
TANI RUE SRT TT 
  
          
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNEsco (Ourier Nikon INTERNATIONAL PHOTO COMPETITION 
PEACE IN EVERYDAY LIFE 
Indonesian boys work 
together on an outdoor 
task. Photo by Gede 
Gusti (Indonesia). 
© 
Ge
de
 
Gu
st
, 
So
lo
, 
In
do
ne
si
a 
In 1994, Archbishop 
Desmond Tutu called the 
new South Africa the 
“rainbow nation”. Left, 
rainbow children pose 
with a cardboard cut-out 
of the famous cleric. 
Photo by Guy Hobbs 
(United Kingdom). 
       . - ' : 2 “i i : Te 
mn 1 Fle —— lg wr ; Po la A Zadhed EN SY : hE $e, 
Agar Amwell - g “. x Dat fe . . oT WN DI AE Aa A Td Py (a) N = NB > hes 0 - SAS ‘ ™ . tA 79, Li “. S38 , Wr 5 AL 7” v OR Sr 4 a o>. - 
. + {4 Cp aR MTSE SRT IS TR Se on AA AN RT Da ie 
@ 
Gu
y 
Ho
bb
s,
 
Br
ad
fo
rd
-o
n-
Av
on
, 
Un
it
ed
 
Ki
ng
do
m

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

THE UNESCO ((OURIER 
  
@© 
Pi
er
re
 
Je
an
 
de
 
Sa
n 
Ba
rt
ol
om
é,
 
Pa
ns
 
INTERVIEW 
48 
Susan Buirge 
A choreographer intent on bringing together 
contemporary and traditional forms of dance 
  
Cover: 
A plane flies over the prison walls. 
Photo taken by Guy Oprey while he was an inmate 
in London's Wandsworth prison 
(see page 35). 
© Guy Oprey/inside Eye/Panos Pictures, Londres 
contents 
JUNE 1998 
PRISONS 
a system in crisis 
  
 
Aninstitutionontrial ....... 4 
by Edmundo Oliveira 
A prisoner'stestimony. 6 
by Louis Perego 
Waiting behind bars Photos..............ooeiiii 8 
Alternatives tojail .............................. 10 
by José Luis de a Cuesta Arzamendi 
Invisible chains... 13 
by Linda Johansson 
From revenge toreparation............................................ 15 
by Tony Peters 
South Africa: puppets in prison Photos...................ccn 18 
Prisons for profit... 20 
by Leonard L. Cavise 
Offenders’ rights... 23 
by Monika Platek 
Women inmates with their children pProtos............................. 26 
The changing role of prisonstaff........................................ 28 
by Abdel-Azim Wazir 
The hard Way BACK ..............ooooveeoeoeeoeeee eee) 30 
by Amadou Cissé Dia 
Political prisoners.............. coo 31 
par Dirk van Zyl Smit 
Prison through prisoners’eyes Photos........................coiiiil. 35 
FAC FIle... ooo 38 
Consultant: Edmundo Oliveira 
Commentary Federico Mayor 40 
GREENWATCH Water: will there be enough? by France Bequette 42 
LISTENING Colombian champeta by Isabelle Leymarie 46 
AUTHORS 50 
THE URESCO Courier B® JUNE 1998 3

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 112054: An Institution on trial

An institution on trial 
BY EDMUNDO OLIVEIRA 
Prison causes more ethical, social, psychological 
and economic problems than it solves. What can be done to improve 
the penal system? 
~ Inthelate twentieth century, an age of 
“0 supposedly penology, 
humanity has far to go before it reaches that 
scientific 
“perfect state where it can do away with prisons. 
©A
 
Li
ch
te
ns
te
in
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Modern society still finds it necessary to 
respond to crime with punishment. 
The retributive character of penal measures 
stems directly from the nature of the appara- 
tus used to fight crime. In spite of advances 
in criminology in discovering the causes of 
crime, there still remains a probability that 
crimes and misdemeanours will be commit- 
ted, and the threat of sanctions as a deterrent 
is thus indispensable. 
But if punishment is a necessity, it must 
not infringe certain inalienable human rights. 
Above all, penalties must be proportional to 
the wrong that has been caused and to the 
offender’s degree of culpability. The principle 
in physics that every action gives rise to an 
 
4 tre unesco (Courier mune 1998 
equal and opposite reaction might be applied 
here. But perhaps the idea of the just penalty 
is a utopian dream. Although a perfect solu- 
tion is unattainable, a reasonable solution must 
be sought, which means proceeding, as in 
mathematics, by successive approximations, 
setting the offence and its consequences against 
the sacrifice imposed on the perpetrator by 
the punishment inflicted. What, for instance, 
is the point of inflicting a penalty involving 
loss of civil rights on someone who has already 
brought his own name into disrepute? 
Regrettably, prison continues to generate 
more ethical, social, psychological and eco- 
nomic problems than it solves. In practice, the 
rehabilitation desired by many systems of 
criminal law around the world ends in disil- 
lusionment, despair and revolt against a soci- 
ety that closes its doors to ex-convicts. The 
judicial system is still seeking ways to carry out   
Visiting day at Gatesville 
women's prison, Texas 
(U.S.A).

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 112054: An Institution on trial

gl
i 
u 
a
t
 
penal sanctions that provide adequate 
responses to the need for the psychological 
rehabilitation of offenders and their reinte- 
gration into society. 
There is an urgent need to find alternatives 
to custodial sentences, so that offenders—with 
the exception of those who pose a definite and 
continuing threat—can be re-educated for pro- 
ductive lives in society. Every penologist knows 
that most criminals retain some vestiges of 
morality, feel rejected and scorned, seck for- 
giveness from their families and the community 
for the offence they have committed and fre- 
quently acknowledge the validity of their pun- 
ishment. They often turn themselves in, and 
remorse even leads some of them to take their 
own lives. 
The cell's naked light bulb. 
Photo taken by Michael Inns 
while he was an inmate at 
Wandsworth prison in London 
{see page 35). 
If the judicial system itself regards sentences 
as punitive measures, how can inmates faced 
with the soul-destroying experience of prison 
life hope that they can ever again be useful mem- 
bers of society? It is indispensable to improve 
and modernize penal and judicial systems so 
that sentences and their application can restore 
the inmate’s dignity and prepare him or her 
for a constructive role in society. Imprison- 
ment should be a last resort, for individuals 
who pose a clear threat to the community. 
The problems facing prison systems cannot 
be solved in isolation, but must be consid- 
ered in relation to social justice and to the law- 
enforcement and judicial systems and inte- 
grated into society as a whole. This requires the 
active participation of all sectors of society, 
me unesco (Durer m june 1998 5 
© 
Mi
ch
ae
l 
In
ns
/I
ns
id
e 
Ey
e/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
| 2

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

> 
© 
Tr
ip
s/
S 
Gr
an
t/
As
k 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
which must set aside their prejudices and shed 
their indifference. 
Dealing with the problems of the prison 
system calls for an innovative approach to 
incarceration and the adoption of alternative 
measures that, while punishing the offence, 
are likely to re-educate the offender for respon- 
sible citizenship. [| 
Should prison 
be abolished? 
A recent penal reform movement has put forward the 
idea of abolishing prison, but although its underlying 
logic can be defended in theory, there seems no obvious 
‘way of putting the idea into effect in institutional terms, 
given the current state of society. 
Abolitionists emphasize the penal system's selective 
nature and its limited operational capacity (prisons are 
filled with poor people). They argue that incarceration 
as a form of punishment has already been abolished for 
those they call “underground criminals”—lawbreakers 
who escape imprisonment because of their prestige, 
privilege or influence. 
But blame for the impunity of “underground crimi- 
nals” should be laid at the doorstep of the judicial rather 
than the penal system. What should be done is not abol- 
ish prisons or imprison all and sundry, but improve the effi 
ciency of the criminal law. It would also be a good idea if, 
once a sentence is handed down, it could subsequently 
be adapted to take account of the offender's develop 
ment during the rehabilitation process. NH E.O. 
6 THE UNESCO Gourizr HB |UNE 1998 
Statue of blind justice in an 
American library. She is 
holding a sword and scales, 
the symbols of truth and 
impartiality. 


### 112055: A Prisoner's testimony

A prisoner's 
After long years in gaol 
a man becomes a student 
and a writer 
ga It is hard to talk about prison 
“0 without losing your cool. And if . 
you do, you risk getting caughtup ina 
confrontation with the supporters or 
opponents of a system that, although 
ineffective, seems indispensable. 
My reason for testifying publicly 
about areas of my life where the scars 
have still not healed is that I would 
like to help in the search for more sat- 
isfactory and more caring responses to 
the problems of delinquency. 
I come from what is euphemisti- 
cally known as a working-class back- 
ground, in other words from the 
underclass. I was onc of seven children, 


### 112054: An Institution on trial

and we were so poor that none of us 
was able to stay on at school beyond 
the minimum leaving age. The prospect 
of working as a boiler-maker did not 
appeal to me at all—a wrong direction 
that in the circumstances it was diffi- 
cult to correct. The mood of resigna- 
tion that settled in after 1968 put paid 
to whatever illusions I still had about 
a better and fairer world. In January 
1970 I was arrested, with some of my 
childhood buddies, for a hold-up 
committed with a dummy weapon. 
Prison came as a brutal shock. The 
appalling physical conditions and to 
an even greater extent the prevailing 
outlook made me feel I had stepped 
back into an age of barbarity. The grim 
universe within the prison walls not 
only seemed out of touch with the 
outside world but to be embedded in 
a punitive mentality bordering on bes- 
tiality. I felt utterly isolated from the 
prison officers and my fellow inmates. 
I also felt cut off from myself, and this 
was not the least of the dangers T was 
up against. I soon learned what life in 
the jungle is all about. If you want to

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 112055: A Prisoner's testimony

testimony 
fa
ta
l 
(L
e 
A 
ry 
Po 
A 
SP 
Noe 
a 
L
r
 230
 
F
N
 
G
e
 
S
A
E
 
0 
x 
“2
 
survive you can’t afford to trust 
another living soul. 
You start by withdrawing into a 
shell. Then, if you don’t crack up, you 
get tougher, carefully concealing your 
slightest weaknesses. You have to think 
twice about every move you make. A 
misplaced word or glance could lead 
to all sorts of trouble. The pressure 
was so intense that whatever vague feel- 
ings of remorse I might have had gave 
way to a strong sense of injustice. 
When you’re always on your guard 
you suffer physical and psychological 
harm that is impossible to measure. 
After serving four-and-a-half years of 
a six-year sentence, [ came out broken 
and bent on revenge. 
Drawing of a peephole used by 
guards to look Inside a cell 
(France). 
© 
NA
D,
 
Ly
on
s,
 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
Vi
gi
ia
nc
es
, 
Al
éa
s 
pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
Ly
on
s 
BY LOUIS PEREGO 
I tried to settle down; I became the 
father of a little girl. But three years 
after my release I was imprisoned for 
armed robbery. The 1974 prison riots 
had led to a handful of vague reforms. 
Inmates were allowed to listen to the 
radio, and washbasins and toilets were 
installed in some (but not all) cells. 
But the mentality had not changed and 
arbitrary power still reigned supreme. 
I found time to think about the 
way my life was going. A spell of soli- 
tary confinement for a breach of disci- 
pline gave me an opportunity to brush 
up on what I had learned in school and 
pursue my education. | wasn’t allowed 
to attend the prison school, so I had to 
work on my own. This time [ served 
eight years of a twelve-year sentence 
and was released with a Master’s in psy- 
chology under my belt. I knew things 
would be tough, but I had no idea how 
tough. 
Reintegration is a term that should 
be added to the list of empty, mean- 
ingless words. Mysteriously, everyone 
I contacted with a view to a job shied 
away as if they had been tipped off 
about me. In July 1987, I committed 
another offence and was arrested again. 
I wondered for a long time whether 
life was worth living but loving sup- 
port from my companion and our 
children helped me get back on my feet. 
Writing my first book led to my 
conditional release after three and half 
years of preventive detention. But when 
I showed up for a court date eighteen 
months later, I was sentenced to twelve 
years imprisonment, in other words I 
had more than eight years to serve. I still 
do not know how I managed to sur- 
vive that additional ordeal. Love and 
the confidence a few people showed in 
me had, of course, a lot to do with it. 
Which just goes to show, whatever 
some people may think, it’s never too 
late to start again. But what a waste. 
Looking back, I can’t help thinking it 
could have been avoided. [| 
THE UNESCO Gourier W JUNE 1998 1

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
os
 
@ 
Ti
na
 
Gu
e/
Pa
no
s 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
en
 
  
 
  
  
  
“Most of the young men with numbers on 
their white T-shirts are just waiting for the 
sound of the gong which means that 
another day has passed and there is one day 
less to count before they can go back to 
their families, where maybe a new brother 
or sister has arrived, see their friends who 


### 112056: Waiting behind bars

will have grown but not changed and live in 
‘a neighbourhood which will always produce 
victims who cannot obtain the quality of 
life produced by a society where money, 
Mercedes and beauty are the ingredients that 
count. As long as honesty and pride don’t 
count in society young men will commit 
crimes which will put them behind bars and 
give them boundless hours of waiting.” 
These lines by British photographer Tina 
Gue accompany her coverage of a prison for 
young men and a women’s prison in 
Djakarta (Indonesia). On these pages, a 
selection of her photos. 
The canteen 
  
Chess game 
  
SREE ra 
— ok 
  
     
8 THE UNESCO Courier 8 JUNE 1998

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 112056: Waiting behind bars

  
Mealtime 
Garden duty The prison school 
  
  
  
   
THE UNESCO Courier HN JUNE 1998 9

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

The application of non-custodial 
sentences should be encouraged 
wherever possible 
Despite efforts to improve the quality 
of inmates’ lives, in most countries 
prison is still by and large a place of exclusion 
and segregation, synonymous with injustice 
and pointless suffering. The steadily rising 
prison population is straining the system’s 
capacity to breaking point and hindering the 
application of more ambitious penal policies 
that look further than the immediate prob- 
lems of imprisonment and overcrowding. Secu- 
rity requirements are so pressing in over- 
crowded prisons that the authorities do little 
to create effective rehabilitation and social rein- 
tegration programmes (although such pro- 
grammes do exist). Add drug abuse in prison 
and its associated problems—Aids being the 
most serious—and the control of prison gangs 
over inmates, and the picture looks grim indeed. 
The prison system’s difficulties in achiev- 
ing objectives such as rehabilitation and social 
reintegration are not exactly new. Deprivation 
of freedom, which was institutionalized in 
the European judicial system during the late 
eighteenth century, was intended as a more 
rational and humane response to criminal acts 
than the punishments that had previously 
been meted out. But its framework of appli- 
cation—prison—soon proved incapable of 
solving the individual and social conflicts that 
crime brings about or reveals. Since then, 
prison as an institution has always been in cri- 
sis. Its legitimacy has been called into ques- 
tion, and penologists have sought new ways of 
improving the situation and, at the same time, 
1 0 ie unesco (Ourier w pune 1998 


### 112057: Alternatives to jail

Alternatives to jail 
BY JOSE LUIS DE LA CUESTA ARZAMENDI 
   
  
 
Two social rehabilitation programmes for young offenders in Los Angeles, California (U.S.A.). 
Above, working in a school for severely handicapped children. Above right, a poetry reading 
with senior citizens. 
  '\ VN

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 112057: Alternatives to jail

  
  
  
  
  
  © 
Se
tb
ou
n/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
Gruvberget, below, is a former lumberjacks’ village north of Stockholm where inmates 
can spend a few days’ vacation with their families. It was purchased by the Swedish 
prison service in 1971. 
  
© 
To
ny
 
Sa
vi
no
/R
ap
ho
, 
Pa
ns
 
  
© 
Se
tb
ou
n/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
me unesco (OURIER B JUNE 1998 1 1

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

© 
To
ny
 
Sa
vi
no
/R
ap
ho
, 
Pa
ri
s 
©R
 
Sm
it
h/
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ns
 
looked for alternative solutions. This trend 
has been gathering momentum since the sec- 
ond half of the nineteenth century. 
A wide variety of alternatives to custodial 
sentences are currently in use in many penal 
systems. The most noteworthy include: 
Attenuated execution of sentences, includ- 
ing detention at home, semi-liberty, freedom 
on licence, and various forms of discontinu- 
ous detention (e.g. during leisure time and/or 
at weekends); 
Probation, which ranges from a suspended 
sentence to conditional remission of a sen- 
tence and a broad gamut of probationary and 
conditional release measures; 


### 112057: Alternatives to jail

Alternatives to custodial sentences that 
benefit the offender as much as society. In 
addition to fining, as traditionally used in 
penal codes, many other alternatives now exist, 
12  } THE UNESCO Courier B JUNE 1998 
Top, young offenders at a “fire 
camp” in Los Angeles, where 
they train alongside 
professional firefighters. 
Above, physical training at 
Harris County hoot camp near 
Houston, Texas (U.S.A.). 
including accessory penalties or penalties that 
restrict freedom or impose a ban on profes- 
sional activities, the deprivation or suspen- 
sion of certain rights and payment of dam- 
ages to the victim by the offender. 
Community service as an alternative to 
prison has been highly successful in many 
European countries.! Introduced for petty 
delinquents in the United Kingdom in 1972, 
this penalty deprives offenders of their free 
time but should not prevent them from ful- 
filling their normal professional commitments. 
Convicted offenders are required to do 
between 40 and 240 hours of unpaid, socially 
useful work over a period of one year to eigh- 
teen months. Community service is performed ’ 
for charitable, humanitarian associations and 
could include such tasks as helping the sick 
or collecting blood or organs. 
Community service is not applicable in 
every case. [tis primarily suitable for teenagers 
and young adults who, though they have 
committed minor offences, have not had their 
sentences conditionally suspended. To become 
common practice, this type of penalty requires 
the creation of an assistance and supervisory 
service as well as sufficient numbers of com- 
munity service jobs. 
The search for alternatives to incarceration 
is no remedy for the prison system’s short- 
comings. The prison population includes 
many individuals who have not been sen- 
tenced, but who are being held for question- 
ing or have been remanded in custody by a 
court decision and are awaiting trial. In many 
countries, they account for up to 50 per cent 
of the total number of inmates. 
Theoretically, these prisoners benefit from 
the presumption of innocence, but their expe- 
rience of prison life is not really different from 
that of convicted offenders. Methods other 
than incarceration must be found to ensure 
that they show up for trial. Some already exist, 
such as mandatory rules of conduct, surrender 
of certain documents, and bail. Judges should 
encourage these practices as alternatives to 
prison. [| 
1 Community service as a main or alternative sentence is 
applied in European countries including Austria (for 
minors), Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, the 
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and 
Switzerland.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

. 
et *E. “ © SC t ‘ La ¢ . Win << \ 2 FA 
h . - 


### 112058: Invisible chains

Invisible chains 
BY LINDA JOHANSSON 
Sweden's electronic tagging project 
Electronic tagging is still only 
practised in a few countries, 
including Sweden and the 
United States. Above, an 
electronic bracelet strapped to 
a young offender's ankle in 
Tucson, Arizona (U.S.A.). 
@ Patrick Bard/Editing, Pans 
Imprisonment is the most expensive 
"© form of punishment in modern soci- 
ety. In Sweden, the upkeep of an inmate in an 
open prison costs approximately 1,500 kroner 
($200 or £120) a day, and around 2,000 kroner 
($250 0r £160) in a closed prison. Studies have 
shown that incarceration has a negative impact 
on detainees, who are forced to leave their fam- 
ilies, jobs and social life, and that prisons are 
breeding grounds for criminality where young 
inmates learn about crime from more experi- 
enced lawbreakers. 
To address these issues, Sweden launched a 
pilot project in 1994 in which minor offend- 
ers can choose to be put under electronic sur- 
veillance instead of going to prison. In six pro- 
bation districts, lawbreakers sentenced to 
prison terms of two months or less were given 
the option of living at home and wearing an 
electronic ankle bracelet. Results surpassed 
expectations and three years later the pro- 
gramme was expanded to include all offenders 
nationwide sentenced to terms of three 
months or less. Nearly half the 4,000 people 
13 ’ 
THE UNESCO Courier B JUNE 1998 oJ

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 112058: Invisible chains

» eligible for electronic tagging in the first six 
months of 1997 had been convicted of 
drunken driving. 
Offenders must meet several requirements 
to be eligible for the programme. They must 
have arecognized home, a phoneand ajob.In 
addition, they must pay 50 kroner ($6 or £4) 
a day for the duration of their sentence to 
Victim Support, a charitable organization. A 
1997 study showed that several offenders who 
did not request the bracelet said the reason 
was they could not afford the 50 kroner a day 
or had neither a job nor a home. 
Probation officers do all they can to assist 
applicants, including trying to find them jobs 
and slots in training programmes. A tempo- 
rary phone line paid for by the national pris- 
ons and probation administration can be 
installed and offenders are encouraged to ask 
relatives or friends to help them find hous- 
ing. Those who cannot afford the 50 kroner a 
day are exempted from payment. 
The tag is fastened around the offender’ 
ankle. A 50-centimetre high electronic trans- 
mitter installed at his or her home beams sig- 
nals to a surveillance centre. If the tag is 
removed or the offender leaves home, the 
transmitter immediately triggers an alarm and 
the centre rings up the offender’s home to 
check for a possible malfunction. If the 
offender is found to have broken the rules, 
the tag is withdrawn and the rest of the sen- 
tence must be served in prison. But that sel- 
dom happens. The study showed that per- 
mission to work was suspended for 
misconduct in only 5 per cent of cases, usually 
because the offender had been drinking alco- 
hol. Infractions were most common among 
offenders serving longer sentences. 
Tight restrictions on movement 
A probation officer draws up a tight schedule 
that must be rigorously followed. Freedom 
of movement is strictly limited. Offenders are 
only allowed to leave home during working 
hours, except for one hour each Saturday and 
1 4 THE UNESCO Gourier MW JUNE 1998 
Sunday. If they are more than ten minutes off 
schedule, the alarm is set off. 
Most of the people who have been elec- 
tronically tagged say that it’s at least as dis- 
tressing as being in a prison where there is 
greater freedom of movement. In addition to 
restrictions on leaving home, total abstinence 
from the consumption of drugs and alcohol 
is required. Probation officers make surprise 
visits at all hours of the day or night, and at 
these times offenders have to take an alcohol 
breath test. 
“If I didn’t have a family,” said Jan-Erik 
Bengtsson, after wearing his tag for a very long 
week, “I would rather have stayed in jail. I 
can’t even take out the garbage and I feel like 
I’m always being watched. The breath tests are 
very demeaning. You don’t feel trusted and 
it’s very unpleasant not knowing when the 
probation officer will show up.” But like most 
people who wear a tag, Mr. Bengtsson still 
thinks it has some advantages. He can work 
and continue living at home with his com- 
panion and their three children. 
Electronic tagging has resulted in much 
heavier workloads for probation officers, 
many of whom say they no longer have 
enough time for their regular duties and believe 
that prison staff should be responsible for 
keeping tabs on tagged offenders. They con- 
sider themselves overqualified for such tasks— 
most of them are sociologists with several 
years of higher education behind them. 
But electronic tagging also results in sav- 
ings. The upkeep cost per offender is approx- 
imately 450 kroner a day, two-thirds less than 
the cost of imprisonment, and several correc- 
tional facilities have closed down for lack of 
inmates. The next step will probably be to 
include in the programme offenders sentenced 
to terms of up to four months. The possibil- 
ity has been raised of extending eligibility to 
lawbreakers sentenced to up to eleven months, 
but the authorities prefer to act cautiously so 
as not to jeopardize the potential of this alter- 
native to imprisonment. m 
  
Eighteenth-century convicts 
employed on public works in 
Bern (Switzerland). Period 
engraving. 
© Jean-Loup Charmet, Pans

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 112059: From revenge to reparation

From revenge to reparation 
BY TONY PETERS 
T. Over the past few decades, more atten- 
tion has been focused on the victims of 
crime than on criminals. This raises two ques- 
tions. How far do legal systems take into 
account victims’ demands for justice in the sen- 
tences they mete out to offenders? And to 
what extent do sentences respond to those 
demands? 
Eighteenth-century theories of law and 
justice developed by the Enlightenment 
philosophers in Europe form the basis of 
what is now regarded as classical penal proce- 
dure, whose non-arbitrary character is quite 
different from the procedure that prevailed 
before the French Revolution. Many forms 
of corporal punishment disappeared and were 
replaced by simple, clear-cut punishments like 
fines and prison sentences. 
In the nineteenth century, the purpose of 
prison sentences was to make criminals pay 
their debt to society. Incarceration temporar- 
ily kept offenders out of the way while serv- 
ing as an example and a warning. Imprison- 
ment was also supposed to give offenders time 
to reflect on their misdeeds. 
With the citizen’s safety uppermost in 
Penal policy takes a new direction by confronting 
offenders with the consequences of their acts and 
giving them a chance to make amends 
mind, classical penologists emphasized a strictly 
legal definition of crime and punishment. How- 
ever, as a result of the growing influence of the 
behavioural sciences views of delinquency 
changed and the idea that a single sentence is 
appropriate for all offenders regardless of the 
crime committed came under attack. A new 
trend emerged whereby sentencing was 
Blackwell's Island . . 
required to take each offender’s circumstances penitentiary in New York City 
(U.S.A.) in the 19th century. 
Period engraving. 
$ - “i- 
   
     
     
      
      
         
    
    
  
SER FIT rEN 
-F - TA PT PELL BE." 
se Brann? 
: 
5100 acirhy rrp ety 1 4041) FORE
 
od 11 § RANE PITRE AERA 
  
  
Rv 
  
  
TOTAL LALA     
 
THE UNESCO Gourier EH JUNE 1998 1 5 
® 
Je
an
 
Lo
up
 
Ch
ar
me
t,
 
Pa
ns

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 112059: From revenge to reparation

> 
@© 
Je
an
-L
ou
p 
Ch
ar
me
t,
 
Pa
ni
s 
and personal history into account. Sentencing 
criteria were no longer based on the legal defi- 
nition of the crime but on the threat to society 
posed by the offender. A battery of alterna- 
tives to fit specific individuals and situations 
were developed from the late nineteenth century 
onwards, including prison terms for hardened 
criminals, suspended sentences and probation 
for occasional offenders and protective and 
rehabilitation systems for young delinquents. 
Sentences were seen as a useful means of reinte- 
grating the criminal into society. 
Crowded prisons 
After the Second World War and the 1948 Dec- 
Jaration of Human Rights, new alternatives 
to prison opened up prospects of more 
humane sentencing with a view to reintegrat- 
ing offenders into society. But these hopes 
came to nothing and alternative sentences 
remained by and large marginal. Imprison- 
ment did not become a solution of last resort. 
In the 1970s, the flagrant inhumanity of 
correctional facilities, the psychological impact 
of incarceration and the social exclusion result- 
ing from this form of punishment resulted in 
@ 
Pa
ul
o 
Am
on
m,
 
Br
az
il
 
  
 
  
 
  
al
 
Se 
d
a
l
 |]
 
  
Yu
l 
an
ak
 
—
 
Lo
 
  
A
L
    
-— 
i 
- 
i 
|
]
 
ud
 
’ 
{ 
 Er
k 
[
R
e
 
i 
  
  
3 Bd 
Inmates in Brazil protesting 
against poor prison conditions 
and the slowness 
judicial system. 
of the 
A tum-of-the-century 
lecture against alcoholism at 
Fresnes prison (France). 
Period engraving. 
  
  
  
  
’ THE UNESCO Courier ® JUNE i998 
 
j
=
 
= 
  
c
a
 
 
| 
i 
Is 
v
r
 
4 
|
 
v + 
a growing scepticism about the prison sys- 
tem’s capacity to rehabilitate inmates. In many 
facilities they also led to strikes, revolts and 
uprisings, which were sometimes violently 
put down. 
Since the 1980s, two opposing viewpoints 
have emerged. On the one hand, prison seems 
to have lost its legitimacy as a punitive insti- 
tution. On the other, some organizations 
insist that inmates serve out their full sen- 
tences, thereby restoring the punitive func- 
tion of imprisonment. At the same time, those 
who remain unconvinced of the socializing 
virtues of deprivation of freedom stress that, 
in a democratic state under the rule of law, 
inmates are citizens entitled to legal protec- 
tion and basic human rights. 
Over the past ten years, crowded prison 
conditions have overshadowed ideological dis- 
cussions about the appropriateness, useful- 
ness and humaneness of incarceration. The 
average length of sentences has increased and 
procedures for early release have become more 
complicated. Keeping the offender off the 
streets seems to have become the main pur- 
pose of imprisonment. 
The debate on sentencing 
One major innovation that has emerged over 
the past two decades is the idea of reparation. 
Recent studies of the victims of crime have 
strongly influenced the debate on sentencing. 
The question of how far sentences solve the 
problems of victims is increasingly being asked. 
In this context, the definition of criminality 
and the penal approach to it become part of a 
horizontal exchange relationship between

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 112059: From revenge to reparation

CETTE A 
TE EY YY RY ww 
  
   
  
   ba US SU 
Ye oo wee         » - 
  
  
ww eee ee - 
add i 
EE Sd 
- 
- ro rr = a i a " df hla -- ww ‘ eh a  
    
Fighting a fire started 
during a riot at Dijon prison 
(France). 
  
  
 
offenders and victims. Both are equally con- 
cerned in the solution that is found for the 
problem posed by a criminal offence. 
Numerous offender-victim conciliation 
projects show that this is in many cases a real- 
istic approach and, what is more, highly sat- 
isfactory for both parties and effective in 
changing the offender’s behaviour. Concilia- 
tion plays a major role in helping to build a 
criminal justice system in which offenders 
make some amends to their victims. 
In handing out prison terms, little attention 
was given to the victim. An intelligent execution 
of the sentence should take into consideration 
 
 
    
7 
AN @ 
D.
 
Ma
nd
nt
ch
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
how the offender and victim experienced the 
crime. The systematic denial of the meaning 
and consequences of the offence and its accep- 
tance or rejection by victims and offenders 
strongly dehumanizes the application of the 
sentence. Confronting offenders with the con- 
sequences of their deeds and giving them an 
opportunity to make amends should become 
a basic function and priority of the criminal 
justice system in the very near future. Ina soci- 
ety where attention is now focused on the vic- 
tim, sentencing which does not require offend- 
ers to make amends to their victims lacks 
credibility and meaning. || 
= 
i 
THE UNESCO Courier HW JUNE i998 - .

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
os
 
® 
Gi
sé
le
 
Wu
lf
so
hn
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
  
  
Rehearsing a scene depicting 
“the boss” and his slave. 
Puppeteer Nyanga Tshabalala 
(centre) during a warm-up 
exercise with inmates. 


### 112060: South Africa: puppets in prison

 
   South 
“Why use puppets to educate prisoners about 
Aids? The puppet is a visual metaphor, repre- 
senting ‘real life’ and at the same time one step 
removed from the real world. Puppets can be 
highly controversial and thus often ‘say more’ 
than live actors. Especially when tackling taboo 
frica: puppets in 
  
  
  
DrSON 
subjects like sex and death, they can be less 
embarrassing to the audience. Puppetry can be 
used to break down racial and social barriers. 
and can reach all audiences, including the illit- 
erate. Combining them with humour and 
music is entertaining, holds up a mirror to 
  
Puppeteer Gary Friedman with a puppet head 
created by inmates. 
  
  
1 8 THE UNESCO Gourier Wm JUNE 1998 
  

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 112060: South Africa: puppets in prison

  
  
society and enables people to look—and 
laugh—at themselves.” 
In 1987 Gary Friedman and Nyanga Tshabalala 
founded Puppets Against Aids, a non-gov- 
crnmental organization that raises awareness of 
the disease. In 1996 they held a six-week pilot 
workshop, Puppets in Prison, with a group 
of young prisoners in Diepkopf prison in 
Johannesburg (South Africa). Participants 
  
  
  
  
Inmates carving 
. puppet heads. 
developed performances whose scenarios 
included rape, sexual practices, drugs, human 
rights, prostitution and the correct use of con- 
doms. A documentary video about the project 
was made and televised in several countries. This 
creative, informative experience had a con- 
structive effect on inmates. Photos on these 
pages were taken by Gisele Wulfsohn at Dicp- 
kopf during the workshop. 
A scene from one 
of the puppet shows, 
  
  
4 nN 
i 
wl i unisco {COURIER JUNE 1998 ©

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

© 
An
th
on
y 
Su
au
/V
u,
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 112061: Prisons for profit

Prisons for profit 
BY LEONARD L. CAVISE 
A police raid on a Moscow 
pool hall breaks up a brawl 
between rival gangs. 
 
{ 
N" U THE UNESCO Gourier B JUNE 1998 
In the modern era, it has only been since 
© the 1980s that private, for-profit cor- 
porations have sought to operate entire prison 
systems!. The private sector has long been 
involved in running various components of 
prison systems such as catering, industries, 
juvenile offender facilities or community- 
based programmes. Only recently, however, 
have governmental entities, mostly in the 
United States and Europe, considered turning 
over the entire management and operation of 
a state’s or locality’s correctional system to 
private contractors. 
The concept of prison privatization has 
given rise to wide debate. Its proponents argue 
that private contractors can build larger pris- 
ons faster and thus accommodate a prison 
population that is, generally speaking, on the 
increase. They also argue that the private sector 
is not encumbered by bureaucracy, which is 
usually seen as a major impediment to the effi- 
cient operation of a state system. Corpora- 
tions tend to be more streamlined and more 
willing to be flexible to meet expanding needs. 
Opponents of prison privatization argue 
that crime is not a private matter between the 
offender and his or her gaolers, but an issue 
that concerns society as a whole. If the inter- 
ests of society and the rights of the individual 
are to be safeguarded, the “government of the 
people” is under an obligation to ensure that 
  
the goals of incarceration are met by the con- 
stant control and monitoring exercised by a 
state agency that is not motivated by profit 
but by societal and individual concerns. 
Cheap labour 
The modern prison system came into being 
during the period of rapid industrialization in 
the Western world in the latter part of the nine- 
teenth century. Prison labour was regarded by 
private entrepreneurs as a potentially lucrative 
resource. It was cheap, and the capitalist did 
not have overall responsibility for the welfare 
of the prison worker. Asa result, prison work- 
shops were equipped, and the prisoners trained, 
by the enterprise concerned. The entrepreneur 
profited from the discounted labour, while the 
prison itself often made a financial gain by 
entering into a joint arrangement with the pri- 
vate contractors. Abuses were, however, com- 
mon. In France, inmates’ living and working 
conditions were deplorable and were seldom 
monitored by state officials. In Germany, many 
contractors supplied only minimal quantiti- 
ties of the cheapest food. In the United States, 
corrupt prison adminstrators often entered 
into agreements whereby the prisoners would 
be paid nothing at all for their labour. 
The state retained overall responsibility 
for the incarceration and rehabilitation of the 
prisoner, for dispensing punishment was scen 
as too important a government function to be 
ceded to private entities. As recently as 1986, 
the American Bar Association took a position 
against privatization, on the principle that 
incarceration is an inherent function of gov- 
ernment. If the private sector is allowed to 
control the terms and, to some degree, the 
length of incarceration, the argument goes, 
the state will have abdicated one of its princi- 
pal moral duties. 
Privatization: for and against 
Proponents of privatization counter by say- 
ing that the government should retain moni- 
toring and supervisory authority over prisons. 
The courts should, for example, review all 
prison decisions to grant or refuse parole, grant 
or refuse remission for good behaviour, or 
restrict or grant rights which might implicate 
the Constitution or other legislation. The total

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 112061: Prisons for profit

delegation of all powers to the private sector 
would compromise the sovereignty of the state. 
On the other hand, to require that the gov- 
ernment actually staff and operate the prisonis 
too great a concession to symbolism. 
We are, at the present time, witnessing a 
shrinkage in the role of government. Govern- 
ment programmes and regulatory powers are 
facing budget cuts or, in more and more cases, 
elimination, particularly in the social sector. At 
the same time, community-based correctional 
The gavel, symbol of the 
judge's authority (U.S.A). 
The private 
sector runs an 
increasing 
number of 
correctional 
facilities in 
Europe and the 
United States—a 
trend which is 
giving rise to 
controversy 
AE 
© 
Me
la
ni
e 
Ca
rr
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
programmes are being scaled back, while the 
prison population of most countries is 
increasing dramatically. The humanitarian and 
reform-minded approaches to incarceration 
exert less and less influence while, with crim- 
inality increasing worldwide, the retributive 
and incapacitation models of punishment are 
on the increase. The issue in the privatization 
debate thus becomes, not whether the private 
sector can duplicate the soctal and rehabilitative 
goals of the prison system, but whether it can 
THE UNESCO Courier A UNE 1998 2 1

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

| 2 
@® 
Be
rn
ar
d 
Bi
ss
on
/S
yg
ma
 
house prisoners and dispense punishment as 
efficiently as the state. If so, the role of gov- 
ernment will again be minimized and the 
stereotype of government-run agencies as inept 
and generally inferior will be perpetuated. 
Mixed results 
Opponents argue that the government still 
plays an essential role in many spheres, includ- 
ing the criminal justice system, public health, 
the environment, social security, and welfare. 
With private control, there is a danger that pris- 
oners, traditionally among society’s most 


### 112061: Prisons for profit

neglected members, will suffer abusc and 
exploitation for profit. There are concerns about 
the development of a “criminal justice industrial 
complex” which could become a political force 
that would affect incarceration rates, length of 
term, and conditions of confinement based not 
upon societal interest but the profit motive. 
On the level of legality, the issue is whether 
private control constitutes an acceptable dele- 
gation of the discipline- or rule-making 
authority. The private controller can hardly 
be considered a neutral rule-maker inasmuch as 
the expectation of profit will usually be the 
dominant rationale for any given rule. A com- 
promise might be to have a state authority 
review disciplinary decisions by the prison 
  
29 
a THE UNESCO Courier @ JUNE 1998 
for compliance with the governing legislation 
or constitution. In that way, the government 
would be relieved of the actual running of the 
system, while retaining overall responsibility 
(and liability) for it. 
As the debate continues, many countries 
are going ahead with privatization projects. In 
1994 alone, the number of privately-operated 
facilities increased by more than 20 per cent. 
The number of inmates in these facilities is now 
more than 30,000 in the United States alone. 
Although the largest of these projects is in the 
United States, other countries such as France, 
Australia and the United Kingdom have opened 
privately-controlled prisons. While the phys- 
ical facilities generally seem to be of higher qual- 
ity, the results as regards the quality of food, 
educational programmes, and, more generally, 
the opportunity for inmates to engage in mean- 
ingful pursuits are mixed. The private compa- 
nies tend to make excellent profits, and all the 
estimates indicate that the future for prison 
privatization is, in economic terms, bright; but 
whether privatization will improve the social 
goals of prison remains to be seen. || 
1. Many prisons in Europe were privately operated in 
the Middle Ages and as recently as the nineteenth 
century. Author's note. 
  
  
  
 
Right, a representative 
of a humanitarian 
organization visits 
a Rwandan prison in 1994, 
©) Langein/Sygma, Pans 
Food service was one of the 
first prison functions 
contracted out to the private 
sector. Below, meal trays at 
the Chateaudun detention 
centre (France).

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
~ Incarcerated persons are still commonly 
©" viewed simply as prisoners, and the 
deprivation of their freedom as merely the pre- 
lude to a series of other ordeals. However, the 


### 112062: Offenders' rights

quite different idea that imprisonment is harsh 
enough retribution in itself is slowly and spas- 
modically gaining ground in the law and pub- 
ffenders’ rights er wovarue 
~The defence of prisoners’ rights is the foundation of 
democratic penal policy 
Dn” 
lic opinion. This shift in attitude is due to the 
impact on national legislation of international 
regulations covering the rights of minors and 
adults subject to detention or imprisonment, 
the spread of democracy in many countries 
and, especially, the growing acceptance of the 
concept of human rights. 
he unesco (Qurier | june 1998 2 3 
 

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

> 
® 
Ma
c 
Gu
in
es
s/
Vu
, 
Pa
ns
 


### 112062: Offenders' rights

The word “rights” can be used only when 
clear procedures allowing their enjoyment exist 
and unbiased, public and competent bodies— 
in most countries, the courts—guarantee their 
proper application. 
The general state of a country’s prison sys- 
tem is a yardstick of its level of civilization. 
Acknowledging that prisoners are still mem- 
bers of society, allowing them to keep most of 
the rights enjoyed by free citizens and grant- 
ing them rights specific to their incarcerated 
status are expressions of basic tenets of human- 
itarianism and social solidarity. Because this 
approach defends human dignity, it helps to 
prevent crime and improve public safety. Low 
self-esteem or lack of self-respect often lead a 
person to be indifferent to the rights or dig- 
nity of others, and constitute one cause of 
deviant and criminal behaviour. The idea of 
prisoners’ rights is the basic premise of any 
penal policy claiming to be rational, preventive 
and concerned with public safety and citizens’ 
quality of life. 
The large number of international regula- 
  
24 
THE UNESCO Gounier BM JUNE 1998 
tions, resolutions and conventions regarding 
prisoners’ rights shows how central this issue 
is and also how far the actual situation and 
legal status of prisoners still fall short of the- 
oretical international standards. In spite of 
many efforts to curb, if not end, torture, 
physical abuse and humiliating treatment, the 
reality inside prison walls remains grim, Only 
international acceptance of prisoners’ rights 
and their recognition on the local level can 
bring to prison systems the real accountabil- 
ity which is the essential safeguard of respect 
for prisoners’ dignity. 
Some prisoners have been detained because 
they have committed acts of cruelty, others 
merely because of their opinions, background, 
nationality, religion or even skin colour. 
Among them are children, young persons, the 
elderly and people with serious illnesses. Oth- 
ers are paying with their freedom for miscar- 
riages of justice and other people’s thirst for 
power and political ambitions. These inmates 
come from many walks of life. But a closer 
look at the prison population as a whole 
{ WD 
     
    
#
 
EB
 
- 
-
 
B
a
 
fo
s 
Rr 
pe
) 
J
y
 
e
e
 
  
Above, life goes on. Inmates 
and their children in Matroska 
Tishino women’s prison in 
Moscow (Russia). 
Opposite page, family visit at a 
Hungarian prison for men. 
A drawing class in a Chinese 
prison for minors.

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

  
reveals that most detainees are penniless, and 
lack education or support; they are outcasts 


### 112062: Offenders' rights

regarded as useless by the rest of society. This 
1s one reason why the application of prison- 
ers’ rights still faces so many obstacles. 
For many years, the United Nations sys- 
tem (see Fact file, page 38) and numerous gov- 
crnmental and non-governmental organiza- 
tions have been working to turn the situation 
round through a series of legal instruments 
mcluding the European Penitentiary Rules, 
the American Convention of Human Rights 
and the African Charter of Human and Peo- 
ple’s Rights. Respect for human dignity is a Ke 
basic right of any prisoner, and is a more effi- 
cient pillar of the law than humiliation and 
threats. | 
4 
  
© 
G 
Ru
sc
he
nd
or
f/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ns
 
 © 
va
rk
on
y 
Ho
rv
at
/S
yg
ma
, 
Pa
ns
 
25 THE UNESCO Courier H JUNE 1998

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
| it 
L
a
L
a
 
 —- 
—
g
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ron ot ve med 
8, ao 
 
 
~~ 
"i 
«0 tre unesco (Quricr m june 1998

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

Women mEERREE 
inmates with 3S 1 ISHRREN. | 
their children I] LJ Il]. 
"LT I'0 | Ie “On visiting day at the men’s prison, you 
can see lines of women who have sometimes 
been waiting to get in since the night before. 
You don’t see that at the women’s prisons. 
The women are left more alone.” (Bailiff at 
the San Martin courthouse) 
  
In Argentina, women who have been 
charged with an offence or who are serving 
time can keep their children with them until 
the age of two. Adriana Lestido spent a year 
photographing mothers with their children 
at Los Hornos prison n° 8 in La Plata. 
2 Wi 
5 me unesco (Durer June 1998 & | 
Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Ad
na
na
 
Le
st
id
o/
Vu
, 
P
a
n
s

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 112063: The Changing role of prison staff

The changing 
BY ABDEL-AZIM WAZIR 
The role of the prison service has 
- changed. Itis no longer simply concerned 
with keeping prisoners under lock and key. It 
«seeks to equip them to return to live in society. 
Correctional facilities have become an 
important social tool. They systematically use 
advanced methods and call on a wide variety of 
experts—doctors, pharmacists, nurses, teach- 
ers, librarians, coaches and art instructors. 
Chaplains take inmates into their pastoral care, 
and psychiatrists, psychologists and social 
workers help them sort out their lives. Last 
but not least, each facility must see to it that 
®F
 
An
ce
ll
et
/R
ap
ho
, 
Pa
ns
 
a0 
a J THE UNESCO Gurr WB JUNE 1998 
role of prison staff 
inmates leave prison with a trade or profes- 
sion, whether carpentry or engineering. 
Each staff member must have the scientific 
or technical background required for his or her 
field, as well as special training to work ina cor- 
rectional facility. Most are employees although 
some are volunteers, especially in the arca of 
social services. Volunteers are often very helpful 
because of the trust they inspire in prisoners. 
Administrative staff and warders, as well as 
specialists, have to learn special skills so that 
they do not lose sight of their role as educa- 
tors. Professional and administrative staff can 
Opposite page, a homeless 
child is questioned at an 
intake centre (Romania). 
Opposite page below, a warder 
in a London prison for women 
holds a baby belonging to a 
prisoner. 
Below, anxious families ask for 
news about their children after 
a police round-up in Rio de 
Janeiro (Brazil). 

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
  © 
Da
wi
d 
Ho
ff
ma
n/
St
il
l 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
  


### 112063: The Changing role of prison staff

 
do their jobs well only if there is a healthy 
relationship between inmates and warders. 
Progress in training courses, which cover 
social problems as well as specific professional 
topics, is measured by theoretical and practi- 
cal testing. Raising the level of recruitment in 
this way enhances the social standing of prison 
employees and helps ensure they will work 
with a spirit of integrity. 
It is just as important to provide training 
for serving prison staff, most of whom began 
their careers when prior training was not 
required. Trained personnel should also have 
regular opportunities to brush up on their 
skills and update their working methods. W 
29 THE UNESCO Courrer 8 [UNE 1998 & 
@ 
Hi
en
 
La
m 
Du
g/
Vu
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 112064: The Hard way back

The hard way back 
After eight years and four months in 
custody, I was released on parole two 
years ago. 
At the end of the day, a prisoner’s release 
depends on the law, in the fullest sense of the 
term. The system must not only be concerned 
with punishment; it should also keep track 
of each inmate’s moral development by means 
" of interviews. The prison service must be inter- 
  
© 
EN
DA
, 
Da
ka
r 
THE UNLSCO Gourier EH JUNE 1998 
Painter Amadou Cissé Dia at 
the opening of one of his 
exhibitions in Dakar (Senegal) 
in 1994. 
BY AMADOU CISSE DIA 
ested in their fate. In the facility where I was 
held, administrators and warders kept an eye 
on every move we made, good or bad, and 
wrote up reports on our behaviour. I believe 
those reports play a decisive role. 
During my eight years of confinement, I 
saw several judges visit the prison to make 
direct contact with certain inmates. That 
enabled them to understand the prisoners’ 
true personalities. I am sure that this in-depth 
knowledge is crucial in the decision to release 
them. 
Getting back into society is a tough propo- 
sition for any ex-convict. But people must 
realize that in some cases crime is a curable dis- 
ease. An inmate who really wants to change, 
who has thought deeply during his years 
inside and who has come to enjoy work 
knows what he wants to become and what he 
wants to do. He has a clear picture of his past 
and present. He knows why his life has been 
filled with pain and suffering and he thinks 
back nostalgically to when he was a child. 
He would like to have a second chance. 
He finally manages to understand society, 
something he had never done before because he 
had never stopped and taken a close look at 
human behaviour. He discovers the self-respect 
and inner peace that come with honest work. 
He wants to cling to happiness with all his 
might. That is why itis vital for an ex-convict 
to find a way to make a living. 
The road to rehabilitation is fraught with 
pitfalls that only the bravest souls can avoid. 
The main problem is the relationship with 
society; an ex-convict needs plenty of under- 
standing. 
Speaking for myself, [ am successfully 
working my way back into society. I am start- 
ing to make my mark as a painter. I managed on 
my own to obtain a commission to paint a 
large fresco in a bank. Some of my works are 
in local collections and I am earning an honest 
living. 
I had already dabbled in painting before I 
went into prison, but it was while I was inside 
that I began to take it seriously. By steadily and 
painstakingly devoting myself to painting all 
those years, [ acquired a passion for work. H

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

Inmates whose 
status is a subject 
of controversy 
Above, South African political 
prisoners and their families 
explode with joy in a post- 
release rehabilitation centre. 
© Darryl Evans/Vu, Pans 


### 112065: Political prisoners

Political prisoners 
¥ 
-— 
| 
~ Few concepts in penology are as con- 
“ tentious as that of the “political pris- 
oner”, the implication of which is that such 
prisoners form a discrete group of detainees 
who, because of the nature of the conduct for 
which they have been incarcerated, should be 
treated differently. 
The first point of contention is usually as to 
whether the existence of a discrete category of 
political prisoners should be recognized. The 
qualification “political” indicates that the pris- 
oners concerned have committed acts which 
directly challenge the authority and legitimacy 
of the government that is detaining them. Rec- 
ognizing that they are “political prisoners” 
therefore entails recognition by a government 
that it is facing a challenge going beyond that 
posed by “ordinary criminals”, whose infringe- 
ment of the laws of the land is not aimed specif- 
ically at the government itself. The result 1s that 
governments are often very reluctant to admit 
that they are holding “political prisoners” in 
their gaols. 
In democratic societies, it is unacceptable 
BY DIRK VAN ZYL SMIT 
for a government to maintain power by 
imprisoning those who do not support it. 
Where large numbers of a government’s oppo- 
nents are imprisoned without trial under 
emergency legislation or following the decla- 
ration of martial law, it is difficult for that 
government to deny outright that it is hold- 
ing people in its gaols for political reasons. 
Governments that act in this way usually claim 
that such measures are temporary and intended 
to prevent disorder. In these circumstances, 
public campaigns demanding that such 
detainees be cither charged or released may be 
very effective, since the government has already 
conceded the principle that its conduct is 
undemocratic. 
Terrorists or freedom fighters? 
The position is more complicated if oppo- 
nents of a government are imprisoned after 
having been charged and convicted under the 
criminal law. Such a course is attractive to gov- 
ernments, since it enables them to deny that 
THL UNESCO Gourer HB |UNL 1998

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

  © 
Mi
la
di
no
vi
c/
Si
pa
 
Pr
es
s,
 
P
a
n
s
 
Former dissident Vaclav Havel 
on his election as president of 
the Czech and Slovak Republic » the persons concerned are political prisoners, in 1990 
and to claim that they are being held because 
they infringed the criminal law and not because 
they opposed the government of the day. In 
this way, the government can attempt to cap- 
italize on the legitimacy which the criminal 
law as a whole possesses in most societies. 
Opponents of a government imprisoned 
after being convicted by the criminal courts can 
and do object to their incarceration on a num- 
ber of grounds. Most simply and directly, they 
can claim that they were not guilty of the 
offences with which they were charged, but that 
their convictions were the result of biased or 
unfair procedures. Second, they can challenge 
the offences as defined in the criminal law by 
arguing that they were not “ordinary crimes” 
but conduct which had been criminalized by 
the government in order to muzzle its oppo- 
nents. Third, they can reject their convictions 
directly by arguing that the conduct which the 
government attempts to criminalize, treason 


### 112065: Political prisoners

for example, is justified because of the essential 
illegitimacy of the government itself. 
Debates about what constitute political The Burmese political leader 
offences and who should be regarded as polit- ~~ Aung San Suu Kyi (upper left, 
ical prisoners may transcend national borders. no ding microphone), eo 
When one state seeks the extradition of an Rangoon from a 
alleged offender from another state in order to |, 1991 she was awarded the 
bring him or her to trial, international law Nobel peace prize.  
32 - THE UNESCO Courier B JUNE 1998

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 112065: Political prisoners

allows the request to be denied if the extradition 
is being sought to try that person for an offence 
of a political character. This exception to general 
extradition agreements is controversial. States or 
their courts differ about whether a particular 
offence is political in character. States may also 
agree among themselves that certain forms of 
conduct are so reprehensible that their perpe- 
trators should be subject to extradition, irre- 
spective of the fact that they were conducted 
with a political motive. International conven- 
tions which allow the extradition of persons 
suspected of aircraft hijacking or terrorism are 
examples of an emerging international consen- 
sus to limit the political offence exception, but 
the difficulty remains that a person who is 
regarded as a terrorist by some may be regarded 
as a freedom fighter by others. 
‘Prisoners of conscience’ 
One way to avoid difficulties of definition is 
by focusing on only some of all those 
detainees who may be regarded as political 
prisoners. Amnesty International, for exam- 
ple, has been particularly successful with its 
campaigns on behalf of “prisoners of con- 
science”. It has defined as prisoners of con- 
science all persons detained because of their 
beliefs, but has specifically excluded those who 
have used or advocated violence. This meets 
the objection that the organization is sup- 
porting the cause of “violent terrorists”. How- 
ever, many prisoners who were motivated by 
political ends and who may have turned to  
Apartheid opponent Nelson 
Mandela spent nearly 30 years 
in prison. In 1993 he shared violence only as a last resort have been excluded. ; 
the Nobel peace prize with 
On this test, for example, Nelson Mandela Frederik De Klork and was 
could not be regarded as a political prisoner, ected president of the 
for in his many years in prison he did not pgepublic of South Africa the 
renounce the violent overthrow of the then folowing year. 
South African Government. 
In practice, the solution of the problem as 
to who is a political prisoner has often been 
pragmatic. Typically, governments insist that 
all those who claim political status are ordinary 
criminals, but mete out different treatment 
to certain subgroups of them. In Northern 
Ireland, for example, the British Government 
consistently refused to grant Republican or 
Loyalist detainees the status of political pris- 
oners, but at various times granted them a 
special-category status, which meant that they 
were subject to regimes very different from 
those applied to other prisoners. Attempts to 
reverse this special-category status met with 
strong resistance from the prisoners. 
Even qualified recognition of a special 
political prisoner status has potential advan- 
tages for the prisoners concerned. At the most 
general level, such public acknowledgment 
that their actions are motivated by ideals of 
social and political change may advance their 
cause. Even limited special status may mean »   © 
N 
€ 
Du
ni
cp
/P
an
os
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
~ 
THE UNESCO Gourier BO UNEI998 
© 
Tr
ip
pe
tt
/S
ip
a 
Pr
es
s

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 112065: Political prisoners

» that prisoners whose alleged offences were 
politically motivated are grouped together. 
There are numerous examples of such prison- 
ers developing increased solidarity and com- 
mitment to their shared cause while in prison. 
There are also examples of individual political 
prisoners obtaining a special status while in 
prison because the government that put them 
there recognized that it might have to negoti- 
ate with them at some future date. 
Recognition of a special political prisoner 
status is potentially a mixed blessing, how- 
ever. There are many examples of political pris- 
oners being treated with particular severity. 
Quite simply, a state may decide to use its 
prison system to break the morale of its oppo- 
nents. Labour and concentration camps in 
wartime are variations of the prison system 
which have been used to this end, with 
.depressing frequency. There are even instances 
of courts colluding in this process. In South 
Africa, for example, in 1978, a group of pris- 
oners managed to approach the highest court 
in the land to ask for some access to news of 
current events. In court, they defined them- 
selves as political prisoners, a status which the 
authorities at that time vigorously contested. 
The court accepted this self-imposed catego- 
rization but used it to argue that, precisely 
because the applicants were political prison- 
ers, they could be denied news which was rou- 
tinely available to other prisoners. 
When the rule of law 
LER D BT 
 The snow-covered yard, by Michael Inns. 
® Michael Inns/inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London 
  
2 QQ 140 : 
is flouted ib Tr 
: RE cn Ge GARE CR SR SR | Lr In practice, the status of political prisoners may CEE hf =f lit a 
also play a part in determining when they will 
be released from custody. In this respect too, the 
impact may be positive or negative. Political 
prisoners may be required to serve a far higher 
portion of their sentence before being consid- 
cred for parole. On the other hand, a change of 
regime or even a shift in the political climate 
may lead to early release for those whose 
offences may be regarded in the new circum- 
stances as being of a political character. 
Such flexibility 1s contrary to the rule of 
law, since it indicates that, where political pris- 
oners are concerned, executive intervention is 
allowed to disrupt the normal operation of the 
criminal justice system. The rule of law requires 
the system to operate according to clear, pre- 
viously determined and impartial principles. 
The fact that the rule of law is routinely 
flouted in these instances indicates that the 
imprisonment of political dissidents is never 
an ideal way of solving a political dispute, but 
is an admission of failure in the political sphere. 
Governments should recognize that when 
prisoners claim political status it is a signal 
that they and the section of the population 
which supports them feel excluded from the 
political process. Almost certainly, political 
solutions rather than the intervention of the 
criminal justice system are required to meet 
this challenge. || 
  
  
Iday 10nd Hday 10nd  
My friend Sami, by Mohamed Manssor. 
© Mohamed Manssor/Inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London 
~ 34 
THe unesco (COURIER 8 june 1998

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

FUJI ROPI 
  
Prison through prisoners’ eyes 
“...thereis a better way to deal with our 
problems of crime and punishment than the 
one we have at the moment. That way 
involves education and understanding. By 
putting more people in prison we are not 
going to solve the problem. And if people 
have been in prison we should urgently help 
them not to go back in. Depriving them of 
their liberty is their punishment, not 
treating them inhumanely. Help them prize 
liberty above everything and they will be 
less likely to lose it. And art is liberty. 
Freedom to express, freedom to 
communicate.” 
Iddy 1rngy 
Gary's wedding day, by Jon Purl. 
® Jon Purl/Inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London 
These lines are from a book of photographs 
entitled Wandsworth Prison as Seen through 
the Prisoners’ Eyes, by Marc Schlossman and 
Adri Berger (“Inside Eye”, London, 1997). 
Inmates themselves took pictures of 
everyday life in the prison. The project, 
entitled Inside Eye, was the brainchild of a 
group of British photographers who in 
1993 had the idea of teaching Wandsworth 
inmates photographic skills and then 
exhibiting their images outside the prison, 
giving the public a view of the prisoners’ 
world through their own eyes. A few of the 
prisoners became professional 
photographers after their release. Some of 
their photos are featured here and on the 
double page overleaf. 
Ida¥ 1rng 
re unesco (Ourier m1 june 1998 35

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
   
  
A guest speaker talks to the prisoners, by 
Dennis Hudson. 
© Dennis Hudson/inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London 
F
U
J
I
 
R
D
P
I
 
    
         
   
 
‘I
he
 
L 
V
N
 
* 
iN
 
[9 
J 
L
t
 
BO
NN
Y 
W
N
 
. 
a 
i
p
 
tT 
SU
RG
E 
{
8
 
[S
{o
] 2 
Ql 
=
F
 
The workout, by Steve. 
© Steve/Inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London 
FUJI RDPI 
3 6 THE UNESCO Courier Wm JUNE 1998

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

    
         
  
FUJI ROPI RDPE 143 
  
  
 
                           
- 
H
F
 
he
 
      
   
NS B=N1 ROPE 2 
The library, by Sid and Larry. 
© Sid and Larry/Inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London 
Self-portrait, by Michael Inns. 
© Michael Inns/ Inside Eye/Panos Pictures, London 
THE UNESCO Courier H [UNE 1998 3 |

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 112066: Fact file (prisons: a system in crisis)

rs 
@ 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l 
Pr
is
on
 
Wa
lc
h,
 
Ly
on
s,
 
fr
an
ce
 
  
  
United Nations international instruments | 
concerning the protection of persons subjected 
to detention or imprisonment 
«Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10 
December 1948 
«Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of 
Prisoners, 30 August 1955 
= [nternational Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 21 December 
1965 
& [nternational Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights, 16 December 1966 
«Declaration on the Rights of Mentally Retarded 
Persons, 20 December 1971 
«Declaration on the Protection of All Persons 
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, 
inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 9 
December 1975 
wr Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement 
Officials, 17 December 1979 
«Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the Role 
of Health Personnel, particularly Physicians, in the 
Protection of Prisoners and Detainees against 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment, 18 December 1982 
«Safeguards Guaranteeing Protection of the 
Rights of Those Facing the Death Penalty, 25 May 
1984 
«= Convention against Torture and Other Crue!, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 10 
December 1984 
& United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for 
the Administration of Juvenile Justice (The Beijing 
Rules), 29 November 1985 
«Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for 
Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, 29 November 
1985 
wr Basic Principles on the Independence of the 
Judiciary, 29 November 1985 
«Body of Principles for the Protection of All 
Persons under Any Form of Detention or 
Impnsonment, 9 December 1988 
= Principles on the Effective Prevention and 
fo»     
  
38 THE UNESCO Gourier EH JUNE 1998 
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary 
Executions, 24 May 1989 
= Convention on the Rights of the Child, 20 
November 1985 
«= Basic Principles on the Use of Force and 
firearms by Law Enforcement Officials, 7 September 
1990 
«Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers, 7 
September 1990 
«  Guidefines on the Role of Prosecutors, 7 
September 1990 
«Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners, 
14 December 1990 
wo United Nations Rules for the Protection of 
Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty, 14 December 
1990 
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for 
Non-custodial Measures (The Tokyo Rules), 14 
December 1990 
wo United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of 
Juvenile Delinquency (The Riyadh Guidelines), 14 
December 1990 
w# Model Treaty on the Transfer of Proceedings in 
Criminal Matters, 14 December 1990 
Model Treaty on the Transfer of Supervision of 
Offenders Conditionally Sentenced or Conditionally 
Released, 14 December 1990 
= Declaration on the Protection of All Persons 
from Enforced Disappearance, 18 December 1992 
Drug Addiction, a poster by Ruedi Baur and Félix 
Miiller (France). This work was shown at an 
exhibition of posters and writings organized by 
International Prison Watch, a non-governmental 
organization based in Lyons (France). The 
purpose of the group is to monitor prison 
conditions worldwide and to draw attention to 
violations of prisoners’ rights. 
   
   
     
Bi 
{
a
a
d
 
2 
, 
p
o
o
 
i
 
A UN-Unesco manual 
oh prison education 
Most of the millions of people in 
the world’s prisons and other cor- 
rectional institutions have had no higher 
education. Evenin countries with a univer- 
sal right of access to 10 or more years of 
schooling, alarge minority faces difficulties 
in reading, writing and numeracy and in 
conducting social transactions. Providing 
them with basic education 1s a prerequisite 
for achieving the internationally agreed goal 
of ensuring a basic level of education for all. 
Some of the ways in which prison edu- 
cation can be promoted and some existing 
practices in countries throughout the world 
are reviewed in Basic Education in Prisons, 
a manual published jointly by the United 
Nations and the UNEsco Institute for 
Education (UIE), UNESCO’s specialized 
centre for research and development in adult 
and continuing education. 
The manual arose from a UIE project to 
investigate basic education in prisons and in 
response to a United Nations request for a 
tool to provide the basis for development 
of prison education and to promote inter- 
national exchange of expertise and experi- 
ence in this field. 
Designed for decision makers, admin- 
istrators, educators and non-governmental 
organizations concerned with education in 
penal establishments, Basic Education in 
Prisons reports on the status and potential 
of prison education strategies, giving con- 
siderable attention to the views of practi- 
toners and, where possible, of inmates. 
This overview is complemented by case 
studies from Botswana, China, Costa Rica, 
Egypt, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, 
Sti Lanka and the U.S.A. | 
  
1 Basic Education in Prisons, United Nations Office 
at Vienna/UNESCO Institute for Education, 203 
Pp Hamburg, 1995, ISBN-92-1-130-164-5. 
  
For further information: 
Unesco Institute for Education 
Feldbrunnenstrasse 58 
D-20148 Hamburg, Germany. 
Tel: (+ 49) (0) 40 44 80 41 
Fax: (+ 49) (0) 40 410 77 23 
Internet: http//www.education.unesco.org/uie

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### 112066: Fact file (prisons: a system in crisis)

  
THE UNITED NATIONS, 
UNESCO AND PRISONER EDUCATION 
The United Nations is the foremost 
international organization concerned 
with the global question of prisoner educa- 
tion and has set many standards and norms 
in this field. UN action has focused on 
inmates’ basic human right to an education 
designed to concentrate on their mental, 
physical, social and spiritual development. Its 
framework has been the Universal Declara- 
tion of Human Rights and the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cul- 
tural Rights, whose signatories recognize 
“the right of everyone to education” and 
that education shall be geared to “the full 
development of the human personality”. 
The UN has adopted several sets of pris- 
oner education standards. The most impor- 
tant, the Standard Minimum Rules for the 
Treatment of Prisoners (1955), stipulates 
that “provision shall be made for the further 
education of all prisoners capable of profit- 
ing thereby”, and that penal education 
should be integrated “so far as practicable” 
with each country’s educational system. 
Another set of principles, the United 
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the 
Administration of Juvenile Justice (The Bei- 
jing Rules) establishes standards on the 
rights of juvenile offenders. Rule 26 stipu- 
lates that a juvenile penal education system 
should help young people in institutions 
“to assume socially constructive and pro- 
ductive roles in society”, The focus is on the 
“wholesome development” of young 
offenders and on training to ensure that 
they do not return to society at an “educa- 
tional disadvantage”. 
Significant new UN resolutions on 
prison education were adopted in 1990, 
including a recommendation that “all pris- 
oners have access to education, including 
literacy programmes, basic education, voca- 
tional training, creative, religious and cul- 
tural activities, physical education and 
sports, social education, higher education 
and library facilities”. 
While UNESCO had previously said lit- 
tle on the specific subject of prisoner edu- 
cation at the international level, the Fourth 
International UNESCO Conference on 
Adult Education (1985) adopted a decla- 
ration on the right to learn for all, which 
consists of: a) the right to read and write; 
b) the right to question and analyse; ¢) the 
right to imagine and create; d) the right to 
read about one’s own world and to write 
history; e) the right to have access to edu- 
cational resources; f) the right to develop 
individual and collective skills. Like the 
human rights articulated by the UN; these 
UNESCO rights are considered fundamental, 
with the goal of developing the whole per- 
sonality. This means that prisoners should 
be given access wherever possible to libraries, 
laboratories, workshops, cultural events 
and similar educational resources to develop 
themselves to the fullest extent. 
The Fifth International Conference on 
Adult Education, organized by the 
UNESCO Institute for Education in Ham- 
burg, 14-18 July 1997, adopted the Ham- 
burg Declaration on Adult Learning and 
its accompanying Agenda for the Future 
which sets out in detail UNESCO's new 
commitment to adult learning. The Agenda 
recognizes “the right to learn of all prison 
inmates: a) By providing prison inmates 
with information on and access to differ- 
ent levels of education and training; (b) By 
developing and implementing comprehen- 
~ 
‘ * 
Street children in Tananarive, the capital of 
Madagascar, where around 4,000 homeless 
children between the ages of 2 and 18 survive by 
begging and doing odd jobs, The non-governmental 
humanitarian organization Doctors Without 
Borders has been running a medical, social and 
legal assistance programme to help them since 
1993. 
sive education programmes in prisons, with 
the participation of inmates, to meet their 
needs and learning aspirations; (c) By mak- 
ing it easier for non-governmental organi- 
zations, teachers and other providers of 
educational activities to work in prisons, 
thereby providing prisoners with access to 
educational institutions and encouraging 
initiatives that link courses carried out 
inside and outside prisons.” | 
For further information on the 1997 conference: 
Internet: 
http://www.education.unesco.org/confintea 
Bibliography: 
Further reading in the Unesco Collection of 
Representative Works: 
v' The Lava of this Land, South African Poetry 
1960-1996, Denis Hirson (ed.), 1997 
Vv’ The Prisoner, Fakhar Zaman, 1996 
Vv Journal de la félicité, Nicolae Steinhardt, 1995 
Vv South African Short Stories, D.Hirson with M. 
Trump (eds.), 1994 
Vv Post-scriptum et autres nouvelles, Vassili 
Choukchine, 1997 
From the Unesco Courier. 
Vv “The education of prisoners”, Stephen 
Duguid, April 1996 (Learning to Learn) 
The above publications are on sale at: 
Unesco Publishing, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 
Paris 07 SP, France. 
Tel: (33)(0)1 4568 43 00; Fax: (33)(0)1 4568 57 41; 
Internet: http://www.unesco.org/publications 
ne unesco (ouricr m june 1998 3 9 
© 
Ri
p 
Ho
pk
in
s 
/V
u,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

(aL, -. 
eT
 
vi tb 
JG
 
Ja
cq
ue
s,
 
Mo
nt
  
Un
is
co
 
In our rapidly changing world, literacy should 
be seen as an important evolutionary variable in 
every society. For the further a society progresses, the 
more it needs to adjust and adapt to new demands and 
pressures, so thatliteracy is a lifelong necessity for all. 
Literacy, in the broad sense, is the foundation for life 
skills, ranging from basic oral and written communi- 
cation to the ability to solve scientific and social prob- 
lems. Today it involves much more than the acquisition 
of the 3Rs and a limited set of traditional skills. It is 
linked with the changing demands of life in a given 
socio-cultural context. 
This means that local communities should be fully 
involved in defining the content of literacy progammes. 
The local dimension of literacy is extremely important, 
not only for accommodating the real needs of learners, 
but also for taking into account the linguistic and cul- 
tural realities of multicultural societies. For in the 
end, only the learners actually decide what they need 
to learn. 
Building bridges between cultures 
I'am very pleased to see that this broader, more dynamic 
- and culturally sensitive stance is accepted by most 
literacy specialists. It marks a long overdue acknowl- 
edgment of the positive role that local languages and 
cultures can play in removing some of the serious ped- 
4 0 THE UNESCO Gourier MW JUNE 1998 
commentary Fed Q Mn CO 
Ke Ll 


### 112067: For a broader approach to education

a )r a broader rl “Es 
Mayor 
agogical and psychological hurdles often encountered 
bylearners. [tis the only way to ensure the relevance 
and authenticity of literacy work. 
I should like to insist here on the importance of 
multilingual education. Today education is as much 
about learning to live together as learning to know, to 
do and to be. Yet we cannot live together if our possi- 
bilities of expression are limited to a single linguistic 
frame. This is often at the root of problems encountered 
in multicultural societies. Of course, inequality in all 
its forms is a major factor. But internal conflicts often 
have purely cultural causes. It is more difficult for peo- 
ple to forge links with each other when they cannot 
communicate linguistically. 
Yet children learn languages easily—much more 
so than the adults who take the decisions. We need to 
take much greater advantage of this fact. Children are 
expected to store too much information in their “hard 
memory” ’—much of it frankly useless! Giving them 
language skills provides them with bridges between 
cultures, enabling them to grow up without the debil- 
itating sense that other cultures are alien. It is UNESCO’s 
task to try to ensure that education at all levels, and 
particularly basic education, promotes multilingualism. 
And we must invest in such education, since to do so 
is to invest in peace. 
Itis also important to remind ourselves that literacy 
“wi

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 112067: For a broader approach to education

‘If we truly believe in lifelong learning, and if we seriously 
believe in redressing the balance of learning in our societies, 
then we should seek to develop in every country an open and more 
enabling system of education.’ 
approach to education 
is not a neutral process which can be applied in all sit- 
uations, all the time, regardless of social and economic 
realities. Such a narrow concept of literacy ignores its 
critical role as a tool of empowerment. The Brazilian 
educator Paulo Freire compared to banking those 
methods that treat adult learners as empty vessels 
waiting to be filled with predetermined bodies of knowl- 
edge disconnected from their social experience. Liter- 
acy must provide space for intellectual development, 
motivations for learning and a sense of self-esteem, if 
itis to be a genuine education for empowerment. 
Bringing adult education into 
the mainstream 
Many individuals and families around the world are fac- 
ing unexpected changes in the pattern of their daily 
lives, disrupting their plans for the future. The 
demands on educational services are increasing dra- 
matically, especially in countries where the state is 
the main provider of education for children and adults, 
In today’s world, we cannot afford a short-sighted 
approach which, in effect, excludes adult education 
from the mainstream of the education system, even 
after the concept of lifelong learning has been accepted 
as a framework for educational policy. 
Literacy programmes must be given the priority they 
deserve. Lifelong learning for all requires quality adult 
education and literacy programmes with qualified per- 
sonnel, relevant teaching programmes, appropriate post- 
literacy materials and decent facilities. We must ask 
ourselves whether we really are prepared to make the 
necessary investments in adult education and literacy 
to ensure universal access to the types of programmes 
needed to reach the targets of education for all. 
If we truly believe in lifelong learning, and if we 
seriously believe in redressing the balance of learning 
in our societies, then we should seek to develop in 
every country an open and more enabling system of 
education, breaking with past concepts of education as 
something which happens to people between the ages 
of six and twenty and which only the privileged few 
were entitled to. Synergy has to he created between for- 
mal and non-formal education programmes. 
A casein point is the family literacy concept. We all 
know that the continuing education of parents, par- 
ticularly when they are illiterate or under-educated, 
can contribute very effectively to their children’s suc- 
cess in school. In fact, the family literacy approach is 
one of the most effective ways of breaking the cycle of 
inter-generational illiteracy. Education and training 
policies should include all types of learning, whether 
it takes place in a school, in the workplace or at home. 
There should be more innovation and creativity in 
using different methods and approaches. n 
THE UNESCO Gounier B JUNE 1998 4 1

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### IGNORE

© 
Ma
rk
 
Ed
wa
rd
s 
/S
ul
l 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
Es 
BY FRANCE 
Women fetch 
water in 
Rajasthan (India). 


### 112068: Water: will be there enough?

GREENWATCH Water: 
will be there 
BEQUETTE 
Humankind has a special 
relationship with water. In 
every civilization, the most ancient 
traditions associate this precious 
resource with the origins of life, 
purification and regeneration. Far 
from being a mere raw material 
such as oil, water is vital for life, 
indispensable to the economy and so 
rich in symbolic value that it trig- 
gers passionate responses. “All the 
computers in the world will never be 
able to express the real perception 
of the value of water or codify the 
interactions between it and peo- 
ples,” says Andras Szollosi-Nagy, 
director of UNESCO's Division of 
Water Sciences and secretary of 
the International Illydrological Pro- 
gramme (IHP). “But that is pre- 
cisely UNESCO's role—to tackle an 
issue that involves science, culture, 
education and communication.” 
For decades, experts have been 
making grim forecasts that the 
4 2 THE UNESCO Gourier A JUNE 1998 
enough? 
Earth will start running out of 
water and that conflicts over this 
precious liquid will erupt into 
wars. The situation is indeed 
alarming. In the first half of 1998, 
two international conferences on 
the world’s water resources took 
place at UNESCO Headquarters in 
Paris. The theme of the first, orga- 
nized by the French government 
and held in March, was Water and 
Sustainable Development. The see- 
ond, in June, was jointly organized 
by UNESCO and the International 
Association of Hydrological Sci- 
ences and entitled “Water: A 
Looming Crisis?” Both events took 
stock of current knowledge, and 
participants discussed ways of cop- 
ing with the problem. 
How much water is there in the 
earth’s reserves? Highly expensive 
probes have been sent to the moon, 
Mars and the satellites of Jupiter 
and Saturn to find out whether 
 
© 
Ju
li
o 
Et
ch
ar
t/
St
ll
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
Lo
nd
on
 
a 
there is water on them, but we still 
lack accurate data about the 
earth’s hydrological resources. 
Such information would help to 
provide a clearer picture of the 
future and, especially, to foresce 
the global repercussions of demo- 
graphic and climate change. 
One thing we know about water 
is that there is plenty of it. The 
total volume is put at 1.4 billion 
cubic kilometres—which could be 
imagined as a 2,650-metre-deep 
layer of liquid evenly distributed 
over the entire surface of the 
planet. But 98% of it is salt water, 
mainly in the oceans and seas. Most 
of the earth’s fresh water is trapped 
in the polar ice caps. Less than 1% 
of itis available in lakes, rivers and 
shallow, easily-accessible aquifers. 
These water resources are con- 
stantly in flux. Water from the 
oceans and land evaporates into the 
atmosphere before falling again as 
rain or snow, nourishing plants and 
swelling rivers that flow into the 
sea. It also seeps through the- 
ground and percolates down to 
aquifers. Very deep groundwater, 
known as fossil water, is impervious 
to seepage and not renewable. 
 

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 112068: Water: will be there enough?

In the industrialized countries, 
all you have to do is turn a tap and 
before you know where you are 
you’ve used a considerable amount 
of water—up to 600 litres per per- 
son a day in the United States. In 
hot developing countries, where 
shanty-towns on the edges of cities 
are crowded with growing numbers 
of migrants from the rural areas, a 
spigot and two litres of water a day 
are a luxury. “In the 1950s,” says 
Mahmoud Abu-Zeid, president of 
the World Water Council, “only a 
few countries had this problem. But 
in the late 1990s, water is scarce in 
26 countries where 300 million peo- 
ple live. Forecasts for 2050 indi- 
cate that 66 countries with approx- 
imately two-thirds of the world’s 
population will experience a mod- 
erate to severe water shortage.” 
Over 1.3 billion people received 
improved drinking water services 
and some 750 million got better san- 
itation facilities during the Inter- 
national Drinking Water Supply and 
Sanitation Decade (1980-1990). 
But, says Mr. Abu-Zeid, approxi- 
mately 1.2 billion people still have 
no access to drinking water and 2,9 
billion lack sanitation. The resulting 
Itaipu dam on the 
Parana river 
(Brazil and 
Paraguay). 
water-borne diseases take the lives 
of five million people a year, most 
of them children. 
Farming and manufacturing 
account for most of the world’s 
water consumption, far outdistanc- 
ing human needs. Of the 3,240 km3 
of fresh water drawn every year, says 
the World Resources Institute, only 
8% are used for human consump- 
tion. Each year fewer than ten coun- 
tries use 60% of the world’s 40,000 
billion m3 of surface and ground- 
water. Lastly, per capita consump- 
tion rises with the standard of hving, 
ranging from 260 litres a day per 
person in Israel to 200 in Europe, 
70 for a Palestinian on the West 
Bank and 30 in Africa. 
THE DANGERS 
OF IRRIGATION 
Demand runs highest in places 
where irrigation is indispensable, 
such as central Asia, Iraq, Iran, 
Pakistan, Madagascar and also in 
some industrially developed coun- 
tries such as the United States. 
Farming accounts {or two-thirds 
of the total water resources used 
by humans—a figure that rises to 
80% in the Southern countries. 
Developing countries consume 
twice as much water per hectare of 
irrigated land as industrialized 
nations, yet their production is 
three times lower. 
Because of the heat, half the 
water evaporates in storage areas 
(1 m3 per 8 m3 at the Aswan dam 
in Egypt, for example) or when 
flowing through open-air irrigation 
canals. Poorly-conceived irrigation 
projects lead to deterioration of 
the soil, as French geographer and 
drought expert Monique Mainget 
demonstrates, using two examples. 
The first is Pakistan. During 
the first half of the twentieth cen- 
tury, 10 million hectares were 
abundantly irrigated in the Indus 
plain. Waterlogging caused by irri- 
gation, combined with a high rate 
of evaporation, has led to saliniza- 
tion of the soil, making it unpro- 
ductive. The seeond cxample, the 
Aral Sea in the former Soviet 
Union, is different but the result is 
the same. Much of the water from 
the Syrdarya and Amu Darya rivers 
that flow into the huge lake has 
been diverted to feed 180,000 km 
of irrigation canals, only 12% of 
which have heen made watertight. 
The rivers’ flow is considerably 
restricted and the Aral Sea is dry- 
ing up. “Irrigation for agricultural 
purposes is expensive,” Ms. 
Mainguet says. “To make it prof- 
itable, farmers must use massive 
amounts of pesticides, herbicides 
and fertilizer on increasingly 
exhausted soil. The impact of pes- 
ticides on health has been over- 
looked. The child morbidity and 
mortality rates are among the 
world’s highest.” 
The Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations 
(FAQ) says that 10 to 209% of the 
water used for agricultural pur- 
poses could be saved with more 
efficient irrigation methods. One 
case in point is the foggaras, 
underground eanals which have 
been used since ancient times in 
Iran, Chile and the oases of North 
Africa, to carry water from wells » 
THE UNESCO Gourier H JUNE 1998 4 3

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 112068: Water: will be there enough?

© 
He
ld
ur
 
Ne
to
cn
y,
 
St
oc
kh
ol
m 
4 
- MN 
A 
located many kilometres away. 
Another is the modern under- 
ground drop-by-drop technique 
used in Israel. But how can the 
240 
million hectares of irrigated farm- 
water needs of the planet’s 
land be realistically met? 
Industry is less greedy than 
agriculture, but it still consumes 
23% of the planet’s available 
freshwater resources. Michel 
Batisse, a UNESCO adviser on the 
environment, says it is primarily 
used for three purposes: “cooling, 
production (as part of the prod- 
uct’s composition or for process- 
ing) and heating (to make steam or 
ensure the smooth running of the 
manufacturing process). These cat- 
egories differ widely in terms of 
both consumption and pollution.” 
Untreated waste water is still 
commonly discharged into the envi- 
ronment, especially in poor coun- 
tries. But the number of antipollu- 
tion projects and water treatment 
plantsis on the rise, particularly to 
stem effluents from pulp mills and 
nitrogen and phosphorus run-off 
from the food processing industry. 
Manufacturers are especially care- 
ful to take the necessary precan- 
4 4 THE UNESCO Gourier WB JUNE 1998 
  
  
tions when the “polluter pays” 
principles applied. 
COSTS FOR THE CONSUMER 
With water consumption rising 
twice as fast as population growth, 
the idea of free water for all is 
increasingly unrealistic. This pre- 
cious, shared resource must have a 
price, and it should be based on a 
sliding scale to ease the burden on 
the needy. Even a nominal cost dis- 
courages waste. French President 
Jacques Chirac says it would take 
at least $400 billion to fund the 
facilities needed to cover priority 
water needs over the next ten years 
worldwide. But “neither taxes, nor 
development aid will be enough, 
even though solidarity is a duty.” 
Consumers must help pay dis- 
tribution costs, while facilities are 
financed by local communities and 
international aid. But this is assum- 
ing that equipment is standard- 
ized. In Senegal alone, nearly 800 
pumping stations are equipped 
with 62 different types of motors 
and 67 different kinds of pumps. 
It is easy to imagine the logistical 
nightinare of storing spare parts. 
Another problem is that 
» TEESE. ig RN 
v i RE 
A Q v' . 
© 
Bil
l 
Ga
ll
er
y 
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
rs
 
J a 
; # ne - "L Eo » %1 
WI Bg Tre RRS Bop, 
Tanzanian 
villagers fill in a 
trench containing 
the pipes of their 
village's newly 
installed water 
supply system. 
Giant sprinklers 
automatically 
move across a 
field in Arizona 
(U.S.A). 
\.d 
go \ ¥ 
AE 
  
. | 
AR 
experts’ analysis of needs based on 
scientific data are often quite dif- 
ferent from the actual require- 
ments of users, whose conception 
of water is shaped by their own 
culture, manage it according to 
their own ethics of sharing and pro- 
tect and use it according to their 
own development needs. Very 
often, there is a lack of communi- 
cation between government offi- 
cials, users’ organizations and non- 
governmental partners. Poorly 
understood water resources man- 
agement has an immediate nega- 
tive impact on a community’s bal- 
et tm LP x / 
i x 
WI e— 
\ 
> CAN 
  

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### 112068: Water: will be there enough?

ance and cohesiveness, penalizing 
women most of all because they 
are responsible for fetching water 
in many developing countries. 
A case in point is Maharashtra, 
India, where a boom in sugar cane 
production led to an increase in the 
number of deep wells for irrigation. 
Shallower wells for domestic con- 
sumption ran dry and the women 
were forced to trudge long dis- 
tances in search of water, adding 
considerably to their burden of 
chores. In Misalai, Tanzania, more 
women than men volunteered to dig 
the trenches for a water supply pro- 
ject. But when the pipes were laid, 
the network went only to the part of 
the village where loeal leaders lived. 
The women decided to stop par- 
ticipating in other developnient 
activities for as long as the water 
was not fairly distributed. Their 
reaction is all the more under- 
standable since African women 
spend an average of six hours a day 
in search of water. 
SPRINGS OF WAR? 
On the Pacifie Ocean island of 
Tonga, women who had formed 
their own environmental and health 
affairs organization boycotted a 
community sanitation projeet when 
the men’s eommittec and the devel- 
opment agency did notinvolve them 
in its planning and management. 
Learning from the experience, 
neighbouring villages invited both 
men and women to meetings. Each 
time project managers, for the sake 
of convenience, consult only men, 
the consequences can be dramatic. 
Men try to appropriate women’s land 
when irrigation drives up its value. 
The women, deprived of their 
source of ineome and their inde- 
pendence, can no longer shop at the 
market, with the result that the 
children suffer from malnutrition. 
This has happened in western 
Kenya and northern Afghanistan. 
In cities, large amounts of water 
go to waste in drinking water dis- 
tribution networks. It is estimated 
that 10% is lost due to leaks in 
the industrialized countries, a fig- 
ure that may be as high as 60% in 
the developing nations. Industrial 
waste, pollution from non-point 
sources and lack of sanitation seri- 
ously affect municipal water 
resources. The situation is exac- 
erbated by unauthorized connec- 
tions to the supply network and 
the failure of some eustomers to 
pay their bills. Meters encourage 
consumers to save water, but they 
have not yet come into widespread 
use around the world. Improving 
urban water supplies is a major 
challenge for tomorrow. Fifteen 
mega-cities already have a popu- 
lation of 10 to 20 million, and their 
number is expected to double over 
the next two decades. 
Jean-Marc Flores of the FAO 
says we already consume half the 
planet’s available water resources 
and demand will outstrip supply by 
2025, when the world’s population 
hits 8.3 billion. After that, it will 
be necessary to introduce water-sav- 
ing measures or tap reserves of fos- 
sil groundwater—provided they 
have not already been over- 
exploited. Further complicating the 
issueis the fact that there are 215 
international rivers, as well as 
approximately 300 groundwater 
basins and underground aquifers 
shared by several countries. 
the 
Mekong, Paraguay and Sencgal, are 
Some rivers, such as 
good examples of joint management 
of a shared resource. But there are 
atleast 70 water-related flashpoints 
in Africa, the Middle East and Latin 
FOR FURTHER READING: 
v 
v 
v 
Man, Drought and Development, by Monique Mainguet, Springer 
Verlag (in press) 
Small Tropical Islands, by Anthony Falkland, IHP series no 2 
Tropical Cities: Managing their Water, by John Gladwell and Low 
Kwai Sim, IHP series no 4 
Les femmes dans les zones tropicales humides, by Annabel Rodda, 
IHP series no 6 
Water and Civilization, by Fekn A. Hassan and Jerome Delli Priscoli, 
IHP study, Unesco, 1997 
Ground water, by Christine Coughanowr, IHP series no 8 
Helping Children in the Humid Tropics: Water Education, by 
Claudine Brelet-Rueff, IHP series no 11 
Culture and Negotiation, by Guy Olivier Faure and Jeffrey Z. Rubin. 
A Unesco-lIASA Project. Sage Publications Inc., London, 1993 
Unesco Water Sciences Division 
1 rue Micllis 75732 Paris cedex 15 France 
Fax: 3314567 58 89 
E-mail: ihp@unesco.org 
Websites: http://www.unesco.org and 
http://pangea.org/orgs /unesco 
America. No country has actually 
gone to war over water yet. But a 
set of factors including demo- 
graphics, rising demand resulting 
from improved living standards, the 
predominance of upstream over 
downstream—the first-served con- 
trol the flow of rivers—may stoke 
smouldering conflicts. 
In medieval Europe, kings had 
the right to “use and abuse” water, 
which was a private possession and 
a source of wealth. Those days are 
over. The right to use this increas- 
ingly scarce resource must be part 
of a community perspective. That is 
why UNESCO Director-General Fed- 
erico Mayor has made an appeal for 
“a new water ethics demonstrating 
our awareness of the need for fair 
distribution, partnership and, 
beyond that, sharing.” | 
  
  A river polluted by 
mining in Peru. 
a] 
© 
Tr
ip
/W
 
Ja
co
bs
/A
sk
 
Im
ag
es
, 
Pa
ns
 
THE UNESCO Courier H JUNE 1998 4 5

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### 112069: Colombian champeta

© 
Lu
ca
s 
Si
lv
a-
Ma
no
n 
Pr
ov
an
sa
l/
Pa
le
nq
ue
 
Re
co
rd
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
LISTENING 
ye (HAMPETA 
A scene from the Colombian- 
French-Venezuelan film Les 
r0is créoles de Ia champeta 
(The Creole Kings of 
Champeta) by Lucas Silva and 
Sergio Arria. 
Lads 
"THE UNESCO Gourier B JUNC 1998 
 
~The Cartagena region, on Colombia’s 
“0 Adantic coast, is fertile agricultural 
land which also produces bumper crops of 
new music. For years, artists from all over the 
Caribbean performed at the city’s popular 
music festival in the old wooden bullring, an 
event fostering cross-fertilization between var- 
ious musical currents. Another rich source of 
sounds is the San Basilio palenque, a former 
settlement of fugitive slaves 70 kilometres away, 
which has jealously preserved centuries-old 
Bantu traditions such as lumbalii, a ritual for 
the dead accompanied by instrumental music, 
dances and songs. Son, a beat from Cuba’s Ori- 
ente province, came to the palenque in the 
early 1930s, where it is still played on instru- 
ments that are no longer used in Cuba. 
For many years African slaves passed 
through Cartagena, and even today the city is 
the meeting point of a wide array of outside 
influences. In the late 1960s, seamen brought 
back records of new African popular music, 
including soukous from Zaire (which stems 
from Cuban son), mbaqanga from South 
Africa, mekossa from Cameroon and highlife 
from Ghana and Nigeria, with which the young 
local black community immediately identified. 
Soukous caught on like wildfire among young 
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE 
Borninthe 
shanty-towns of 
Colombia, one of 
the most inventive 
forms of popular 
music today 
 
people from the palenque who sensed their 
Bantu roots in the music. 
It wasn’t long before local DJs and musi- 
cians were experimenting with these rhythms, 
reinterpreting them in their own way and, in 
the early eighties, blending them with rap and 
raggamuffin in lively remixes. That is when a 
new kind of music emerged in the black neigh- 
bourhoods in and around Cartagena and in 
the San Basilio palenque. It was first known as 
champeta, then as terapia criolla (“creole 
therapy”). Today the terms are used inter- 
changeably. 
Self-taught musicians 
Born in the slums, champeta at first devel- 
oped surreptitiously outside the mainstream of 
cumbia and vallenato, internationally known 
forms of Colombian popular music which also 
originated on the Atlantic coast, and of salsa, ° 
which started in Cuba but has taken deep 
root in Colombia. 
Champeta is played over huge sound sys- 
tems, or picds (from the English term “pick- 
up”), painted with psychedelic designs in vil- 
lages and run-down city neighbourhoods. A 
kind of Latin American soukous, it features a 
throbbing bass, front-and-centre guitar and

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 112069: Colombian champeta

percussion solos, repeated “breaks” and riffs of 
Haitian compas, Trinidadiansoca and rap. At 
first it was popular among gangs of hoodlums 
who squared up to each other around the picés 
with long fishing knives known as champetas 
(hence the name of the music). Then it spread 
among the working classes, the people of the 
port and door-to-door salesmen. 
Champeta was created hy self-taught musi- 
cians who sing using both the typically African 
phrasing of the San Basilio palenque and the 
community’s Bantu-based dialect. The records 
are produced by small, sparsely-equipped, 
storefront independent labels. Just about any- 
one can drop in off the street for an a cappella 
audition. But as the Colombian film-maker 
Lucas Silva shows in his documentary Los 
reyes criollos de la champeta (“The Creole 
Kings of Champeta”), champetuos (exponents 
of champeta) have very fixed ideas when it 
comes to music. They draw inspiration from 
everyday life, sometimes even from American 
cartoons shown on television. Anythingis grist 
for their mill. 
A cultural phenomenon 
At first, owners of sound systems went down 
to the docks to buy the latest hit records 
imported from Africa and the Caribbean from 
seamen. As in Jamaica, they vied with each 
other to attract audiences and to see who had 
the most innovative mixer, the most talkative 
DJ, the loudest sound system and the widest 
range of records. 
In the 1980s, a handful of Colombian busi- 
nessmen who realized how popular African 
music was becoming locally invited African 
and West Indian groups to the Festival of 
Caribbean Music. These performers, includ- 
ing Kanda Bongo Man, Bopol Mansiamin and 
M’Bilial Bel from Zaire, Mahlathini and the 
Mahotella Queens from South Africa and 
Coupé Cloué from Haiti, were a smash hit with 
the public. Around the same time, Justo 
Valdez, a young musician from San Basilio, 
founded Son Palenque, Colombia’s first souk- 
ous group. “Bnt,” he says, “I singin onr lan- 
guage and keep many of the palenque’s tra- 
ditional elements.” 
Champeta singers, rappers and DJs sport 
outlandish attire, nimbly engage in hyperbole, 
verbal one-upmanship and sexual innuendo, 
and using unbridled, colourful language, 
bring audienees to their feet with hot dances 
thatrecall despelote, currently popular with 
young Cubans in Havana. 
Among the rising stars of Colombian cham- 
peta and soukous are the Kusima group, 
Shaka the Zulu King of Cartagena, Candido 
Perez (“the doctor of la terapia”), Luis Tow- 
ers and especially Elio “Boom” (Francisco Elio 
Corrales), a young Black from Turbo in the 
Antioquia region on the Pacific coast. Boom 
started performing songs by Panamanian stars 
in his home village at the age of seven and 
today lives in Cartagena where he is an idol of 
the poor. lis first two records—La Turbina 
and El caballero de la champeta criolla.— 
sold in thousands. He sings La Turbina in the 
language of his birthplace, which he describes 
as a mixture of Spanish, lkaitian Creole and 
English. His fame bas spread to Panama, 
Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica 
and, by word-of-mouth, the Spanish-speak- 
ing communities of the United States. 
The commercial success of terapia criolla 
spawned a festival, which took place in the 
Cartagena bullring for the first time on 2 April, 
1997. Headliners included Melchor El Cruel, 
Alvaro El Barbaro and Dogardisc y Bustafa. 
José Quessep, who organized the event, says 
“Champeta has always been thought of as 
aggressive music for common people and gang 
members, but we’re sure this festival will show 
that it is also a cultural phenomenon that has 
taken root in Cartagena and is catching on 
world-wide.” 
Brimming with vitality, champeta is both 
nostalgic and a novelty, strengthening the 
bonds between Africa and the New World, 
and yet again reflecting the boundless cre- 
ativity of Blacks in the Americas. [| 
SELECTIVE DISCOGRAPHY:  
TRADITIONAL MUSIC FROM THE SAN BASILIO PALENQUE: 
Colombie: El Sexteto Tabald, 0CORA € 560126 
Elio Boom, El Cabaliero de la Champeta Criolla, Rey Records RR 003 
Elio Boom, Sigo Reinando, Rey Records RR 006 
Elio Boom, Viva la champeta criolla 96, Flecha Records   
CHAMPETA: 
  
I'L 
wis unesco (ouritr m june 1998

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### IGNORE

INTERVIEW 
roy 
“The ( UdilCel 
1s a bond 
yetwe 
earth 
and sk 
~ a yom 
HM What is choreographry for you? 
S.B.: For me, there are basically two kinds of 
choreographers. There are the visionaries who 
project their mental images on stage—the 
American choreographer Alwin Nikolais is a 
good example of this type—and there are those 
like myself for whom dance is part of a ques- 
tioning process. For me, choreography is like 
a detective novel in which the questions are: 
who does what? where? when? and how? I 
leave out “why”? because in choreography the 
“why” emerges from all the other factors. 
Hl Could you tellus something about your 
methods? 
S.B.: My approach to choreography is not nar- 
rative, but abstract. I have developed a process 
in which a series of questions are asked about 
the structure, space and time. For example: 
where the dance is situated on stage, which 
dancer enters from which side, who begins, 
and so on. I have evolved a process of ques- 
tioning in which the answers are given by using 
the tools of chance—flipping a coin, drawing 
lots, or throwing dice. This allows me to work 
on the borderline between what I know and 
what I do not know. By using methods of con- 
struction based on chance I can construct pieces 
that I could never have imagined otherwise. 
4 8 THE UNESCO Courier BH JUNE i998 
Susan Buirge is an American 
choreographer who lives in 
France, where she is associate 
artist to the Arsenal in Metz, 
For some years she has been 
profoundly influenced by 
Japanese traditions and 
civilization, and her most 
recent work with 
contemporary Japanese 
dancers and gagaku musicians 
will be performed at this 
year’s Avignon Festival (15-21 
July 1998). A compilation of 
the notes she made during 
visits to Far Eastern countries 
has been published under the 
title En allant de louest a 
Uest, Carnets 1989-1993 
(Editions Le bois d’Orion, 
1996). Here she is interviewed 
by Romain Maitra. 


### 112070: Interview with Susan Buirge

SUSAN BUIRGE 
 
I prepare a section of the choreography on 
a piece of paper, beginning with the structure 
and the many details of each movement—its 
direction, which part of the body evokes 
which quality, its duration, and various other 
details. Then, working with the dancers in the 
studio, drawing on their energy and the 
atmosphere at that specific moment, I read the 
results of the questions from the paper I have 
prepared. The dancers have to be very alive and 
alert to capture the essence of the movement 
that flows out of my body at that precise 
moment—because once I repeat it, it loses its 
initial impact. 
HB Would you agree with the idea that dance is a 
cerebral art? 
S.B.: I strongly believe that movement in 
post-modern dance springs from thought, 
setting aside movements prompted only by 
animal instincts. The principles of post-mod- 
© 
Pi
er
re
 
Je
an
 
de
 
Sa
n 
Ba
rt
ol
om
é,
 
Pa
rs

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 112070: Interview with Susan Buirge

ern dance originate in a certain tradition that 
can be traced back to theories set forth by 
Kandinsky and Klee. 
When we see choreography as the result of 
a thought process, we can always feel an under- 
lying sense of construction. All human beings 
have a basic need to build, in the same way 
that birds build nests. When choreography is 
“constructed”, spectators can sense its latent 
structure even if they cannot actually see it or 
identify it. I think one of the reasons why 
contemporary dance 1s interesting and elicits a 
wide public response is that it responds to 
this basic need. Of course there is the pleasure 
of secing the dancer dance, but there is also 
something more. 
BH Do you believe that gestures and movements 
have a cultural origin? 
S.B.: Of course they do. I noticed this when I 
came from America to France in 1970, but I 
have felt it even more strongly working with 
Japanese dancers since 1992. The Japanese live 
very close to the floor, they take off their shoes 
when they enter a house, and they kneel for 
long periods while working or discussing. This 
relationship to the ground and this sitting pos- 
ture give them a unique sense of verticality, 
something quite different from the Western 
experience. This verticality, incidentally, gives 
the Japanese very powerful hips and I have taken 
advantage of this in my work with them. 
If there is such a thing as a culture of space, 
it certainly exists in Japan where space is a 
highly elaborated code. People do not touch 
one another in public. Although they are 
packed like sardines in the subway, there is a 
feeling that they are not touching. When meet- 
ing, there is always a sense of distance between 
people—not as a divider but as something that 
brings people together and relates individu- 
als to the community. True contact is based 
on an absence of physical contact. 
This creates a specific approach to the way 
people work together. This “non-touching” 
makes the body more vibrant and emphasizes 
the way it situates itself in space. Japanese 
dancers are far more keenly aware than West- 
ern dancers of where they are in space. Dancer, 
choreography and space become one. As a 
choreographer who is passionate about space, 
I felt entirely at home in Japan. 
HM What else did you learn from your time in Japan? 
S.B.: During my first visit to Japan in 1989, I 
discovered bugaku, a dance form that came to 
Japan from China in the seventh century and 
is performed in a strictly confined space. In 
‘Human beings 
have a basic need 
to build, inthe 
same way that 
birds build nests. 
Contemporary 
dance responds to 
this need.’ 
Japan, special architectural spaces are set aside 
for dance, whereas in the West dance is always 
performed in borrowed spaces. 
The indigenous traditional dance of Japan is 
kagura, whose many forms are directly related 
to the agrarian cycle—from planting to har- 
vesting, particularly rice. There are nearly 60,000 
kagura dance forms still in existence in Japan 
today. Each is danced but once a year, by the vil- 
lagers, conceived for a specific place, on a specific 
date, for a specific reason. We know from writ- 
ten sources that some of these forms have 
existed for at least a thousand years. All the 
dances take place in specially created areas which 
are sometimes destroyed after being used. 
These forms are thoroughly choreo- 
graphed, in other words the dancers do not 
cxpress themselves spontaneously. Their struc- 
tures are extremely sophisticated and complex. 
To my mind they comply with all the princi- 
ples of post-modern choreographic con- 
struction because they are based on process. 
Most of these dances are performed for the 
people of the villages, for the well-being of 
the community, the land and the crops. As 
such, the dance is the responsibility of the 
community. Many of these villagers, who may 
be farmers, craftsmen or postmen in their 
working lives, are good dancers. 
BM The difference between dance and theatre is a 
convention that arose relatively late in Europe. 
Where do you draw the line between the two? 
S.B.: To me, there is a big difference between 
dance and theatre, and it is essentially a differ- 
ence of responsibility. Theatre is the art of the 
city, of the polis. It is a moment when the peo- 
ple of the city gather around a subject that 
someone has written and that concerns them. 
Dance is something different. With his feet 
firmly planted on the earth, his body erect and 
his head in the sky, the dancer is abond between 
earth and sky. In traditional Japanese kagura, 
the dance assumes responsibility for tying what 
is of the earth to what is of the sky. 
Theatre, on the other hand, ties people to 
each other and to the city. In the West, when 
dance wants to tell stories, it tends towards 
theatre. But this is a use or application of dance 
and not its primary function. Today my work 
focuses on reaffirming the dancer’s responsi- 
bility as a link between earth and sky. 
HB Do you think there is a crisis of creativity in 
traditional dance cultures? Are they finding it hard 
to adapt to modern sensibilities? 
S.B.: As acontemporary artist, [ feel arespon- 
sibility to perpetuate traditional dance cultures 
everywhere. I believe that cultural traditions 
a 
49 
THE UNESCO Gouner MW [UNE 1998 LJ

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### 112070: Interview with Susan Buirge

» and the contemporary arts should exist onan 
equal footing in every culture. There is need to 
talk about the distinctions and boundaries 
between the traditional and the contempo- 
rary, but as complementary forms. Some of 
my own works could never have been created 
without the ancient Japanese kagura. But every 
culture also needs contemporary artists. 
For the Japanese, “contemporary art” is 
often trendy art from an American or Euro- 
pean ethos, something that is not part of their 
culture. So much contemporary Japanese dance 
that I have seen is an imitation of well estab- 
lished styles, what has been learnt in dance 
classes in the United States. Most contempo- 
rary Japanese choreographers discard or ignore 
-their cultural traditions. I am interested in 
how they are going to find their own con- 
temporary art. On the other hand, the Japan- 
ese also regard nob, kabuki and bugaku dances 
as contemporary forms. 
Innovations have been taking place in India 
where Chandralekha, for example, has used 
the techniques of Bharata Natyam to generate 
modern sensibilities. Wu Kuo-Chiu from Tai- 
wan, who was trained in Chinese Opera, has 
worked on Macbeth using Chinese opera tech- 
niques as well as certain Western ideas about 
space and decor, and an innovative recon- 
struction of the narrative. 
BR In the West, dancers retire young, but this does 
not seem to be the case in the East. Why this 
difference? 
S.B.: Theidea of dance as the image of youth 
comes from classical ballet. But in contempo- 
rary dance this is not so. Mary Wigman and 
Martha Graham danced long after they were 
sixty years old, and Jiri Kylian has formed a 
company of dancers over forty. Nevertheless, 
contemporary dance is not easy on the body. 
We aren’t made of iron or rubber, and even- 
tually the knees and the hips go! However, 
some of the thinking about dance in this cen- 
tury has defined beauty as emerging from 
inside, rather than outside, the body. 
On the other hand, thereare bugaku dances 
specially conceived for six-year-old children. 
These are not childish dances, they have strict 
rules. There is a bugaku dance intended for 
performance by a centenarian. Also there is a 
“last dance” when one knows one is going to 
die, a moving way of acknowledging the span 
of a life gone by. This wonderful idea takes 
us back to the question of the place of dance 
in society, of whether it is merely a decora- 
tive art or whether it can be functional—like 
much of what we find in ancient dances in tra- 
ditional societies. 
Choreography cannot go back to ancient 
times—it must go forward. In our age of 
information processing, computers and mul- 
timedia, the counterpoint of live dance with 
live music is more necessary than ever. | 
AUTHORS 
EDMUNDO OLIVEIRA, of Brazil, is professor of penal law at the Federal University of Para and professor of medical ethics at the 
State University of Para. His most recent works are Pofitica criminal e alternativas & pnséo (1996, “Criminal Policies and Remedies 
to Incarceration”) and Deontologia, erro médico e direito penal (1997, *Deontology, Medical Error and Penal Law”). 
LOUIS PEREGO, of France, is an ex-convict. His published works include Retour a la case prison and Le coup de grace (L'Atelier 
publishers, Paris, 1990 and 1993). 
JOSE LUIS DE LA CUESTA ARZAMENDI, of Spain, I1s professor of penal faw at the university of the Basque Country in San 
Sebastian, and deputy secretary-general of the International Association of Penal Law. He 1s the author and/or co-editor of several 
works including Ef delito de tortura (1990, “The Crime of Torture”). 
LINDA JOHANSSON 1s a Swedish journalist. 
TONY PETERS, of Belgium, is professor of criminology and victimology at the Catholic University of Leuven. He has recently 
published Van Orientatienota naar Penaal Beleid (1997, Leuven University Press). 
LEONARD L. CAVISE, of the United States, is professor of law at DePaul College of Law in Chicago and a practising attorney. 
MONIKA PLATEK, of Poland, is professor of criminology at Warsaw University’s Institute of Penal Law. 
ABDEL AMADOU CISSE DIA, a Senegalese artist, 1s an ex-convict. 
DIRK VAN ZYL SMIT, of South Africa, 15 professor of ciminology in the faculty of law of the University of Capetown. A specialist 
in prison law, he 1s co-editor of a book entitled Imprisonment Today and Tomorrow (1991). 
FRANCE BEQUETTE is a Franco-American journalist specializing in environmental issues. 
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco-Amencan musicologist, has published La musique sud-américaine, Rythmes et danses d'un 
continent (“South American Music, a Continent’s Rhythms and Dances”, Gallimard, Paris, 1897). 
ROMAIN MAITRA is an Indian journalist and anthropologist specializing in the performing arts. 
5 0 THE UNESCO Courier B JUNE 1998 
Ths UNESCO 
OURIER 
51st YEAR 
Published monthly in 27 languages and in 
Braille by Unesco, The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization. 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 
75732 Pans CEDEX 15, France. 
Fax: (33) (0) 1 45 68 57.45 
e-mail: unesco courier@unesco org 
Internet http://www unesco.org 
Director, a. i.: René Lefort 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor. Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition* Roy Malkin 
French edition: Alain Lévéque 
Spanish edition: Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Features. Jasmina Sopova 
Art Unit/Production Georges Servat 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey (Tel. (33) (0) 
1 45.68 46.90) 
Documentation: José Banaag 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1.45 68 46.85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions 
and press: Solange Belin 
(Tel. {33)(0) 1 45 68.46.87) 
Film duphcation. Daniel Meister 
Secretanat. Annie Brachet 
(Tel. (33) (0) 1 45 €8 47.15), 
Administrative Assistant; Theresa Pinck 
Selection In Braille in English, French, 
Spanish and Korean. (Tel. (33) (0) 
1 45 68.45 69) 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian’ Irina Utkina {Moscow} 
German. Dominique Anderes (Berne) 
Arabic: Fawzi Abdel Zaher (Cairo) 
Itahan, Gianluca Formichi (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil. M, Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: Jalil Shahi (Teheran) 
Portuguese: Alzira Alves de Abreu (Ric de 
Janeiro) 
Urdu. Mirza Muhammad Mushir (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras | Marti {Barcelona) 
Malay, Sidin Ahmad Ishak (Kuala Lumpur} 
Swahili: Leonard J. Shuma (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Slovene Aleksandra Kornhauser (Ljubljana) 
Chinese: Feng Mingxia {Beiing) 
Bulganan: Dragomir Petrov (Sofia) 
Greek: Sophie Costopoulos (Athens) 
Sinhala: Neville Piyadigama (Colombo) 
Finnish: Rutta Saarinen (Helsinki) 
Basque: Juxto Egaiia (Donostia) 
Thai: Duangtip Surintatip (Bangkok) 
Vietnamese: Ho Tien Nghi (Hanoi) 
Bengali Kafil uddin Ahmad (Dhaka) 
Ukrainian: Volodymyr Vasiliuk {Kiev) 
Galician Xabier Senin Femandez {Santiago de 
Compostela) 
SALES AND PROMOTION. 
Fax: (33)(0)1 45.68 57.45 
Subscriptions Marie-Thérése Hardy (Tel. 
(33) (0) 1.45.68.45 65), Jacqueline Louise- 
Juiie, Manichan Ngonekeo, Mohamed Salah 
EI Din (Tel. (33) (0) 1.45.68 49.19) 
Customer service: Michel Ravassard, (Tel. 
{33)(0) 1.45.68 45 91) 
Accounts (Tel. (33){0) 1.45 68 45.65) 
Shipping: Daniel Meister 
{Tel. {33} (0) 1 45 68 47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS. 
Tel: (33) (0) 1.45.68.45 65 
1 year: 211 French francs. 2 years® 396 FF. 
Students: 1 year: 132 French francs 
Binder for one year's issues: 72 FF 
Developing countries: 
1 year: 132 French francs. 2 years: 211 FF. 
Payment can be made with any convertible 
currency to the order of Unesco or by Visa, 
Eurocard or Mastercard 
Indmidual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from the Unesco Couner”, plus date of 
issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the edi- 
tor Signed articles reprinted must bear author's 
name Non-copyright photos will be supplied on 
request Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be 
returned unless accompanied by an intemational 
reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles 
express the opinions of the authors and do not nec- 
essarily represent the opinions of Unesco or those 
of the editors of the Unesco Couner Photo captions 
and headlines are written by the Unesco Courier 
staff The boundaries on maps pubhshed in the 
magazine do not imply official endorsement or accep- 
tance by Unesco or the United Nations The Unesco 
Courier 1s produced in microform (microfilm and/or 
microfiche) by (1} Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 
75700 Pans, (2) University Microfilms {Xerox}, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48100 US A, (3) NCR Mircrocard 
Edition, Indian Head Inc , 111 West 40th Street, 
New York, U S.A.. (4) Bell and Howell Co, 01d Mans- 
field Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U S A, 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
DEPOT LEGAL: C1 - JUNE 1998 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE N° 71844 - 
DIFFUSE PARLES NM P.P. 
Photocomposition, photogravure: 
Le Courrier de I'Unesco. 
Impression: Maulde & Renou 
ISSN 0041-5278 N° 6-1998-0P-98-572 A 
This issue comprises 52 pages.

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
 
 
J 
—
 
E
T
 
E
E
 
E
E
 
~
~
.
»
 
y
r
 
-
 
_
—
.
~
_
 
.
.
.
 
- 
L
y
 
D
—
 
>
 
-
e
,
 
hy 
g 
RK 
wo 
00 8 
I FT i ns 
is 
i E 1 B lea ped Wh 
il a - 
P b a4 ] > 8 
" ue Ul 
1! A TART 
    I 
"NX IT 
1TTT 
SS i iS 
| 
a
 
l
i
 
od 
. 
l
l
.
 
i
 
A
 
E
L
 
Bll 
E
S
 
Ril 
l
m
s
 
 

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/112053engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

  
I 
  
  
Ey AN 
Ly 
     
        
      
  
  
      
T
w
 
  
l
m
 
“
a
l
 
- : 
—
 
™ 
- 
S
D
 
PT 
P
R
 
> 
A 
) 
Via 
i 
Pa 
E
W
 
r
y
 
: 
CIS 
IR 
| 
F
W
Y
 
T
L
 
»
 
fo” 
oC 
e
r
 
A
L
 
N
E
S
 
2 . 
Zh 
A
E
 
- 
I
E
A
 
r
y
 
L
E
W
 
a
f
 
7 
 
O - 
it a : ATV Taig on 
   