# [074828](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
:   
  
THE omens A window ORen on the world 
mC ouricer 
November 1976 (29th year) 2.80 French francs 
     
   
EXPLORING 
THE NEW 
SOUNDSCAPE

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
  
    
   
   
   
   
TREASURES 
OF 
WORLD ART 
@ 
H ungary 
Siren-borne 
candlestick 
The siren, a fabulous creature 
—half woman, half bird—ori- 
ginating in ancient Oriental 
mythology, inspired a Hun- 
garian craftsman to create 
this graceful bronze candle- 
stick 120 cm high) some 700 
years ago. Metalwork was a 
flourishing art in Hungary at 
the beginning of the 11th cen- 
tury A.D. and from then until 
the early 16th century Hun- 
garian craftsmen working in 
gold, silver, bronze and copper 
wrought a profusion of 
jewelry, plate and cult objects, 
bringing to perfection a tech- 
nique of filigree enamelling 
that came to be imitated all 
over Europe. 
Photo «© Hungarian National Museum, 
Budapest

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Ne 
@mCourier 
NOVEMBER 1976 29TH YEAR 
PUBLISHED IN 15 LANGUAGES 
  le
=—
1\
" 
 
English Arabic Hebrew 
French Japanese Persian 
Spanish Italian Dutch 
‘Russian Hindi Portuguese 
;German Tamil Turkish 
 
Published monthly by UNESCO 
The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
Sales and Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris 
Annual * subscription rate 28 French francs 
Binder for a year's issues: 24 French francs 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, except in 
August and September when it is bi-monthly {11 issues a 
ear). For list of distributors see inside back cover. 
ndividual articles and photographs not copyrighted may 
be reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from 
the UNESCO COURIER,” plus date of issue, and three 
voucher copies are sent to the editor. 
printed must bear author's name. Non-copyright photos 
will be supplied on request. Unsolicited manuscripts 
cannot be returned unless accompanied by an interna- 
- tional reply coupon covering postage. Signed articles 
express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors 
of the UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and head- 
lines are written by the Unesco Courier staff. 
Signed articles re- 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (micro- 
film and/or microfiche} by : (1) University Microfilms 
{Xerox}, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.: (2) N.C.R. 
Microcard Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th 
Street, New York, U.S.A.; (3) Bell and Howell Co., - 
Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
"The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in the 
Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature, published by 
H. W. Wilson Co., New York, and in Current Con- 
+ tents - Education, Philadelphia, U.S.A. . 
Editorial Office 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris - France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editors-in-Chief 
René Caloz h 
Olga Rodel 
Managing Editors SU a. 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton (Paris) 
French . Edition: Jane Albert Hesse (Paris) 
Spanish Edition : Francisco Fernandez-Santos (Paris) 
Russian « , Edition : Victor Goliachkov (Paris) 
German Edition : Werner Merkli (Berne) : 
Arabic Edition ; Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
“Japanese Edition : Kazuo Akao {Tokyo}. 
Italian’ Edition : Maria Remiddi {Rome} 
Hindi Edition : Krishna Gopal (Delhi) 
Tamil - . . Edition: M.- Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew Edition : Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian’ Edition : Fereydoun Ardalan (Teheran) 
Dutch + Edition : Pau] Morren (Antwerp) . 
Portuguese Edition : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish Edition : Mefra Telci (Istanbul) 
Assistant Editors 
English * Edition : Roy Malkin 
French Edition : Philippe Ouannés . : . ® 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Enrique -Adoum . o 
llustrations : Anne-Marie Maillard t 3 
Research :. Christiane Boucher > 
! [2] 
Layout and Design : Robert Jacquemin a 
All correspondence should be addressed 
to the Editor-in-Chief in Paris : 
N?
 
1
0
-
1
9
7
6
 
M
C
 
7
6
-
3
-
3
2
6
 
Page 
 
EXPLORING THE NEW SOUNDSCAPE 
By R. Murray Schafer 
 
 
 
 
9 ROCK... POP... AND RISING DECIBELS 
By Irmgard Bontinck and Desmond Mark 
15 TUNING IN TO THE PAST 
Can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days? 
By David Lowenthal 
18 ON INSECT "WINGS OF SONG” 
Photos 
22 EARLY MAN GOES THROUGH 
THE SPEECH BARRIER 
By Aleksey A. Leontyev 
24 MASKED VOICES AND SPOKEN SIGNATURES 
Photo story 
28 SOUNDS OF SOUND SCULPTURE 
30 PSYCHOANALYSIS OF SOUND 
By Peter Ostwald 
33 UNESCO NEWSROOM 
34 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
2 TREASURES OF WORLD ART 
HUNGARY: Siren-borne candlestick 
  Cover 
The scientific exploration of our acoustic 
environment—the “soundscape”—has 
recently begun. Noise and sound are 
indeed as much a part of our lives as 
shapes and colours, although our modern 
world of sound is very different from 
that of our ancestors. The “World 
.Soundscape Project” set up and directed 
by the Canadian composer R. Murray 
Schafer is today studying the innumerable 
~ sounds in our acoustic environment 
(see page 4). Here, child with a sea 
* shell listens intently for the sound of 7 
waves upon the sea-shore. : 
1 
  
Photo © Roger Canessa, Toulon, France

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

Photo © Christian Dobbelaere, Brussels 


### 49592: Exploring the new soundscape: pioneer research into the global acoustic environment

EXPLORING 
THE NEW 
SOUNDSCAPE 
Pioneer research into the global 
acoustic environment 
by R. Murray Schafer 
R. MURRAY SCHAFER, internationally known Canadian composer, is founder and 
director of the World Soundscape Project in Vancouver. Until 1975 he was professor 
of Communication Studies at Simon Fraser University, British Columbia (Canada). 
A complete treatment of the subject of this article is presented in his book The Tuning 
of the World, a study dealing with all aspects of the world soundscape which will be 
published shortly by Alfred A. Knopf in New York and Mclelland and Stewart in 
Toronto, Canada. : 
L 
 
  
MW OST Europeans and North 
Americans still believe 
that the eye is the most important 
receiver of information. | have heard 
psychologists say that as much as 
80 per cent of our vital information 
comes through this receiver. Very - 
. few people stop to consider that this 
may not have been true in the past, 
or that it may not be true in the future, 
and that it may not even be true for 
much of the world’s population at 
present. 
We are coming to believe that 
dependence on the. eye as the 
gatherer and orderer of environmen- 
tal information is directly related to 
literacy and is therefore a habit that 
has been learned by Westerners as 
far back as late Greek civilization, but 
that as the West begins to enter its 
post-literate phase, the ear will return 
as a primary sensing instrument, just 
as it still isin many parts of the world. 
The fact that the Western World has 
a noise pollution problem today and 
that increasing numbers of people 
are aware of it is one clear sign that 
we have reached this change-point. 
+

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 49592: Exploring the new soundscape: pioneer research into the global acoustic environment

The ears are crying out for greater 
respect. We can 
they are telling us or we can give up 
and resign ourselves to inevitable 
deafness as the hurricane of noise 
increases. 
Soundscape is the term we use to 
describe the acoustic environment. 
You will not find it in any dictionary. 
We have derived it from landscape 
but its properties are different. Consi- 
der the number of people who have 
helped to define the meaning of land- 
scape for us: geologists have studied - 
its structures, geographers its surface 
formations, painters and poets have 
described it, gardeners and engineers 
have shaped it, architects and plan- 
ners have embellished it. As for the 
soundscape, who has studied that? 
it is a discipline we must now learn, 
or rather relearn. 
it is to this end that, a few years - 
ago, we set up the World Soundscape 
Project. Perhaps the best can doin 
this short article is to describe some 
of the approaches of our work and 
hope that they will suggest fresh or 
related studies elsewhere in the world. 
recognize what 
; modern city. 
"of the absence of life there. 
To effectively know about the sound- 
scape we must consider the past as 
well as the present in order to make 
intelligent recommendations for the 
future. How can we do this? We 
can tape record and analyse sound- 
scapes of the present and we can talk 
to people who inhabit them to find 
out what they think. Still we can't 
delve into history with our micro- 
phones and our analytical equipment. 
Here history becomes geography. 
We can, for instance, study wilder- 
ness environments. in northern 
Canada or the deserts of Australia. 
Or we can get some impression of the 
past acoustic environments of a com- 
plicated continent such as Europe by 
selecting . and comparing remote 
“villages in different countries. 
The first’ thing we notice when 
we study a wilderness soundscape or 
even a rural or village soundscape is 
that it is quieter than that of the 
Yet this is not because 
Rather 
it seems that whatever sounds that 
are present are subject to” cycles of 
activity and rest. The sound pro- 
Technological civilization has 
brought sweeping changes 
to our acoustic environment— 
the “soundscape”. Today the 
“harmonies of nature” are : 
seldom heard except in places 
far from the hubbub of modern 
life: leaves rustle and water laps 
beneath the paddle (opposite 
page) as a boat glides over the 
tranquil waters of a canal in 
Kerala (India). But in most 
cases “background noise” now 
tends to be an all-pervasive 
cacophonous din. The roar of 
jet engines inflicts intense strain 
on the nerves and eardrums of 
people living near large airports 
(photo left). Ph
ot
o 
Ky
os
hi
 
Ha
sa
ka
, 
© 
Pa
ri
ma
ge
, 
Pa
ri
s 
ducers seem to know when to speak 
up and when to shut up. 
- Different species of insects, animals 
and birds complement each other in 
daily and seasonal rhythms of syn- 
chronized beauty. For instance, 
during the months of June in British 
Columbia, frogs will leave off chirping 
at precisely the moment when birds 
begin their dawn chorus and will only 
return as the last bird is fading at 
. sunset. Geese will be heard only 
a few days each year in Ontario as 
they streak north in May and return in 
huge honking flocks on their way 
south in October. 
Such environments, uncluttered 
by an overpopulation of competing 
sounds we call hi-fi. That is to say, 
the signal-to-noise ratio is favourable. 
Every sound is newsworthy. Each is 
made for a purpose and is comple- 
mentary to the others, like a good 
conversation or a good orchestration 
in music. 
One learns to read such signs for 
vital clues about the environment. 
For instance, on my farm we know 
5

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 49592: Exploring the new soundscape: pioneer research into the global acoustic environment

   
            
  
SARE AA I » pm SAVIN Rat) 
TE i ii 1 Til 
LLL CT 
COW om 
uy 
SNA 
 
 
  
    
   
  
Oh, tc co ug re i i i At ne] 
Photo ¢ Kosidowskl, Moscow 
HORSE-POWER 
WITHOUT THE HORSE 
In a square of Ulan Bator, capital of Mongolia (above) a horse left 
fettered by its rider gives vent to its indignation with an outburst 
of bucking and neighing. Such a scene is uncommon in cities 
" today, where the neighing of horses and clop-clop of their hooves 
have been replaced by the din of motor traffic: horse-power without 
the horse. From the start of the Industrial Revolution 
in the 19th century workers in the metal industries had to put up 
with a bedlam of noise (see engraving below) and in spite 
of preventive measures taken in recent decades, deafness from 
excessive noise can still be an occupational hazard. 
Engraving from Das Buch der Erfindungen, Gewerbe und Industrien 
(Discovery of Tools and Industries), Berlin 1874 
  
  
bi the ground has thawed | in spring and 
is ready for ploughing when, lying in 
bed at night, we can hear animals 
burrowing beneath the surface. 
The same is true of village life. 
When we studied the mountain village 
of Cembra in Northern Italy we found 
that life centred on. annual and sea- 
sonal cycles of festivals and special 
events, each with its prominent acou- 
stic soundmark. 
Church bells were rung in different 
ways on different occasions, small 
cannons or mortaretti were fired on 
fixed days; there were certain days 
“when the goatherd’s horn conducted 
the sheep to summer pasture; there 
were special days for folk songs and 
special horns that were blown when 
youths and girls were courting. 
The whole village was enfolded in 
periodic sound cycles that only began . 
"to disintegrate when a new road 
brought mountain buses up to 
connect the village with the cities in 
the valley below. 
The transition from rural to urban 
life can be characterized generally as 
a passage from the hi-fi to the lo-fi 
soundscape. A lo-fi soundscape is 
one in which trivial or conflicting 
acoustic information masks the sounds 
we want or need to hear. For a. 
sound to catch one's attention at 
all it must be monstrously loud or 
insistent. Radios, the birdsong of 
modern life, do not go south in winter; 
bulldozers do not hibernate and traffic 
does not sleep at night. . Everything 
operates simultaneously with much 
wasted acoustic energy and attendant 
destruction of nerves and eardrums. 
The study of the natural sound- 
scape suggests not only that the 
total volume of sound needs to be 
reduced in order that diminutive or 
message-bearing sounds can again’ 
~ be clearly heard, but it also gives us 
the clue as to how this might be 
achieved by the restoration of clearer 
rhythmic patterning. 
Curfews on jet flights at night is 
one possibility, but this needs to 
be augmented in other ways, for 
instance by restrictions on construc- 
tion equipment or loudspeakers in 
public places. Where they are a 
nuisance, a neighbourhood might 
even consider restricting the opera-- 
tion of power lawnmowers to one or. 
two evenings a week. 
Another difference between the 
urban and, rural environment is that 
in the urban environment most sounds 
are close by while in the natural en- 
vironment many are distant. The 
urban soundscape possesses pre- 
sence while the natural soundscape 
possesses both presence and an 
4

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 49592: Exploring the new soundscape: pioneer research into the global acoustic environment

  
CITY TUMULT 
AND FOREST MURMURS 
Like natural and man-made shapes such as the palm tree and the city 
- of Dakar, in Senegal (above), sounds have their own architecture, 
also modulated spontaneously by nature or drawn from the myriad 
noises of human origin.. Today research teams are analysing and 
measuring the volume of the innumerable noises forming 
- the “soundscape” in many parts of the world, under a project 
directed by the Canadian composer R. Murray Schafer. 
Diagram below pictures the cycle of the sounds of nature 
. on Canada’s Pacific coast. 
CYCLES OF THE NATURAL SOUNDSCAPE OF THE WEST COAST 
OF BRITISH COLUMBIA BY RELATIVE VOLUME OF SOUNDS 
-    s
a
f
s
t
9
4
®
 
ph \ at 2 ~i 
I F, T T T T T T T T T T 
JAN ° FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC 
  
JI eve 
  
TITIIIIT IR ppd 2 ¥ 4 FR [ J ; Re Rain and Snow EE *< Flies 
~All = he Water and Ice upnumssrssbuwisey he Bird-song 
AAA AAANAT “ml Grasshoppers » Frog-song 
we Bees a — — ~~ Wolves 
crtess runs pa Mosquitos +0+0+0+0r040 . Elk 
Diagram © R. Murray Schafer, Vancouver 
Photos © Hoa-Qui, Paris 
acoustic horizon. Then news of in- 
vasion into the area is picked up by 
the ear. A dog on a distant farm 
signals the arrival of a strange animal 
or a visitor to the neighbourhood. 
Dependence on the ear was espe- 
cially strong in the early days in North 
America as Fenimore Cooper's novels 
show. .Danger was then signalled 
by the snapping of a twig. Ina deep 
forest vision is useless; one sees at 
best a few metres in any direction. 
The ear is alert like that of an animal. 
Curiously, the same dependence on 
the ear is evident in the treeless - 
deserts of Australia today, where an 
aborigine can, by pressing his ear 
to the ground, pick up footsteps as 
distant vibrations. A car, for ins- 
tance, can be heard 20 kilometres 
away, first as a ground vibration. 
Sometimes hearing at a distance is 
vital to the survival of a community. 
In the Breton fishing village of Les- 
conil we conducted a study which 
illustrates this clearly. A daily on- 
shore-offshore wind cycle carries a 
complete circumference of distant 
sounds to the village, some as far 
away as 12 kilometres. Bells from 
distant villages are heard, sounds 
from inland fields, buoys in different 
locations at sea, each appears at its 
appointed time. Any change in the 
accustomed pattern indicates a 
change in the weather, a matter 
which each fisherman and fisher- 
man’s wife picks up immediately 
with practiced ear. ) 
7

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 49592: Exploring the new soundscape: pioneer research into the global acoustic environment

) Acoustic space is not visual or 
physical space. It cannot be owned 
or delimited on a map. It is shared 
space, a mutual possession from 
which all inhabitants receive vital 
signals. It can easily be destroyed 
by thoughtless soundmaking or im- 
perialistic noises. 
The modern world shows us many 
examples of mismanaged acoustic 
space. For instance, without expan- 
ding its physical premises an airport 
may require more and more acoustic 
space to accommodate increased 
flights or newer and noisier aircraft. 
A citizen may then discover that he 
is sharing his bedroom or his garden 
with the international aviation in- 
dustry and yet he will get little relief 
in modern law, which defines pro- 
perty exclusively as a visual holding. 
As we move into an acoustic era 
such attitudes will change and even- 
tually they must be expressed in new 
legal conceptions also. Sound im- 
" perialism will then be considered as 
much an offence as breaking and 
entering. 
Another way to learn about the 
changing soundscape is through ear- 
witness accounts of people who have 
described - the sounds of their own 
time and place; and so we have been 
compiling a large catalogue of such 
descriptions ‘from writers of all peri- 
ods and nationalities with the hope 
that it will enable us to discover more 
about soundscape morphology and 
also will tell us something about the 
‘changing attitudes of listeners over 
the centuries. 
We have cross- indexed this ¢ cata- 
logue by time, place and the sound 
objects described, and an accompany- 
.ing computer programme enables us 
to make: statistical comparisons 
concerning -the appearance.and-dis- 
appearance of the different sounds 
in our index. It will be a long time 
before we have enough references to 
- make reliable deductions for all parts 
of the world, but we do have a large 
sampling of sounds from European 
and American sources and we can 
draw some interesting conclusions 
from them. 
For instance, we note that of all 
sound quotes from 19th century 
European literature 43 % referred to 
natural sounds, while during the 
‘20th century mentions of natural 
sounds had slipped to 20 %. = Inter- 
estingly enough this decline is not 
observed .in North America, where 
just over 50 % of all quotes for both 
centuries refer to natural sounds. One 
might assume that North Americans 
are still closer to the natural. envi- 
ronment, or at least that they have 
easier access to it than Europeans, 
8 
for whom it definitely seems to be 
disappearing. 
We notice a decline also in the 
number of times quiet and silence 
are evoked in earwitness descriptions. 
Of all descriptions in our file for the 
decades 1810-1830, 19 % mention 
quiet or silence; by 1870-1890 men- 
tions had dropped to 14% and by 
1940-1960 to 9 %. 
in going through the catalogue . 
| am struck by the negative way in 
which silence is described by modern 
writers. Here are some of the modi- 
fiers employed by the most recent 
generation: solemn, oppressive, 
deathlike, numb, weird, awful, 
gloomy, brooding, eternal, painful, 
‘lonely, heavy, despairing, stark, sus- 
penseful, aching, alarming... 
The quiet and silence evoked by 
these worlds is rarely positive. It is 
not the quiet of a contemplative walk 
in the countryside, it is not the quiet 
one observes when listening to music, 
it is not the silence of fascination or 
meditation, or even the silence of 
sleep. 
Does this mean that such qualities 
are going to disappear from our planet 
forever, or does it mean rather that 
our attitude towards them needs to 
be revalued ? 
The loudest and most continuous 
sounds in the world today are those " whole nation is going to be made 
‘more jumpy.’ 
of modern technology. . It is these 
sounds which are destroying our hear- 
ing, disrupting the natural rhythms 
of our lives and pulverising the word 
tranquility in every language. If we 
are to recover elegance and balance 
in the soundscape, . 
that will have to be brought under 
- control first. 
This is not a matter of passing the 
responsibility over to acoustical 
engineers, whose livelihood, after all, 
is. dependent on a perpetuation and 
even an augmentation of the problem. 
It is rather a matter of larger groups 
of citizens everywhere beginning to 
study all aspects of the soundscape, 
beginning to assess and criticize it, 
and ultimately beginning to think of 
ways to render it more beautiful. 
i have often likened the soundscape : 
to a huge musical composition that 
is unfolding around us ceaselessly. 
The question is: how can we improve 
its orchestration? The analogy of 
the acoustic environment to music 
may seem strange to some but! have 
a special reason for suggesting it. 
In music sounds matter; the 
musician doesn’t fumble with them or 
throw them about aimlessly. The 
object of music is to achieve balance 
and harmony; the enemy of music is 
waste energy, noise. 
f 
"could be ‘multiplied endlessly. 
it is machinery. 
It is important, _ 
I feel, to keep the model of music in 
mind as we begin to design the world 
soundscape, for it reminds us that our 
task will be one of uniting science 
and art in the service of society. 
Redesign the acousticenvironments 
of the world? What an arrogant 
and preposterous idea this will seem 
to-some. All | can say is that it is 
already being done, though often 
thoughtlessly or by people whose 
motives are unaesthetic and anti- 
social. 
Purveyors of background music are 
creating sound walls which nobody 
asked for in the interests of inducing 
workers to produce more or consu- 
mers to spend more. Generators for 
producing white noise (a background 
sound that is a blend of audible fre- 
quencies over a wide range) are now 
being installed in modern office build- 
ings in North America in order to 
prevent office workers from talking so 
that they can type more letters for 
their bureaucratic bosses. 
In Sweden the ringing of tele- 
phones, nicely paced at ten-second 
intervals, was sharply sped up to five- 
second intervals in 1975 in order to 
. force people to answer their receivers 
more promptly. For a telephone 
company the less time a line is tied up, 
the more money that can be saved. 
Thus, for the saving of a few crowns a 
Examples of bad acoustic design 
- We 
can only improve them when we be- 
gin to consider other motives than 
. profit and. power .in. the .shaping of 
sonic artifacts, when we learn how 
".to control loud or irritating sounds, 
when we learn how to reclaim quiet 
groves and times in our lives, when 
~ we learn that there is a time to make 
every sound and a time not to. 
MH R. Murray Schafer

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 49593: Rock, pop and rising decibels

ROCK...POP.. 
AND RISING DECIBELS 
by Irmgard Bontinck 
and Desmond Mark 
~ 
} RY to imagine yourselves in the 
quiet countryside somewhere, 
making your way towards a town. 
In order to get a better idea of the 
changes in your acoustic environment, 
you close your eyes, and put your ears 
to work more sensitively. If we regu- 
larly put our aural impressions down 
on paper at specific points in this 
sound-walk, then we shall have pro- 
duced a kind of acoustic map which 
would ultimately allow us to recog- 
nize by its typical features many 
individual parts of the globe. 
Naturally enough, it is a much more 
difficult business to prepare a map of 
a soundscape than a geographical 
map, even more so since the methods 
and terminology are only in the first 
stages of development. Sonography 
and geography are still a very long 
way apart. The Canadian composer 
and music educator R. Murray Schafer 
has become particularly fascinated by 
this problem, and in the “World 
Soundscape Project” which he con- 
ceived, he is setting out to research the 
multifaceted links which exist between 
Man, the sound environment, and 
music itself. (See article page 4) 
How would the map of our sound- 
scape look? In the rural, unurbanized 
   Ph
ot
o 
© 
J.
 
Va
nf
le
te
re
n,
 
Be
lg
iu
m.
 
Young lovers of yesteryear (see medieval engraving below) : "world of sound, noises present them- 
could meet in gardens orchestrated by birdsong and water. : : selves mainly one at a time, springing 
fountains. Today's Romeo and Juliet (above) must try out of a deep surrounding silence. 
to whisper sweet nothings against the babel of the modern city. Even the smallest sounds can i 
  
IRMGARD BONTINCK of Austria is 
Assistant Director of Research at Mediacult 
in Vienna (Austria) an international institute 
founded with Unesco support to study 
cultural development with special regard to 
the audio-visual media. Formerly known as 
the International Institute for Music, Dance 
and Theatre in the Audio-visual Media, 
Mediacult is directed by Kurt Blaukopf, a 
member of the Executive Board of Unesco. 
Irmgard Bontinck is the author of La Cri- 
tique de la Culture Etablie (Critique of Esta- 
blished Culture) a study prepared for Unesco, 
and editor of New Patterns of Musical Beha- 
viour of the Young Generation in Industrial 
Societies (Vienna, 1974). 
    
DESMOND MARK of Austria is in charge 
of research in acoustic sociology at the 
Institute for Music Sociology (Vienna). He 
has published a number of papers on the 
acoustic environment and the modern sound- 
scape and is co-editor of a collection of 
studies, The Cultural Behaviour of Youth, 
Vienna 1976. :   © 
Me
tr
op
ol
it
an
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
 
of
 
Ar
t,
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
, 
19
74
. 
1 
5t
h-
ce
nt
ur
y 
G
e
r
m
a
n
 
en
gr
av
in
g 
   
9

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 49593: Rock, pop and rising decibels

" Fascinated American audience listening through ear tubes to phonograph playing popular 
tunes in the 1880s (below) is a far cry from mass events such as the Woodstock 
rock music festival in 1969 (far right) attended by 300,000 young spectators in Bethel, 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
B
e
t
t
m
a
n
n
 
Ar
ch
iv
e,
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
. 
) 
SOUND AND SUPERSOUND 
New York. The breakthrough in electro-acoustical devices has made mastery 
of the technology as important as mastery of the musical-instrument (right). 
Fears that mechanization of music might induce a passive musical attitude in young people 
are not borne out by a recent study on urbanization, modernity and musical behaviour 
of Indian youth by Dr. Manas Raychaudhuri, of Rabindra Bharati University, Calcutta. 
“The transistor radio”, he reports, “has stimulated an active interest in traditional 
and non-traditional music among young people in rural and semi-urban areas of India.” 
‘picked up, and tell their own clear 
story to the countryman. From the 
low tinkle of cow-bells, he can tell 
where his cattle are, for example. 
Birdsong, the rush of a brook, human 
voices—all these aural events can be 
told apart, clear one from another, 
and free of distortions and background 
noise. 
The nearer we come to the town, 
the heavier becomes the noise of 
cars, trains, aeroplanes, construction 
" machinery, and so on, overlaying the 
natural world of sound until it is 
- completely drowned out by the noise 
of machines and traffic. ~~. 
In this industrial sound-world single 
acoustical signals are buried in a 
broad and deep bed of background 
noise; in order to make an individual 
signal capable of being picked out, it 
must be enormously amplified—and 
that also includes human forms of 
communication, such as speech and 
music. 
If we examine the development of 
this industrial sound-world in historical 
terms, we arrive at much the same 
conclusion as we did following our 
earlier sound-walk. For many thou- 
sands of years our ancestors lived as 
hunters and foragers in the context 
10 
of an acoustic landscape overwhelm- 
ingly composed of the sounds of 
the natural environment, with human 
sounds reduced to a very minor ele- 
ment, and the noise of tools and man- 
‘made instruments very rarely falling 
on the ear. 
It was only in the industrial epoch, 
which began in Europe during the 
first half of the 19th century, that the 
soundscape underwent a radical 
alteration. Today we live in industrial 
centres producing a tidal wave of 
noise unthinkable in earlier times, 
and whose power steadily exceeds 
the power of the human organism to 
withstand it. 
The human ear is a highly sensi- 
tive instrument, able to measure 
sound intensities ranging from the 
smallest perceptible physical intensity 
to an intensity a million times greater. 
The measurement of the strength of 
sounds, however, is calculated accord- 
ing to the logarithmic decibels scale. 
Each addition of 10 decibels (dB) in 
-intensity denotes about a doubling of 
subjectively received sound. Bet- 
ween the auditory threshold and the 
roar of a jet engine, which can cause 
actual physical pain, lies a range of 
some 120-130 decibels. 
    Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ti
bo
r 
Pa
sz
to
ry
, 
Pa
ri
s.
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Jazz as seen by an American artist, 
Bob Gill (1963).

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 49593: Rock, pop and rising decibels

© 
Le
s 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
Re
nc
on
tr
e 
an
d 
La
 
Gu
il
de
 
du
 
Di
sq
ue
, 
La
us
an
ne
, 
19
66
. 
Fr
om
 
“M
us
iq
ue
 
d’
Au
jo
ur
d’
hu
i”
 
by
 
R
o
m
a
i
n
 
Go
ld
ro
n 
. 
  
  
  
    
    
  
The increasing noise of the environ- 
ment must obviously have an effect 
on men and their music. In the 
industrialized world people have 
become quite used to the fact that as 
‘one’s age increases, the inevitable 
consequence is a growing loss of 
hearing. But studies carried out in 
the area inhabited by the Mabaan 
tribe in Sudan have turned up the 
surprising fact that the tribe, living in 
a peaceful acoustic environment, has 
almost’no experience of hearing-loss 
connected with increasing age. 
A comparative study carried out 
with the inhabitants of a Western in- 
dustrial cauntry showed that the 
hearing capacity of an 80-year-old 
Central African was still as great as 
that of an 18-year-old New Yorker. 
The obvious conclusion is that any 
natural hearing-loss in the aged is 
radically modified by environmen- 
tal factors. 
Even more dramatic is the effect of 
the new sound-world on the countries 
‘of the developing world, where the 
transition to the age of technology 
and its accompanying acoustic inferno 
is not reached in a steady, step-by- 
step, upward climb, but in one abrupt 
burst. 
The effects of this tidal wave of 
noise can also be severely increased 
by the climatic conditions; in areas 
where the ambient heat makes it ne- 
cessary, and part of the local custom, 
to keep doors and windows open for 
most of the year—such as the cities of 
India, which have provided the basis for 
a report on the problem—the level of 
noise inside the dwelling can be as 
great as the level outside. 
In the industrialized world, at least 
it is not only the noise of machinery 
which is omnipresent; music can also 
be made available on a mass scale, 
thanks to the existence of loudspeak- 
ers. One can hardly imagine a situa- 
tion in which loudspeaker music is not 
readily available: in" supermarkets, 
aeroplanes, restaurants, cinemas, 
banks and in the home—we can hear 
music everywhere. 
This again is quite unknown to 
previous generations in human history. 
While before, music and speech were 
inextricably linkell to the physical 
source of the sound, whether instru- 
ment or speaker, today any desirable 
sounds can be separated from their 
source by electro-acoustical means, 
and reproduced on records or tapes, to 
be put out with the aid of loudspeak- 
    
  
    
ers at any time and in any place. 
The significance of electro-acousti- 
cal techniques, in fact, goes much 
- further than a simple reproduction 
and instant availability of music; it 
also allows a range of ways in which 
original live music can be altered 
in terms of intensity, sound-tone, 
acoustic characteristics and so on. 
It is in no way surprising that the 
attitude to music shown by young 
people—particularly open to change 
and innovation—has been deeply 
affected by the new sound-world 
around them, or that they have 
become very accustomed to the idea 
of music linked with technology. . 
With the breakthrough in electro- 
acoustical devices (loudspeakers, am- 
plifiers, mixers, and so on), the music 
of young people is a completely new 
approach. The use of technological 
machinery has now been integrated 
into the making of music, and the 
mastery of the technology is now as 
important as the mastery of the musi- 
cal instrument for performers. Never 
before in the entire history of music 
has the average musical performance 
been so dependent on technical 
means as it is now. 
nN 
Ph
ot
o 
Ne
al
 
Z
a
c
h
a
r
y
-
U
N
I
C
E
F
.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 49593: Rock, pop and rising decibels

) 
concert showed 
The most striking technical mani- 
pulation of music for young people 
lies in the area of musical dynamics: 
amplification. The level of amplifi- 
cation to be experienced in pop or 
beat concerts, in discothéque or beat: 
cellars is one of the most character- 
istic signs of the changed acoustic- 
musical environment. Some exact 
measurements have been taken in a 
number of countries of this particular 
relationship of youth to music, one in 
particular from Switzerland. 
During a pop concert in Lausanne 
a technician checked the amplifica- 
tion in various parts of the concert 
hall, and later described the possible 
consequences of the level of sound 
received by the audience: "Measure- 
ments with the sonometer taken 
during the Mahavishnu Orchestra 
sound levels of 
125 dB at a distance of three metres 
from the loudspeakers, 110 dB in 
the back stalls, and 118 dB in the 
front row of the balcony. It is per- 
fectly possible that 100-200 people— 
that is, some 10 per cent of the total 
audience—would have sustained irre- 
versible damage to their eardrums; 
in other words, nerve-endings would 
have been destroyed that cannot be 
regenerated.” 
For all that, there is no point in 
wringing one’s hands over the entry 
of electro-acoustic devices into the 
development of music and the exper- 
ience of young people, or indeed— 
as is often the case—shutting one’s 
ears to any discussion of such “deplor- 
able” phenomena. To identify youth 
with noise is hardly helpful to an- 
understanding of the many-sided 
problems of where man and music 
stand in the acoustical environment 
of today; this is an area in which it 
seems particularly easy to confuse 
cause and effect. 
One must look deeper into this spe- 
cific acoustical relationship, in the 
context of the general environment, 
in order to arrive at an understanding 
and so make it more possible for 
alternative measures to be taken 
successfully. Musicians, teachers, 
technicians and sociologists have all 
arrived at explanations for the strik- 
ingly high sound-levels of music for 
young people—each of them in some 
  
Fr
om
 
“T
he
 
Ar
t 
of
 
No
is
e”
 
by
 
Lu
ig
i 
Ru
ss
ol
o 
© 
S
o
m
e
t
h
i
n
g
 
El
se
 
Pr
es
s,
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
, 
19
67
 
  
| a 
ORCHESTRA 
 
OF BUZZERS AND HOWLERS 
As early as 1913 the Italian futurist painter Luigi Russolo (1885-1947) had 
the revolutionary idea of using the everyday noises of the industrial age to 
create a truly modern form of music. Above, Russolo with some of the 
“buzzers and howlers” he invented to represent the sounds of industry, 
technology and urban life. Russolo compositions, bearing such titles as 
“Awakening of a Capital” and “Meeting of Automobiles and Airplanes”, were 
produced on these devices and presented to Italian audiences in 1914. In the 
early 1920s “noise instruments” imitating sounds from industry were also 
constructed in the U.S. S. R. and used to perform “noise symphonies” and 
“operas”. About the same time experimental symphonies of factory whistles 
were held in several Soviet cities, partly due to the efforts of the great 
Russian poet Mayakovsky. 
way linked with the modern human 
environment. 
The first argument is that the 
phenomenon stems from an inten- 
tional break with the adult world. 
Young people demand their own 
areas of freedom, and achieve them— 
in this sense—through the erection of 
a “sound barrier”. This acoustic wall 
protects their area of autonomy from 
those grown-ups who refuse to cross 
this sound threshold. Within the 
barrier, youth can operate freely and 
undisturbed. : 
The second thesis treats this erec- 
tion of a wall of sound in terms of 
the sound-level of the environment. 
In order to make themselves audible, 
and to allow their own musicians a 
proper hearing, it is necessary to he . 
louder than the ambient sound-level. 
Some thought-provoking material 
has been produced on the links bet- 
ween the general environmental level 
of sound and the sound-levels of 
30,000 SINGERS 
ON STAGE 
Below, mammoth annual song festival 
at Tallinn (Soviet Estonia). 
During the two-day event open-air concerts 
attended by over 200,000 spectators are 
held in the “Field of Song”, whose 
immense shell-shaped stage has room for 
30,000 singers and 20,000 dancers. 
_ 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 49593: Rock, pop and rising decibels

Ph
ot
o 
© 
B.
C.
 
Hy
dr
o 
Lt
d.
, 
V
a
n
c
o
u
v
e
r
 
SOUNDMARK OF VANCOUVER 
One of the prominent soundmarks of Vancouver {Canada} is this set of air horns on top 
of one of the city’s higher buildings. It plays the opening of Canada’s national anthem each day 
"at noon. It has been doing so since 1967 when a local engineer, Robert Swanson, thought 
up the idea as a way of celebrating Canada’s Centennial that year. Two other 
Vancouver soundmarks are the bells of Holy Rosary Cathedral and the nightly 
boom of the Nine O'Clock Gun. 
music, not only in the realm of beat 
- and rock concerts, but also where 
contemporary “serious” music is 
concerned: in a historical perspective, 
the growth in the size of orchestras 
between Haydn and Mahler is also 
not without interest. 
- + The next argument is closely con- 
nected with the preceding two, but is 
based not on an attempt to over- 
power and drown out ambient sound- 
levels, but to imitate them. 
Here a number of acoustic factors 
play a part, all of which can be found 
in current music. The level of sound 
is the most apparent characteristic, 
but there are also special reverbera- 
tive notes, continuous droning, or 
clearly recognized rhythmical patterns 
which match entirely the modern 
sound environment. 
. If one now compares the unchang- 
ing broad spectrum of background 
sound to the low drumming of a beat 
band, the sharp wailing of a synthe- 
sizer, and the clumped notes (cluster 
effect) of modern music, the argu- 
~ ment that the music is a mirroring 
of our technical 
sound becomes at least plausible. 
Yet another thesis looks at the 
effect of over-loud music on the 
human organism. Thanks to a num- 
ber of scientific experiments in the 
modern world of 
"fainting fits. 
area of music therapy we now know 
that music has a very powerful effect 
on the autonomous nervous system 
in .man, particularly where the action 
of the heart, the blood circulation, 
and breathing rhythms are concerned. 
These physiological reactions allow 
one to argue that beat music, for 
example, is not merely experienced 
through the auditory system, but is 
felt on the pulses, on the skin, in 
breathing and in the heart itself; 
the whole physical body is affected 
by music. 
When listening to musical perfor- 
mances amplified to abnormal levels, 
more hormones are released and 
a state of excitement is induced in 
the listener. The over-amplified 
sound has the effect on the organism 
of an alarm signal, forcing the release 
‘of more adrenalin—the “fight or flight” 
hormone—from the body's chemical 
system. 
This physical stress situation can be 
stimulating; it can also lead to acts of 
aggression, e.g., the destruction of 
seats at the end of a concert. The 
flight reaction of the body moves 
completely beyond conscious control, 
and can lead, in the extreme, to 
Even more important are the most 
recent studies on the effect of over- 
amplified sound on the body. These 
studies see the consequences reach- 
ing much further than their initial 
effect on the nervous system, and 
actually affecting the substance of 
the brain. 
As a result of acoustic shock, the 
engrams—the delicate pathways 
traced in the brain which produce 
memories—can be erased. Memory 
gaps can be induced. This finding is 
even more alarming when considering 
the position of people forced to live 
in an industrial soundscape. 
Thus, today, we find ourselves in 
a situation of acoustical crisis. We 
will have to re-think the entire rela- 
tionship of men to their acoustical. 
environment, as well as the increase 
in noise-producing potential in our 
technical. tools. The conscious 
control of our acoustical and musical 
environment seems yet more neces-. 
sary when we remember that the 
same technology which has expanded 
the sound range and repertory of 
contemporary music to such a fasci- 
nating extent is also threatening our 
very capacity to hear, to remain 
sensitive to sound. 
The time has come for a campaign 
for the acoustical quality of life, for 
an ecology of sound. 
HM Irmgard Bontinck 
and Desmond Mark 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

Ngpwr~ ~ 
- - - 
- Er rt 
nn ii 
. 
: ‘Frys. 
  Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ré
my
, 
Pa
ri
s.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

TUNING IN TO THE PAST 
Can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days? 
The Western world of the Middle 
Ages readily believed that the peoples 
of distant and little-known lands 
- possessed strange characteristics, 
including oversized physical features. 
One example was the “Panotii”, people 
with enormous ears who were thought 
-to live “somewhere in the Indies 
beyond the Ganges”. In the 12th 
century, images of three “Panotii” 
—a man, woman and child—were 
carved above the portal of the church 
of Vézelay, in France {photo right). For 
Christians of medieval times the ear 
symbolized in particular the hearing 
of the divine word. Left, a massive 
bell about to be tolled in one of the 
many temples in the town of 
Bhadgaon (Nepal). 
3 
by David Lowenthal 
  
DAVID LOWENTHAL, Professor of Geo- 
graphy at University College London, has 
written extensively on environmental per- 
ception and is currently concerned with 
values attached to relics from the past. A 
former Secretary of the American Geogra- 
phical Society and an associate editor of the 
interdisciplinary quarterly Environment and 
Behavior, he has published a number of 
books including George Perkins Marsh, a bio- 
graphy of a pioneer American conservationist. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
H.
 
Ro
ge
r 
Vi
ol
le
t,
 
Pa
ri
s.
 
  
Wi becomes of music, 
speech, and other sounds; 
natural and man-made, when they 
cease reverberating? How far do 
previous sounds differ from those of 
today? How much do we remember 
of what we hear? What meanings 
and emotions attach to sounds from 
the past? Why do familiar sounds 
often trigger nostalgic yearning? 
What sounds do we regard as anti- 
quated, and why? 
On these topics little is known and 
less has been written. For each 
~ of us the answers depend, in part, 
on our age, our cultural heritage, and 
our musical and other auditory ex- 
periences. This article is a first ex- 
ploration into past sounds and our 
feelings about them. 
The world we live in is'a product 
of the past; the very familiarity of 
its features implies the memory of 
previous experience. Awareness of 
the past through mementoes and 
monuments is essential to individuals 
and to nations; the .recognition of 
continuity gives meaning to the 
present and hope to the future. 
Vision is the main sensory mode 
through which we apprehend the past, 
but it is not the only one. We are 
aware of the passage of time and the 
endurance of things through other 
senses too. Lo 
This assertion may seem hardest 
to demonstrate with respect to sound. 
No noise. that human ‘beings are 
capable of hearing is really old. Radio 
signals from the stars, to be sure, 
have taken many light years to reach 
the earth, but these play an inconspi- 
cuous role in our acoustical land- 
scape. No sound that we actually 
hear is more than a few moments 
old: the rapid decay of sound energy 
coupled with our limited capacity for ° 
hearing makes even the loudest noise 
undetectable soon after its inception. 
In. one sense, however, sound 
seems the essence of time. Aural 
impulses have long been the main 
way of marking off years, seasons, 
weeks, days, hours, and minutes: 
‘bells, chimes, and other clock mecha-. 
nisms provide a man-made counter- 
point to ‘the natural periodicity of 
pulse and heartbeat, and enhance our 
‘awareness of connexions between 
past and present. 
Yet to recover the sounds of the 
past is an infinitely more difficult 
enterprise than to restore the visual 
images of previous landscapes. 
Countless visible relics, however 
eroded, decayed, or selectively pre- 
served they may be, nonetheless 
survive to’ tell us much about the 
bygone material world and its spatial 
organization. 
- But of sounds from the past, save 
for a small and relatively recent 
repertory, recorded for the most part 
“under laboratory or studio conditions, 
not a trace remains. No recording 
15 
)

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

exists of the loudest known noise in 
world “history, the explosion of Kra- 
katoa volcano on 26-28 August 1883, 
which was heard 3,000 miles away, 
and it is probable that no one now 
alive would remember hearing it. 
Of sounds before the phonograph, 
we know only what can be surmised 
from indirect evidence: the noises of 
presumably unchanging natural or 
human activities; the sounds pro- 
duced by ancient musical instruments; 
the performance of music preserved 
in notational form; the written ac- 
counts of those who heard and 
reacted to the noises and music of 
their times. 
“We know how Chopin played,” 
as Gerald Abraham puts it in The 
Tradition of Western Music, “only 
through the playing of the pupils of 
the pupils of his pupils.” And their 
memory, like all of ours, is a notor- 
iously fallible guide. Earwitnesses 
are to be trusted even less than 
eyewitnesses. “Long term memory 
tends to ‘idealize’ and isolate sounds,” 
notes Barry Truax in an aural history 
interview, which is one reason why 
the tape-recorded past seems quite 
unlike the sounds we imagine we 
remember. 
But however deficient these indirect 
modes of historical reconstruction 
may be, they are often invaluable. 
The timbre, tone, and rhythm of a 
clap of thunder, the beating of surf 
-against the shore, have probably 
varied little over many millennia; the 
ancient flute sounds today much as 
it did when first made; the clash of 
spear against shield, the ring of the 
hammer at the forge, the sizzle of 
meat on a Neolithic spit can be fairly 
accurately reproduced by reactivating 
their constituent parts. 
Other features of past soundscapes. 
however, are now unrecoverable: the 
utterances . of extinct species, the 
clangour of early metallurgy, the 
intonations of ancient languages, 
the distinctive susurrus of obsolete 
domestic crafts. Not least, thewords 
spoken on any particular occasion 
throughout history are gone beyond 
recall. 
" For most of this we lack even indi- 
rect evidence. Least accessible is 
the total ensemble of sounds that 
characterized past epochs, the inter- 
play of background and foreground 
noises that made up the daily sound- 
scape heard in each community and 
locale. . 
We do have some clues to these 
things, for we know that the sounds 
~ of nature antedate those of man, and 
that machine noise follows the man- 
made sounds of pre-industrial times. 
16 
-interstices of - our 
-
 
p
i
 
td
 
a
 
Bh
d 
& 
AL \ BE 
. 1 
H 
: MEER 
| 
hd 
| Af 
       vad re ii "TN ho 
tae 
  
   
   4 NORRIE #0 a a Ee . 2g a A SE RE = Ah 4 
Feo SSSwsnn al ’ HE ) LA 6) . Ey > ing WT 
Photo © fram Aberrations, by Jurgis Baltrusaitis, 
Olivier Perrin publishers, Paris 1957. 
Nostalgia for past sounds indeed cen- 
tres on our efforts to recapture, or 
re-experience, the soundscape pat- 
terns that we associate with earlier, 
simpler, more natural epochs. 
Particularly do we sometimes long 
for silence, that interval between 
sounds so seldom present in the 
electronic age. 
Nostalgia sometimes deceives us 
. about the past; not even screeching 
jets ‘and thundering - subway trains 
could be much worse than the 
wheeled traffic of late 19th century 
London, as recalled in 1958 by the 
architect H. B. Creswell: 
The noise... was a thing beyond 
all imaginings.... The hammering 
of a multitude of iron-shod hairy heels 
upon [the granite ‘sets’ of the streets], 
the deafening, side-drum tattoo of 
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

DESIGNED WITH EAR AND EYE tyred wheels jarring from the apex of 
In religious buildings, certain architectural forms tend to promote the kind of one set to the next like sticks drag- 
audio-visual balance required for religious worship. Such buildings have a vitally ; . ; 
important acoustic function: singing, prayers and instrumental music establish a ging along a fence: the creaking and 
link with the spiritual world. In Gothic cathedrals the lightness of the arches and groaning and chirping and rattling o 
the rhythmic repetition of the lofty stained-glass windows help sound waves vehicles... the jangling of chain har- 
to disperse. Like the vaulting branches of trees in a forest, the arching pillars ness and the clanging or jingling of 
act as distributors of sound, an analogy strikingly illustrated in photo montage, every other conceivable thing else 
“left, of a Gothic nave giving on to a forest path. Below, entrance to the Shah Jd b h hrieki pe 
Abbas, or Blue Mosque, at Isfahan (Iran) where the acoustics are so sensitive augmented by the shriekings an 
that a snap of the fingers directly beneath the cupola echoes no less than seven '  bellowings... raised a din that... is 
times. Bottom, 13th-century minaret in Turkmenistan (U.S.S.R.): from its tip beyond all conception. It was not 
the voice of the muezzin echoes as far as the horizon. Minaret’s spiralled "any such paltry thing as noise. It 
structure recalls that of the famous ziggurat-shaped minaret of Samarra (Iraq). . . 
: was an immensity of sound. 
The everyday sounds of the past 
were different, yes, but not necessa-. 
A | rily preferable, as we are often 
es ] tempted to suppose, to those of today. 
i 
g 
: 
: 
    
   
  
£9 
“Ls 
— ERE CR) 
- Ca Ly "we 
at 3 —— LF 
  
Nevertheless, the city dweller who 
retreats to the rural countryside, or 
anyone who sojourns for a time in 
the wilderness, rightly supposes that 
the change of locale brings him in 
contact with earlier or previous 
soundscapes. It is difficult wholly 
to escape the everyday sounds of - 
modern life, for the internal combu- 
stion engine and long-distance com- 
munications are almost omnipresent. 
  
  
But today’s natural and rural envi- 
ronments bear at least some resem- 
blance to those of earlier epochs, and 
by listening to what happens there we 
can partly recapture the soundscapes 
of the past. Just how much today’s 
natural or rural sounds replicate 
yesterday's can not be determined, 
however. A desire for both authen- 
ticity ‘and specificity animates our 
continuing search for ways to recover 
the actual sounds of the past. 
  
S
P
L
 
Nd
 
S
o
u
 
: 
  
] HE capacity or ability to recap- 
: ture such sounds is arecurrent 
theme of imaginative literature. Ba- 
- ron Munchausen describes a winter so 
‘cold that a hunter's tune froze in his 
‘bugle, emerging as audible notes only 
the following spring. - Rabelais’s Pan- 
tagruel, sailing on the confines of the 
Frozen Sea, is amazed, while seeing 
nothing, to hear a great din—the 
booming of cannon, the whistling of 
bullets, the shouts and groans of 
men, the jostling of armour, the 
clashing of battle axes, the neighing 
of horses; all these sounds of a great 
battle, fought there the previous 
winter, had frozen in the air and 
were only now tumbling down and. 
melting into audibility. 
» -
 
* 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
fr
om
 
Or
ie
nt
al
 
Ar
ch
it
ec
tu
re
 
in
 
Co
lo
ur
, 
by
 
We
rn
er
 
Sp
ei
se
r,
 
Th
e 
Vi
ki
ng
 
Pr
es
s.
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
 
19
65
. 
The “Journeyers to the East” in 
Hermann Hesse's The Glass Bead 
Game include itinerant instrumen- 
talists and minstrels whose “mystic 
identification with remote ages and 
cultural conditions” enabled them “to 
perform the music of earlier epochs 
with perfect ancient purity... exactly 
- CONTINUED PAGE 20 
17 
Ph
ot
o 
Yur
i 
Tr
an
ku
il
it
sk
i 
C 
So
vi
et
sk
ay
a 
So
yu
z,
 
Mo
sc
ow
.

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

   
  
    
    
    
     
Photo © Studio Natiris, Cébazat, France. 
GRASSHOPPER VIRTUOSO. Like a violonist using his bow, ] 
the grasshopper rubs its thigh, equipped with a toothlike ridge (above) against 
the sides of its abdomen, thus producing its characteristic “song”. 
* On insect 
‘wings of song’ 
BATS, MOTHS AND ULTRASOUND. Bats find their prey while flying at night 
by emitting ultrasonic cries and locating the source of echoes. 
Some moths can detect the cries and then take evasive action. 
Photo below shows oscilloscope tracing of a bat’s cry and a moth’s response to it. 
Pattern at left of top trace shows bat's cry. - 
Reaction of the moth’s acoustic cells produced row of spikes at bottom. 
Photo © Scientific American. 
 
18

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

  
    
  
    
CRICKET'S MUSICAL °‘FILE". 
Only the male cricket produces sound. 
It chirps by rubbing an upturned “scraper” 
on one fore-wing along a “file” or thickened 
vein with crossridges on the underside 
of the other fore-wing. Photo above, taken 
through a microscope, shows a cricket's 
musical “file”. 
T
e
 » 
SPIDER'S LYRE. Is the spider deaf? 
It was always thought that the spider 
had no hearing organ, but then tiny slits 
stretched from a fine membrane linked 
to sensory cells were discovered 
on the insect’s feet. Some scientists 
believe that these lyre-shaped organs, 
sensitive to vibrations, may be a kind 
of foot-mounted ear. 
    
—
 
-
 
P
e
n
 
S
a
y
 
Pi 4 
-
 
4
 
d
l
 
ad 
-
 
a
   BUG’'S BREASTPLATE. The bug stings its 
victims with its rostrum—a kind of beak. 
This instrument also, amazingly enough, 
enables it to “sing”. The bug scrapes 
it against minute grooves on its thorax 
(below) to produce its “stridulation”. 
   
  
® 
3
 
or
 
“-
 
i 
iy  —— Rs 
BNF rr aan eS A 
3 i al Ada fist at - oe Sh SE a 
Photos © Studio Natiris, Cébazat, France.

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17 
as if all the subsequent modes, 
refinements, and virtuoso achieve- 
ments were still unknown.” 
One archaeological dreamer sur- 
mises that, by analogy with the 
sound that needles re-evoke in record 
grooves, the voices of plasterers of 
past millennia may be caught in the 
masonry of ancient walls and temples, 
awaiting only the proper stylus to 
come to life once more. 
The desire to regain audible his- 
tory bespeaks the power of sound 
to transport us back to the past. To 
hear, or even just to remember, a 
familiar tune, can instantly call to 
mind long-vanished scenes and 
events. 
The playing of childhood melodies 
was said to have triggered fatal out- 
breaks of nostalgia among Swiss sol- 
diers serving in France and Belgium 
during the 17th and 18th centuries. 
The Kiihe-Reihen or ranz-des-vaches, 
rustic tunes to which herds were 
driven to Alpine pastures, revived 
Swiss recollections of their homeland. 
" The tune, “a fragment of the past,” 
as the Swiss essayist "Jean Staro- 
binski puts it, “revives in the imagi- 
nation all our former life . Lo 
Music is not’ the only” sound to" 
arouse such memories; the bubbling 
of springs and the murmuring of 
streams, even -certain vocal inflec- 
tions, can also be evocative. Indeed 
the 19th-century "French novelist, 
Etienne Pivert de Sénancour, felt that’ 
“the sounds emanating from sublime 
places make a deeper, more lasting. 
Impression than .do ‘their visual fea- 
tures.” © The ‘significance ’ of ¢ sound 
dominates the inhabitants. of Ameri- 
can author John Updike's imaginary 
planet, Minerva: “an elderly Minervan 
wishing to memorialize his life, would - 
remember it almost exclusively in 
terms of music he had heard, or had 
made.” 
‘Any sound, if memory is vivid, 
evokes the past. But certain sounds 
in particular induce us to sense them 
as old, stemming from antiquity or. 
surviving from a remote past. 
Real or fancied similarity to some 
known work persuades us-to link 
new music to some past epoch. Even 
the use of a particular key may evoke 
the musical past. 
Thus long accumulated associa- 
tions with major and minor modes 
make it difficult for some cognoscenti, 
according to Gerald Abraham, to 
“hear B minor without our sub- 
conscious being stirred by memories 
of the Kyrie of Bach's Mass, the 
first movement of the Unfinished 
Symphony, and Tchaikovsky's Pathé- 
-tique.” 
20 
- Courier” (June 1975), 
The timbre as well as the structure! 
of music may suggest the past. 
Certain instruments, whatever their 
actual age, produce tones that are 
generally recognized as archaic. The 
recognition stems from our expecta- 
tion, based on a mixture of experience 
and belief, that early musical instru- 
ments were characteristically thin, 
reedy, quavering, or nasal; from the 
absence of a well-tempered pitch; or 
from certain acoustic properties—the 
castrato voice, for example—that are 
no longer to be found. 
} HE presumption of antiquity 
may be mistaken: not many 
early instruments have the archaeolo- 
gical authenticity of the Ukrainian 
mammoth bones, so cut and shaped 
that Soviet scholars could deduce 
that Cro-Magnon man 20,000 years 
ago used them as percussion instru- 
ments; modern tests on them, as Ser- 
gei Bibikov describes in the “Unesco 
yield “hard, 
resonant, and musically expressive” 
sounds. 
But many so-called early instru- 
ments are in fact copies or recon- 
structions of originals; we have 
little firm evidence about how early 
music sounded; some modern music 
Is intentionally written for . antique 
instruments or set to deliberately 
anachronistic language, like Stra- 
vinsky's Lyke-Wake Cantata. 
A presumption of antiquity also 
attaches to sounds that seem worn, 
flawed, or partly obliterated. Such 
tones strike the ear as being either 
products of ancient forces or end 
results of processes of decay.. A 
scratched record, a muffled church 
bell, and a wheezy car engine give 
the illusion of having come from long 
ago because their tones suggest 
much prior use. A cracked or qua- 
vering voice conveys a sense of time 
past because we may assume it be- 
longs to an old man or woman. 
Words sung or spoken may be ano- 
ther high road to antiquity. Songs, 
chants, and other vocalizations 
connote age when they employ anti- 
quated language or refer to historical 
personages or epochs. References 
to bygone persons and places, obso- 
lete vocabulary, and archaic musical 
style and instrumentation converge 
to create compelling illusions of anti- 
quity, as in Gregorian chants. 
Words or eroded sounds often 
combine with aural memories to 
conjure up past images. Philip Lar- 
kin's novel Girl in Winter describes 
how recorded music can evoke a 
vanished scene: 
The record was old-fashioned, and 
had a tinny quality only partly due to 
the needle. The tune it played had 
been popular for perhaps a week or 
two, or perhaps even for as long as 
a musical comedy had run in London, 
but was now quite forgotten. The 
orchestra that played. it did so in 
what had been the fashion of the 
moment, with [ittle empty tricks 
of syncopation that recalled the out- 
moded dresses of the girls that had 
danced to it. It was strange to 
think it had once sounded modern. 
Now jt was like an awning propped in 
the sun, nearly white, that years ago 
had been striped bright red and 
yellow. 
The content and condition of the 
musical reproduction together sug- 
gest outworn tastes, frayed and faded 
fabrics, evanescent popularity. 
Auditory like visual experience 
often makes natural things seem pre- 
vious to man-made ones. Rocks, 
trees, lichen may look older than 
houses or highways because we 
assume that nature generally ante-. 
dates artifice. The sounds of nature 
may similarly suggest a primeval 
scene. 
For Larkin’s antagonist, “as far as 
age was concerned, sheer age that 
was almost timelessness, the sound 
of trees was more impressive” than 
an ancient ‘Oxford church. “The 
surrounding treetops settling and 
unsettling with an endless sifting of 
leaves ...- filled the air with the 
whispering of eternity, making 
this place, famous as it was, like all 
other places.” 
But the rustle of wind in trees, 
like the atavistic charm of breaking 
"waves, is not so much ancient as itis 
eternal. Such sounds betoken not 
the historical past but the primordial 
scene, a time previous to history. 
‘The sounds of decay, like its 
visual images, also evoke a feeling of 
desuetude. A crumbling stone wall,

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 49594: Tuning in to the past: can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?

an ivy-covered building, a mossy roof 
are felt to be old because they are 
apparently weathering back to age- 
old nature. Similarly, tunes, speech, 
and other man-made noises patterned 
after the sounds of nature or decaying 
so as to resemble them impress 
hearers as akin to primeval. 
We tend to assume that sounds dis- 
tant in space are also remote in time; 
far away and long ago seem intima- 
tely interwoven. The experience of 
echoes bears this out in paradoxical 
fashion. As reverberations in ampli- 
fied space they echo sounds further 
away but after the original sound. 
~The growth of interest in sounds 
stemming both from nature and from 
the human past mirrors increasing 
disenchantment with the noises felt 
to be most characteristic of the pre- 
sent day. 
And a preference for. the aural 
past goes beyond music; it questions 
the quality of the whole modern 
soundscape. The broad-gauge blur 
of the machine-dominated environ- 
ment creates sounds that are in- 
herently boring. “In the past the 
trains either whistled more or we 
heard them better,” reminisced one 
old lady about the 1920s. “They 
had more personality.” 
This is the quality that makes so 
many sounds of the past a precious 
legacy, now in danger of being lost 
. through obsolescence, and that gives 
purpose to the World Soundscape 
Project's effort to record "certain 
sounds before they vanish (see 
page 4). 
Such sounds include the ringing of 
old cash registers, washing clothes 
on a washboard, churning butter, a 
razor being stropped, a kerosene 
lamp, the squeak of leather saddle 
‘bags, hand coffee grinders, milk cans 
rattling on horse-drawn vehicles, 
heavy doors being clanked shut and 
bolted, school hand bells, wooden 
rocking chairs on wooden floors, 
the quiet explosion of old cameras 
and hand-operated water pumps. 
A special auditory quality often 
associated with the past is silence. 
We are so accustomed today to per- 
vasive background noise that when 
it is absent we feel transported into 
another time, the past if we were 
accustomed long ago to the absence 
of noise, the future if we have never 
experienced certain surroundings 
without it. 
Critical reactions to the present 
soundscape help to make us aware 
that the audible environment has a 
temporal character. Just as concert 
audiences have grown used to hear- 
- ing chronologically sequential pro- 
grammes, so does the whole sonic 
world begin to acquire historical 
markers. : 
We tend more and more to date the 
distinctive elements of the sound- 
scape medley: the crash of waves 
and the wind in the trees seem eter- 
nal; bird-song is both seasonal and 
cyclical; voices seem either old or 
new depending on “their age and 
familiarity; traffic sounds are placed 
in time because we have experienced, 
or heard recordings of, trains and 
cars and planes of various vintages; 
music and Muzak have temporal con- 
notations that differ depending on 
where and how we hear them. 
Even when we do not consciously 
attend to these sounds their tempora- 
lity affects us. 
ating past sounds into our present 
lives, the auditory medley takes on 
an increasingly diachronic character. 
We hear in the present but simultane- 
ously recognize elements, tonalities, 
and themes from many pasts. 
As we keep incorpor- 
What can be concluded from all 
this? Given our present level of 
technology, past sounds, strictly 
speaking, appear to be irrecoverable. 
Sounds persist only in memory, often 
evoked by associations, and in their 
influence on imagination. 
What we can reconstruct from indi- 
rect evidence, however, suggests 
that in many important respects past 
soundscapes differed substantially 
from those of today. It is partly 
because of these differences that we 
remain so strongly attached to sounds 
that we consider to be antiquated, 
whether or not they are truly old. 
un David Lowenthal 
FOR FURTHER READING AND LISTENING 
® The Vancouver Soundscape, edited by R. Murray Schafer. 
Vancouver's sound patterns over its 100-year growth, accompanied by two 
LP records recreating aspects of the soundscape. (See article page 4). 
A study on 
  
® Sound Sculpture: A Collection of Essays by Artists Surveying the 
Techniques, Applications and Future Applications of Sound Sculpture, 
edited by John Grayson. Collection of over 30 articles and essays describ- 
ing the evolution of sound sculpture and introducing all its current forms. 
196 pp. ($ 18.95). See page 28. 
® The Sounds of Sound Sculpture: A Cross Section Representing 
Three Decades of Sound Sculpture. An A.R.C. record accompanied by 
“The Sounds of Sculpture”, a booklet providing descriptions and photos of the 
sound sculptures heard on the album. ($ 6.95) . 
® Environments of Musical Sculpture You Can Build, edited by John 
Grayson. How to invent and build your own new musical instruments and 
“sound sculptures” (see page 28) using ready-to-hand materials. ($ 18.95). 
eo Pieces: An Anthology, edited by Michael Byron. An easy-to-sight- 
read anthology of compositions for drum and percussion ensembles, shaku- 
hachi (Japanese bamboo flute), voice and harp, solo voice, solo clarinet and 
numerous works for piano. 176 pp. ($ 18.95), 
® Suitable for Framing: Compositions for Two Pianos and Sout 
Indian Mrdangam. An A.R.C. recording. ($ 6.95). : 
| Forthcoming titles from the World Soundscape Project (see page 4). 
e Five Village Soundscapes in Europe, edited by R. Murray Schafer. A 
study on the soundscapes of villages in Sweden, Germany, Italy, France and 
the U.K., accompanied by two LP recordings. - . 
eo A Dictionary of Acoustic Ecology, edited by Barry Truax. 
. ® European Sound Diary, edited by R. Murray Schafer. Excerpts from 
the diaries of world soundscape researchers. 
® The Art of Drumming: South Indian Mrdangam, bv Trichv Sankaran. 
(Foreword by Palghat Mani lyer). Basic knowledge on the technique and 
theory ot South Indian drumming presented to Western readers. All books 
and records are published by the Aesthetic Research Centre of Canada 
(A.R.C.}). Send orders to: A.R.C. Publications Distribution, P.O. Box 3044, 
Vancouver, B.C. V6B 3X5. Canada, or contact your local book and/or record 
shop. Please do not send orders to Unesco.   
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 49599: Early man goes through the speech barrier

EARLY MAN GOES THROUGH 
THE SPEECH BARRIER 
by Aleksey A. Leontyev 
| HE ancient Greeks believed that 
field mice could read and there- 
fore used to scratch messages on 
stones asking the mice to keep out 
of their fields. Legends aboutspeech 
and sound persist among many peoples ~~ 
of the world. There are several Rus- 
. sian folk tales in which the hero tries 
to learn the language of birds and 
“beasts as well as the languages of 
+ other peoples. 
In one such tale, for instance, the 
hero's parents send him out into the . 
world “to learn many different: lan- 
guages from a wise man so that he 
-may know what the bird says when 
"it sings, the horse when it neighs 
and the sheep when it bleats.” 
Animals live in the same world of 
sounds as man: the sounds, firstly, 
of inanimate nature—the whistle of 
the wind, .the thunder of the water- 
fall, the rumble of the avalanche; 
the sounds of other living creatures— 
the song of birds, the shriek of the 
howler monkey, the snarl of the tiger; 
"and the sounds made by man and by 
man-made things. 
yet completely different: animals are, 
' as it were, completely separated from 
that world by an impenetrable psy- 
chological barrier, a filter which lets 
through only certain sounds. They 
  
"ALEKSEY A. LEONTYEV, head of the de- 
partment of Methods and Psychology at the 
Pushkin Institute of the Russian language, in 
Moscow, is a leading Soviet specialist in lin- 
guistics and psychology. He is the author of 
10 books and over 200 papers in these fields, . 
many of which have been widely translated, 
and .was a contributor to Foundations of 
‘Language Development, a two-volume work 
published under Unesco’s auspices in 1975. 
22 
offing. 
ther 
It is the same world of sounds, but 
hear sounds but heed only those 
which are in some way connected 
in their consciousness with their own 
vital needs, those which have signi- 
ficance as a signal. 
The female nightingale appreciates 
the singing of the male as a signal 
‘of the forthcoming satisfaction of its 
sexual needs, whilst to a prowling 
cat the same song conveys quite a 
different message—a meal in the 
- The roar of a tiger is a danger 
signal for all other living creatures. 
. To an animal, human speech is just 
another, more complex signal, ano- 
element of reflex behaviour. 
Even such: domesticated animals as 
dogs, which sometimes appear to 
understand everything that is said 
to them, are in fact responding to 
the sound of the words (not to the 
sense of those words) as research 
by the eminent Dutch animal psycho- 
logist F. Buytendijk and. the Soviet 
physiologist Leonid Voronin has shown. 
The essential difference between 
man, even primitive man, and animals 
is that man does not submit passively 
to nature but pits himself against it. 
.He joins forces with others, - helps 
them and is helped in return. He 
uses things made by others and co- 
operates with them in transforming 
his environment. A new world thus 
emerges, the world of man and of 
man’s achievements, material’ and 
spiritual, the world of human culture. 
Sound too forms part of this emer- 
gent culture.” Primitive man needed 
sounds in order to organize collective 
labour. Whereas among: animals 
sound is identified with needs, with 
man it became identified with activity. 
It would be interesting to know 
“man, were like. 
‘Neanderthal 
.accompanied by a lot of inharmo- 
boo i. . oo 
what these first truly human sounds, 
the primitive speech of Neanderthal 
Early man obviously 
had the necessary vocal apparatus, 
‘but its functions were limited: the 
edges of the vocal folds, or true vocal 
cords, had not yet curved round and 
the passage between the larynx and 
the oral cavity was narrow, while the 
soft palate was further away from 
‘the back of the larynx than in present- 
day man. 
This means that the speech of 
man must have been 
nious, piercing, high-pitched noises— 
whines, screeches, squeaks, etc. 
This, however, was not the most 
important characteristic of primitive 
speech. Soviet anthropologists who 
have studied the shape of the cere-- 
bral cavity in the skulls of ‘our early _ 
ancestors have come to the conclu- 
sion that by Neanderthal times the 
fronto-temporal region of the cerebral 
cortex, which is responsible for orga- 
nizing external stimuli, images and 
signals "into a coherent order, was 
becoming highly developed. 
This development signified a revo- 
lutionary change. Man had hitherto - 
simply allowed sound to break over 
him like the waves of a great ocean, 
distinguishing only certain “splashes” 
of sound which carried some vital 
message for him. | 
But when sound acquired a social 
significance, man had an objective 
criterion for comparing different so- 
cial sounds with each other: sound - 
became to some extent independent 
of the perception of a particular hu- 
man being, and acquired an objective 
content which was the same for all 
hearers. Only then could man cap- 
CONTINUED PAGE 25

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 49599: Early man goes through the speech barrier

 
 
Phote © Raghu Rai, New Delhi 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 49599: Early man goes through the speech barrier

MASKED VOICES AND 
SPOKEN SIGNATURES 
For centuries the plastic arts depicted the human voice simply as 
an open mouth, suggesting the spoken word or a cry, 
as in the head surmounting this pottery vessel from Zaire (left). 
Below, decorative mask carved in stone and symbolizing tragedy, - 
in the ruins of a Roman theatre at Demre (Turkey). Like their 
Greek counterparts, Roman actors wore masks, pierced 
with enormous gaping mouths, indicating the nature 
of the characters they played. Recently a Swiss musician 
and painter, Aage Justesen, has succeeded in giving the human: 
voice visual form. The vibrations of the voice can be recorded 
as a series of irregularly-shaped overlapping surfaces 
which are then photographed. Justesen has used 
this process to record famous contemporary figures pronouncing 
their own name and has given the name “pictonoms” to the resulting 
“spoken signatures”. Below, in descending order, the “pictonoms” 
of the celebrated violinist Yehudi Menuhin, Sherpa Tensing 
{the Nepalese who reached the summit of Everest with 
Sir Edmund Hillary in 1953) and the Spanish painter Joan Miré.    
Photo © Hoa-Qui, Paris 
YEHUDI MENUHIN 
A       tid 
  Ph
ot
os
 
© 
Aa
ge
 
Ju
st
es
en
, 
Zi
ir
ic
h 
  JOAN MIRO 
Photo René Caloz, Paris 
24

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 49599: Early man goes through the speech barrier

CONTINUEO FROM PAGE 22 
ture sounds and compare them with 
other sounds, only then could he 
put two meaningful sounds together. 
Thus he acquired the faculty of speech, 
the faculty of communicating with 
others. 
As primitive man’s activities be- 
came more varied and complex he 
began to acquire a faculty which he 
had previously lacked, that of per- 
ceiving his own actions as a chain 
of separate but sequentially linked 
operations. Previously he had to 
indicate his activities by means of 
single, unarticulated sounds, but now 
there was no longer anything to pre- 
vent him articulating different sounds 
to compose a complete, coherently 
developing sequence. 
This again represented a revolu- 
tion in the relations between man 
and his world, and in his perception 
of the world: sound now became 
subjectively linked not with an acti- 
vity, but with a particular object used 
in that activity. Sounds had become 
symbols. 
Words now began to represent 
only that aspect of things which is 
of practical utility. - They conveyed 
ideas about things themselves, about 
the whole category of similar objects 
and about the variety of functions 
which such objects perform in social 
life. As words developed this new 
role, general ideas about objects 
began to exist independently of the 
particular situation in which the object 
is being used—concepts emerged. 
The. next and vitally important 
development was the appearance of 
concepts which were not connected 
‘with any tangible object. Joy and 
sorrow, time and space, life and 
death have no existence in the world 
of material objects, but they exist 
in the world of words and the world 
of concepts. Thus, thanks to sounds, 
thanks to words, man could now juggle 
with the most abstract concepts. 
Words were now becoming more 
and morg numerous, but the human 
ability to pronounce different sounds 
was still restricted. Such a skill 
became increasingly necessary .as 
words could now be lifted from their 
immediate context, that of practical 
activity, and needed to be recognized, 
distinguished, demarcated from other, 
similar words. How was this to be 
‘done? 
One way of varying sounds is by ~ 
the pitch of the fundamental tone, 
-but here again the possibilities are 
limited: the human vocal apparatus, 
except for that of a Chaliapine, is 
capable of producing sounds within | 
a register of only two octaves, and 
the vocal apparatus of primitive man, 
as we have already seen, was inca- 
speech sounds. 
pable of producing pure musical 
tones. 
A simpler way is to take variations 
. of timbre—the pitch and quantity of 
overtones—i.e. to take as the criterion 
for distinguishing between different 
sounds the region in which the cha- 
racteristic resonance bands determin- 
ing the quality of a given sound are 
to be found, a region known as the 
formant of that sound. The formant 
does not depend on the fundamental 
tone with which a particular sound 
is uttered. The concomitant noises 
occurring along with consonants are 
"also situated within the limits of par- 
ticular regions of the sound spectrum. 
This was the way which nature 
chose in creating human speech. 
Each of the thousands of languages 
in the world has its own system of 
Each of these sys- 
tems satisfies at least two conditions: 
all the sounds in that system are - 
sufficiently well differentiated in their 
place and manner of articulation. 
‘However, only those differences in 
articulation which produce adequate 
differentiation of formants, thus en- 
suring that the ear can distinguish the 
different sounds, are actually used. 
The criteria used for differentiating 
the sounds of speech vary widely from 
one language to another. In Rus- 
sian, sounds are differentiated by 
place of articulation (labial, dental 
and “velar consonants), by whether 
they are voiced or unvoiced, “soft” 
or “hard”, and by whether or not the 
nasal cavity is involved in their pro- 
nunciation. 
There is no distinction between 
hard and soft in German, but there 
is a distinction between strong and 
weak. The aspirate-non-aspirate 
distinction is important in Hindi. In 
Fori, one of the languages of Papua-- 
New Guinea, none of these previous 
distinctions is made and the important 
differences are the presence or absence 
of the nasal glide or the glottal stop 
at the beginning of aconsonant. The 
length of the consonant is also an 
important factor. 
In the course of his development 
‘man learned to organize word sounds 
into coherent sequences. Why then 
should he not apply the same prin- 
ciple to organizing sounds within the 
word itself? This would obviously 
give him even greater opportunities 
for distinguishing words and in par- 
ticular for inventing new ones in order 
to keep pace with the ever-increasing 
variety of objects and concepts in the 
world around him. 
The task of shifting sounds around 
and putting them into different orders 
did not, however, prove easy. Even 
now it is not easy because of the 
  
Dr
aw
in
g 
fr
om
 
Th
e 
Hi
st
or
y 
of
 
Mu
si
ca
l 
In
st
ru
me
nt
s,
 
W.
 
W.
 
No
rt
on
 
an
d 
Co
.,
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
, 
19
40
 | 
LISTENING , 
TO PREHISTORY 
Thousands of years old, this strip 
of reindeer horn (below) is one 
of the most ancient musical 
instruments yet discovered. 
Covered with geometric incisions 
and painted with red ochre, it 
was found in the Dordogne 
region of France. 
resemblance to an instrument 
known as a “bull-roarer” (above) 
once used in Brazil during certain 
      
It bears a strong 
mystic ceremonies. The bull-roarer 
consists of a thin board that 
the player holds by a cord tied 
to one end and whirls over his head. 
In whirling, the board also spins 
around its own axis, thus 
producing a roaring or wailing 
sound.” Today the bull-roarer 
is simply an easily improvised toy. 
  
   
       
  
57
, 
ta
 
L
y
 
g
i
v
 
IN
 
L
E
 
X
e
 
I}
 
~ wo
 
1
 
ie
 
7
 
"|
 
4 
O
T
I
S
 
T
E
 
WE
L 
cx 
- 
-—
 
a
 
- 
E
n
 
R
S
 
A
 
og
 
Ph
ot
o 
& 
M
u
s
é
e
 
de
s 
An
ti
qu
it
és
 
Na
ti
on
al
es
, 
St
-G
er
ma
in
-e
n-
La
ye
, 
Fr
an
ce
 
y 
    
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 49599: Early man goes through the speech barrier

) need to arrange sounds into basic 
pronounceable units—syllables. For 
this reason, a particular sequence of 
vowels and consonants is obligatory 
in _many languages—the Polynesian 
languages, Japanese and others. 
In those languages where the 
syllable can end with a consonant, 
the choice of such final consonants 
is always smaller than that of initial 
consonants, and in the languages 
of South-East Asia—Chinese, Viet- 
namese, Burmese—these are almost 
exclusively the so-called sonants. 
The combination of consonants in a 
syllable thus always follows a definite 
articulatory sequence. 
To take an example from the Rus- 
sian language, we have the mono- 
syllabic word “vdrug”, meaning “sud- 
denly”, but from the point of view 
of articulation the syllables “drvug” o 
“rdrug” are not possible words. 
Another new world also emerged 
alongside the world of words: that 
of socially experienced feelings, ex- 
pressed in images specially created 
for that purpose. Primitive art, pri- 
mitive sculpture and music were born. 
The opinions of scholars differ as 
to the origins of music. The com- 
monest theory is that man began by 
mimicking the sounds of nature. But 
there are no. clearly distinguishable 
differences of pitch in nature, no cri- 
teria, that is to say, that the originator 
of the first scale could work by. Why 
for that matter did he need to fix, to 
memorize a sound of a particular pitch 
in order to compare it with others? 
The most likely explanation is that 
the first sounds of fixed pitch were 
speech sounds which already had a 
human significance. Musicologists 
who have studied the music of 
present-day peoples with archaic 
forms of culture, such asthe aborigines 
of Tierra del Fuego or the Vedda of 
Sri Lanka, have found that singing is 
the only form of music familiar to 
them and that there is a striking simi- 
larity in the musical structure of 
their chants, the overwhelming major- 
26 
_ 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Au
ro
ra
 
Pu
bl
is
he
rs
, 
Le
ni
ng
ra
d.
 
Ch
ur
li
on
is
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
Ka
un
as
, 
U.
S.
 
S.
R.
 
  
  
and fugues—in visual terms.   MUSIC FOR SEEING. The interplay of light, leaves, birds and wind- 
swept flowers in this drawing explains its title, Summer Sonata. It 
was drawn in 1907 by the Lithuanian painter Mikhail Churlionis (1875- 
1911) who sought to present the language of music—sonatas, preludes   
ity of which consist of a sequence of 
only two or three notes, not exceeding 
the range of a minér third. The 
songs of peoples with a more highly 
developed culture such as the Hausa 
of Africa have a similar recitative 
form, a similar sequence of two notes 
separated by a minor third. 
The ability to distinguish the sounds 
of music thus developed from the 
ability to distinguish differences of 
timbre, - and is another physiological 
mechanism peculiar to man. This 
ability was systematized and dev- 
eloped as music itself developed. 
Music, however, did not part company 
entirely with speech. There are many 
known languages in which differences, 
of pitch help to distinguish different 
words or even different syllables— 
Lithuanian and Serbo-Croat, Swedish 
and Norwegian, Japanese and Ainu, 
most of the African languages, many 
. of the Amerindian languages, Chinese, 
- 
Vietnamese, Thai, Burmese, the 
Austronesian languages and many . 
of the languages of Papua. 
Sound was now broken down into 
separate phonemes and syllables, but 
in the form of stress or accent it 
continued its existence. Accent 
may be even or it may be musical, 
using differences’ of pitch, or it may 
take the form of stress, involving 
differences of intensity. But there 
is not a single language, nor indeed 
a single word in any language, 
without accent. Accent is a vestigial 
fragment of the primitive speech 
sound, but one which: now plays a 
new function. 
Speech is, however, more than 
the sum of the words which compose 
‘it. “Words flow together into com- 
plete utterances and the thing that 
binds them together, which indicates 
their special functions (question, 
exhortation, exclamation), which

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 49599: Early man goes through the speech barrier

  shows what elements of the utterance 
the speaker considers most impor- 
tant, is yet again sound, this time 
embodied in the speaker's intona- 
tion. 
Intonation is another vestigial 
trace of primitive, probably even 
animal sound: “dumb” animals, al- 
though they are unable to imitate 
speech sounds, can sometimes imi- 
tate human intonation quite 
accurately. 
The language of man contains yet 
another leftover from its animal an- 
cestry: interjections, those inarticulate 
utterances which - facilitate the ex- 
pression of the simplest emotions— 
fear, surprise, joy, sorrow, admiration, 
etc.—without the use of words. In- 
terjections are similar, though not 
-—
 
te
m.
 
  Dr
aw
in
g 
fr
om
 
Ph
on
ur
gi
a 
No
va
 
by
 
A.
 
Ki
rc
he
r,
 
16
73
 
The wind sighing in the trees, ruffling water, beating across vast plains ) 
always identical, from one language and rushing through narrow mountain gorges produces some of nature's 
to another. To express surprise, a most striking and memorable sounds. In the 17th century a German 
Russian says “Akh!” or “Okhl”, a Jesuit scientist, Athanasius Kircher, widely known for his writings on 
“Oh lal” Enalish acoustics and musicology, created this “wind harp”, a curious 
Frenchman Oh-la-la! an Englisn- instrument whose strings vibrated in the wind to produce unexpected 
man "Oh!”, a German “Ho Ho!", and and mysterious sounds. : 
a Papuan of the Asmat tribe “Woo”. 
Another ancient stratum of sound 
  
     
       
in various languages is onomatopoeia. WIND, WATER 
A Russian represents the crow of a | AND TALKING BUSTS 
cock as “kukareku”, a German as 
“kikiriki” and an Englishman as “cock- 
a-doodle-doo”. Hero of Alexandria, the Greek 
Sound has been socialized, it has | Tagnamant charter on 
become the common property of all . in the 1st century A. D. created 
“humanity, but "at the same time it remarkable water sculptures” . 
remains an essential element of that contemporaries. ro this 
which makes each individual human. ingenious example, the water 
* Sound—the sound of speech—makes fills the box and drives out 
all the wealth of knowledge and social the air, causing the birds to 
experience available to us. Sound— pipe different notes. The water 
the sound of music—enriches our Is then emptied by means of ) a syphon causing the owl to 
emotional world. The sounds of turn towards the birds which 
“man are social sounds and the world are now silent. £2 
of human sound is a social world. 
Underlying the system of sounds in. 
any given language is a particular out- 
look on the world which is expressed 
in that language, in its sounds, its - 
words and its grammatical forms. 
To be able to grasp this new, always 
fresh, always surprising outlook, to 
see the same world through different 
eyes, is a great pleasure which is now 
; accessible to more and more people. 
  
  
HM Aleksey A. Leontyev    I LT | 
TT 1.1 LIE 
Engraving shows the creation of a sound environment as imagined 
by Athanasius Kircher, inventor of the wind harp shown above, in his 
work Phonurgia Nova (1673), a mixture of serious scientific exposition 
and a kind of science fiction. A system of “acoustic horns” funnels 
street noises to the “talking busts” inside the houses. A modern 
counterpart exists in the U.S. A. today where a young American 
composer, Maryanne Amacher, creates experimental “musical” 
compositions out of natural and urban sounds. Such sounds are 
relayed live to a concert hall and are blended into spontaneous 
“musical” performances. 
  
   
Dr
aw
in
g 
fr
om
 
Ph
on
ur
gi
a 
No
va
 
by
 
A.
 
Ki
rc
he
r,
 
16
73
 
  
M
a
c
D
o
n
a
l
d
,
 
Lo
nd
on
 
an
d 
Am
er
ic
an
 
El
se
vi
er
 
in
c.
 
N
e
w
 
Yo
rk
, 
19
71
 
Dr
aw
in
g 
fr
om
 
Th
e 
Pn
eu
ma
ti
cs
 
of
 
He
ro
 
of
 
Al
ex
an
dr
ia
, 
 

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

We present on these pages some of the remarkable sound sculptures 
that have been created since this new art form began three decades ago. 
How it evolved and how it is developing today are described in “Sound 
Sculpture” a collection of essays by an international cross section 
of sound sculptors, published by The Aesthetic Research Centre 
of Canada, in Vancouver, from which these examples are taken 
(see also box page 21). 
                Below, Argentine artist Luis Frangella with a section of his sound 
sculpture “Rain Music I!“. Frangella visualises as many as 110 such 
modules, each with its series of drums, assembled to form roof-like 
canopies. Moving elements above drums transform impact of rain | 
drops or wind movement into drum beats. 
         
   
  
—
 
I
 
T
r
 
- 
So
 
—
—
.
 
T
E
 
T
A
 
—
—
 
A
 
—
 
d
a
 
—    
     
   
   
  
   
  
T
T
 
T
T
 
S
g
 
e
—
—
—
—
 
I
 
—
—
—
—
—
 
a 
—
—
—
—
 
-
   
e
r
 
i
 
—
—
 
I
 
a
 
I
—
—
—
—
=
 
                   
    SOUNDING RODS shown above with their 
creator Harry -Bertoia (U.S. A.) are sculptures 
of varying metals, thicknesses and heights 
designed to produce tones bearing no relationship 
to the present musical scale. } 
  
FLAME ORCHARD, a field of fire modulated by electronic 
music that changes the shape, colour, size or movement of 
the flames. Its designer is Gyorgy Kepes, head of the Center 
for Advanced Visual Studies at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (U.S. A.) 
28

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

GOURD TREE AND CONE 
GONGS with its author the late 
Harry Partch (U.S. A.). This artist, 
who used three phrases—magical 
sounds, visual form and beauty, 
experienced ritual-to describe 
the core genesis of his art, has 
been called the founding father of 
sound sculpture. 
SONOROUS STRUCTURES built 
by artist brothers Francois and 
Bernard Baschet, of France, in- 
clude this steel and aluminium 
work entitled “French Monument 
Born on 57th St”. The brothers 
are pioneers in the integration of 
new musical sounds with visual 
forms.  
  
    
TO
NE
S,
 
w
e
 
. 
L
a
n
 
MUSICAL CARILLON by artist Tony Price stands on a piece of scrubland 
near Santa Fe, New Mexico (U.S. A.). Here it is being played with clappers 
activated by ropes. The wind also plays it. Its metal cylinders came from 
a scrap yard. - 
iif E— 
  
- 
: 
P
h
o
t
o
s
 
©
 
A
R
C
 
P
u
b
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
s
,
 
V
a
n
c
o
u
v
e
r
,
 
C
a
n
a
d
a
.
 
 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

WW: all live in an environment 
of acoustical vibrations from 
which we take what is useful, infor- 
mative, and enjoyable for human 
existence and into which we broad- 
cast a variety of sounds that others 
may hear and make use of. From 
the standpoint of the behavioural 
sciences, the phenomena we call 
.sounds can be divided into three 
basic categories, the first called 
noise, the second music, and the 
third speech. | will try to explore 
these three realms of sonic  expe- 
rience here from the somewhat 
specialized perspective of psychiatry. 
NOISE. Physically, all acoustical 
phenomena share certain properties. 
Sounds are produced by movements 
and transmitted centrifugally in the 
form of .pressure waves through 
various media. When such vibra- 
tory events impinge on pressure- 
sensitive receivers called ears, they 
call forth a variety of perceptions. 
_As human beings, we are in pos- 
session of a remarkably capable 
auditory system, and while our ears 
do not react to vibrations much 
above 20,000 cycles per second as 
do those of bats, certain insects, 
and other members of nonhuman 
species, what we do with the limited 
band of frequencies that we perceive 
is truly remarkable. 
The three categories of human 
sounds—noise, music, and speech— 
represent not only spheres of differ- 
entiation in our perception of sonic 
events but also point to different 
groups of specialists who deal with 
unique aspects of the world of 
sounds. 
Noise is generally thought to be 
that category of sound which has an 
intrusive or disturbing effect. It tends 
to make people wince and complain. 
They can only tolerate a certain 
amount of noise before feeling 
 
PETER OSTWALD, American psychiatrist 
and educator, is an authority on acoustics and 
. linguistics especially as related to problems 
of mental health and disease. Professor of 
Psychiatry at the Schoo! of Medicine, Uni- 
versity of California in San Francisco, he is 
particularly interested in the psychiatric pro- 
blems of refugees, displaced persons and 
victims of disaster. His latest book, Commu- 
nication and Human Interaction, will be 
published in 1977. 
30 
in pain. 
. tion, plus 


### 49600: Psychoanalysis of sound

PSYCHOANALYSIS 
OF SOUND 
tense, irritable, annoyed or actually 
This does not mean that all noise 
should be controlled or eliminated. 
One of the great advantages of the 
Soundscape Project inaugurated by 
Murray Schafer and his colleagues 
in Vancouver is that it shows the 
sorts of noises people become adap- 
ted to and learn to live with (see 
article page 4). A certain amount 
of discomfort can also result when 
we are suddenly deprived of the 
customary environmental noises. 
Physiologists used to think of the 
ear as having a fairly fixed “threshold, ” 
and that a sound could not be per- 
ceived until it achieved an intensity 
capable of crossing this threshold for 
hearing. We now know this to be 
an overly simple idea, one which 
may be true for a very small set of 
relatively pure sounds presented 
under controlled conditions in a 
laboratory, but is not applicable to 
the majority of noises. 
Indeed, every sound of nature is 
a relatively complex physical event, 
one which must be considered in 
terms of the duration of time from 
the onset of vibrations to their cessa- 
the exact waveforms, 
frequencies, and intensities of vibra- 
tory components. Not only may the 
auditory threshold shift in the course 
of listening, but even before a sound 
actually begins, different listeners 
can have different threshold levels 
depending on their state of arousal 
and their expectations. 
One reason why noises differ in 
their effects is that as we focus to 
listen, our eardrums may tighten up, 
requiring less acoustical energy to 
set the auditory system in motion 
than when the drums are relaxed. 
Under the condition of auditory 
attentiveness our ears are maximally 
receptive, and sounds that are ordi- 
narily ignored may then come into 
awareness and be labelled as noise. 
One can easily observe this reaction 
in the concert hall when a slight - 
whisper by someone in the audience 
can be distracting and unpleas- 
ant to the attentive music-lover. 
Acoustical scientists who use 
instruments to measure sound have 
discovered that what we call noise 
tends to have a high intensity—when 
reaching about 120 decibels a sound 
actually starts to produce pain—and 
that in terms of vibration pattern, 
noise tends to be spread in a fairly 
dense and irregular way across the 
frequency spectrum, with a time 
distribution thatis not very predictable. 
Science also is able to make some ° 
fairly reliable statements about how 
much noise is potentially damaging 
to the ear as well as to the rest of 
the human body. 
But can the physical study of 
sound waves totally define what a 
noise is? No! Some human fac- 
tors play a very important role in 
this. For instance, a listener's age 
seems to determine how much and 
what kind of sound can be tolerated. 
Youngsters in general tolerate much 
more noise than do oldsters, and a 
cymbal crash or vocal shriek enjoyable 
for a teenager can drive a middle- 
aged person quite frantic. 
Tastes and styles in listening 
change from generation to genera- 
tion. Thus, the engineer with his 
battery of measuring devices capable 
of giving objective definitions to 
various noises, is still left in the end 
with a subjective definition: noise is 
unwanted sound.

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 49600: Psychoanalysis of sound

With this definition in mind, we 
can turn to some observations about 
noise which are of psychiatric interest. 
First of all, there appears to be a 
strong association between noise 
and fear. Throughout the course of 
human history noise has been dreaded 
as a source of evil power. The 
ancients thought that noise has 
-death-dealing properties and .one 
finds the idea in primitive folklore, 
for example, that it is the noise of a 
spear's impact which kills its victim. 
The Assyrians believed in evil deities 
capable of producing noises that 
cause earthquakes and storms. 
Frightful creatures are often por- 
trayed as noisy. One sees this 
characterization ‘not only on the 
stage where villains shriek and dan- 
gerous beasts roar, but also in the 
behaviour of people who are on the 
attack. 
Noise has been a tool of warfare 
for centuries. . Trumpet blasts and 
drumbeats incite men to action. The 
Romans employed a special cadre of 
troops to make noises capable of 
frightening and confusing the enemy. 
The invention of chemical explosives 
for warfare strengthened this con- 
nexion between noise and offen- 
siveness, and during the two world 
wars, systematic efforts were made 
to find sounds that can kill. 
Gala concert! 
Ph
ot
o 
S.
 
Go
rb
ac
he
v 
© 
Se
vi
et
sk
oi
e 
Ph
ot
o,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
 
The technology of destructive 
sound is paradoxically silent! Ultra- 
sonic beams which can burn and 
destroy tissue actually are inaudible 
to the human ear. Used mostly for 
medical work in ultrasound diagnosis 
and surgery, this form of acoustical 
energy does not at the present time 
pose much of a threat to humankind. 
Noise has often been used for 
therapeutic purposes. Defective or 
damaged organs give off tell-tale 
noises, and clinicians must know 
how to recognize them. Scraping 
joints, heart murmurs, harsh noises 
in the chest, gurgling of the intes- 
tines—these and many other body 
noises have been diagnostic signs 
for centuries, detected first by the 
clinicians’ unaided ears and later by 
technical means, such as percussion 
of the chest and auscultation with a 
stethoscope. Today's specialized 
methods of phonocardiography can 
give - useful information about heart 
disease. 
Currently, doctors do not believe 
that excessive noise is particularly 
good for patients. But it should be 
mentioned before we go on to the 
two other categories of sound that 
there have been therapists who 
firmly believed in the curative pro- 
perties of violent acoustical stimuli, 
mostly in the days when illness was 
thought to be caused by evil spirits 
“taking possession” of the body. 
To aid in exorcising these invaders, 
healers would scream and yell at 
patients, or use instruments to make 
terrifying noises. The influence of 
Mesmer, a doctor of the 18th century 
who believed in animal magnetism 
rather than evil spirits (and, inciden- 
tally, was a practising music thera- 
pist} has promoted a much quieter" 
and restrained form of psychotherapy. 
Yet even today, mostly in nonmedical 
circles, a so-called “primal scream” 
therapy is being promoted. It calls 
for noise as part of the healing 
process. 
MUSIC. | now want to comment 
on music as a distinctive experience 
in the world of sound, one that is 
more pleasurable than noise but 
unlike speech conveys no precise or 
linguistic meanings. The highly emo- 
tional and desirable connotations of 
music probably stem from childhood, 
before communication with words, 
when an ebb and flow of rhythms 
and vocalizations bound the infant to 
his or her mother and song-and- 
dance was part of socialization 
through play. 
Every human being has a residue 
of ecstatic feelings tied up in memory 
with blissful emotions. It can be 
tapped when the individual is appro- 
priately stimulated, through singing, 
playing, listening, and participating 
in music. 
Subsequent life experiences have a 
tendency to emphasize the importance 
of music for emotional well-being or, 
on the contrary, to squelch the child's 
involvement in this form of sonic 
hedonism. Some children develop a 
special relationship to music, an art 
form available in every human cul- 
ture which offers unique opportunities 
for imagination and self-expression. 
Like mathematics, the other great 
nonverbal form of thinking that 
interests many children, music occa- 
sionally produces a marvel of nature. 
This is the child prodigy—Wolfgang 
Amadeus Mozart or Yehudi Menuhin 
for example—who can set the world 
on fire with his extraordinary abilities 
even before reaching adolescence. 
Other musically gifted personalities 
emerge into the spotlight of public 
acclaim only when they are big 
enough and sufficiently independent 
to forge a career without parental 
guidance—the Beatles, for example, 
whose musical taste and even general 
bearing and behaviour have influenced 
an entire generation of people in 
many countries of the world. Devoid 
of semantics, music is the only lan- 
guage that approaches true univer- 
sality. 
Music-making is a skill thatinvolves 
specific vocal and/or manual move- 
ments, and for this reason is much 
easier to acquire during the first 
decade of life. Our mental and 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 49600: Psychoanalysis of sound

) emotional openness to the learning 
of new complex acts tends to fade 
after puberty, and this limits the 
number of people who can excel in 
musical behaviour. 
The psychiatrist thus encounters 
two kinds of problems around music. 
One has to do with ‘musicians who 
cannot tolerate their minority status 
and who may suffer from the social 
isolation which results from speciali- 
zation and excellence. The other 
problem has to do with non-musicians 
who for various internal and external 
reasons cannot participate in this 
foremost emotional experience and 
thus are cut off from one of the richest 
sources of human culture. 
It is interesting from a historical 
perspective that Sigmund Freud, the 
psychiatrist whose ideas have had 
such a strong influence during the 
past eighty years as a result of his 
extraordinary literary skill and force 
of character, was in significant ways 
“unmusical. 
This may have stemmed in part 
from his early childhood. Freud 
became upset when his little sister 
started playing the piano and in a 
rather tyrannical way he demanded 
that the offending instrument be 
removed from the house. Later, 
when the world-famous psychoanalyst 
was consulted by musicians, including 
Gustav Mahler and Bruno Walter, he 
spent very little time with these men 
in contrast to the much greater atten- 
tion he gave to other patients. 
Nor did Freud's most creative 
disciple, the psychiatrist C. G. Jung, 
have much understanding for music, 
as he regretfully confessed in personal 
correspondence. Part of the problem 
may stem from the intense curiosity 
both of these men of genius displayed 
towards dreaming as a means of 
psychological insight. 
Not only are dreams mostly visual, 
but the sound-effects that accom- 
pany them tend to be difficult to 
remember and even more difficult 
to talk about. During sleep, hearing 
tends to be directed outward into the 
external environment, whereas the 
eyes are closed and able to scan the 
inner, psychic milieu. Hervey de 
Saint-Denis, whose dream studies 
were published several decades 
before Freud's, found that different 
tunes played while he was asleep 
caused him to dream about women 
he had danced with to these tunes. 
The composer. Igor Stravinsky was 
able to observe how dreaming helped 
his creativity. One night before 
going to bed he was disturbed by a 
certain tonal interval which kept 
coming to mind, and he dreamt about 
it as an elastic substance stretched 
between two notes. Along with the 
notes he visualized testicle-like eggs, 
warm and protected by nests. This 
vision apparently reassured the com- 
poser, 
more comfortable about his musical 
ideas and whatever else had been 
troubling him. 
32 
1 
and after waking up he felt’ 
| once treated a patient who, after 
dreaming about a theme from Bach's 
Saint Matthew Passion, suddenly 
came to the realization that he felt 
jealous enough to “crucify” his best 
friend. - 
SPEECH. Finally we turn to speech, 
the third major component of man’s 
world of sound, one we value most 
for reasoning and for the communi- 
cation of explicit, factual meanings. 
Like music, speech begins in 
infancy. The mother or father fol- 
lows the child's gaze to what interests 
him or her and teaches the child what 
to pay attention to and what to ignore. 
Objects of focussed attention are 
given names—e.g., Mama, milk, 
Daddy, toy, bed, etc.—and as the 
baby grows older he or she repeats 
the names, or verbal labels, with 
increasing exactness. : 
Connectives, adjectives, action- 
words, and adverbs that the child 
hears in the environment of speech 
sounds also become part of his or 
her verbal repertoire, partly due to 
an innate or biological propensity 
which the human brain has for making 
sense, and partly because the child 
wants to share the communicative 
network of a family and society. 
Most children achieve considerable 
facility in understanding and using’ 
speech before they are ten years old. 
A secondary process of literaliza- 
tion takes place during this first 
decade of living in most societies, 
especially those which consider 
schools to be essential for the educa- 
tion of children and where high value 
is placed on reading and writing. 
Unfortunately the acquisition of 
literary skills creates conflictsbetween 
the ear. and the eye. No sound is 
ever heard or spoken in exactly the 
same way twice, and during the 
years that the child masters language, 
he or she also comes to enjoy the 
marvellously dynamic and flowing 
quality of speech and learns to 
depend on the ever-changing nuances 
and emotional inflections of the voice. 
The speech medium consists of 
hisses and buzzes articulated quite 
rapidly, in clusters of about five mor- 
phemes per second. To represent 
this information nonacoustically with 
visual symbols requires an alphabet, 
and no alphabet has yet been devised 
that accurately and reliably translates 
all speech sounds. 
Thus school-children are made to 
learn a fairly arbitrary system of let- 
ters, so arbitrary in fact that as 
George Bernard Shaw pointed out, 
the word “fish” could also be spelled 
“ghoti” (gh as in laugh, o as inwomen, 
and ti as in nation). 
In psychiatry, we see many casual- 
ties of this kind of education. First 
of .all there are “dyslexic” children 
whose brains simply rebel at the 
basic notions of written language so 
that while they speak perfectly well, 
they write in reverse or in typically 
disorganized ways, and have trouble 
reading. 
Another group of children shows 
undue concern for verbal disconti- 
nuities {e.g., spaces between words 
play a significant role in writing but 
don’t exist in speech). Some begin 
to stammer or stutter over words that 
ordinarily pose no problems. Dys- 
fluent youngsters are often singled 
out for ridicule, punishment, or extra 
schoolwork. Finally there are chil- 
dren who withdraw from speech - 
situations because of a sense of 
frustration or the fear of humiliation. 
| have tried to set down a few 
observations about the role of sound 
in human affairs, dividing the acou- 
stical world roughly into: three com- 
. ponents—noise, music, and speech. 
There is, of course, a considerable 
overlap. Thus certain musical com- 
positions when heard for the. first 
time may seem noisy, and speech 
can enter the realm of music through 
song. 
Electronics has given science the 
tools to study acoustical behaviour 
directly, by recording sound so it 
can be repeated over and over, and 
by video-recording the body move- 
ments and facial expressions during 
sound-making and silent behaviour. 
Much of the knowledge gained from 
today’s research probably cannot be 
preserved in books and journals, as 
was done in past centuries, but has 
to be transmitted through direct 
experience. 
| have been impressed in my acti- 
vities as a psychotherapist with the 
extraordinary versatility that patients 
at all ages—not only children and 
adolescents—display in their use and 
abuse of sound. Therapeutic com- 
munication consists in many ways of 
attempts to clarify meaning and 
reduce anxiety through the analysis: 
of what people say, how they feel 
themselves to be in an environment 
of social rhythms, and what they do 
to each other. : 
Whether such knowledge will affect 
the search for truth and how it can 
influence belief is impossible to pre- 
dict, but my hope is that the human 
ear will continue to become increa- 
singly sophisticated in perceiving the 
warnings of noise, the beauty of 
music, and the meaningfulness of 
speech. 
H Peter Ostwald

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

BOOKSHELF 
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS 
® History of Mankind: Cultural 
and Scientific Development: Vol. 
5, The Nineteenth Century, 1775- 
1905, edited by Charles Morazé. 
Latest (4-part) volume in a unique 
global history, produced under 
Unesco’s auspices, of man’s cul- 
tural and scientific development 
~ from Prehistory to the Atom Age. 
~ Published by George Allen and 
: Unwin, London, 1976. (Parts 1 
! 
i 
  
      
      
              
W
E
 
and 2, £15; Parts 3 and 4 £15 | 
each). i 
HB The Health of the Oceans, by 
Edward D. Goldberg. An analysis | 
of data on marine pollution. 1976, 
172 pp. (28 F). 
B® Annual Summary of Informa- 
tion on Natural Disasters, No. 9, 
1974. Detailed information on 
earthquakes, tsunamis (seismic sea- 
waves) volcanic eruptions, land- 
Hides and avalanches. 1976, 99 pp. 
F). 
HM Cross-cultural Broadcasting, by 
Eduardo Contreras, James Larson, 
John K. Mayok and Peter Spain. 
A study on the political, cultural, | 
linguistic and psychological impli- | 
cations of cross-cultural broad- 
casting. 1976, 49 pp. (6 F). 
BM Cultural Policy in the United 
Republic of Cameroon, by J. C. 
Bahoken and Engelbert Atangana. 
1976, 91 pp. 12 F); Cultural 
Policy in the Republic of Zaire, 
a study prepared under the direc- 
tion of Dr. Bokonga Ekanga Botom- 
bele, 1976, 119 pp. (14 F). (Both 
published in Unesco’s “Studies and 
~ Documents on Cultural Policies” 
series). | 
a
 
t
h
 
dr
 
d
l
e
 
IN
 
AN
 
Be
 
EN
 
E
T
     
  
UNICEF greeting cards 
For more than 25 years sales of 
UNICEF greeting cards have helped to 
provide food, medicines and school 
supplies for needy children in over 
100 countries. This year's cards, 
offering a wide selection ranging 
from eight designs in mini format to a 
large size Collector's Edition, are now 
available at UNICEF sales points 
throughout the world. A trilingual 
{English, French, Spanish) UNICEF 
desk calendar for 1977 on the theme 
“The Rights of the Child” is also 
available. This gay winter scene—one 
of UNICEF'S broadly international 
designs for 1976—is by the German 
(Fed. Rep.) artist M. Beisner. 
RESED GSO 
 
  
Culture and a new world economic order 
A SPECIAL ISSUE 
OF UNESCO'S QUARTERLY CULTURES 
An international round table on intellectual and cultural co-operation and 
a new world economic order was held in Paris last summer, as we reported 
in our last issue. Unesco's quarterly Cultures (¥) has just published a special 
200-page issue entirely devoted to this event. 
Meeting at Unesco headquarters on the initiative of leading international 
non-governmental organizations, 34 statesmen, scientists, writers and artists 
from all parts of the world set out, under the chairmanship of Mr. Jean 
d’Ormesson of the Académie Francaise, to formulate the cultural conditions, 
moral attitudes and political and economic principles that should form the 
basis of a new world economic order. In welcoming the participants, the 
Director-General of Unesco, Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, declared: “Far from 
being the expression of self-seeking demands, to strive for a new world order 
is to wager boldly and wholeheartedly on man, on his will to survive and 
to live a fuller life... Within this context, the efforts undertaken by Unesco, as 
" by all the other organizations that make up the United Nations system, link 
up—over and above technical procedures—with the longing for a new huma- 
nism, free from exclusiveness or restriction, in which the explosive truth of the 
Dogon proverb that tells us that Man is the grain of the universe would 
be revealed.” 
In its last issue the Unesco Courier presented extracts from contributions 
by two of those taking part in the round table, Trygve Bratteli of Norway and 
Samir Amin of Egypt. Cultures now publishes the ensemble of the texts 
from the round table, presented in five major sections: 
The challenge of the 20th century: Philip Noel-Baker (U.K., Nobel laureate), 
Alfred Kastler {France, Nobel laureate) and Sean.MacBride (Ireland, Nobel 
laureate} outline the major problems of the 20th century: the arms race, the 
population explosion, environmental pollution. 
Proposals for a new order: Willy Brandt (German Fed. Rep., Nobel laureate), 
Trygve Bratteli {Norway} and Samir Amin {Egypt) describe the major economic 
and political principles that could serve as models for the creation of a world 
order designed to promote more harmonious international relations. 
Cultural identity and the new order: Each people's growing awareness of 
its cultural identity is a striking. feature of the 20th century. Oswaldo 
Guayasamin (Ecuador), Joseph Kotsokoane (Lesotho), Prem Kirpal (India) and 
Paolo Grassi (Italy) seek to reconcile traditional cultural values with the moder- 
* nization of society.. Co 
The new order in culture, society and economic life: Nine texts by econo- 
' mists, sociologists and scientists describe the many cultural aspects of a new 
economic order. . : 
The vision of Man in a new world: Social, economic and cultural changes 
confront artists and writers with a new vision of Man. Here, artists, writers, 
theatre directors and urbanists trace the major trends in the evolution of 
artistic expression in the 20th century. : 
 
(*) Cultures (Vol. Ill, N° 4, 1976) Annual subscription 75 Fr. francs; Each issue 22 Fr. francs.   
Over 50 issues 
of the ‘ Unesco Courier’ 
on cassettes 
Since June 1972 each issue of the 
Spanish edition of the “Unesco Courier” 
has been recorded on cassettes by El 
Libro Parlante (The Speaking Book) an 
official body based in Buenos Aires and 
connected with the Ministry of Social 
Welfare of the Argentine Republic. The 
recordings appear regularly each month 
and so far over 50 numbers of the “"Cou- 
rier" have been published, each on two. 
cassettes. Each issue is loaned free to 
blind “listener-readers” whose numbers 
are constantly increasing. For further 
information write to: El Libro Parlante, 
Avenida de Mayo 869, 1084 Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. 
Africacult, 
. a Unesco 
TV programme 
Unesco has produced a TV programme 
based on the culture of the Ashanti 
people of Ghana. “Africacult” shows 
how a traditional culture can continue 
to exist alongside a modern economy, 
stresses the importance of culture as 
a factor of economic and social devel- 
opment and demonstrates that cultural 
identity can be a powerful force for unity. 
- Written and directed by Philip Gaunt, 
this 16 mm. 18 min: colour film is avail- 
able in English, French, Spanish and 
Russian language versions. Further 
information from the Press and Audio- 
Visual Information Division, Unesco, 
Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
Letters to the editor 
OPEN LETTER FROM 
 
NAPLES SCHOOLCHILDREN 
Sir, 
In the February 1976 issue of the 
“Unesco Courier” we read the letter pre- 
sented to the Director-General of Unesco 
by 50 children of the primary school at 
Etterbeek, near Brussels, when he visited 
their school. 
We share their ideas and their fears. 
And so we want to send the following 
letter to these children at Etterbeek: 
“We ask the same questions as you: 
Why is there social injustice? Why are 
there wars? Why: is there economic 
disorder and lack of freedom? It is 
. perhaps because war already exists within 
us, in the constant duality of good and 
evil which so often leads us to give in 
to the worst instincts that degrade human 
nature. But we should try to resist this 
enemy within us, in order to understand 
our neighbours better and help them 
to develop all that is best in themselves. 
And we should join together in building 
a different society where the noblest 
ideals become realities in a new order 
based on respect for mankind and esteem 
for human dignity. 
“We, the children of the A Scarlatti 
middle school at Vico Equense, are your 
friends. We greet you in the name of all 
our classmates.” 
Anna Lisa, Maria Grazia, 
Colomba Staiano, Patricia Como, 
Benedetto Esposito, 
- Antonino Caccioppoli, AndreaCelentano, 
Domenico Esposito, Renata Cilento 
Vico Equense, Naples, Italy 
REBIRTH. OF PHILAE 
Sir, 
After reading your issue dealing with 
-Philae {November 1974) it was with great 
interest and wonder that |, with a group 
associated with The Goulburn College of 
Advanced Education, Goulburn, New 
South Wales, Australia, visited the Philae 
monuments as part of a recent Middle 
East tour. 
. We were able to view this spectacular 
operation of the salvage of the monu- 
ments. The fact that we were actually 
on the coffer dam wall to see the expertise 
and technology being used to transfer 
and eventually restore these master- 
pieces of architecture is something | 
personally will never forget. 
Norma Gowland 
Bradfordville 
New South Wales, Australia 
RESEARCH DIVORCED 
 
FROM REALITY 
Sir, 
1 recently came across Dragoljub 
Najman's article on conservatism in the 
world’s universities (your June 1975 
issue). Mr. Najman’s comments are par- 
ticularly relevant to developing countries 
like India. 
His question “How many of those who 
teach in schools of engineering have ever 
been in charge of factory workshops or 
building sites?” strikes me as distur- 
bingly poignant. 
  
Sir, 
- biochemists, 
 
In India, teaching jobs serve merely as 
comfortable sinecures for those who 
either cannot or do not wish to join’ 
industry. Consequently, research (if 
any) being carried out is quite divorced 
from reality. Moreover, members of the 
_ teaching faculties are easily lured by 
publications in foreign journals. What 
they overlook is that Western countries 
have reached a stage of technological 
development where they can indulge in 
research topics which are for us a luxury 
we can ill afford. 
Politicians” and statesmen’s exhorta- 
tions for science geared tq the needs of 
society may have become hackneyed 
through over-use. But this need is still 
of over-riding importance, even though 
our university teachers tend not to per- 
ceive it. 
| hope the “Unesco Courier” will conti- 
nue to highlight issues of special rele- 
vance to developing countries. 
P. R. Patnaik 
Research Scholar 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Madras, India 
APOSTLE 
OF THE INDIANS 
Sir, 
Congratulations on having published 
two articles on Father Bartolomé de Las 
Casas, the “Apostle of the Indians” 
(June 1975 issue). You did an admirable 
job in presenting to a wide public the 
most interesting aspects of the life of 
this great pioneer in the struggle for 
human rights. 
The attitude of Bartolomé de Las Ca- 
sas in America before his first conver- 
sion was virtually unknown. Now thanks 
to the “Unesco Courier” it has been 
described in many languages to readers 
all over the world. From this issue 
scholars and students can renew and 
deepen their understanding of the Indian 
and white colonization in America. 
Congratulations on all you have 
achieved in the “Courier” over the 
years helping to raise our cultural level 
by teaching us to think and find the 
truth. 
Jorge Lépez Fuentes 
Havana, Cuba 
LEARNING TO COPE 
WITH STRESS 
  
Dr. Ivan S. Khorol's extremely topical 
"article about stress (“Unesco Courier” 
October 1975) raises questions of con- 
cern to everyone and above all of course 
to specialists. 
The scientific and technological revo- 
lution, urbanization and the growing 
tempo of living are placing increasingly 
heavy intellectual and emotional loads 
on people. Given these conditions, me- 
thods' of reinforcing the nervous system 
must be sought. 
The problem is a complex one, requir- 
ing the co-ordinated efforts of clinicians, 
physiologists, pathophysio- 
logists, pharmacologists and sociolo- 
gists’ in all countries. It may be neces- 
sary to set up a single centre to 
co-ordinate these efforts and research, 
perhaps in the form of an International 
Stress Institue. 
. A. Luk 
Moscow, U.S.S.R. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA'S 
  
CITY OF HUMOUR 
first rate. 
Sir, 
The article about Gabrovo, Bulgaria's 
“capital of humour” and its Scottish 
counterpart, Aberdeen, in your issue on 
the world of humour (April 1976} was 
We too in Czechoslovakia 
have our town of humour: its name is- 
Kocourkov. 
Although it is a fictitious place, many 
books have been written about the 
town and its inhabitants, and anecdotes 
about the people of Kocourkov have 
been told throughout Czechoslovakia 
for at least a century, The doings and 
quips of its people which amused our 
grandparents still set our children 
chuckling. 
This town .where clocks move back- 
wards and the people get up to all sorts | 
of tricks has figured in books and illu- 
strations and was the subject of a film 
made in 1937. 
On one occasion the people of Kocour- 
kov welcomed the king with a red carpet. 
But it was too short and so as the king 
walked along they rolled it' up behind 
him, meaning to lay it out again when he 
reached the end. In their haste, how- 
ever, they entangled him in the carpet 
and rolled him in the mud. They also 
built a town hall but forgot the windows. 
So they let people bore holes for win- 
dows wherever they chose, until the build- 
ing looked like a giant Gruy&re cheese. 
Kocourkov, Czechoslovakia's imaginary 
counterpart to Gabrovo, transmits good 
humour and optimism and symbolizes 
honest self-criticism, 
Viadimir Kriz 
Jihlava, Czechoslovakia 
CHILDREN'S CONTEST 
FOR UNESCO'S 30 YEARS 
Sir. 
i 
A regular reader of the “Unesco Cou- - 
rier” for over 20 years, | have recently 
been organizing a competition on Unesco 
for primary and secondary schoolchildren 
in Villepinte. The contest has been 
launched as part of our town’s cultural 
activities programme and is intended to - 
mark the 30th anniversary of Unesco’s 
foundation. 
Working in pairs, the children will be 
asked tec compile dossiers on Unesco 
and its activities using documentary 
material and adding their own descrip- 
tions and commentaries. 
The competition opened on 1 October 
1976 and the closing date is 31 Decem- 
ber. The winning entry will be pub- 
lished in a booklet which we distribute 
quarterly to all: our local clubs and asso- 
ciations. 
C. A. Leroy 
" President, 
Municipal Cultural Committee 
Villepinte, France   Im
p.
 
B
R
O
D
A
R
D
 
et
 
T
A
U
P
I
N
,
 
C
O
U
L
O
M
M
I
E
R
S
.
 
— 
Dé
pb
t 
la
ga
l 
C'
1 
Z 
N
o
v
e
m
b
r
e
 
19
76
 
— 
I
M
P
R
I
M
E
 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
(P
ri
nt
ed
 
in
 
Fr
an
ce
} 
34

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
Constructive 
education for 
W.D. Wall, Ph.D. 
Harrap -   
children 
  
The Unesco Press 
is to be published soon. 
349 pages     
An outstanding survey 
of major themes 
in constructive education | 
Intended for the parent, administrator, guidance worker and youth 
leader as well as the educator and child psychologist, this first volume 
of a Unesco study by W. D. Wall concentrates on educational problems 
of the first ten years of a child's life, including: 
B mental hygiene and education 
B the role of the family 
® home, school and community services 
B pre-school education 
B the primary school and its problems etc. 
“...a book of scholarship which will become an educational classic.” 
(The Times Educational Supplement). 
A companion volume, Constructive Education for Adolescents, 
54 French francs (Cloth) 
68 French francs (Hardbound) 
Co-published with George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd., London 
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the 
National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below; names of distributors in countries not 
listed, along with subscription rates in local 
currency, will be supplied on request.) 
* AUSTRALIA. Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. 
Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale. 2100. NSW: Periodicals: 
Dominie Pty., Limited, Box 33, Post Office, Brookvale 
2100. NSW. Sub-agent: United Nations Association 
of Australia, Victorian Division 5th floor, 134-136 
Flinders St., Melbourne (Victoria), 3000. — AUSTRIA. 
Verlag Georg Fromme & Co., Arbeitergasse 1-7, 1051, 
Vienna. — BELGIUM. “Unesco Courier” Dutch edition 
only: N.V. Handelmaatschappij Keesing, Keesinglaan 
2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen, French edition and 
general Unesco publications agent: Jean de Lannoy, 
112, rue du Trone, Brussels 5. CCP 708-23. — 
BURMA. Trade Corporation N° 9, 550-552 Merchant 
Street, Rangoon. — CANADA. Publishing Centre, 
Supply and Services Canada, Ottawa, KIA 089. — 
CYPRUS. “MAM”, Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, 
P.O. Box" 1722, Nicosia. — CZECHOSLOVAKIA. 
S.N.-T.L. Spalena 51, Prague 1 (permanent display); 
Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka. Prague 1. For 
Slovakia only; Alfa Verlag - Publishers, Hurbanovo 
nam. 6, 893 31 Bratislava - CSSR. — DENMARK. 
Munksgaards Boghandel,. 6, Ngrregade, DK-1165, 
Copenhagen K. — EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). 
National Centre for Unesco Publications, N° 1 Talaat 
Harb Street, Tahrir Square, Cairo, — ETHIOPIA. 
National Agency for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis 
Ababa. — FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. — FRANCE. Librairie de 
I'Unesco. 7, place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, C.C.P. 
12598-48. — GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REP. 
Buchhaus Leipzig, Postfach 140, 710 Leipzig or from 
Internationalen Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. — FED. 
REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco Kurier {German 
ed. only): 53 Bonn 1, Colmantstrasse 22, C.P. 
Hamburg 276650. For scientific maps only: GEO 
CENTER D7 Stuttgart 80, Postfach 800830. Other _ 
publications; Verlag Dokumentation. Pdssenbacher 
Strasse 2, 8000 Munchen 71 (Prinz Ludwigshohe). — 
GHANA, Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd., P.O. Box 
195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd.,, P.O. Box 
7869, Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, 
Accra: The . University Bookshop of Cape Coast; The 
University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. — 
GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom, — GREECE, 
International bookshops. — HONG KONG. Federal 
Publications Division, Far East Publications Ltd.. 5 A 
Evergreen Industrial Mansion, Wong Chuk Hang Road, 
Aberdeen. Swindon Book Co., 13-15, lock Road. 
of Baghdad, P.O. Box 75, Baghdad. — IRE 
Kowloon. — HUNGARY. Akadémiai Konyvesbolt, 
Vici u. 22, Budapest V; A.K.\V. Konyvtirosok Boltja, 
Népkoztirsasdg utja 16, Budapest Vi. — ICELAND. 
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co... H.F.,, Hafnarstraeti 9, 
Reykjavik. — INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd., Kamani 
Marg. Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chit- 
taranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount 
Road, Madras 2: B-3/7 Asaf Ali Road. New Delhi 1; 
80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Road, Bangalore-560001; 
3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-Depots: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 17 Park Street, Calcutta 
16; Scindia House, New Delhi; Publications Section, 
Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, 511 C-Wing, 
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi 110001. — INDONESIA. 
Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 29 JI. Oto 
Iskandardinata Ill, Jakarta; Gramedia Bookshop. JM. 
Gadjah Mada 109, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI. Dr. Sam 
Ratulangie 47, Jakarta Pusat. — IRAN. Kharazmie Publish- 
ing and Distribution Co., 229 Daneshgahe Street. Shah 
Avenue, P.O. Box 14/1486, Teheran. Iranian National 
Commission for Unesco. Avenue lranchahr Chomali No 300, 
B.P. 1533, Teheran. — IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al- 
Rashid Street, Baghdad; University Bookstore, University 
LAND. The 
Educational Company of Iretand Ltd, Ballymount Road. 
Walkinstown, Dublin 12. - ISRAEL. Emanuel Brown, 
formely Blumstein's . Bookstores, 35 Allenby Road 
and 48, Nachlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv: 9, Shlomzion 
Hamalka Street Jerusalem. — JAMAICA. Sangster's 
Book Stores Ltd., P.O. Box 366, 101 Water Lane, 
Kingston. — JAPAN. Eastern Book Service Inc., C.P.O. 
Box 1728. Tokyo 100-92. — KENYA. East African 
Publishing House, P.O, Box 30571, Nairobi. — KOREA. 
Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O.: Box 
Central 64, Seoul. — KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop 
Co., Ltd, P.O. Box 2942, Kuwait. — LESOTHO. 
Mazenod Book Centre, P.O. Mazenod, Lesotho, 
Southern Africa. — LIBERIA. Cole and Yancy Book- 
shops Lltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. — LIBYA. 
Agency for Devetopment of Publication & Distribution, 
P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. — LUXEMBOURG. Librairie 
Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. — MALAY- 
SIA. Federal Publications Sdn. Bhd., Balai Berita, 
31, Jalan Riong. Kuala Lumpur. — MALTA. Sapien- 
zas, 26 Republic Street, Valletta. — MAURITIUS. 
Nalanda Company Ltd.,, 30. Bourbon Street, Port- 
Louis. — MONACO. British Library, 30, bd des Mou- 
lins, Monte-Carlo. — NETHERLANDS. For the 
“Unesco Koerier” Dutch edition only: Systemen Keesing, 
Ruysdaelstraat 71-75, Amsterdam-1007, Agent for all 
Unesco publications; N. V, Maninus Nijhoff, Lange 
Voorhout, 9, The Hague. — NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. 
G.C.T. Van Dorp & Co. {Ned Ant). N.V., Willemstad, 
Curacao. N. A. — NEW ZEALAND. Government Prin- 
ting Office, Government Bookshops at: Rutland Street, 
P.O. Box 5344, Auckland: 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 
1721, Christchurch; Alma Street. P.O. Box 857 Hamil- 
ton; Princes Street, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin; Mulgrave 
Street, Private Bag, Wellington. — NIGERIA. The 
University Bookshop of Ife. The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. Box 286: The University Bookshop of 
Nsukka; The University Bookshop of Lagos; The Ahmadu 
Bello University Bookshop of Zaria. — NORWAY. All 
publications: Johan Grundt Tanum (Booksellers) Karl 
Johans-gate 41/43, Oslo 1. For Unesco Courier only; 
A.S. Narvesens Literaturtjeneste, Box 6125, Oslo 6. — 
PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-e- ° 
azam., P.O. Box No. 729. Lahore 3. — PHILIPPINES. 
‘The Modern Book Co.. 926 Rizal Avenue, P.O. Box 632, 
Manila D-404. — POLAND. ORPAN-IMPORT, Palac 
Kultury i Nauki, Warsaw: Ars Polona-Ruch, Krakowskie 
Przedmiescie No. 7.00-901 WARSAW. — PORTUGAL. . 
Dias & Andrade Ltda, Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, 
Lisbon. — SINGAPORE. Federal Publications (S}.Pte 
Ltd., No. 1 New Industrial Road. off Upper Paya Lebar 
Road, Singapore 19. — SOMALI DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC. Modern Book Shop and General, P.O. 
Box 951, Mogadiscio. — SOUTH AFRICA. All publi- 
cations: Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty.) Ltd., Libri Buil- 
ding, Church Street, P.O. Box 724, Pretoria. For the 
Unesco Courier (single copies) only; Central News 
Agency P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. — SOUTHERN 
RHODESIA. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union 
Avenue, Salisbury. — SRI LANKA. Lake House Book- 
shop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata P.O.B. 
244 Colombo 2. — SUDAN. A! Bashir Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. — SWEDEN. All publica- 
tions: A/B C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, 
Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Courier: Svenska FN-Forbundet, Skolgrénd 2, Box 
150 50 S- 104 65. Stockholm. — SWITZERLAND. All 
publications: Europa Verlag, * 5 Rémistrasse. Zurich. 
Librairie Payot. rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 
12-236. — TANZANIA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop. 
P.O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. — THAILAND. Nibondh 
and Co. Ltd, 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg 
Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok: Suksapan Panit, 
Mansion 9. Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok: Suksit Siam 
Company, 1715 Rama IV Road. Bangkok. — TURKEY. 
Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi, Beyoglu, 
Istanbul. = UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, 
Kampala. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O. Box 569, london, S.E.l., and Government 
Bookshops in "London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Belfast, 
Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol. — UNITED STATES. 
Unipub, Box 433, Murray Hill Station, New York, N.Y. 
10016. For “Unesco Courier” in Spanish: Santillana 
Publishing Company, Inc., 575 Lexington Avenue, 
New York, N.Y. 10022. — U.S.S.R. Mezhdunarodnaya 
Kniga, Moscow, G-200. — YUGOSLAVIA. Jugoslovenska 
Knjiga, Terazije, 27, Belgrade; Drzavna Zalozba Slovenije, 
Titova C 25, P.O.B, 50-1, Ljubliana. 
35 
 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074828engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
- 
- 
AN . ; Gis 
oe 2 
a "V' 
a 
« 
a 
~ 
| 
“vy 
W
r
 
" Photo ©sStudio Natiris, Cébazat, France 
(See also pages 18-19). ® y 
F 4 4 
MOSQUITO'S 3 
HEARING ORGAN- 
Here photographed with a high-powered 
microscope is the hearing organ through which 
a mosquito picks up vibrations around it. 
A female mosquito attracts males by the 
high-pitched sound of her wings. 
££ A 
»   [2 
i 
  
T
N
 