# [068988](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
EXPLORING 
THE OCEANS 
"WITH SCIENCE 
  
  
    
   
  
In this issue : 
rn  - % FISH MIGRATION DETECTIVES 
32 francs ci (Frances i arr % PLANKTON-—BREAD FROM THE SEA 
% WORLD PLAN FOR MARINE RESEARCH 36 PAGES 
Wigs 
      Fw sme } smesinam——" Cr 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### 190015: (Editorial)

= Tn a SH lS St ms 
Ra | ~~ E w— I a ea a Te 
jo 
— 
SE 
~ - — _—_ — -_ - — : ~~ 
y " 
- «—— WD, — 
hm A — a —— | 
— ACL HENDS ON" DECK-WHENTTUNNY STRIKE: ton Sto IRR PN 5 ; a 
. varyon¢, incrudlig the captain and the Cook, hag™™ == ra a NS EE — — — 
a fouple afte at feverish, back-breaking work « — RE — —— — —— GEN. d oe we 
wes=when aP nay boatsmeets a school of fish. RR SAR an —— = —i . - 
- Live sardines are thrawn intoztiie water as bait ar TT oa TL a 
B and when the tlnny Strike the sardines they go  — i TE w 
a tg 8 fr ener; strike at anything and Capethus bo —eo™ on on - hE — : — pr ny 
P nthe oat w simple barbless hoBks. — rin ET - A] 
- wo Al. <2 “tifa ds greof the richest-of «ww — ™ = i To F——— - _— 
© ew ods, "but. little is kKUPWo of its Migratory ander —m— y a tS 2h ee — : — 
Wi spawhing_habitsSelgiay Fihery obialogists “an tS 
tt — my = 
of er scientists, carrying out special studies eT ere, ~<e Pa ——_ m—— a - = 
we the tunnyhgs part-of asworld-wide campaign tau a — a — no — a - - — 
Raake ihe 38 offmarine retodlicessd Sae page 12. “WT - ng ee a NS 
wif oto k a ho. % - ya - -~ <n a 
pS —— ny i. C— ee ~ - “——— N 
E ha TORN Ea ulerh ? Sp SE — | he , - a ~~ ~ ol Re —— “ 
¥ 
i Te- - ~~ 
— - ” = 
: 
a - RA i Raa — 
RE ae he ee Ro SS — Sin, “i a No - _— lL 
. wo —-— & 
- a aa _. - a i «3 T— 
_ — —_— - 
We . el 
a i — Be. Th 
: eS Re — ee a. 
   

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  gCourier 
———— 
EE ——— A WINDOW OPEN ON TNE WORLD 
Number 5 - 1955 
8h Y EAR 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
3 EDITORIAL 
By Gerald Wendt 
4 THE METEORA 
Rock pinnacles “hung in the air” 
By Prof. G.A. Sotiriou 
9 THE SUGAR BOWL IN THE DATE PALM 
U.N. helps Iraq create a new industry 
By Georges Fradier 
12 SCIENCE AND THE SEA 
Harvesting instead of hunting the sea’s resources 
16 STRANGE FACTS ABOUT NEPTUNE'S REALM 
By Frangois Le Lionnais 
18 HUNTING THE WHALE 
The largest creature living or extinct 
By David Gunston 
21 MIGRATING MAMMOTHS 
Playing tag with Antarctic whales 
By Paul Budker 
23 BREAD FROM THE SEA 
Farming the world’s last frontiers 
By Charles Drummond 
27 FISH IN MYTH AND LEGEND 
Symbols of tenacity, vitality and fertility 
By Jean Marabini 
32 UNESCO IN PICTURES 
33 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
34 FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
* 
Published monthly by 
The Department of Mass Communication of the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, 19, Avenue Kleber, Paris 16, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Alexandre Leventis 
Spanish Edition : Jorge Carrera Andrade 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin 
* Circulation Manager 
Jean Groffier 
U.S.A. : Henry Evans 
Individual articles not copyrighted may be reprinted from THE COURIER but 
must be accompanied by the following credit line: “Reprinted from UNESCO 
COURIER”. Signed articles reprinted must carry the author's name. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied by an inter 
national reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of Unesco or those of the editors of THE COURIER. 
Annual subscription rates of THE COURIER : 6/=; $ 1.50 or 300 French frs 
or equivalent (U.S. edition $ 2.50) 
MC. 55.1 91. A   
Unesco Courier. — Nf 5. — 1955 
COVER PHOTO 
 
PRIZE PREY of underwater spear and 
spring-gun fishermen in the Mediterranean 
is the meru. Weighing as much as 45 
pounds, these fish swim with mouths 
agape, taking in whole octopi and lobsters. 
(Photo Rapho-Rebikoff) 
  
LTHOUGH nearly all nations have shores touching the sea 
A most of the human race has never seen the ocean and 
few know it well. Yet it is humanity's great unused 
resource, and moreover, a truly international one. 
The land is divided among nations; the sea belongs to 
mankind. A few miles, adjacent to the shores, are under 
local control but they form a microscopic fraction of the 139 
millicn square miles of the ocean surface — about two and 
a half times the entire land area of the earth. Its total 
volume is 328 million cubic miles, a figure which far surpasses 
the human imagination. The entire human race of more than 
2,000 million persons, for example, could be contained in one- 
tenth of a single cubic mile ! 
This incredibly vast storehouse of mineral and food 
resources has hardly been tapped to meet man’s needs. It 
provides, for instance, less than cone per cent of the world’s 
food. Every cubic mile of seawater contains 750 tons of 
nitrogen, 225 tons of phosphorus and nearly two million tons 
of potassium—three major agricultural fertilizers. Equally 
important is the rich plant-life of the sea : scientists 
calculate that a square mile of sea produces an average of 
13,000 tons of vegetation per year, and a world total of 
probably five times that of vegetation on land. 
Most of the sea plants are microscopic and simply serve 
to feed the fishes. But they are already recognized as 
potential food both for men and for domestic animals. Much 
more needs to be learned about their varieties, the conditions 
under which they grow best, and their nutritional value; 
methods must be invented for cultivating and harvesting them 
But the major practical objective of oceanographic research 
will be an increase in the availability of fish for human food. 
The U. N. Food and Agriculture Organization has estimated 
that the world’s total annual production of fish and all sea 
foods, excluding whales, is about twenty-six million metric tons 
per year. The amount of fish caught and ccnsumed could be 
increased many times if fishing were no longer an essentially 
primitive method of finding food, much as hunting was for 
our ancestors who roamed the woods in search of galne. 
Many privately endowed and government institutes have 
developed new methods of studying the ocean depths, and 
revealed strange forms of deep-sea life. Recently inter- 
national crganizations like the Pacific Science Congress, the 
Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, and F.A.Q. have called 
attention to the research that is still needed, and especially 
to studies that will increase the world’s food supply. 
It is for this reason that Unesco is organizing a broader 
international attack on the problems of the sea as it has sue- 
cessfully done for the problems of the arid lands. As early 
as November 1953, Unesco participated in the studies on the 
development of oceanographic research in the Indo-Pacific 
region and last September at meetings of marine biology 
scientists in the Latin American region. Two months later, 
a programme of aid to oceanographic research on a world- 
‘wide scale, prepared in accord with F.A.O. was approved hy 
Unesco’s General Conference in Montevideo, Uruguay. 
To co-ordinate this programme, Unesco is now setting up 
an International Advisory Committee on Marine Sciences. A 
first meeting of scientists was held in Rome in May. As 
in other fields of its work, Unesco cannot solve the complex 
problems of the sea all hy itself. No human institution can. 
Unesco looks at the task ahead as a co-operative venture of 
long-term international research. It will serve as a world- 
wide link between the many organizations now dealing with 
these questions on a national, inter-governmental or inter- 
national level and help to organize, encourage and co-ordinate 
research along specific lines. 
The rich resources of the sea will not be truly mastered 
until oceanography develops as a co-ordinated group of 
sciences as reliable as the other exact sciences. This is a 
vital need for the future with a ‘world population of 4,000 
million persons foreseen by the end of the present century— 
well within the lifetime of our own children. 
Gerald WENDT. 
2

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 68977: The Meteora; rock pinnacles 'hung in the air'

x : x 
vor RINRE. | 
go CERES SE   
    
  
  
- 
Closer to heaven 
than to earth 
I WP 1h i FR VEU ASC EY FJ 
r IAS - SA   
     
The vast rock piles of the Meteora tower above the vil- 
lage of Kastrani on the edge of the Thessaly plain (above). _ 
This stone forest of giant pinnacles was chosen by mediev- 
al ascetics as a place of retreat from the world. The 
monks who first climbed these rocks felt they were much 
closer to heaven than to earth, as did the Stylites, the 
famous ascetics of the East who spent their whole lives 
perched on the columns of ancient temples. On the 
Meteora, the monks built hermitages, churches and, 
later, great monasteries, some of which are still occupied 
today. Monastery of St. Stephen (right) stands perched 
on the cliff-edge and dominates the town of Kalabaka, 
which, eight centuries ago was called Staghi, a contraction 
of three Greek words meaning “home of the saints”. 
In the far distance glitter the snow-covered peaks of 
the Pindus mountains. Ancient engraving (opposite 
page) depicts religious buildings on the Meteora during 
most flourishing period of monastic life. (Meletzis photos.) 
\\ EY
 
fa
 
EL
 
EE
 
: 
i
k
 
- 
: JL AI
 
ww
! 
  

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco Courier. — Nr 5. — 1955 


### 68977: The Meteora; rock pinnacles 'hung in the air'

THE METEORA 
Rock pinnacles "hung in the air’ 
by Professor George Sotiriou 
Member, Athens Academy and Director, Byzantine Museum 
  
  
ments which form part of the world’s cultural heritage, Unesco helps to organize and 
support their work. In particular it has encouraged efforts to make cultural treasures 
easily accessible to visitors from other lands. The need for new roads along which visi- 
tors could easily travel to the ancient sites was emphasized by Unesco missions which studied 
the problems of restoring and enhancing the ancient monuments of Syria and Lebanon in 
1953. A recent achievement in this respect is now reported from Greece where a fine new 
road today leads to the Meteora, the fantastic rock formations on the edge of the plain of 
Thessaly. Below, Professor George Sotiriou describes the strange land of the Meteora and 
I many places where men are striving to preserve and restore the ancient sites and monu- 
N the north-west corner of the plain 
of "Thessaly, some eight hours 
journey by road, north of Athens, 
stands one of the strangest sights in 
the world: the Meteora, a group of 
gigantic black rocks rising up in the 
sky like vast pillars or massive ruins. 
The early inhabitants of the region 
gave these rocks the name of “meteora” 
(“hung in the air”) because they seem 
to be suspended in space, each separate 
from the others, at the entrance to a 
mountain-girt valley leading into the 
heart of the Pindus range. 
‘Some geologists maintain that in very 
ancient times Thessaly ‘was a lake and 
the Meteora were part of its rocky 
banks. Great earthquakes split these 
rocks apart, while on the eastern rim 
of the Thessalonian plain an enormous 
fault brought into being the lovely vale 
of Tempe and the two great mountains 
Olympus and Ossa. The waters of this 
lake formed the river Peneus which   
the medieval monasteries which crown their pinnacles. 
flows through Tempe into the gulf of 
Salonika. 
Nowadays it is easy to climb these 
rocks and visit the great monasteries 
built there centuries ago. Only a few 
years ago the ascent still had to be 
made in nets, which the monks hauled 
up on pulleys from above, as depicted in 
certain old prints. In earlier times, 
sectional wooden ladders were used, 
hooked into the rock, and naturally 
enough the ascent was not without 
danger. Today, however, visitors can 
rlimb up safely by way of spiral stair- 
cases hewn into the rock. A recently 
made road now leads almost to the foot 
of the rock stairs. 
It is quite understandable that me- 
diaeval ascetics should have chosen the 
Meteora as a place of retreat from the 
world. The monks who first clambered 
up these rocks no doubt 
felt that they were much (Continued 
closer to Heaven than to *page) 
earth, as did the Stylites,

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 68977: The Meteora; rock pinnacles 'hung in the air'

THE METEORA 
(Continued) 
Nowadays it is possible to reach the Meteora monasteries by climb- 
ing spiral staircases hewn into the rock. Eighteenth century engrav- 
ing (right) shows the hazardous means of ascent to the Varlaam monas- 
tery by sectional wooden ladders hooked into the smooth surface 
of the rocks. Materials and food were hauled up in baskets. Even 
a few years ago, visitors to some of the monasteries were still pulled 
up in nets which the monks raised by cords and pulleys. Below, 
the Varlaam monastery as visitors see it today. On opposite page, 
the Hermitage of St. Nicholas. What look like huge birds’ nests 
on the cliff face are monks’ cells, supported by slender wooden poles. 
Insets in text on these pages are a series of saints’ heads reproduced 
from the frescoes in the little monastery of Ipapanti. 
the famous ascetics of the East, who 
spent their lives perched on temple col- 
umns. A small basket attached to a 
length of rope, in which the pious 
would place morsels of food, was the 
hermit’s only link with the outer world. 
The first monk of the Meteora was 
known by the name of “Ho tou Stylou”, 
that is to say “he of 
the column”, because 
the cave ‘which was his 
hermitage lay beneath 
a rock shaped like a 
pillar. 
It is probable that 
ascetics and monks 
sought refuge in the 
caves of the Meteora at 
a very early period, but 
the first historical ref- 
erence to the mon- 
asteries of the Met- 
eora appears in an 
edict of the Byzantine 
Emperor, Manuel Comnenus, dated 1143, 
which speaks of the foundation of the 
Sketis at Staghi. This was the name of 
the little town, now called Kalabaka, 
which lies at the foot of the rocks. 
“Staghi” is derived from the contrac- 
tion of three Greek words “eis tous 
aghious”, meaning *home of the 
saints”, and it is clear that, there, the 
saints were the monks. 
Gradually several hermitages were 
founded; then, on the Doupiani rock a 
6 
  
 
  
  
Ee LT TT Tr fd ~ pr 
peti rxsie Oy “dal a “iy pbx Lon 
Mona cz create Seka , 
   
  
   
  
 
church was built. Every Sunday all 
the ascetics gathered there for the 
celebration of Mass and thus a sort of 
monastic community came into being. 
However, it was only during the 14th 
century that the great monasteries 
were founded, and from these emerged 
many eminent figures - 
who played an im- 
portant role in the or- 
ganization of monastic 
life on the Meteora. 
Mention should be 
made of the Cenobite 
Athanassios, who was 
honoured as a saint 
after his death, and 
King John Doukas Pa- 
leologus, ‘who became a 
monk under the name 
of “Joasaph”. Atha- 
nassios founded the 
monastery of the 
Transfiguration which is still the most 
important and is known as the “Me- 
teoron” or “Great Meteor”. In it are 
the tomb of Athanassios and the 
portrait of Joasaph. 
At the same period several other 
monasteries were founded: St. SJephen, 
Varlaam, Holy Trinity, the little mon- 
astery of the Ipapanti (Visitation), and 
that of Ayia Rosani. There are also 
several small monasteries in inacces- 
sible spots on the site of former 
hermitages. Some of these are now in 
ruins. 
Only five of these monasteries can 
now be visited: the Great Meteor, 
Varlaam, Holy Trinity, St. Stephen and 
Ayia Rosani. They are all built in the 
usual form of Eastern monasteries. 
The entrance consists of a large 
 
courtyard, in the middle of which 
stands the main church—the Katho- 
likon—with the chapels, the sacristy, 
the refectory and occasional guest- 
rooms. Surrounding the courtyard are 
the monks’ cells. 
A deep peace reigns. Several cen- 
turies seem to have dropped away, and 
yet the past is not dead. The monks 
with their mediaeval look complete the 
illusion. In silence they go to and fro 
 

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 68977: The Meteora; rock pinnacles 'hung in the air'

about the tasks assigned to them, 
faithful guardians of an age-old tra- 
dition. 
The monastery of St. Stephen is the 
best preserved of those that remain 
today. The view from here across the 
Tempe Valley to the Pindus mountains 
  
is magnificent, and many travellers 
make short stays at the monastery, 
before crossing the mountains which 
separate Thessaly from Epirus. 
Inside the Katholikon, another world 
is revealed to the visitor's astonished 
gaze—the world of Christ and the 
Saints as they appeared to the imagi- 
nation of those monks who, from the 
14th to the 19th century covered the 
inside walls of the church with frescoes 
of scenes from the Holy Writ. As parts 
of these frescoes fell into disrepair, they 
were restored by the monks, so as to 
preserve the unity of the whole. Pre- 
cise rules laid down in which part of 
thie church certain holy personages 
were to be depicted. Thus the central 
dome was reserved for Christ the Sav- 
iour, the “Pancrator”, who reigned over 
all. The Blessed Virgin 
is depicted in the altar 
apse, and the rest of 
the walls are almost 
entirely covered with 
scenes from the life of 
Christ and the Virgin. 
The ante-naves of 
the monastery chur- 
ches are full of frescoes 
depicting the lives of 
the saints—their mar- 
tyrdoms and the mir- 
acles they performed. 
Painted in vivid co- 
lours, with a realism 
that is moving in its simplicity, these 
frescoes serve as a continual reminder 
that the path of holiness is a hard one. 
The frescoes in the ante-nave of the 
Varlaam church are remarkable. They 
date from 1566 and are the work of the 
painter Frangos Katalanos. The mar- 
tyrdom of various saints is depicted 
with an extraordinarily life-like vigour. 
On the north wall, the priest Sisoes 
contemplates with horror the skeleton 
of Alexander the Great, lying at his 
feet. The inscription reads: *Sisoes, 
  
Unesco Courier, — Nr 5 — 1955 
renowned among ascetics, on sceing the 
exhumed body of that great and glo- 
rious King of the Greeks, Alexander, 
shudders at the thought of how glory 
decays with passing time; sadness 
comes over him and he laments: “Oh 
Death! Alas! who can escape thee?” 
On the east wall 
appears a vast fresco of 
the Last Judgment. 
Thus the monks al- 
‘ways had before their 
eyes three ideas: ine- 
vitable Death; Paradise 
awaiting the faithful; 
Hell, the fate of sin- 
ners. 
Hours can be spent 
in the contemplation of 
these memorials to the 
life'and work of many 
simple and devout 
Christians who have 
passed from this world with their 
hearts and minds entirely given up to 
an ideal which they steadily sought to 
preserve and also to hand on to future 
generations. 
Asceticism was the ideal of the monks 
- who made their homes on the hard 
rocks of the Meteora. 
From the heights, they contemplated 
the vanity of human life far below 
them in the valley, while the blue sky, 
filled with the chanting of Vespers, 
inspired them with mystic joy.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 68977: The Meteora; rock pinnacles 'hung in the air'

THE METEORA 
(Continued) 
  
Stories from the lives of the saints—their 
martyrdoms and the miracles they performed— 
are painted in some of the monastery churches 
with a realism that is moving in its simplicity, 
Among the most remarkable frescoes are those 
at Varlaam, from which the painting of 
St. George in military habit (above) is taken. 
They date from 1566 and are the work of the 2 : 
painter Frangos Katalanos. Right typical high- yr 
perched monastery of the Meteora.  ; ad 
= afl Bo SE bn i 
a8 
fo Rh EL : 
ek 
  
SIC TRANSIT 
GLORIA MUNDI 
— Sisoces, a famous 
priest of ancient ti- 
mes stands before the 
tomb of Alexander 
the Great and con- 
templates the mighty 
conqueror’s remains 
with sadness—detail 
from a fresco at Var- 
laam. Inscription 
reads: “Sisoes, renow- 
ned among the asce- 
tics, on seeing the 
exhumed body of the 
great and glorious 
King of the Greeks, 
Alexander, shudders 
at the thought of how 
glory decays with 
passing time; sadness 
overcomes him and 
he laments: “Oh 
death! Alas! who 
can escape thee?” 
  
 
  

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

New industry in Iraq 
Unesco Courier. — NT 5. — 1955 


### 68978: The Sugar bowl hidden in the date palms; new industry in Iraq

I'he sugar bowl hidden 
In the date palms 
by 
Georges Fradier 
CIENTIFIC experiments carried out under the United Na- 
tions Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance 
have paved the way for an important new industry in Iraq. 
Iraq has been importing 80,000 tons of sugar a year; while, 
for want of a market, thousands of tons of Iraqi dates were 
allowed to rot. Then a Swiss expert sent by Unesco led the 
way in experiments to manufacture sugar from dates. As a 
result, Iraq is on the way to saving $16,000,000 annually spent 
for imported sugar. 
As the result of the pioneer work of a Swiss scientist, sent 
to Iraq by Unesco, the country will soon begin the manu- 
facture of sugar from dates, and some $16,000,000 annually 
spent for imported sugar can be saved. 
  -Dr. Herman Mohler, head of the Unesco team 
 1 - 
Photos Roger Viollet 
For thousands of years, dates have grown in abundance in 
Irag and have constituted the principal food for the people 
of the region and for desert dwellers generally in Asia and 
Africa. Iraq, in fact possesses well over 150 varieties and pro- 
duces about 80 per cent of the world’s dates. The date-palms 
are cultivated as lovingly as hot-house flowers by farmers 
who spare neither their wealth nor their labour. Sixty-five 
million palms line the banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates 
and sprawl out into handsome forests around Basrah. 
Dates are the Bedouin’s staff of life but, in Iraq, their 
influence is not merely economic. Iraqi poets sing of the 
date the way other poets under other skies write verses to 
fields of wheat, to vineyards or to olive groves. Your true 
connoisseur can distinguish 169 varieties of dates, some of 
them bearing such charming names as ashgar, the blonde; 
asabiil arus, the fingers of the fiancee; saadah, happiness or 
ishagqi, the lovers. 
In a “good year”, Iraq may harvest as much as 400,000 tons 
of the fruit. This should be a source of considerable wealth. 
But in these “good years”, date prices fall so low that distri- 
butors cannot even afford the luxury of moving the fruit to 
market—in Basrah you can often buy a ton of dates for 4 
dinars ($11.20). : 
Despite progress in fruit preservation and in packing, which 
has helped date producers to gain a foothold in certain 
markets, they have been unable to solve what, at first sight, 
seems to be a permanent case of overproduction. 
This situation has been a constant source of worry to the 
directors of Iraq’s big fruit-producing company, the Date 
Association. Recently it also began to worry (Continued 
on next 
of scientists sent to Baghdad in 1951 to help page)

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 68978: The Sugar bowl hidden in the date palms; new industry in Iraq

The sugar bowl hidden Ek 
in the date palms 
(Continued) 
SS       
  
    
Anyone who had visited Baghdad thirty years ago would have 
some difficulty in recognizing it from a present-day description. 
“A university at Baghdad ?” he might exclaim, “An engineering 
school ? Physics laboratories? Why, | remember Baghdad—it 
was an unhealthy town and not a very safe one.” A visit today 
would change his ideas. Within a few years, a modern city 
with spacious avenues has replaced the swamps and the empty 
lots he knew. Iraq is no longer an old land with three-quarters 
of its territory lying wasté, but a new country—and a rich one. 
The efforts of the Government, aided by the U.N. Technical ° 
Assistance Programme, have helped to give Iraq many new 
looks. One of these is the sight of students working in the 
physics laboratory of the Baghdad College of Science, under 
Professor Hermann Mohler (above). Professor Mohler, a 
Swiss expert sent by Unesco, initiated experiments to manu- 
facture sugar from dates pointing way for a new Iraqi industry. 
Below, trunk of a date palm. (Photos Unesco and Viollet)          
establish courses in natural science and to initiate research 
on a university level at the school which is emerging as the 
University of Baghdad. 
Dr. Mohler learned that Iraq on the one hand was letting 
thousands of tons of dates rot for want of a market and, on 
the other hand, was importing more than 80,000 tons of sugar 
a year, at a price ranging from $196 to $244 a ton. He knew 
that the sugar content of the date is 81 per cent, although 
it is true that this sugar is not the pure saccharose extracted 
from the sugar cane or the sugar beet, but a compound of 
glucose and fructose. Date syrup might be extremely nu- 
tritious but it seemed useless for any practical purposes, for 
example in the manufacture of sweets, both from the stand- 
point of taste and the dark brown colour. 
a) d \ 
“ i 
a A [i | 
’ ee p 
. NINE 
i _ ‘ ! Be OA 
"nv AA A 
AR} 
’ Ty ' \ 
Still, a sugar content of 81 per cent—no matter what kind 
of sugar it was, looked impressive. Dr. Mohler was more 
impressed than a layman would have been for, as former 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 68978: The Sugar bowl hidden in the date palms; new industry in Iraq

  
chief of Zurich’s municipal laboratory, he was well aware of 
Swiss research during the Second World War on the produc- 
tion of fruit sugar. A few experiments in the laboratory of 
the school proved to his satisfaction that dates could be used 
on an economically-sound basis to produce a white sugar 
which no palate could distinguish from ordinary sugar. 
This ‘was heartening, but it wasn’t enough. More conclu- 
sive experiments were required on an industrial scale. 
Dr. Mohler knew that the refining equipment he needed to 
carry them out existed in Switzerland. At his suggestion the , 
Date Association shipped to Zurich three tons of fruit—and 
a few ‘weeks later, Swiss laboratories sent back one ton of 
clear white sugar. 
This new product was immediately distributed in Baghdad 
to manufacturers of sweets and to pastry shops. Its tests 
turned out to be a small-scale triumph: a few ‘weeks later, 
an official reception was held in the capital and its guests 
/ 
Unesco Courier. — NF 5. — 1955 
Sixty-five million 
date palms 
Palm groves are a common sight 
in many parts of the Middle East, 
but they are exceptionally profuse 
in Iraq. Here, 65 million palms 
line the banks of the Tigris and 
the Euphrates in thin ranks, sprawl- 
ing out in some places into hand- 
some forests. Iraq has a rich 
variety of dates—nearly 170 kinds. 
(Photos Unesco and Viollet) 
were served cakes and sweets, all made out of “national 
sugar”, 
Since then, a company has been founded by the Date 
Association, the Agricultural Bank and the Iraqi Agricultural 
Fund to put the dates-to-sugar process on a business basis. 
Its first factory, now under construction, will be equipped to 
produce 9,000 tons of sugar a year. Dr. Mohler believes this 
factory will also be able to produce an inexpensive syrup 
which will provide emergency food in a period of famine. As 
for the by-products of the factory, the company’s directors 
have already announced that they will be used for animal 
feed. 
For the first time in history, it appears, Iraq will obtain the 
full benefit of its most precious agricultural resource. As for 
the technical assistance mission, it will have demonstrated 
once again the value of scientific research to economic pro- 
gress.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 68980: Science and the sea

  
KING OF OCEAN GAME is the tunny, (also called the “tuna”) unique among the important food fishes of the world because it is a truly oceanic fish, 
living, spawning and dying on the high seas. Scientists know little about tunny and their migratory habits, but what they do know suggests that here is 
a group which may comprise ultimately the most important food fishery in the world, for they are distributed in commercially important quantities over 
a greater area of the oceans than any other group of food fishes. Above, French tunny fishermen at work in the Bay of Biscay. Below, A giant tunny 
being hauled aboard by Nova Scotia fishermen. Tunny fishing is a new, thriving industry in Eastern Canada. (Photos Black Star-Rapho and Acme) 
  
12

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 68980: Science and the sea

AND THE SEA 
The mystery of the sea: 
“To me the sea is a continual miracle 
—the fishes that swim—ithe rocks— the 
motion of the waves—the ships with 
men in them. What stranger miracles 
are there?” 
The challenge of the sea: 
“Faithful to no race after the manner 
of the kindly earth, receiving no 
impress from valour and toil and self- 
sacrifice, recognizing no finality of 
dominion, the sea has never adopted 
the cause of its masters like the land.” 
The men of the sea: 
“The fishers shall mourn, and all 
they that cast angle into the brooks 
shall lament, and they that spread nets 
upon the waters shall languish.” 
HESE words—by Walt Whitman, 
Joseph Conrad, and the prophet 
Isaiah—eXxpress the three aspects 
of man’s relationship with the sea that 
surrounds him; our relative ignorance 
of its character and resources; our 
difficulties in trying to exploit it for our 
benefit; and the penalties 'we may have 
to pay if we exploit it recklessly, 
without thought or understanding. 
These are the matters which concern- 
ed a recent international conference 
called by the United Nations. 
All over the world and right through 
the year the conference table is in 
acticn. Any problem which crosses an 
international border may come to it. 
These issues and the decisions which 
are made affect and shape our lives. 
Sometimes that may sound like a 
pretty extravagant claim—even though 
it’s perfectly true in every case if we 
bother to trace the line from the 
conference table to our own front door. 
On this occasion, however, there’s no 
difficulty. This recent meeting was 
held in Rome at the headquarters of 
the United Nations Food and Agri- 
culture Organization (FAO). 
Its subject is stated in rather formi- 
dable words: “An International Tech- 
nical Conference on the Conservation 
of the Living Resources of the Sea.” In 
other words, a number of experts from 
different countries got together to try 
and make sure that we can continue to 
get that fine fresh flounder for dinner 
any time we feel like it. Which would 
suggest that perhaps the fish in the sea 
aren’t as plentiful as we imagine—or 
at least that we're consuming them at 
such a rate that a dangerous shortage 
lies ahead. 
In a sense that’s the way it is. For 
instance a British fisherman recently 
told a U.N. reporter : “I’ve been work- 
ing on a British trawler in the North 
Sea ever since I was a boy. I can re- 
member, just after the first world war, 
we used to take an average of over 30 
cwt of fish every day. These days we 
think we're doing well if we take in an 
average of 13 cwt. And that, mind you, 
despite the fact that our fishing me- 
thods are better today.” 
Despite the fact? It is, perhaps, 
more accurate to say because of the 
fact. Dr. D.B. Finn, Director of the 
Fisheries Division at FAO, describes 
some recent developments in fishing 
technique and relates them to the 
matter of marine resources: 
“Throughout early literature there 
are many references to the inexhaust- 
ible bounty of the sea,” he says. “And 
indeed this opinion was shared by some 
of the early naturalists. Nowadays 
things are different. We can traverse 
in a few days stretches of ocean that 
formerly took us months and this 
makes distant fishing grounds much 
more accessible. We have’ taken sub- 
marine-detecting devices and turned 
them into fish-finding apparatus. 
There is hardly a modern fishing vessel 
afloat that does not have an echo- 
sounding device for locating fish. We 
now have the floating trawl, the Danish 
seine, and immense nets that a few 
years ago would have been impossible 
to handle and experiments are under 
way with an electrical method of fish- 
 
SEAFOOD ESSAY on dietary value of fish is this 
.Chilian schoolgirl's contribution to Government- 
FAO eat-more-fish campaign. (U.N, photo). 
ing which would even eliminate a hook 
or a net. - ’ 
“All this has led to an increase in 
production. The most recent, and 
more accurate, estimates of FAO in- 
dicate that it was about 27 million 
metric tons in 1953. However, while it 
is estimated that the sea could, overall, 
produce more than it does there are 
nevertheless places in it where the re- 
turn of fish caught no longer pays for 
the effort put into fishing. And so it 
is brought home that the resources of 
the sea are not inexhaustible in the 
economic sense. While it might be im- 
possible for man by his fishing effort 
ever to exterminate fish he can, by 
over-fishing, so reduce the take that it 
no longer pays.” 
So what should be our approach to 
the problem? Obviously were not 
going to abandon our very effective 
modern techniques and return to the 
idyllic methods of Isaac Walton who, 
despite the title of his famous book, 
was really a very incomplete angler. 
Millions of people in the world need 
more protein in their diet and they 
 
Unesco Courier, — Nr 5, — 1955 
HEAVY LADEN with a record catch of 
sprats, a fishing boat ties up alongside the jetty 
at Concarneau, Britanny. (Keystone photo.) 
could get it from fish if we could 
assure a continuing, cheap, and abund- 
ant supply. 
One man who knows from spectacul- 
ar personal experience how valuable 
the sea is as a source of food is Dr. 
Alain Bombard of France. In 1952, 
Bombard lived for weeks off raw flsh, 
the tiny living organisms called plank- 
ton, and even the salt water itself, 
when he sailed in his open rubber raft 
“The Heretic” all the way from Monaco 
in the Mediterranean to Barbados in 
the West Indies. 
Speaking on a United Nations radio 
programme a short time ago, Bombard 
said: “The problem for me was—can 
you survive at sea with only the pro- 
ducts of the sea. And the results prove 
that the sea can give you to drink and 
to eat, and also a supply of vitamins.” 
Dr. Bombard’s epic voyage made him 
an expert layman as it were, on the 
subject of fishing and marine resources, 
and from what he says it may be ne- 
cessary to change the present pattern 
of fishing, under which we still have to 
hunt for fish. We may have to adopt 
a pattern under which fish are deliber- 
ately and scientifically cultivated. 
Bombard said: “At present fishing is 
empirical—-but now we must go about 
 
SEA HARYEST, glistening and wriggling, 
is hauled aboard a deep sea trawler. Captain 
opens the mouth of the big net. (USIS photo.) 
i3

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 68980: Science and the sea

SCIENCE AND THE SEA 
(Continued) 
it scientifically. Fishermen are just 
like prehistoric men—and animals— 
merely searching. We must cultivate 
fish just as we breed cows, horses and 
ducks. But the big difficulty is to 
change the habits of men because fish 
culture will kill the fisherman. You 
must explain to him ‘you must be now 
no more a fisherman like a hunter in 
prehistorical time but also a cultivator 
—a farmer,’ That's difficult—the most 
difficult, I think. The scientists un- 
derstand well but the fisherman... my 
goodness!” 
But even if large-scale fish cultiva- 
tion is accepted as an ultimate objective 
a lot of research will be necessary be- 
fore it can become a practical un- 
dertaking. And the same applies even 
to the much more likely matter of 
conserving the naturally developed 
stocks of fish in the sea. At present we 
simply lack sufficient knowledge of the 
sea and its resources. 
Tracking the tunny 
tunately there is far too little 
knowledge among the fishery 
biologists and scientists to make the 
answer easy or in some cases even 
possible. Great strides are being taken 
in the development of this knowledge 
by some countries. In others relatively 
little attention is being paid to it. But 
the fact that a specific fisheries refer- 
ence was given to FAO by its member 
nations—the first time in history that a 
world-wide body has received such a 
reference—is a sign that more and 
more attention is being paid to the 
subject.” 
But what are some of the specific 
lines of research that must be followed? 
The migration habits of fish is one. We 
know a lot about the migrations of 
some species but in the case of the 
D° Finn puts it like this: “Unfor- 
tunny (or “tuna”), for instance, which - 
is perhaps the richest sea food of all, 
the known facts are few, 
One of the technical papers present- 
ed by Unesco at the Rome conference 
was by the British hydrographer John 
B. Tait. “The temperature of the sea,” 
Dr. Tait says, “exerts marked and often 
decisive influence on all fishes through- 
out their lives. If undoubtedly go- 
verns spawning and it has an effect on 
the development and growth of larval 
and baby fishes. Salinity—the salt- 
content of the sea—is another influence. 
It can affect not only the fish them- 
selves but the various marine organisms 
on which they feed. 
TV in the depths 
-+ HEN there are the currents of the 
1 sea both horizontal and vertical. 
They control the distribution of 
temperature and other physical pro- 
perties of the sea on which all marine 
life depends. They control the dis- 
persal of fish eggs and of the youngest 
fishes before they are able to swim 
under their own power. And there is 
the bottom of the sea itself— its strue- 
ture and topography. Different species 
of fish favour mud bottoms, sandy 
bottoms, and gravel bottoms. Because 
14 
of the technical difficulties involved in 
observing fish near the bottom we 
have, in the past, been severely han- 
dicapped. But now, with the deve- 
lopment of under-water photography 
and television, there is promise of great 
progress in this aspect of marine in- 
vestigation.” 
Dr. Finn summarizes these—and all 
the other considerations in this subject 
—like this : “All these problems have 
their technical and scientific side. It is 
a matter first of trying to measure the 
continuous forces which reduce a popul- 
ation of fish and then to contrast these 
with the other continuous forces that 
build up a population of fish.” 
One technical conference, of course, 
is not going to find the answers to all 
the problems. But there have already 
been several conferences—recently in- 
ternational organizations like the Pa- 
cific Science Congress and the Indo- 
Pacific Fisheries Council have called 
attention to the research that is still 
needed, and especially to studies that 
will increase the world’s food supply— 
and there will be many more. And 
between conferences—all the time— 
practical research will continue to be 
done by individual scientists and 
scientific organizations in many lands. 
To help in this work the Natural 
Sciences Department of Unesco has 
now organized an Advisory Committee 
on Marine Sciences and Mr. J.A. Mus- 
sard, head of Unesco’s Division of 
Scientific Research, has described its 
functions as follows: “One aim is to 
establish a bridge between the different 
disciplines involved in oceanographic 
research. The phenomena of the oceans 
are of a physical character, also of a 
chemical character, and there are 
other disciplines like meteorology which 
are also involved. And we think that 
 
 
FRENCH FISHERMEN cleaning a sea bass. 
These fish can grow to more than six feet in 
length. Their livers are a rich source of 
vitamins. (Office des Péches Maritimes photo.) 
some interesting results could be 
achieved if the research which is being 
carried through separately in these va- 
rious disciplines is co-ordinated. 
“The second aim is fo mobilize 
science to find through scientific means 
the solution of practical problems 
which are being faced by the fisheries. 
And the third aim of this programme 
is to establish also a bridge between the 
under-developed countries, which rely 
very much on fisheries, but do not have 
the scientific equipment to develop this 
kind of research, and institutions in the 
scientifically advanced countries which 
could aid these underdeveloped lands.” 
ICELAND 1S SURROUNDED by some of the richest fishing grounds in the world. Photograph 
shows salted cod, which has been cut and gutted aboard trawlers, drying in sun. (USIS photo)

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 68980: Science and the sea

      
     
  
   gy 
“hi 
A LARGE BARRACUDA caught on lines trail- 
ed by a cargo and passenger-carrying schooner 
plying among the Grenadine Islands in the Carib- 
bean Sea. (Central Office of Information photo) 
The Advisory Committee on Marine 
Sciences, which held a preparatory 
meeting in Rome early in May, will co- 
ordinate a co-operative, long term in- 
ternational research programme now 
being prepared under Unesco’s auspices. 
This programme will include activities 
such as the mapping of the ocean 
bottom, study of the soils and sedi- 
ments there, analysis of the ocean 
depths and waters in many areas, 
knowledge of the temperature varia- - 
tions and ocean currents, special cha- 
racteristics of the shallow waters in 
bays and near rivers, the changes with 
the seasons and with the weather. 
Fm 
 
   
Lk dg ey 
Unesco Courier, — Nr 5, — 1955 
   ¥) 
  
 
LOWERING A GIANT RAY into an aquarium tank. These immense fish can weigh as much as 
1,500 Ibs. and have a span of up to 10 feet or more. Expert fishermen are employed to catch them 
for aquariums, Contrary to general belief, the safest place to grab a sting ray is by the tail tip—the 
stinger is near the root of the tail. If its tail.is held the ray cannot use its stinger. 
Also to be studied are the conditions 
governing plant growth, the types of 
animal life at various locations, depths 
and temperatures, the diseases and pa- 
rasites of plant and animal life, and 
especially the methods for increasing 
the resources of edible fish in accessible 
areas and those nearest the great cen- 
tres of population. 
Thus, when the Advisory Committee 
meets for the first time in Tokyo next 
October, its members are expected to 
include specialists in physical and che- 
mical oceanography, marine biology, 
geology, submarine topography and 
maritime meteorology as well as in the 
THE PORPOISE is a friendly creature. Here at an oceanarium on the southern Californian coast 
one of them is fed by hand. It appears to need no lessons in * showmanship” (Black Star photo) 
(USIS photo) 
different kinds of oceans: arctic, ant- 
arctic, tropical and temperate seas, etc. 
There is also a legal aspect of marine 
conservation. In fact, the conference 
on the conservation of marine resources 
held in Rome stemmed from the need of 
tho United Nations International Law 
Commission for technical information 
to help it in its work of codifying the 
law of the high seas and of territorial 
waters. Fishing rights have always 
been a rather complicated legal matter 
and history records numerous disputes 
between countries over where and 
where not their respective fishing fleets 
may cast their nets. 
Close to anarchy 
NE of the Law Commission’s pro- 
posals is that an International 
Fisheries authority should be es- 
tablished within the framework of the 
United Nations. In its report to the 
last General Assembly of the UN the 
Commission said: “The task of this 
proposed authority would be to set up, 
at the request of any interested state, 
systems regulating fisheries in any. 
given area of the high seas for the 
purpose of protecting the fishing 
resources of that area against waste 
or extermination, There is an urgent 
necessity for international legislation 
on the conservation issue. This is 
significant of the present state of opi- 
nion, and of the widely felt need for 
the removal of what is considered by 
many to be a condition approaching 
anarchy. 
So the prospects are hopeful—both 
for the survival of fish in the sea and 
for all of us who like to have some on 
our plate now and again. As Dr. D.B. 
Finn has summed up the situation: “It 
Is quite within man’s technical ability 
to arrive at a state where he has suffi- 
cient knowledge to treat the sea as he 
does his farm land. Then, instead of 
hunting the wild stocks of the sea in a 
random fashion, he will be able to ma- 
nage his take of the crop so that he 
may achieve its full abundance.” 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 68983: Strange facts about Neptune's realm

STRANGE FACTS ABOUT 
NEPTUNE'S REALM 
VERYONE knows that fish breathe 
E through their gills but not so 
many people know that there are fish 
which have both gills and lungs and 
can live either in water or on land 
according to circumstance. These fish 
are known as dipnoi and it may be 
that the transition from aquatic to 
terrestrial existence was first made by 
animals of this type. 
Walking on the sea 
N the Sargasso Sea in 
the North Atlantic 
ocean a sea slug spends much 
of its time crawling under 
the waves, much as flies 
walk on the ceiling. The body 
of the slug clings to the sea’s 
surface by capillary action. 
It is admirably camouflaged 
as the upper part of the body 
which is turned to the sky is 
blue and, therefore, birds 
cannot distinguish it. The 
underside is white and is 
thus unseen by fish. Were it 
not for this protective co- 
louring it would not survive, 
Tree-climbing fish 
HE anabas, or climb- 
T ing perch, lives in 
the swamps of South Asia 
(India, Malaya and Indo- 
china). This strange fish 
can crawl over dry land for 
several hours and can climb 
trees with the help of its fins. 
- 
- 
n
s
 
- 
— 
n 
a 
’ 
—
—
—
 
—
 
“N
 
» 
T
I
 
—
 
» 
—
—
p
 
. 
ots
 
—
—
—
 
; 
1 
3 
R
N
 
oe 
om
 
—
—
 
e
d
 
q 
>
 
p
n
 
B
A
 
a 
- 
« 
a
 
P
g
 
> 
/ 
$ 
. 
a 
. 
; 
‘ 
+ 
a
 
E
E
 
: 
= 
; 
ar 
Nh
 
. 
# 
: 
a
 
a: 
er
 
“v
e 
S
T
 
Y
e
 
- 
. 
»
 
Nd
 
- 
- 
- 
-~
 
-
_
 
: 
a
 
>
 
R 
“
=
 
= 
’ 
=
 
or
 
- 
£5
 
; 
g
 
» 
Y
i
 
. 
L
T
 
4 
or 
: 
3 
: 
: 
’ 
-
—
r
 
- 
_
 
"
 
- 
- 
- 
r 
| 
fe
 
C
p
 
r
n
 
x
 
: 
. 
yy
, 
3 
x
 
a
5
 
B
A
 
Cure for malaria 
wo types of fish, cal- 
led the guppy and 
the gambusia, feed mainly 
on mosquito larvae which 
they find on the surface of 
the water. As they devour 
enormous quantities of larvae 
they have been acclimatised 
in many parts of the world 
to help in clearing mosquito 
infected areas. 
Longevity champions 
HE age of a scaly fish can be 
T determined by examination of 
its scales, in much the same way as 
the age of a tree is calculated by the 
number of concentric rings in a sec- 
tion. Contrary to popular opinion it 
seems that no fish reaches the age of 
100. Carp may live from 25 up to a 
maximum of 50 years and two sheat- 
fish were known to have lived for more 
than 50 years in England. The pike is 
also a long-lived fish. On the other 
side the stickleback, a European river 
fish, lives for less than two years. 
Wanted—a Jonah 
HIs strange piece of research 
was conducted with a view to 
discovering a new method of preserving 
whale meat. A British physiologist 
decided that the only sure way was to 
swim up to a whale which was prepar- 
ing to surface for the last time and 
plant a metal recording thermometer in 
its stomach. This odd task was 
16 
- | 
Fa
y 
  
» Li | F
d
 
  
successfully accomplished and it was 
found that when sea water was allowed 
to enter the body of a whale the meat 
was better preserved and the flavour 
improved. The method was later 
adopted by whaling crews. 
Duels in the deep 
HEN the sperm whale, which 
WwW may weigh anything up to 70 
tons, hunts the giant squid a conflict 
develops which, for size, is unmatched 
   
 
i py ’ By $ = 
an —— 4 *IRRET of x : ET Air A EE A TE EE ’ 
by Francois Le Lionnais 
in the ‘world. The squid is sometimes 
over 30 feet in length and its tentacles 
measure another 20 feet. It usually 
lives 1,500 feet below the surface of the 
ocean and the sperm whale plunges to 
this depth to hunt and fight it. No 
man has ever witnessed the undersea 
duel between these two monsters, but 
when sperm whales are caught, the 
scars of wounds inflicted by the squid’s 
suckers are often seen on their backs 
and fragments of squid are found in 
the whale’s stomach. 
A male gives birth 
HE sea horse is a curious little 
fish which has a head like a 
horse and a body resembling a cater- 
pillar. It belongs to one of the few 
species of living creatures '™ which 
pregnancy is the function of the male 
and not of the female. At the moment 
of impregnation the female lays her 
eggs in a pocket situated in the 
stomach of the male. The gestation 
period is two months and to judge by 
the contortions which accompany it the 
confinement of the male sea horse is 
apparently as painful as for any other 
female. 
Fertility record 
He fertility of certain fish is 
T phenomenal but there can be 
no question that the record holder is 
the turbot which can lay up to 12 mil- 
lion eggs at one time. Obviously the 
majority of this offspring cannot hope 
to find food and are thus 
hd condemned to disappear be- 
fore they can reproduce 
themselves. However, if the 
world turbot population were 
a hundred times greater than 
it is there would be an ap- 
preciable addition to the hu- 
man food supply. 
Sexual habits 
IFFERENCES between 
the sexes are fre- 
quently more striking in fish 
than they are in mammals. 
For example the male cera- 
tiae can only exist by at- 
taching himself to the sides 
or the head of the female. 
Eventually the male becomes 
firmly fastened to the female 
and cannot be removed 
without tearing the tissue. 
Usually each female carries 
two or three males. A simi- 
lar phenomenon is found 
with the deep sea fish, the 
photorynus spiniceps, where 
the male spends his entire 
life attached to the female 
like a small horn on the 
forehead. 
Sexual differences are even 
sharper in the lower animal 
species such as the bonellia, 
a worm which is found off 
the European coasts. The 
female may attain, when 
extended, a length of over 
six feet. For a long time in- 
vestigators were unable to 
discover any males of the 
species, but about the middle 
of the nineteenth century it 
was found that the male, 
which only measured from 1/25 to 
1/12 of an inch in length entered the 
mouth of the female, made his way 
towards the middle of her body and 
lived thereafter as a parasite inside 
his mate. 
Seas and oceans : a few figures 
HE seas and oceans occupy 
T approximately 72 % of the 
surface of the globe. In terms of 
statistics the overall area is about 
200,000,000 square miles of which the 
land mass occupies some 56,000,000 
square miles (including rivers and fresh 
water lakes) and the seas and oceans 
take up the remainder. The average 
depth of the seas and oceans of the 
world is something like 12,000 feet, but 
this ean only be an approximate 
figure as large ocean areas in the Arctic 
which lie under the ice have not been 
systematically explored in depth. 
Although only 2 per cent of the land 
(Continued on page 30)

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Unesco Courier, — Nf 5, — 1955 
Ra ! Li y) "41 
war 
    
» 
Hazardous hand harpooning from a 
four-oared boat is depicted (left) 
in this early nineteenth century 
French print. Above the modern 
method: one man and a harpoon 
gun. To get into position for firing 
the catcher ship makes use of a 
device working on the asdic prin- 
ciple which gives the whale gunner 
a continuous account of the unseen 
whale's movements. Below, a spot- 
ting seaplane is loaded on a giant 
factory ship. More recently use 
has been made of helicopters—more 
effective for sighting and easier to 
stow away (Unilever's magazine 
“Progress”, Keystone and Norwegian 
Foreign Information Office photos) 
 

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco Courier. — NT 5. — 1955 
pth td Tr —_ pe RT I I —_., TR, Sd RL POR TAA RETRY TN kT AEE LAT Re 3 STN TN EP Fr i y 


### 68984: Hunting the whale

THE WHALE 
by David Gunston ics 
  
HALES have been hunted for 
\X/ something like ten centuries 
but only within living memory 
has there been a scientifically or- 
ganized whaling industry. The whale 
has been aptly described as a 
mammal with an unfortunate eco- 
nomic background. The larger spe- 
cies are extremely valuable, and as 
they are free and wild they are not 
subject to any form of international 
control. Thus they became the goal of 
quick profit seekers. Only recently was 
effective protection introduced, but not 
before unbridled exploitation had led to 
serious depletion of world whale stocks. 
The history of the whale since about 
1600 has been a tragic story and species 
after species have been completely 
wiped out. First the whalers caught 
their quarry from the shore, then off- 
shore, and finally throughout the 
oceans of the world, often thousands of 
miles from their home base. Only a 
hundred years ago whales were being 
caught off the Scottish coast and in the 
North Atlantic. Hull on the east coast 
of England was once a busy whaling 
port. But gradually whales diminished 
in the off-shore waters and towards the 
end of the nineteenth century it looked 
as if this type of whaling was coming 
to an end after a brief heyday. 
New lease of life 
N 1904 the Norwegian whaling 
captain, Abraham Larsen, gave the 
industry a new lease of life, and in 
consequence the hunted whales a much 
smaller chance of survival. He opened 
up new whaling grounds in the icy 
waters bordering on the South Polar 
land mass. By the use of modern ships 
and new techniques he hoped to have 
an endless supply of whales for the 
taking, but the blue and fin whales 
which he found were only the remnants 
of a one time enormous world whale 
population. 
Antarctic whaling was largely pio- 
neered by the Norwegians but other 
nations soon joined the whale hunt. 
However, in 1912 when the world’s whal- 
ing fleet had 141 factory ships, no fewer 
than 37 sailed under the Norwegian 
flag. 
In the years prior to the first world 
war, and in the years following the 
war, whale hunting in the Antarctic 
was unrestricted and an international 
free-for-all prevailed. The economic 
crisis of 1930-31 had its effect on the 
whaling industry as the whaling fleet's 
record catch coincided with falling 
prices and heavy losses were incurred. 
More serious than this, however, were 
the grave inroads made on world 
stocks by unrestricted whale hunting. 
Cosmetics and hormones 
T the commencement of the second 
world war in 1939 the world whale 
population reached its lowest ebb. 
Even so, the remaining whale popula- 
tion is still a valuable economic res- 
ource and the industry which turns 
whales into food and raw materials 
can ill be spared. This knowledge has 
not, nevertheless, prevented the hunt- 
ing and Killing of all species of oil- 
bearing whales with the result that 
they have been driven, if not to the 
verge of extinction, then at least to a 
dangerous economic level. Only three 
or four species now survive in any 
numbers. 
The main targets today among the 
remaining species are the enormous 
blue whale—equal in weight to 17 ele- 
phants and the largest animal the 
world has ever known—the slightly 
smaller fin whales and an occasional 
sperm whale, Although oil remains the 
principal object of whaling there has 
been a great increase in the number of 
by-products and these account to a 
large extent for the mammoth size of a 
modern floating factory which costs in 
round figures about three million 
pounds sterling (approximately nine 
million dollars). 
In the world to-day there is an 
urgent need for fats, especially edible 
ones, and this situation is likely to re- 
main for a long time to come. Prior to 
the 1939-1945 war whales provided 
about 3 % of the world’s edible oil pro- 
duction. Though this figure has now 
risen to about 10 % it is still only a 
marginal source of supply and is liable 
to be superseded in the future by vege- 
table oils, and possibly by synthetic 
products. 
Whale oil is at present used in mak- 
ing margarine, cooking fat, cosmetics, 
lubricating oils, soap and many other 
products. At a price of around ninety 
pounds sterling (approximately 270 
dollars) a ton it is assured of a ready 
market. Whales also provide valuable 
by-products such as hormones, insulin, 
meat and bone meals, fertilisers, poultry 
and stock feed, vitamin extracts and 
whalebone for brush making, 
In recent. -years there has been a 
(Continued on page 20) 
  
 
STRANDED on a beach in Long Island (USA) a whalebone whale reveals his enormous mouth. Whalebone, or baleen whales, are named 
for the flexible baleen or series of thin plates to scoop up food which hang in parallel rows on either side of the mouth (Keystone photo) 
CAPTURED WHALE carrying a marker harpoon with the house 
flag of the ship and two small oil lamps, (Keystone photo) 
                
      
(Black Star Photos) IT ONLY TAKES ONE HOUR TO DISPOSE OF A GIANT BLUE FACTORY SHIP CREW IN THE ANTARCTIC WORKING ON WHALE CARCASS 
V0 PE sh Tl EB Wo LT i RI Lt ed EE

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 68984: Hunting the whale

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 68984: Hunting the whale

  
HUNTING THE 
WHALE (Cont’d)     
growing demand for whale meat. Pre- 
viously hundreds of thousands of tons 
of meat, after the oil had been extract- 
ed, were thrown back into the sea as 
useless. In fact whale meat has the 
highest protein content (85 %) of any 
edible meat and provides a staple food 
for the whalers themselves and other 
peoples such as the Eskimos and the 
Japanese. Attempts were made to po- 
pularize whale meat on the British 
market but these did not meet with 
much success and in common with 
another fish, the snoek, whale steak be- 
came rather a music hall joke. Recent 
research has improved methods of 
preserving and processing whale meat 
and it may yet prove to be of import- 
ance in the industry. 
To gain a good idea of the present 
status of the whale fishing industry it 
is necessary to trace some of its recent 
history. With the opening-up of new 
fishing grounds in the Antarctic, the 
increasing scope for development and 
the perfection of the open sea whaling 
technique, the industry was a highly 
profitable one until about 1930. The 
old-fashioned methods of hunting from 
shore bases in South Georgia and the 
Falkland Islands were dropped and the 
factory ship, which processed whales 
A RUSSIAN 
whale catcher 
bringing her haul 
of whales back tw 
the factory ship. 
This Russian whal- 
ing fleet, during 
one Antarctic 
season caught a 
total of no fewer 
than 3,092 whales. 
(Keystone photo). 
20 
 
Vanishing 
far from land, and acted as a parent 
vessel for small tuglike catchers, came 
into its own. South Africa became the 
jumping-off point for. the ‘whaling 
fleets, and today tankers from South 
Africa feed the fleets thus enabling 
them to stay at sea for several months. 
But the ocean could not be expected 
to go on yielding liquid gold for ever. 
Too many countries ‘were sending 
whaling fleets to the Antarctic and the 
mad scramble for returns which ensued 
soon had its effects. Attempts were 
made by Norway and Britain to keep the 
total annual catch within reasonable 
limits, but these ‘were not successful. 
Further new whaling fleets appeared in 
the fishing grounds with the result 
that more and more ships were catch- 
ing fewer and fewer whales. 
In the 1930-31 |season some 40,000 
whales were killed for an oil yield of 
564,000 tons. By the 1938-39 season the 
size of the whaling fleet had more than 
doubled but the yield was only 13 % 
higher : 46,000 whales were killed for a 
return of only about 550,000 tons of oil. 
Following the outbreak of war in 1939 
the whales ‘were left to themselves. But 
nature ‘was not to be hurried, and the 
long ravaging which had taken place 
since 1904 had by no means been made 
Quarry 
up when the whalers returned in 1945 
to resume their work. As most of the 
British and Norwegian factory ships 
had been sunk during the war it was not 
until the 1947-48 season that a fully- 
equipped whaling fleet once again set 
out from Europe. Weather conditions 
were good during that season and 
31,000 whales ‘were taken for a yield of 
302,000 tons of oil. Since that time 
catches have been high and oil produc- 
tion good. 
In efforts to restrict the annual 
slaughter of ‘whales International Con- 
ventions designed to fix a maximum 
annual target were signed in 1944 and 
1946 by those countries interested in the 
whaling industry. These conventions 
imposed a total limit of 16,000 “blue 
whale units” for the entire Antarctic 
whaling fleet in one season. The blue 
whale is used internationally as the 
standard measurement of whale 
catches. One “blue whale unit” is 
equivalent to one blue whale, two fin 
whales, two and a half humpback 
whales or six sei whales. 
Industry’s last chance 
HE maximum catch figure is con- 
trolled on the whaling grounds by 
means of a floating headquarters. 
Here the day-by-day catches are to- 
talled and announcements are given 
regarding the closing of the season 
when reports indicate that the limit of 
16,000 is in sight. Despite this inter- 
national whaling agreement there are 
many people who believe that the 
maximum catch is still far too high to 
allow for the future safety of the 
whales. 
The great cost of building and 
equipping a whaling fleet today has 
tended to limit the number of new 
countries sending whaling ships into 
the Antarctic. At present Japan, Nor- 
way, the Netherlands, South Africa, the 
U.K. and the USSR send independent 
fleets to the far south for four or five 
months of the year. An International 
Whaling Commission has been es- 
tablished and agreement has been 
reached on many technical points. 
All measures of international control 
are of the utmost value and the guid- 
ing principle of such control must be 
to restrict the annual catch to the ap- 
proximate surplus of nature. This is 
not, of course, easy to judge and in the 
absence of precise knowledge safety 
would appear to be the best policy. 
The potential value of the world 
whale population is now universally re- 
cognized ; all that remains is a realiza- 
tion of the need for care in its hand- 
ling. Certainly one lesson cannot be 
forgotten : in every area ‘with the 
exception of the Antarctic, whales have 
vanished through lack of foresight in 
not controlling the numbers of whales 
killed. The industry—and the world— 
cannot afford to let it happen again, 
for this would be the last time.

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Uncsco Courier, — NT 5. — 1955 


### 68985: Migrating mammoths; scientists play tag with Antarctic whales

One whale equals MIGRATI NG 
seventeen elephants M A M M O T H S 
SCIENTISTS PLAY TAG 
WITH ANTARCTIC WHALES 
by Paul Budker 
Assistant Director, National Museum of Natural History, Paris. 
ROSSING the waters of the southern latitudes during the 
month of October the surface of the long ocean swells 
will be broken here and there by the sudden appear- 
ance of giant black humps shooting clouds of spray high 
into the air. These humps betray the presence of vast 
As shown above the giant blue whale, the largest animal the underseas hulks of hundred ton whales. At this time of the 
opid has Ber an is 2qual to 3 is 17 elephants, year the whales are on the move southwards to their summer 
en ourtesy “Frogress’, the Unilever magazine) feeding grounds in the Antarctic seas. This whale migra- 
tion occurs regularly every year, and to enable scientists to 
study the fascinating story of the whale’s life many of these 
ocean mammals which pass by will carry, embedded in the 
flesh below their immense dorsal fins, a thin steel cylinder 
engraved with essential scientific data concerning their first 
contact with man. 
This amazing story of scientific detection is only today 
revealing the surprising history of the controlled mass 
movement of whales, to and fro, from the tropics to the 
poles : a continuous rhythm which has, without doubt, been 
carried on in the same way for centuries past. However, it 
is only since the beginning of the present century that 
precise facts have come to light on this previously unknown 
pilgrimage across the oceans of the world. 
    : = NE id 
SEI WHALE MEASURING UP TO 56 FT. 
Summer dining room 
ARLY in January the ‘whales have arrived in their 
summer sea pastures and the whaling season opens. 
In whaling parlance Antarctica comprises the entire 
area from the South Pole northwards as far as latitude 40 
south. It is here in this vast expanse of ice and ocean, 
among some of the most inhospitable waters in the world, 
that the whalers hunt and pursue their prey. Each year at 
precisely the same time the fleets arrive on the edge of the 
ice floes, and each year the vast schools of whales keep an 
exact rendezvous with their killers. In some ways it is a 
tragic story of man’s inhumanity to an inoffensive denizen of 
the ocean depths. 
What is the impulse which drives the whales southwards 
year after year? They come down to the Polar Seas for a 
specific purpose. As the pack ice retreats southwards with 
the coming of warmer weather, the ice floes break up and 
the temperature of the water rises above freezing point to 
about 35 degrees Fahrenheit. For the Antarctic wastes these 
are summer conditions and a tiny shrimplike creature (Eu- 
phausia superba), popularly known as krill thrives in them. 
These minute organisms move along in million-strong masses. 
BLUE WHALE MEASURING UP TO 100 FT. The krill might well be described as the whalebone whale’s 
bonne bouche and every summer hundreds of tons are 
consumed, or rather sifted through the ‘whalebone tilters of 
the Blue and some other species which do not possess teeth. 
(Continued on next page.) 
 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 68985: Migrating mammoths; scientists play tag with Antarctic whales

"MIGRATING 
MAMMOTHS 
(Continued) 
The Antarctic in the summer season serves as a vast dining 
room for the whale schools. When the whales arrive from 
the northern tropical waters they are “lean” and hungry, but 
after a diet of krill they fatten out and put on a few tons in 
weight in preparation for the long journey before them. 
In March and April, when the weather in the Antarctic 
begins to grow cold and the autumn gales start to sweep across 
the ice pack the whales begin to turn their noses to the north 
and head for the tropic seas. This is their honeymoon 
period and they move into the balmy equatorial waters to 
mate. From April until October the whalebone whales are to 
be found cruising usually in couples in the tropical waters. 
The vast schools have been dispersed and there is enough 
evidence to show that they practise a type of seasonal mono- 
gamy. Not only is their mating carefully organized but 
tropical whaling stations have established that throughout 
this period the whales do not consume any food at all 
Numbers of whales, mainly of the Humpback variety, have 
been examined and their stomachs have been found to be 
quite empty. It is generally supposed that the whales live 
throughout this mating period on the reserves which they 
have accumulated during their long feast of krill in the 
waters of the Antarctic. 
As the month of October approaches a new impulse makes 
itself felt, and the whales gather together, and, driven by an 
internal rhythm which governs their wandering life, once 
again begin their southerly peregrination towards the Polar 
Seas. On their next journey northwards to the tropics the 
mother whales will give birth to the infants which were 
conceived in the same warm waters 11 months before. The 
full cycle will have been completed. 
Bachelors on the prowl 
HAT is the story of the migration of the whalebone 
whales, but the ivory toothed sperm whales have a very 
different saga. These sperm whales maintain their 
permanent headquarters in the tropics where they lead a 
somewhat dissolute existence. Notoriously polygamous, each 
male usually cruises in cecmpany with a harem of females 
while on the outskirts of the group prowl the marauding 
bachelors. 
Few sperm whales make the long journey down to the 
south, and those that do are usually solitary males who have 
been ousted by their younger and more vigorous rivals, or 
else hermit-like types who decide to forgo the pleasures and 
vanities of the balmy equatorial waters and seek consolation 
in a sterner life in the glacial waters of the south. 
To garner the data which was essential for any study on 
the migration of whales it was obviously of the first impor- 
tance to establish some system of checking or control. While 
it was easy enough to ring or mark birds and small fish, such 
a procedure with a hundred-ton whale posed a very different 
problem. To catch a whale without injuring it, to fix a 
mark and then to give the animal its liberty again was 
patently an enterprise fraught with the greatest complexity 
and danger. However, the problem was eventually solved 
and the method now used has yielded the most fascinating 
results. 
The mark used on whales consists of a thin steel cylinder 
slightly under a foot in length, Engraved on it are indica- 
tions giving the time and the place where the whale was ) 
marked. The steel cylinder Is fired at the whale from a 
special calibre gun which is effective for the purposes of 
penetration up to a distance of 50 yards. The projectile has 
to be aimed so that the steel bullet will lodge in the muscular 
masses lying under the layers of blubber in the area of the 
whale’s dorsal fin. Here, the cylinder becomes embedded and 
will stay In place for years without harming the whale. 
Cases have occurred where whales have been captured with 
22 
marks on them which have been placed between 15 and 19 
years earlier. 
In case it may be thought that this process might cause the 
whale suffering, or give rise to infection, the biologists work- 
ing on the Enern in 1953, under the direction of Professor 
Johan Ruud, the Director of Oslo Whale Institute, were 
particularly careful to smear the outside of the cylinders used 
for marking with penicillin, 
The marks are recovered from the carcasses of the whales 
during the normal course of whaling operations. Sometimes 
the mark is seen when the dead whale Is dragged aboard 
the factory ship ready for fiensing, and sometimes it is not 
discovered until the carcass is in the processing chambers 
after the meat has been treated. It is obviously preferable if 
the mark is found when the whale is on the flensing deck 
as this permits exact identification. In order to aid in 
discovery some marks have nylon threads attached to them 
which serve to catch the eye of the flensers. 
Creatures of regular habits 
OoDERN methods of whale marking started in the 
1932/33 whaling season and since that time they 
have been continued every year. Between 1932 and 
1938 a total of 5,350 whalebone whales and sperm whales 
were marked, principally in the Antarctic. In 1950 the 
William Scoresby, oceanic research vessel of the British 
Discovery Committee, took part in marking operations, and 
in the course of a whaling cruise in 1953 the whale catcher 
Enern with Professor Ruud and other scientific colleagues 
aboard, concentrated on perfecting the marking process. 
Although the information has only recently been firmly 
established it is now well known that whales are not scatter- 
ed indiscriminately throughout the Antarctic. They tend to 
concentrate in distinct zones which have been numbered 
from 1 to 6. Here they return regularly after each northerly 
migration. According to each particular species this regular- 
ity of appearance is more or less constant and can now be 
considered as a general rule governed by certain exceptions. 
The whale marking system has provided the biologist with 
information of the utmost importance on the age and growth 
of whales in addition to data on their migratory habits. 
Dr. N. A. Mackintosh of the British National Institute of 
Oceanography has observed that whale marking has proved 
beyond any possible doubt the existence of a regular whale 
migration between the Antarctic and the tropical seas. It 
has also shown that after each migration the whales return 
to their same zones. An interesting piece of whale history 
has been recorded by S. G. Brown. - He relates that a whale 
marked in 1938 was captured in 1954 less than one degree of 
longitude away from the exact spot where it was marked 
sixteen years before. 
Nations on the watch 
F the various types of whales the Humpbacks are 
apparently the most regular in their migratory habits, 
since none have ever been captured outside the 
marking zones. Rorquals and Blue whales also show a 
remarkable degree of regularity each year in their return to 
the Polar Seas, 
Whale marking can be of considerable value to the whaling 
industry and all countries interested in these problems have 
expressed the desire to intensify marking operations under 
the auspices of the British National Institute of Oceano- 
graphy. The work already carried out by the Enern was 
accomplished with the aid of whaling companies from Nor- 
way, the Netherlands, South Africa and the United Kingdom. 
In addition Australia, Japan, New Zealand and the USSR 
also conduct whale marking, France has a research vessel, 
the Orsom I, stationed at Madagascar which has the equip- 
ment necessary for this work, and a laboratory at Pointe 
Noire in French Equatorial Africa will soon be in possession 
of similar equipment. Thus it can be seen that close inter- 
national co-operation already exists for studying the migra- 
tory habits of the whale. Such co-operation can only lead in 
the future to the most fruitful results.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

hs i A Ge A eT) LN PL Are 
Unesco Courier, — Nf 5. — 1955 


### 68986: Farming our last frontier

  
Farming our last frontier 
‘by Charles Drummond 
  
Specimen of plankton (top) as it comes from the depths of the sea. Left, plankton enlarged many times. All sea life depends on this mass 
of minute drifting organisms. The name plankton is derived from the Greek word meaning “wandering”. It is the staple food for fish, 
and it is also edible by human beings. Right, an enlarged view of a tiny jellyfish only one and three quarter inches in diameter : 
one of the myriad forms of sea life which go to make up: plankton. (Photos National Geographic Society and Black Star-Rapho) 
ARE CS Ae BC OE Cy ew BA 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 68986: Farming our last frontier

Bread from the sea 
ITHIN the last dec- 
ade or two marine 
biologists and bio- 
chemists have realized 
that the possibilities of 
producing the additional 
food needed with ever- 
increasing urgency to feed 
the world’s hungry mil- 
lions lie in the seas and 
oceans. In other words, 
man must now farm the 
world’s “last frontiers”, 
extensively, intensively. 
To farm the seas suc- 
cessfully will be a gigantic 
task calling for the closest 
integration of the efforts 
and achievements of all 
branches of science in- 
volved, for although scien- 
tific knowledge in oceano- 
graphy is advancing steadily, the science itself is a rela- 
tively young one, originating largely through the 69,000-mile 
cruise of HM.S. Challenger some 80 years ago. It was then 
realised that the problems of how to utilize the products of 
the seas, to exploit fully its vast riches in food and minerals, 
could be solved only by the closest collaboration among the 
. sciences concerned. 
The cessation of World War II and the knowledge that the 
world’s population is increasing at a rate which threatens to 
outstrip the most promising advances of agricultural science 
have focussed the attention of many nations on the urgency 
of “farming the seas”. A great deal of research and much 
experimentation have been undertaken successfully by inde- 
pendent organizations, a work which is being steadily 
intensified. 
  
A marine algae named gelidium 
cartilagineum from which isinglass,aform 
of gelatin, is extracted. (USIS photo) 
Great meadows for all nations 
LEARLY It is necessary to experiment first in order to 
decide on ways and means of utilizing fully the seas’ 
resources. It is necessary not only to improve existing 
fishing grounds but to find (and even create) new ones, not 
only to encourage faster breeding but to pin-point those 
kinds of fish which are most useful commercially, not only 
to discover more ways of utilizing marine plants but to 
invent methods of growing and harvesting them. 
Despite the many obvious difficulties, especially those of 
a financial nature, the idea of farming the seas possesses 
several well-defined advantages. These may be summed up 
thus: — 
A. The sea contains great quantities of nutrients which, 
properly directed and supplemented where necessary, could 
be made to increase (in the first instance) the growth of 
planktonic life, and thus in turn stimulate the growth of 
marine animal life. 
B. In marine agriculture there can be no lack of water 
such as besets terrestrial agriculture. 
C. It is believed that marine plant diseases, where they 
exist, can be more easily controlled in this environment. 
D. The seas, comprising 71 per cent of the earth’s surface, 
are vast enough for all nations, including those which have 
no seaboards of their own, to participate in marine agri- 
culture. 
Space does not permit the detailing of the many research 
expeditions and experiments conducted to probe the poten- 
tialities of farming the seas, but it can be mentioned that 
outstanding work in these respects has been (and continues 
to be) carried out by various organizations, including the 
National Geographic Society, the Marine Laboratories of the 
24 
University of Miami, and the Agricultural and Mechanical 
College of Texas, as ‘well as by research departments of the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture and government bodies of 
other nations. Under the impetus of ever-growing need, 
science, industry and government are teaming up as never 
before to explore and exploit the seas’ food reservoirs. 
Marine research has long established that algae (comprising 
the many varieties of seaweed) and both zooplankton and 
phytoplankton have definite food value. Professor D. W. 
Hood, of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas, 
in a note to the writer points out that “these plants, if 
obtained in large quantities, may be useful for livestock feed, 
human food, pharmaceuticals, drugs and other important 
biochemicals.” He relates how experiments with a fresh 
water algae (chorella pyrenoidosa) grown under good condi- 
tions proved that this plant can be made to yield around 
50 tons of dry material per acre surface per year, having a 
composition of 55 per cent protein. Under similar conditions, 
he argues, marine algae could be “farmed” with results 
approaching this. 
Seaweed, dried and ground fine 
URING the two world wars, the development of acute 
food shortages in many countries brought about nu- 
merous experiments with seaweed, conducted both on 
an official basis and individually. In France tests were made 
on the use of seaweed gathered on the Atlantic coast, when 
it was found that horses could eat as much as 3.3 lb. in a ra- 
tion totalling approximately 17 lb. per day. The French 
peasants also made a satisfactory silage from seaweed 
harvested along the coasts. An official of the Animal Nutri- 
tion Investigations Department of the Bureau of Animal 
Industry (Beltsville, Maryland, U.S.A.) points out that even 
in normal times the Laplanders as well as the inhabitants of 
the Faroe and Orkney islands use seaweed as a cattle feed. 
“The material”, he writes, “is dried and then ground 
into a fine meal for 
2° rs Ch : » * mixing with various con- 
3 bed 2 centrate feeds. Usually, 
2% = o Pers : /." however, seaweed consti- 
: : SE tutes only one or two per- 
) 4 cent of the total mixture.” 
Most of the nutritional 
, studies into the uses and 
RF $30 TAI 3 9 value of seaweed have 
IRR, Ean ip a2. focussed on the produc- 
; " . _ tion of kelp (the slag or 
ash obtained by burning 
seaweed). Marketed as a 
feed supplement, the value 
of kelp resides largely in 
its iodine content; but though both seaweed and kelp meal 
have been proved to be valuable constituents of animal fod- 
der, especially in areas low in iodine, the overall possibilities 
of utilizing seaweed directly as a food for domestic animals 
are of a supplement-ary value only as far as present-day 
research indicates. 
The major possibilities of producing great quantities of 
food from the seas lie largely in the potentialities of 
“plankton”, those vast “meadows” of minute living creatures, 
both animal and plant, that live in the sea at varying depths, 
covering many acres at a time, 
Plankton, taken from the Greek word “planktos”, means 
“wandering”, and is the name given by the German scientist 
Hensen in 1887 to the swarms of microscopic organisms 
which, at the mercy of the seas, drift aimlessly to and fro 
with the currents. Plankton is of course also found in rivers 
and lakes. Phytoplankton is the name given to plant 
plankton. Because many members of animal or zooplankton 
depend directly on these tiny plants for food, 
phytoplankton constitutes the basis of animal 
life in the sea. In turn, zooplankton is eaten by 
Phytoplankton under the microscope. 
(Photo Fisheries Laboratory, Lowestoft) 
(Cont'd on 
page 26)

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 68986: Farming our last frontier

    
  
   
Unesco Courier. — NT 5. — 1955 
     
  
‘Skyscraper’ tombs 
on the ocean floor 
Analyzing the microscopic plants and animals of the ocean has become an Increasingly 
Important part of the science of oceanography and is being carried on in research 
laboratories throughout the world. Here, at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
in California, two working methods are shown. In the first, a plankton net is being 
lowered into the sea. Composed of fine silk, this net is equipped with a meter for 
measuring the amount of water filtered as it is towed through the sea. [n the second, 
the diver plunges to the ocean depths for treasure: not gold, but specimens of sand, 
rocks and marine flora. The samples thus gathered from the ocean floor will be 
analyzed in the laboratory to determine their scientific contribution to oceanic know- 
ledge. Enlarged 15,000 times here are some of the results of the search. They are 
unicellular Diatomes—the most important part of marine plankton, the staple diet of 
the fish. They are found in vast quantities in the sea and when they dle their shells 
fall to the ocean bed where they form a kind of submarine cliff, often hundreds 
of feet high. (Photos USIS and Helmcke-Krieger, Max-Planck Gesellschaft) 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 68986: Farming our last frontier

fish and even by whales. Clearly, 
these “floating pastures” are as 
vital to marine life as grass is to 
land animals, Yet these organisms 
are so tiny that it is possible to see 
only a few out of the 50,000 or so 
found in a single pint glass of 
plankton seawater! 
It follows, therefore, that if me- 
thods can be devised to increase these pastures, to improve 
their nutritional value and also to grow and harvest them 
under controllable conditions, an immense food reservoir of 
unlimited potentialities lies at hand for the benefit of all. 
Scientific investigations have already established the 
nutritional value of plankton. It has been proved moreover 
that planktonic life is so adaptable that it can reproduce 
vigorously in almost all kinds of water or climatic conditions. 
This research, much of which has been carried out on 
American research ships in the Gulf of Florida and elsewhere, 
is however a long-term project with numerous implications. 
For instance, it is being used to tabulate the behaviour of 
important ocean currents such as the Gulf Stream (which 
we know affects the climate both of Europe and North 
America and hence the food-growing potentialities of these 
continents), to establish the locations of good feeding grounds 
for commercial fisheries, to trace the life histories of 
different forms of marine life, to find out how seasonal 
changes and water origins affect planktonic productivity and 
growth, and many other related aspects. 
Plankton has already been put to practical use. 
Bread from 
the sea 
(Continued) 
At the 
© off the west coast of 
  
    
Microbiological Research 
Institute in Trinidad, fat 
is extracted which is 
used in the manufacture 
of margarine. During 
the last war an attempt 
to harvest plankton as 
human. food was made 
Scotland by an eminent 
British scientist, but the 
attempt did not succeed. 
German scientists, how- 
ever, succeeded in 
producing plankton arti- 
ficially and extracting 
fat for use in animal 
forage. 
Major problem exer- 
cising scientific minds 
engaged in planktonic 
research is that of dev- 
eloping methods of grow- 
ing and harvesting algae 
and plankton under fully controlled conditions. 
It is a happy thought not only that research into the seas’ 
natural resources is being intensified, but that in the train 
of advancing developments in the science of oceanography 
will come other vital advantages, the most notable of which 
will probably be the establishment of new fishing areas 
adequately stocked by new planktonic productivity. 
   
Retrieving a sediment trap from the 
ocean bed. This instrument is used to 
study beach formations. (USIS photo) 
NEEDLE 
IN A 
PLANKTON 
STACK 
  
“Sorting out” a collection of 
plankton in the marine re- 
search laboratory, Aberdeen, 
Scotland. The sea's “float- 
ing pastures” of plankton are 
as vital to marine life as 
grass is to livestock. Yet 
these organisms are so tiny 
that it is possible to see only 
a few out of the 50,000 or 
so in a pint glass of plank- 
ton seawater. (COI photo)

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

Unesco Courier. — Nr 5, — 1955 


### 68987: Fish in myth and legend

FISH IN MYTH 
AND LEGEND 
INCE prehistoric times many of the 
S world’s civilizations have sought to 
identify their peoples with the 
creatures of the sea, to deify them 
and to endow them with strange super- 
natural powers. The fish has appeared 
as a symbol in the religions, myths and 
legends of mankind, and even as a 
constellation of stars in the heavens. 
Although man has always tracked and 
pursued fish with the most ingenious of 
weapons and devices, nevertheless the 
simple fisherman has always retained a 
sense of awe for the wonders of marine 
life. The fish has been venerated as a 
symbol of tenacity, vitality and fertility. 
"In Japan, the carp has long been a token 
of courage and perseverance and every 
year on May 5th, on the occasion of 
the Ton-go-sek-ku (the Boy's Festival), 
long bamboo poles are raised outside 
every house with a son in the family. 
On these poles are strung hollow carp 
models made of gaily painted paper or 
cloth—one carp for each son. 
  
  
2 
==> 
FI = Fo 
  
  by 
Jean Marabini 
I
 
| 
         
A somewhat similar tradition exists in 
the Caucasus. Here, according to an 
ancient folklore tale, described by Rus- 
sia’s great poet, Alexander Pushkin, 
the young men offer pictures of goldfish 
(a member of the carp family) to the girl 
of their choice. 
Legends and stories about the salmon 
are to be found among practically all 
a peoples inhabiting northern latitudes 
where the salmon abounds. The vitality, 
® P) strength and persistance of this fish is 
- proverbial. Hatched in fresh water, 
) they mature in the open sea and then 
1 
         
  
  
return to spawn in the very stream 
  
  
a where they were born. This king of fish 
will sometimes travel 2,000 miles inland 
to spawn. En route it will leap water- 
d falls, cut through churning rapids and 
ILLUSTRATIONS wriggle across the shallows. Only death 
y NN BY SALE can prevent it from reaching its goal, 
. and only death will be its reward when 
/ it has reached it, as most 
ww species of salmon die soon (Cont'd on 
after spawning. next page) 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 68987: Fish in myth and legend

FISH IN MYTH 
AND LEGEND 
(Continued) 
The Laplanders, who believe in reincarnation, consider the 
salmon to be the most noble form into which man can be 
reborn. This belief has its reflection in a story told by an 
old Lapp fisherman near Lake Inari in Northern Finland. 
“Do you see this scar on my head?” he said, “One day I told 
my son not to fish in the river, But Lapp boys are no 
different from any other boys and he disobeyed me and went 
fishing just the same. He speared a salmon, but it was a 
strong fish and fought courageously. Though badly wounded 
and covered with blood it finally got away. My son returned 
in the evening empty-handed and found me lying by the 
fire with a wound in my head. I showed him the fresh blood. 
Did I not tell you not to go fishing today? Look what you 
did when you harpooned me in the river.” 
Unlike the Lapps the Buddhists in China believed that it 
is only evil people who are given fish form in their next 
existence. The fish is one of the eight magic symbols of 
Buddhism, and it is not without significance that the Chinese 
dragon often takes the form of a carp. Many Asiatic 
legends describe in various ways the story of the worthy 
fisherman who was rewarded because he freed a fish which 
was the incarnation of a god. 
Similar tales have been told by the Slavs. The story of 
the golden fish which rewards the fisherman who spares his 
life may well have had the same origin as-the Asiatic myths. 
  
      
28 
  
However, 2,000 years ago, long 
before the introduction of 
Buddhism fo China these same 
tales were being told in India, 
and this would seem to indicate 
the existence of a maritime civi- 
lization of some form in South 
East Asia at the close of the 
prehistoric era.   
The underlying theme running 
through these early myths was Vi 
the idea of the sea being a vast 7 Hae. 
reservoir out of which gods, 'e 
saints and kings drew their di- 
vine powers. These concepts were 
probably initiated by peoples 
whose lives were spent within 
sight and sound of the sea, and 
it is interesting to note that they 
conflict with the later evolution 
of religion in India and China, 
where, for both the Hindus and 
the Chinese, divine power and 
authority did not come from the 
sea but from the sky. Certain 
scholars have concluded from 
N
A
R
I
 
3 
. 
S
E
N
S
 
2
 
AN   
 
this that the Indian and Chinese 
civilizations borrowed elements 
of their culture from this maritime civilization. When 
brought into contact with a different environment these 
cultural beliefs were changed and transformed, thus the 
fish became a dragon in China and a Hindu mythological 
serpent god in India. 
Another fascinating legend in Eastern Asia was that of 
the fish princess, who always carried with her the scent of 
the sea. As the story goes, a royal seed on a lotus leaf was 
blown by chance into waters where a sacred. fish ‘was 
swimming. The issue of this chance mating became the 
fish princess who, like Cinderella, was held in a form of 
slavery until, with her singular charm, she seduced a Prince 
by whom she had some wondrous children. 
As fish were a symbol of fertility it ‘was quite natural to 
portray them as being assexual. The tales of the sea sirens 
came from the Far East to the Mediterranean where, as we 
know, Ulysses had some encounters in the waters off the 
north coast of Sicily, and thence northwards to follow the 
shores of the Atlantic where the navigators of those days had 
many stories to relate of the appearance of the sirens, 
Greek mythology was full of sirens and mermaids, and 
despite Christian and rationalist attacks on belief in such 
creatures, their fame survived and the beliefs persisted. 
They continued to sing their timeless songs in bewitching 
voices, and the Nordic water nymphs and Hans Christian 
Andersen’s little mermaid are but further proofs of the 
tenacity of these myths. 
A primitive aboriginal myth from Australia, which has also 
appeared in various different forms in peasant legends from 
other lands, is that of the frog, the moon and the seas. 
These Australian primitives imagined the moon as a form of 
monstrous frog, and inside the body of the frog were the 
seas of the world. The story goes that the frog one day 
burst out in laughter when watching the antics of an eel, and

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 68987: Fish in myth and legend

Unesco Courier. — Nr 5. — 1955 
  
                                
    
             
  
     
                
     —
—
—
 
—
—
—
—
 
—
—
—
 
          .       
  
        4 
Andi ha 
 
  
                                                       
  
        Ad 1. -   
thus set free the oceans. It is significant to note, however, 
the inter-connection in this story between the moon and 
the sea. Perhaps these Australian aboriginals knew of the 
relationship between tides and the moon. This frog myth 
is also extant in the folklore of other countries, and it 
is popularly believed that the frog has the power fo reflect 
itself in the face of the moon. Whether or not these stories 
originated among the aborigines it is difficult to say, but 
what is reasonably certain is that traces of the beliefs held 
by the seafaring civilization which first inhabited South East 
Asia have come to light in the Mediterranean basin and in 
the Middle East. 
The Philistines had a fish-god called Dagon, and the 
Carthaginians worshipped the fish as a symbol of strength, 
and had an image of a fish buried with them. The 
Egyptians, Herodotus noted, regarded the eel as sacred. The 
Chaldeans worshipped the fish-god Cannes which was 
supposed to have imparted wisdom to the first men on earth. 
Even today in western Syria the old Dagon cult of the 
Philistines still lives on in the worship of certain fish which 
no fishermen are allowed to catch. Although originating 
from a different source it is of interest that the Jews are 
still prohibited by their religion from eating fish which have 
neither fins nor scales. 
There have been, of course, many references to fish in the 
Bible, sometimes in natural terms and sometimes in terms 
of miracles. The Gospels tell us that the first Christians 
were very often simple fishermen, and this in a way would 
explain the importance given in the Bible to fish as a source 
of food. In its Greek name the fish became an actual symbol 
of Christ, as the letters of the Greek word ICTHUS furnished 
the initial letters of the phrase “Jesus Christ the Son of God 
Saved”, ’ 
In the early Christian era the martyrs absorbed and 
transformed the idea of the symbolism attached to fish and 
fertility and made it part of their faith. Also among various 
non-Christian peoples there could be seen a similar type of 
transformation. In forming the capital letters of their 
alphabets the fish appeared in written form. In the 
Frankish cemetery at Marchepot in the Somme region of 
France, there is a bronze plaque with a fish and dove in the 
same group—two Christian symbols joined’ together on a 
pagan monument. 
Both in past centuries and in modern times the fish has 
exercized a considerable influence on everyday language. The 
ancient Phoenicians called a hermit by the name of pike, as 
this fish was reputed to be—and still has the satne 
reputation today—anti-social. Terms referring to fish have 
a variety of meanings, but in the majority of countries these 
are usually of a disparaging nature—“As drunk as a fish” 
would serve as a good example. In France an April Fool . 
joke is called an “April Fish”. In coastal areas, however, 
fewer unfavourable words and references to fish are found, 
and this can be readily explained by the fact that the 
maritime peoples very often depend for their food and keep 
on fish and they thus pay a form of ‘tribute by flattering 
references in their everyday language. 
Whatever may be the final judgment on the facts relating 
to the fish as man’s first ancestor, there can be no doubt that 
the fish has exercized a profound influence on civilization in 
all its forms. The fish has provided the key to certain things 
of the past, and if may be, as simple Celtic inhabitants 
of Amlwch, Wales, believe, that it can also predict the future. 
As H.G. Wells once said, “when humanity has exhausted 
itself in dreams and lust for power it may well be that the 
only remaining sound on earth will be the murmur of the 
sea lapping on deserted beaches.” The fish will certainly 
then have re-captured their kingdom for all eternity. 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 68983: Strange facts about Neptune's realm

STRANGE FACTS ABOUT NEPTUNE’S REALM 
surface of the globe rises two and a 
half miles above sea level almost 50 % 
of the ocean bed lies the same distance 
below the surface of the sea. The 
world beneath the seas is greater than 
the world above them. 
Upside-down mountains 
HE highest mountain in the 
world, Everest, rises to a height 
of 29,034 feet, but in the Pacific Ocean 
near the island of Mindanao in the 
Philippines the sea plunges to a fan- 
tastic depth of 35,5030 feet. This figure 
is the world’s record for ocean depth. 
At this same point in the Pacific, the 
Snellen in 1930 plumbed the greatest 
known depth by line. A piece of red 
clay was brought to the surface from 
the ocean bed 33,000 feet below. 
World’s tidal contrasts 
HE Bay of Fundy on Canada’s 
Nova Scotian coastline has the 
distinction of having the largest tides 
in the world. Twice every day 100,000 
million tons of sea water are swept into 
the Bay causing tides which reach a 
height of nearly fifty feet. By way of 
contrast to this gigantic inrush of 
30 
  
water the Mediterranean is practically 
tideless. 
Ocean wave globetrotters 
CEAN waves are great travellers 
O and it has now been discovered 
that some will begin their life in the 
southernmost seas of the world and 
after that traverse a quarter of the 
circumference of the globe, some 6,500 
miles, before they disappear and die. 
Meteorologists are now studying the life 
of waves and wave motion and record- 
ing their results. This information has 
made it possible to predict in advance 
the arrival of hurricanes and storms. 
Herrings in History 
HROUGHOUT the Middle Ages 
T the herring played an im- 
portant part in the economic 
and political life of Europe. In the 
thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries the herring shoals were 
concentrated in the Sound and the 
Belt, the narrow passages between the 
North Sea and the Baltic. Ports in 
Denmark and Southern Sweden owed 
their prosperity to this fact and one 
of the reasons for the establishment of 
the famous Hanseatic League of North 
  
{Continued 
from p. 16) 
German towns was the determination of 
its members to enter into competition 
with Denmark in the herring fishing. 
But in the fifteenth century the herrings 
were displaced from their usual feeding 
grounds and driven into the North Sea. 
The reason for this migration is still a 
mystery but it is thought to have been 
caused by powerful submarine currents 
‘which followed a period of very high 
tides. The departure of the herrings 
weighed heavily on international 
relations at the time as the ports 
of Southern Sweden, Denmark and 
Northern Germany were impoverished 
and the ports in the Low Countries 
became prosperous. It has been said 
that at the time the Dutch abandoned 
agriculture for herring fishing and 
thereby improved their shipbuilding 
and navigation. 
Deep Sea Voices 
T used to be assumed that silence 
was to be found in the ocean 
depths but it has now been 
proved that they are actually as noisy 
as a farm-yard at feeding time. Fish 
utter piercing cries. They groan, 
cackle and trumpet so that the deep is 
filled with a cacophony of sound. 
During the 1939-45 war the US Navy 
made a systematic study of the noises 
made by fish for two very particular

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 68983: Strange facts about Neptune's realm

reasons. The acoustic mines which 
were then being brought into use were 
exploded by the vibrations caused by 
the noise of ships motors but it was 
feared that the sounds made by fish 
might also explode these mines. Ultra- 
sensitive microphones had been sunk 
deep in the sea near the US coastline 
to pick up the noise made by submarine 
motors but it was found that these 
were also picking up the noises of the 
undersea world, thus making it im- 
possible to distinguish the sound of the 
submarines. Special electrical filters 
were constructed to eliminate the 
undersea noises but retaining the 
noises made by ships engines. 
The study of sounds made by marine 
animals is only in its infancy, but 
although many mysteries remain to be 
solved it is possible to gain a fair idea 
of the whole strange. phenomenon. 
Fish do not possess vocal cords and so 
they produce noises by grinding their 
teeth, oscillating their air bladders, 
rubbing their bones together and 
jerking their heads. It is of some 
interest to note that while’ the human 
muscle can produce only 36 vibrations 
per second that of certain fish can 
produce up to 2,332. 
In old age the “voices” of fish, both 
of the male and female, tend to become 
lower in tone. In those types which 
produce sounds by means of their air 
bladder this fact is explained by the 
elongation of the bladder with the 
consequent lowering in pitch of the 
sounds made. 
It is now possible to distinguish 
certain types of fish by their “voices”, 
However, this study has not proved as 
easy as it was thought at first as when 
fish are taken into captivity for the 
purpose of recording the sounds which 
they make, it is found that they do not 
produce the same amount of sound as 
when they are at large in the ocean: 
some even become quite dumb. 
Fish are not the only marine animals 
capable of producing sounds. One type 
of round shrimp makes a frying noise 
by knocking its claws together. This 
sound, when made by one shrimp is 
practically imperceptible, but it is quite 
noticeable when there are some 
hundreds grouped together on a rock. 
Aircraft made of sea water 
EA water contains between 
350,000 and 400,000 tons of mag- 
nesium per cubic mile. In 1941 
scientists devised a method of extract- 
ing the metal directly from sea water 
by means of a chemical process. One 
aircraft contains on an average half a 
ton of magnesium and it was due to the 
extraction of magnesium from sea 
water that aircraft production was 
expanded so rapidly during the course 
of the Second World War. 
Dangers of the sea coasts 
EARLY 2 million square miles of 
N land in the coastal regions of 
the continents and islands would be 
submerged if sea water did not possess 
a certain degree of elasticity. Although 
much less elastic than gas, sea water 
Unesco Courier, — Nr 5. — 1955 
DETECTIVES 
OF THE SEA 
Photos on these pages show re- 
search being carried out at Scot- 
tish Home Department Marine Labo- 
ratory, Aberdeen. |.—Hydrography 
Department assistant prepares drift 
bottles and plots on charts where 
they are found. Three thousand of 
these bottles are set free each year. 
2.—~Tagged herring which had trav- 
elled 180 miles is examined after 
being returned to laboratory. Ob- 
ject is to check migration, move- 
ments of which are shown on charts 
in background. 3.—The life of the 
lobster comes in for a searching 
investigation. One of senior scien- 
tific officer’s jobs is to advise on 
lobster catching restrictions. 4.— 
Examination of a plaice’s earbone 
reveals its age. Check on the rate 
of tagged fish gives an idea of rate of 
fishing and of natural mortality. 
5.—~What did he have for breakfast? 
Examination of fish stomach reveals 
natural fish foods, thus increasing 
knowledge about distribution of 
food organisms for shoals. 6. —Fish 
landings at Aberdeen are not as 
large and lucrative as they were 
some years ago. Fishermen are help- 
ing Laboratory investigation, return- 
ing tagged fish and allowing scientists 
to take samples of scales and 
measure catches. (C.O.l. photos) 
has sufficient elasticity so that the 
upper levels of water compress the 
lower layers. If the lower water was 
not compressed the general sea level 
would rise by about 100 feet throughout 
the world. 
Gold not worth the taking 
VERY ton of sea water contains 
FE about three quarters of a grain 
of gold and if all the gold were extract- 
ed from the seas and oceans of the 
world there would be available 77,000 lbs 
of gold for every single person. Unfor- 
tunately the cost of production of this 
gold comes to more than it would be 
worth. 
Killed by their own weight 
ARGE whales can weigh anything 
I, up to a maximum of 100 tons 
and this enormous weight when 
suspended in ‘water is consequently re- 
duced in conformity with the principle 
of Archimedes. Normally, therefore, 
whales are supported by the water and 
the muscles which they use for 
breathing have no need to be par- 
ticularly strong. But once caught on dry 
land their soft underbodies are pressed 
down so hard on the unyielding ground 
by their own weight that it becomes 
impossible for them to breathe, and in 
the matter of an hour or so they have 
been smothered, not for lack of air, but 
for lack of strength to expand their 
lungs against their own enormous 
weight. 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

~~ 
32 
Learning to ‘hear’ 
with 
 
 
their eyes 
     
     
Pupils of Professor J.A. van der Beek have now got used to being beaten on the back, pounded on the chest 
and seized by the throat (above). If they utter a sound in response to this apparently rough treatment the 
professor, founder of a school for deaf-mute youngsters at Bandung on the island of Java—the only one of its 
kind in Indonesia—is delighted. His cuffings, slaps and strangle-holds are all part of a modern method for teach- 
ing children born deaf, and therefore mute, how to speak. The school is now a Unesco Gift Project, so 
that people in other lands can help it to obtain vocational materials and teaching aids. (Unesco photos) 
  
Farmers’ university 
in a reclaimed Iand 
Farmers in Ceylon’s barren “dry zone”—now being 
rapidly reclaimed and resettled—have their own 
rural university at Minneriya, where Unesco, in 
collaboration with the Ceylon Government, has set 
up a fundamental education pilot project, with library, 
classrooms, workshops and a model farm. Techniques 
are being developed and people trained in agricultural 
extension work, home economics, cottage industries 
and health education. Above. Unesco educator 
pulls himself across a river. Left farmers perform 
the “winnowing dance’. (Unesco photos)

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

U.N. planning 
for atomic 
power era 
   
   
A new era of power through atomic energy began on December 4, 1954, when the United 
Nations General Assembly agreed on the establishment of a new agency for international co- 
operation in developing the peaceful uses of the atom. On August 8, 1955, scientific 
delegates from some 80 countries will meet in Geneva, to study the technical and scientific factors 
involved and to explore the means required to develop atomic power on an international scale. 
The preparatory committee of this conference met in Unesco House, Paris on May 23. Dr. H.]. 
Bhabha of India, will be President of the Geneva Conference, and Dr. Walter J. Whitman of the 
United States (above) has been appointed Secretary-General. (Unations Photo) 
  
Stamp honours 
Unesco’s work      
  
   
    
Collectors can now add a new 
stamp to their United Nations 
series. Issued by the United Na- 
tions to honour the work of Unesco 
and designed by George Hamori of 
Israel, the stamp was placed on 
public sale on May 11, It is issued 
in two denominations: 3 cents and 
8 cents. Photo shows Mr. Dag 
Hammarskjold, U.N, Secretary-Gen- 
eral, left, presenting a folder of the 
new stamps to M. René Maheu, 
one of Unesco’s Assistant Direc- 
tor-Generals.  (Unations Photo) 
 
 
Unesco Courier, — Nr 5. — 1955 
"Letters to 
the Editor 
Sir, 
I have long been a reader of the Unesco 
Courier which I find an inexhaustible 
source of news and reports from the most 
diverse corners of the world. But as I 
should like to know more about the habits 
and customs of different peoples and to 
make contacts in all countries, I should be 
grateful if you would help me to make 
friends in other lands. ' 
I am Lebanese and I could correspond 
equally well in English and Krench. My 
hobby is stamp collecting and I am in- 
terested in music, dancing, books and sports. 
Aniéce Elias 
B.P. 30, 
Beirut, 
Lebanon. 
Sir, 
I wish to take out a subscription to the 
Unesco Courier for a friend of mine, but 
I should like to remain anonymous. My 
friend is always anxious to increase his 
knowledge of the world and it will be a 
great pleasure for him to draw from the 
Courier that aspect of culture which is 
indispensable to all thinking and active 
members of mankind. 
I appreciate the value of each issue of the 
Courier. The one I received today on 
“Puppets” seems to be well-filled and the 
articles in the previous issue on Latin Ame- 
rica were encouraging. When one realizes 
how many men and women--ang how many 
consciences—are working to improve the lot 
of disinherited peoples, it is some consola- 
tion for the set-backs of humanity... 
M. Y. 
France. 
Sir, 
I belatedly ran across the articles on Ja- 
pan in your issue No 4/5, 1954, (Aug-Sept, 
U.S.). They were very good. I have always 
been interested in Japan, and I was very 
intrigued with the girl Michiko Jinuma, 
about whom you had a full article. If she 
speaks English, I would like very much to 
correspond with her. Can you give me her 
address? I would appreciate it very much. 
I am incidentally a graduate student at the 
University of California in Los Angeles. 
Alan Campbell. 
4108 Bledsoe Avenue, 
Los Angeles 66, 
California. 
No address available - Ed. 
Sir, 
I have just renewed my subscription and 
that of the Esperanto Group in Rochefort 
to the Unesco Courier. Personally and on 
behalf of the members of our Esperanto 
Group, I wish to say with what interest and 
pleasure we read the Courier. Our interest 
would, of course, be doubled if an Esperanto 
edition of the Courier was also published. 
Pierre Babin 
Chairman, 
Groupe Esperantiste Rochefortais, 
Rochefort-sur-Mer, 
France. ' 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

From the Unesco Newsroom 
UNDER THE UN FLAG: 
The UN flag flew at sea for 
the first time recently when 
two modern deep-sea fishing 
trawlers—the first of a fleet of 
ten built by the United Nations 
Korean Reconstruction Agency 
(UNKRA) to help the recovery 
of the Korean fishing industry— 
sailed from Hong Kong for Pu- 
san in Korea. The end of fight- 
ing found Xorea—which was 
formerly one the six foremost 
fishing countries of the world— 
stripped of boats, gear and fish- 
packing equipment—all essen- 
tial to maintaining the health 
of the nation, as 80 % of Kor- 
ea's protein diet depends on 
fish products. Under UNKRA’S 
ald plan ten T7-ton trawlers 
costing $500,000 are being built 
for the Republic's fishing fleet, 
and nets and equipment have 
also been bought. 
* POPULAR ‘PILOTO’: One, 
of the largest and fastest de- 
veloping educational institu- 
tions in the city of Medellin, 
Colombia, is the model libra- 
ry set up as a public library 
pilot project under Unesco 
sponsorship. It is especially 
popular with children, who, 
it is reported, have waited 
in long lines after school 
hours in the rain-swepl 
streets and have even barler- 
ed places with one another 
so as to be first into the li- 
brary. “La Piloto”, as the 
Colombian press calls the li- 
brary, had already outgrown 
itself six months after open- 
ing, and the question of a 
new building is now being 
studied. 
CLAss OF 55: Thirty- 
two teachers who have received 
specialized training in health, 
agriculture and community de- 
velopment as well as in primary 
school teaching methods will 
shortly graduate from the na- 
tional fundamental education 
centre, set up in the Liberian 
back country by the Govern- 
ment and TUnesco. Teachers 
will return to their home villa- 
ges scattered throughout Libe- 
ria to run primary schools 
which will also be outposts in a 
campaign to raise rural living 
standards. This national fun- 
damental education centre—one 
of three now being run in Afri- 
ca and Asia with Unesco tech- 
nical assistance—has succeeded 
in opening 19 primary schools 
in the surrounding district. 
* PLACE FOR WOMEN: 
Nearly 100,000 Japanese wo- 
men were taking courses in 
universities or institutes of 
higher education last year—a 
300 per ceni increase on 1947 
when Japan's new educalion 
law came into force. The 
fact that three out of every 
hundred girls aged belween 
19 and 22 now atiend univer- 
sities or similar institutions 
has led to the creation of 
many new educational estab- 
lishments and of openings 
for women teachers. There 
are now, for instance, some 
13rheadmistiresses of primary 
and secondary Schools, while 
more than 2,000 women serve 
on educational committees. 
Many Japanese housewives 
attend universily-organized 
summer schools, as well as 
family welfare courses. 
GLOBAL AID PLAN : 
Direct aid, ranging from the ser- 
vices of specialists in cosmic 
rays, nuclear physics and the 
teaching of social sciences, to 
the development of national li- 
braries and the organization of 
educational television will be gi- 
ven to 41 countries this year by 
Unesco. Nearly $800,000 have 
been allocated under a new pro- 
gramme voted by Unesco's Gen- 
eral Conference last December 
to cover projects in education, 
science and culture in 41 mem- 
ber states, associate members 
and non self-governing territo- 
ries. In all, 6% experts are to 
be sent out, 46 fellowships 
awarded, and 341,000 worth of 
equipment provided ower the 
next 20 months. 
+ MEET THE U.N: Visitors 
to U.N. Headquarters in New 
York now also see some- 
thing of the Organization in 
action in faraway places 
through a special one-hour 
programme — “Introduction 
to the United Nations” —de- 
signed to acquaint the pub- 
lic with the U.N.s aims, 
structure and work, It in- 
cludes film-showings, a lec- 
ture and a question and ans- 
wer period. More than 1,000 
of the three to four thousand 
daily visitors to U.N. can 
thus see, for example, how 
Philippine efforts to raise 
health and educational stan- 
dards are aided by the World 
Health Organization and by 
Unesco and how the U.N. is 
helping to prepare Somali- 
land for self-government. 
THE MISSING FIFTH : 
More than a fifth of -food crops 
planted by the world’s farmers 
never reaches the dinner table. 
The Food and Agriculture Or- 
ganization (FAO) reports that 
insect pests and diseases des- 
troy or seriously damage this 
much of plantings each year. 
Knowledge of control measures 
is, however, Increasing, but 
there is a new threat of pests 
and diseases being spread more 
easily from one continent to an- 
other because of improved and 
faster international transport. 
FAO experts are helping many 
countries to organize or expand 
control programmes. 
+ SHARING THE ATOM: 
A link in the chain of inler- 
national co-operation for the 
peaceful use of atomic ener- 
gy was forged at Oak Ridge 
Institute of Nuclear Studies, 
USA. recently when the 
first of a Series of classes 
for scientisis from different 
countries began {to study 
how to handle radio-isotopes. 
Tkirty-one scientists from 
21 countries will attend the 
four-week courses at Qak 
Ridge. Previous American 
and Foreign graduates from 
this Instituie already are ap- 
plying their training (0 a 
wide range of projeclis—jrom 
cancer therapy lo experi- 
ments in the preservation of 
perishable food, (See ‘the 
UNEsco Courier “The Pro- 
mise of Atomic Power”, 
Ne, 12, 1954). 
(= 1VE-AND-TAKE: Tar- 
ascan Indians in the Mexican 
State of Michoacan recently 
learned some useful lessons 
from Pakistani teachers who 
were studying fundamental edu- 
cation work in and around Lat- 
in America on a one-year 
Unesco fellowship—and the 
Pakistanis picked up some new 
educational techniques for use 
back home. One result of their 
visit is that some Tarascan In- 
dian families are no longer sleep- 
ing on traditional floor mats, 
but on Pakistani charpeys— 
simple wooden beds with mat- 
tresses made of woven strings, 
And Indian fishermen on Lake 
Patzcuarc have learned that 
their nets will last three times 
as long if they dip them in the 
juice of a ceftain plant. The 
ten Pakistani educators, agricul- 
tural experts and social workers 
spent eight months at Unesco’s 
Regional Fundamental Educa- 
tion Centre for Latin America 
at Patzcuaro, Mexico, and also 
watched rural development cam- 
paigns in both Puerto Rico and 
Jamaica. 
* THROUGH THE LENS: 
The world of photography 
recently went on display in 
Paris af what was probably 
the most comprehensive in- 
ternational event of its kind 
ever held—the first Biennial 
of Photography, Cinema and 
Optics. A series of exhibi- 
tions demonstrated world 
progress in photography and 
motion pictures, and Lhe 
French National Commission 
for Unesco sponsored meet- 
ings where leading scien- 
tists, educators, artists and 
others who use photography 
in their work exchanged 
ideas and discussed needs 
and the means of meeting 
them with experts in photo- 
graphy. The Biennial show- 
ed how developed photogra- 
phy is loday as a universal 
art form and how important 
it is for communicating ideas 
and information, 
FUROPEAN EQUALS: 
Nine countries—Denmark, Fran- 
ce, the German Federal Repu- 
blic, Iceland, Ireland, Luxem- 
bourg, Norway», the Saar and 
the United XKingdom—have 
now ratified the European Con- 
vention on the’ equivalence of 
university entrance examin- 
ations, Drawn up by the 
Council of Europe in 1953, the 
Convention gives “students who 
have passed the entrance exa- 
minations to a university in any 
one of the nine signatory nations 
an equal right with nationals to 
enter a university in one of the 
other countries. 
Unesco's National Distributors from whom 
the English edition of THE COURIER can be 
obtained are listed below. Other Unesco 
Distributors are histed in the French and 
Spanish editions of THE COURIER. 
Australia : Oxford University Press, 346, 
Little Collins Street, Melbourne. 
Austria ; Wilhelm Frick Verlag, 27, Gra- 
ben, Vienna I. 
Burma : Burma Educational Bookshop, 
551-3 Merchant Street, P.O. Box 222, 
Rangoon. 
Canada : 
Toronto. 
Ceylon : Lake House Bookshop, The Asso- 
ciated Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P.Q. 
Box 244, Colombo 1. Rs. 5. 
Cyprus : M, E, Constantinides, P,O.B, 473, 
Nicosia. 
Denmark : Einar Munksgaard Ltd., 6 Nor- 
regade, Copenhagen, K 
Egypt : La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9, Adly 
Pasha Street, Cairo. 
Ethiopia : International 
P.O.B. 120, Addis-Ababa. 
University of Toronto Press, 
Press Agency, 
34 
NATIONAL 
Finland : Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Kes- 
kuskatu, Helsinki. 
Formosa : The World Book Company Ltd., 
99, Chung King South Rd, Section |, 
Taipeh. 
France : Sales Division, Unesco, | 9, Avenue 
Kléber, Paris- i 6°. 
Germany : Unesco Yertrieb fir Deutsch 
land, R. Oldenbourg, Munchen. 
Greece : Librairie H. Kauffman, 28, Rue 
du Stade, Athens, 
Hong Kong : Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan 
Road, Kowloon. 
India: Orient Longmans Ltd., Bombay, Cal- 
cutta, Madras : sub-depots : Oxford Book 
& Stationery Co., Scindia House, New 
Delhi; Rajkamal Publications Ltd., Hima= 
laya House, Bombay 7. Rs, 4. 
Indonesia : G.C.T, van Dorp & Do. NY,, 
Djalan Nusantara, 22, Djakarta. 
Iran : Iranian National Commission for 
Unesco, Avenue du Musée, Teheran. 
DISTRIBUTORS 
Iraq : McKenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Israel : Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd., 35, 
Allenby Road, P.O. Box 5154. Tel-Aviv. 
Jamaica : Sangster’s Book Room, 99, Har- 
bour Street, Kingston; Knox Educational 
Services, Spaldings. 
Japan : Maruzen Co, Inc., 6 Tori-Nichome, 
Nihonbashi, Tokyo. 
Jordan : Jl. Bahous and Co., Dar-ul-Kutub, 
Salt Road, Amman. 
Korea : Korean National Commission for 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, Seoul. 
Liberia : }. Momolu Kamara, 69, Front 
and Gurley Streets, Monrovia. 
Malayan Federation and Singapore : 
Peter Chong and Co., P.O. Box [35, 
Singapore. 
Malta : Sapienza's Library, 26, Kingsway, 
Valletta. ’ 
Netherlands ;: N V, Martinus Nijhoff, 
Lange Voorhout 9. The Hague. 
New Zealand: Unesco Publications Centre 
100, Hackthorne Rd., Christchurch. 
Nigeria : C, M.S, Bookshop, P.O, Box 174, 
Lagos. 
Norway : AfS Bokhjornet, Stortingsplass, 7, 
Oslo. 
Pakistan : Ferozsons Ltd., Karachi, Lahore, 
Peshawar. Rs. 3. 
Philippines : Philippine Education Co., 
Inc., 11 04 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila. 3.00 
Surinam : Radhakishun and Company Ltd, 
(Book Dept.), Watermolenstraat 36, Para- 
maribo. 
Sweden : A.B.C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hov- 
bokhandel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm |&. 
Thailand : Suksapan Panic, Arkarn 9, 
Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok, 20 ticals. 
Union of South Africa : Yan Schaik's Book- 
store, Ltd., P.O. Box 724, Pretoria, 
United Kingdom : H.M, Stationery Office, 
P.O. Box 569, London S.E.L 
U.S.A. : Unesco Publications Service, 475 
Sth Ave., New York 17, N.Y, 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
 
Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
P
A
R
I
S
.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
The ~~ 
  mCouricr 
A WINDOW OPEN ON THE WORLD 
HOW NATIONS SEE THE FOREIGNER 
‘How the French farmer sees the stranger. A Britisher looks at Americans. 
“A Britisher dissects British CUETET CIAL TR» LRVEITR EAVES CR VERT TT Er to know or understand them? ie EF . ws 
MAN AND THE [31475 g—- exciting 
CLEVE CETTE] I CR EL CE World de efforts 
LCN EU CR GEN CELT TT Po EV CY CR 
solar energy, wind energy, fresh water from 
CLE WET EEE VET) AE rtificial ELE ELIT 
A myths about the ort old CL ‘gods 
3 primitive peoples fi 
WELCOME STRANGER. — International 
fellowships and exchange of people 
between countries as one of the most 
powerful roads to building peace and 
RU CIOEVLEURTT TG EYES E10 TT Pi ETE i 
CUED LRAT TET ERSTE EL ET GR EEE 
cher exchange, ‘workers abroad. g 
   WHAT'S WRONG WITH OUR 
TEXT-BOOKS? Distortion of his- 
tory in school books. Textbook 
PUblisting:=a CICENRTOLG LI RT [TEES 
= ARE WOMEN INFERIOR BEINGS? 
LLVEL LE in women’s status in recent 
~ ears in education, politics, ‘society. 
  
OR A BBR, WOR sm mtn ” a Cn Nong i Sa a . el a aE a - CO i ey i i Emi Ca 
a : — os OR a i oa 
SUBSCRIBE TO THE UNESCO COURIER TODAY. - English, French, Spanish, U.S. editions 
ONE FULL YEAR’S SUBSCRIPTION AT THE AMAZINGLY LOW PRICE OF : 
300 French frames; 6/-; $1.50 or equivalent in local currency (U.S. edition $2.50). 
 
hc 

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068988engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

be
 
OW OFIEN ON THE WORLD 
       Rig i 
th
 
” 
     
   
     
 
      
  
   
ROCKS “HUNG IN THE AIR” 
One of the strangest sights in the world is the 
Meteora, a forest of gigantic black rocks rising out 
of the plain of Thessaly, north of Athens. In medie- 
val times, ascetics chose the Meteora, a name 
Pad which means “hung in the air”, as a place of retreat 
Bl and built great monasteries on the craggy pinnacles. 
BM For a story on their history and the religious 
art, which is preserved in them, see page 4. 
(Photo Spyros Meletzis, Athens.) 
» - - ps - pvr 3 Ae En : 
» - wo 
. & : . 
ll on ER gy AX I 
a aA pu FT fo ana dt ¥ ay 
» oh, 3 3 x gh . : my 
gn t > 
; ; : x oy AF 4 
dE ia HOS 4 hae a : a
BT lr. ai R- 2 a a HEY a andl Toe _» ; og 5 ie SEE    