# [068918](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

U
N
E
S
C
O
 
JUNG 
ifm 
ESTRELLA 
= 
RHE £2iTe 
aww 
VIGLIETT! 
LEE 
ea) 
: ‘ \ o fo oe ®:-1 Corts STM = 41 Vie, &' 
. RELA A ' 
C HO RR RSS 
= yY™~ Voety = 30,5 "2 eale 
’ M 3 ) I$ ‘x yy 14 ~ « Kp K x¥ xe Ne r k 
 
   
    
          
  
    
 
  
        
  
    
() 
. 
2 Fi 
- ; ! 
Y a . 
xX In Ysa POJ- 64) 66) Urol “) 
Mey well Beltanass ’ Iz) G amas= Lepliea 
         
| =p C= |

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

A time to live 
44 Afghanistan 
The man with the rose 
The music of Afghanistan has assimilated 
influences from an exceptionally wide range 
of origins and periods. Incorporated in it 
are elements of ancient types of music from 
India, Turkey and Russia, as well as traces 
of ancient Greek music and certain musical 
forms close to those of medieval Europe. It 
is thought that some unusual features of the 
music of the high valleys of the Pamir moun- 
tains may be traced back to the ancient 
civilization of central Asia. Above, Afghan 
craftsman in the bazaar at Tashkurgan. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Sa
br
in
a 
an
d 
Ro
la
nd
 
Mi
ch
au
d,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

U
N
E
S
C
O
 The Courier 
A window open on the world 
 
Editorial 
 
¢ W ITHOUT music, life would be nothing.” Nietzsche’s 
aphorism neatly encapsulates the importance of music in 
human history, a subject so vast that this issue of the 
Unesco Courier can only attempt to trace a few of the many directions in 
which music is moving today—the context in which it is created, 
produced and listened to. 
In the West it is widely felt that music is going through a period of 
crisis. It is true that the experimental work of modern composers, in 
conjunction with technical innovations, has transformed the conditions 
in which both popular and so-called serious music is created through the 
mysterious and inexplicable process which Anthony Burgess examines 
in this issue. For a modern composer like lannis Xenakis, scientific 
thought is part and parcel of creative renewal, as his own work amply 
demonstrates. 
While some forms of contemporary musical experimentation are 
taking place in relative isolation, other traditional forms are today 
acquiring a range and significance they have never had before. In Latin 
America this is happening with protest songs and the “nueva cancion”, 
new songs which have emerged from a specific historical situation, and, 
as Uruguayan composer Daniel Viglietti describes, have had a conti- 
nent-wide impact. 
Musical feedback between continents can be fruitful. It is, for 
example, a not uncommon misconception that African music is pro- 
duced within a rigid tradition. How far this is from the truth emerges 
from the testimony of Lamine Konte, an African “griot” or musician- 
storyteller who in this issue describes the wealth of modern musical life 
in Africa and the vitality of its traditional components. He stands at a 
cultural crossroads between Africa and Europe, and draws inspiration 
from both continents. 
China is a country with an especially long musical tradition. An 
instrument such as the Chinese lute is surrounded by a pattern of 
symbolism which has been recorded in writing since very early times. In 
this issue we publish a text on the subject by the great Dutch orientalist 
Robert H. van Gulik. 
The development of the electronic media (cinema, television, re- 
cords, radio) has vastly increased the accessibility of music worldwide, 
so that it is now possible to speak of a “phonosphere”, as does our 
contributor Mikhail Tarakanov. This phenomenon is not without risk. 
In addition to the danger of noise pollution and, eventually, of the 
weakening of the creative sensibility to which Professor Nils L. Wallin 
draws attention, there is also the possibility that certain forms of 
production may distort or debase musical values. The long association 
of cinema and opera, whose moments of fulfilment and of tension are 
here analysed by Dominique Jameux, is a fascinating example of a 
phenomenon in which such risks may arise. 
Finally, it is impossible to overemphasize the role of music as a form 
of social communication. The pianist Miguel Angel Estrella is a leading 
figure among those who are trying to bridge the gap between so-called 
classical and popular music, the product of a false antithesis. By 
designing a concert hall in which listening ceases to be a passive activity, 
a musician-architect like Xenakis is also opening wider the gates of 
access to music. 
Cover: score of Achorripsis (1956-1957), a work by Iannis Xenakis for 21 
instruments. This “stochastic” music is entirely composed on the basis of the 
calculation of probabilities. Length 7 minutes. 
Photo © All Rights Rescrved 
Editor-in-chief: Edouard Glissant 
April 1986 
39th year 
4 Science and music 
An interview with lannis Xenakis 
9 ‘Nueva cancion’ 
Latin America’s song without frontiers 
by Daniel Viglietti 
12 The mystery of melody 
by Anthony Burgess 
14 Music for all 
by Miguel Angel Estrella 
17 Folklore and phonosphere 
by Mikhail E. Tarakanov 
18 On wings of song 
The lute and the crane in Chinese tradition 
by Robert Hans van Gulik 
21 The griot, singer and chronicler of African life 
by Lamine Konte 
26 When opera takes to the screen 
by Dominique Jameux 
31 The modern soundscape and noise pollution 
by Nils Lennart Wallin 
34 Year of peace: 4 
  
2 A time to live ... 
AFGHANISTAN: The man with the rose 
= 
IN PERN 
ANNAN 
AAR TE — 
Eo SG SS SO A 
poropppopransnssppapeaprans \ 
Jie EE < 
A 
 
 
E
W
 
SR 
  
  
MVERLA 
bhi didi ididad iii dears itd dia sud iat Si 
AGRA Ro oo = 
Unesco’s first 40 years 
To mark Unesco’s fortieth anniversary, the next issue of the Unesco 
Courier will be a double number containing an anthology of extracts 
from some of the best articles to have appeared in the magazine since it 
began publication. 
Published monthly in 32 languages English Italian Turkish Macedonian Finnish A selection in Braille is published 
by Unesco French Hindi Urdu Serbo-Croat Swedish quarterly in English, French, 
The United Nations Educational, Spanish Tamii Catalan Slovene Basque Spanish and Korean 
Sclentlfic and Cultural Organization Russian Hebrew Malaysian Chinese Thai SSN 0041-5273 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. German Perslan Korean Bulgarian 
’ Arabic Dutch Swahlli Greek N° 4-1986 - DPC - 85-1 - 433A 
Japanese Portuguese Croato-Serb Sinhaia 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
Fas an
o- 
C, - = = 
Tae = 
Cc, - = 
he 
ee A= xa —
~~ == X= 
wr = = 
- =m 
= —_— 
Eee 
= C er Cie ——t pr — oe 1 
1 
Iannis Xenakis, an architect in music and a musician in architecture, has been for over 
thirty years a leading composer whose influence has spread throughout the world. Perhaps 
more than that of any other living composer, his work illustrates the important role of 
scientific thought in the aesthetics of contemporary music. Below, an exclusive Unesco 
Courier interview with Iannis Xenakis. 
  
  


### 68728: Science and music, an interview with Iannis Xenakis

 
Science and music 
An interview with lannis Xenakis 
lannis Xenakis, besides being a musician 
you are also an architect. How do you 
account for these twin preoccupations? 
I am not really an architect in the profes- 
sional sense of the term. When I worked 
with Le Corbusier, a good many years ago, I 
was involved in both activities at once. In 
particular, I collaborated on the Cité 
Radieuse residential complex in Marseilles, 
the Convent of Sainte-Marie-de-La- 
Tourette in Eveux-sur-I’Arbresle, near 
Lyons, and the city of Chandigarh in India. 
And in 1958 I designed the Philips Pavilion 
at the World's Fair in Brussels. But since 
then I have been concerned with making 
music, and occasionally, when the oppor- 
tunity arises, with architecture. 
What is your most recent project? 
The plan for an experimental concert hall 
that I designed with the architect Jean- 
Louis Veret. It was short-listed for the Cité 
de la Musique music community centre at 
La Villette, in Paris, but was not the win- 
ning design. This concert hall is entirely 
different from a conventional one. It is a 
sort of potato-shape, so as to avoid being 
circular, which is very bad acoustically. So it 
has a rounded, oval shape, with walls that 
bulge slightly. Instead of a fixed floor, there 
are cubes one metre wide, each of which 
can accommodate two people: the contours 
can thus be modified and the levels can be 
varied by as much as six metres. This makes 
several combinations possible: groupings in 
the centre, or several groupings to left and 
right, or, again, a traditional stage. The 
instrumental performers can accordingly be 
placed in the middle, on a platform of 
cubes, with the audience all around them. 
Butit is also possible to shift the focus away 
from the centre, or, on the contrary, to 
keep everything on one side only. Every- 
thing is possible. Running around the inside 
of the walls there is a spiral gallery which 
can accommodate the audience and also 
musicians, so as to produce a three-dimen- 
sional soundscape. The walls themselves 
are perforated with panels which can vary in 
their degree of absorbency to obtain the 
right degree of reverberation. Moreover, 
this entire volume can be made to com- 
municate with another, much larger 
volume, which contains it and which opens 
outwards, thereby creating a great many 
new possibilities for performances. But this 
is not mobile architecture. Mobile 
architecture never works, because the 
machinery gets jammed. 
Why is there such a link, in your opinion, 
between these two areas of creative activity, 
music and architecture?

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 68728: Science and music, an interview with Iannis Xenakis

  
  
 
  
Because architecture is a three-dimensional 
space in which we live. Humps and hollows 
are very important, in sound as well as in 
the visual sphere. The handling of propor- 
tions is essential here. The best architecture 
has to do not with decoration but with plain 
proportions and volumes. Architecture is 
the bare bones. Architecture is something 
visual. And in the visual sphere there are 
components which relate to what we call the 
rational sphere, which is also part of music. 
Whether we like it or not, there is a bridge 
between architecture and music. It is based 
on our mental structures, which are the 
same in both cases. Composers, for exam- 
ple, have used symmetrical patterns which 
also exist in architecture. If we want to 
discover the equal and symmetrical parts of 
a rectangle, the most informative way of 
proceeding is to rotate it. There are four 
directions in which a rectangle can be tur- 
ned, and no more than four. Such trans- 
formations also exist in music: this is what 
was invented in the melodic field during the 
Renaissance. You take a melody: (a) you 
read it upside down; (b) you invert it in 
relation to the intervals; (c) that which rose 
towards the upper part of the scale now 
descends towards the lower, and vice versa. 
To this you must add (d) the recurrence of 
the inversion, which was used by the 
polyphonists of the Renaissance and which 
also occurs in serial music. In this example, 
we find the same four transformations car- 
ried out in architecture and in music. 
Another example is the Philips Pavilion. 
To design this I used ideas borrowed from 
the orchestral music that I was composing at p» 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
Sa
la
be
rt
, 
Pa
ri
s,
 
an
d 
C
E
M
A
M
u
,
 
Is
sy
-l
es
-M
ou
li
ne
au
x,
 
Fr
an
ce
 
. 
S
g
 
an
? o
o
 
ob
 S
E
 
E
a
 
mn | a
l 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
  i 
wb
 
» 
i»
 
: 
Above, the Philips Pavilion at the 1958 
Brussels Exposition, designed by lannis 
Xenakis in what was then a totally new 
architectural form composed of hyperbo- 
lic paraboloids. The world premier of 
Poéme Electronique by the composer 
Edgard Varése (1883-1965), with a film by 
Le Corbusier, was held in the pavilion dur- 
ing the Exposition. 
A}

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 68728: Science and music, an interview with Iannis Xenakis

a
l
 
jo 
Fi
la
 
H
E
E
 
| 
    
  
TR 
oy ed, 
I \ 
IA yb 
A fis vi 
2 9 
a (| |9¥ 
ay A | 
N ZL, 
Av t 
3 1 
: Ji 
z ih 
2 = FR 
ER = ils 
7 —— HALES 
== = TRL = SN 
  
X 
I 
3 
ca 
: 
oo | 
Ll 
EZ 
a" 
F. ord 
NE 
a n®e X 
& 
a AA 
a 
LS na = 
AEs 
| 
©,
 
v
e
 
1] 
p the time. I wanted to create changeable 
spaces, which could be continuously altered 
by the displacement of a straight line. This 
produces hyperbolic paraboloids in 
architecture and masses of glissandos in 
music. 
Can you give any examples from history of 
such a convergence, or even coincidence, 
between architectural and musical patterns? 
Bartok used the golden section to achieve 
his harmonies. The golden section is taken 
from the visual sphere. It is a geometrical 
proportion, with the additional property 
that each term is the sum of the previous 
two terms. From the Egyptian pyramids to 
the Greek temples, it was used in 
architecture as a sort of miraculous key to 
the creation of something beautiful. 
But for you this correspondence is fun- 
damental? 
Goethe said: “Architecture is frozen 
music.” If we attempt to go further than this 
literary form of words in order to make a 
more objective claim, we soon come to 
mental structures which fall into the group 
category. The rotation of rectangles or 
melodies are groups of transformations. 
And in fact group theory deals with sym- 
metries, down to the infinitely small level of 
particles—this is the only means whereby 
particles can be identified. 
There are thus several levels of corres- 
pondence. The vaguest is the literary level, 
that of Goethe; I have mentioned another, 
more objective level, with my example of 
groups; there are others of a different type 
such as that of forming space either in sound 
or in architecture by using the acoustic axis 
such as glissandos, or the numerical axis. 
But there are other possible approaches. 
Rhythm, for example. What is rhythm? It 
consists of chosen points along an axis, 
namely, the axis of time. The musician mea- 
sures time as the walker counts milestones. 
The same thing is found in architecture— 
with a facade, for example. And piano keys 
are also architecture. They are regulated in 
a constant manner. In one case itis a matter 
of time, and in the other, of space. So there 
is a correspondence between the two. And 
this is possible because there is an under- 
lying mental structure which mathemati- 
cians call an “order structure”. 
Stretching across the top of pages 4to 8 is 
the score of Mycénes Alpha (1978), a piece 
of music created by lannis Xenakis on the 
UPIC, a composing machine he invented 
(see photo opposite page). The work lasts 
approximately 10 minutes. 
So in your experiments as a composer, you 
draw on experiments in physics, among 
other things? 
Admittedly, I have not carried out such 
experiments myself, but I know that they 
are so defined. The surprising thing is that 
order structures, isomorphic mapping and 
group theory originated with mathemati- 
cians. They created, as it were, a more 
searching experimental psychology than the 
psychologists of the nineteenth century. 
Much later, researchers such as Jean Piaget 
discovered that the development of mental 
structures in children coincides with these 
definitions in mathematics and physics. 
In your work as a musician, informatics 
plays an important part because of the new 
possibilities it opens up. You have even in- 
vented a music-composing machine, the 
UPIC. Can you tell us about it? 
In the laboratory that I set up twenty years 
ago, we developed a system whereby any- 
body at all can compose music by drawing. 
It is both a tool for composers and acoustics 
experts and a teaching aid for children, who 
can learn to think in music without having to 
be trained in musical notation—learning by 
direct experience, in other words. This 
could not have been done without informa- 
tics, which yielded possibilities comparable 
to those brought by the invention of writing: 
preserving thought in symbols. Here, we 
can use our machine to preserve musical 
thought, since we can also store it. 
Do children remain free and unaffected by 
the conditioning of a specific musical lan- 
guage? 
They do. For example, an Indian or 
Balinese child who has learned the tradi- 
tional music of his village will start to think 
musically in a different way if he or she uses 
this machine. Children can imitate Bach 
without having learned musical notation. 
Gradually the child assimilates this and 
fashions his or her own environment in a 
particular style. 
How do you use computers at present? 
In Diatope (1977), the entire programme of 
laser beams and electronic flashes co-ordin- 
ated with the music, which was also pro- 
duced by computer, had been devised by 
programming In computation centres. 
There were 1,600 electronic lights which 
could flash on and off individually in one 
twenty-fifth of a second. This cannot be 
done by hand: it is too fast and the numbers 
are too high. Furthermore, computers and 
other new technology available to us can 
produce light, so that it becomes possible to 
transpose the musical composition into the 
visual sphere and experiment with shapes 
and movements. The effects of light be- 
come like visible sounds. You can play with 
them just as you play with sounds, but in a 
spatial dimension instead. The morpholo- 
gical techniques (creating moving or sta- 
tionary shapes) are often the same as in 
music. For example, if you want a cloud of 
points of light to appear and disappear, you 
need to introduce the calculus of prob- 
ability, as I did with sounds. It is the same 
technique. But not everything is con- 
vertible... 
It should be borne in mind that computer 
technology is only a tool. If I use mathema- 
tical functions or even sometimes physical 
theories in music, it is because there is a 
profound connexion between music and 
numbers. All of Pythagorean theory, of 
course, is based on this thesis. But it is a 
truth which derives from our own mental 
structure, nothing more. Once you have 
grasped this principle, it is easy to make use 
of whole chunks of mathematical thought, 
which is already present in music and even, 
In some cases, at a much more advanced 
stage than in mathematics. 
For example, consider what happened 
when musicians in the tenth century in- 
vented musical notation, no longer relying 
on the vague indications of neumes, but 
using the staff and calibrated units of the 
characteristics of sound: pitch and duration. 
In doing this they transformed sensations 
which have nothing to do with spatial sensa- 
tions into spatial notation. 
Four hundred years before Nicole

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 68728: Science and music, an interview with Iannis Xenakis

   
   
    
  
  
      
  
  
  
  
_ — 
in fpmend Eo 
—_— — —=—3 end — - = = Pa i —- = Tr EEE = == a] = = —= . = = = — —_— _—_— EY = = — 
—_— hm ———e—— — ’ Sed x = 
= = Rr = = ¥ 8  —— = 
= = = = T 1 === ==—_— == = = = = = | = — ae =_ —_ - == = Sr r——— = = ——————— _ == = —_ —_— : = =a == =, — —_— —_— = Ls T   ———— = — — = Pos HF o= Tm = Pe - = h— ———z = = —_ 
—_——— = _— == —_———
=~ = = 
= TTT —_— = — = — —— = =  _  1 —_— S— —— —— === —_— _— V= — == = == = — —_— —_— en I= —_— —_— _— =pntna—  —_- = = == = = = — - = —— = = Te —_ - _— 0 — = —_— -— — rey —_— — — == = —_— 
— = _ = —_—— — —_ — = —_— —_——— TF — —_— —_— = = — —_— EX -_ —_ = = tr S— — 
= _— — 
— — nd —_— — = _— 
—_— = —_— —_———— — = - — me _  = _— — — iy = —_ —_— = _ —_ = = _ —— ——— 
—_— ja 
—_— —_ mn —_— —_— 
— ————r 
——— sr — — —— 
— a 
—— 
———— — - er 
—— _— 
= —_— —— —_ pe C=  
pr —_- — — —— —_— —_— 
— 
= —_ _— — — —— = —— — _ — —_— = fd ——e —— — 
= 
— 
—_— 5 _— — — = — 
=z =T 
—_— — —_— —_ my tt XN 
x 
od. 516 
616 
76 
— — 0 . [] 
: 
! 
: 
5 
ossa— 
A \ ¢ 
r 
R « 
| 3 +] 3 Ry 5 
S r- : ve . 
he \ AL ] 
w 
oN 
{ 
‘7 % : : ’ : 
y 
| a : a — sy 
! o— AR 4 
a . 
f 
Ee ine MOTLEY | 
Oresme and six centuries before the analy- 
tical geometry of Descartes! Music was 
ahead of its time. I do not know whether 
Oresme or Descartes were influenced by 
musical notation, which did exactly what 
they did, and yielded even more abundant 
possibilities, since pitch and duration have 
nothing to do with space, whereas these two 
thinkers were working in space. This is only 
one instance where musicians, without 
knowing what they were doing, have stolen 
a march on knowledge and invention in 
other areas. 
Do you see no sharp dividing line between 
traditional musical thinking and the most 
modern aspects of contemporary music? 
None. There is even a fairly smooth con- 
tinuum which has resulted, for example, in 
[ B
e
 
Rey 
TT.
 
= Es 
serial music. The escape from tonal func- 
tions made possible by “dodecaphony”, and 
later by serial music, was only relative, since 
Schoenberg and the Vienna School adopted 
self-imposed restrictions in returning to 
manipulations of the polyphonic type that 
came in with the Renaissance. This was the 
criticism that I levelled at the serialist school 
in the 1950s. If Schoenberg had been famil- 
iar with the science of his day, including 
philosophy, physics and mathematics, he 
would have introduced the calculus of prob- 
ability. 
So the musician should keep up to date with 
contemporary knowledge? 
Yes. Of course, this is increasingly difficult. 
But even without a thorough knowledge of 
every field, he should be familiar with as p 
in NE pic 4 35 _ - 
LE TG 
    
       
lannis Xenakis with the composing 
machine he invented in 1975 and which 
has since won wide acclaim. Known as the 
UPIC (Unité Polyagogique Informatique du 
CEMAMu), the machine makes it possible 
“to compose music through drawing, even 
without any knowledge of music or infor- 
matics”, with a stylet on the electro- 
magnetic table. It brings musical creation 
within reach of everyone and is a useful 
educational tool. It enshrines one of the 
composer's major preoccupations, the re- 
lationship between forms created in space 
and those created in time. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
He
nn
in
g 
Lo
hn
er
, 
Wi
es
ba
de
n,
 
Fe
d.
 
Re
p.
 
of
 
G
e
r
m
a
n
y

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  
Drawings by lannis Xenakis of a theatre 
and concert hall which he designed in 
association with the French architect 
Jean-Louis Veret. The building consists of 
two volumes: a large multi-purpose area 
enclosed by a thin concrete shell (8), in- 
side which is the “potato-shaped” ex- 
perimental music room itself, with its 
wood-covered concrete walls. The two 
areas communicate by means of pivoting 
acoustic panels (1). The building opens 
out through sheets of “wavy” glass (4) 
onto an elevated platform (6). The project, 
initially intended for the “Cité de la Musi- 
gue” at La Villette, in Paris, breaks with all 
previous conceptions of what a concert 
hall should be, and is designed to “receive 
music, musicians, their technological 
equipment and the audience in three 
dimensions”. 
1} Pivoting acoustic panels 
2) Interior ramp for audience, performers, 
projection, sound and lighting equipment 
3) “Potato-shaped” experimental concert hall 
4) Sheets of “wavy” glass yd 
7 
  
5) Helicoid general access and 
performance ramp: main entrance 
/ =I 
~ 
¥ Tn 6) ol < 
a g y- platform or 
8 RIL Sy 
J = y «A ’ 
¥ 3 4 KZ y 
Sosy 
Place de ta “Fontaine aux Lions” 
  
   
A 
—_— 
EE ——— pray = 
— —- =. = 
—_—— -—== 
=== 
—_— — 
= 
1 — 
= = 
= ——— 
— Ta 
= == — — —_— —— 
= —_ == _ = == = = =
pe = — rrr 
IE == = = = = oe
= ow —— == jt 
i = 
A ———— - R———— - — | Sem = 
Midindy - = = = = Cu p— —_ A = as 
————— a - —-_ —— 
— 
—_ 
mcemve———, == - = —_—— == = __ = J —_— = = 
=== == == = = = er — —_ —— = - Z = —_ 
—— wr oT — = = = TT TS oe. 
= = = em —_— Ex Ser Fm STE Ya ee — — —— - h— = = = = = = = = 
—_— == — = == bay = = —_ 
Te — — = = Comme = Xx == — — — _— ae — 
smm— me —_ = — = Aon = = = 
Pear = = ———— — Teme = = _ — er EW 
T I 
rr ”, 2d 
Fn 2 B35 936 
    
  
 
=" TT 
. RR a ii 
SRST RNC NT 
et   EY 
  
   
View from the “Fontaine aux Lions” 
  
   
  
 
     
   
   
  
    
  
3 
General access ramp 
  
8) Hyperbolic paraboloid shells (thin layer) 
Dr
aw
in
g 
©)
 
la
nn
is
 
Xe
na
ki
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
9) Outside ramp for movement 
, around the potato-shaped hall 4 
MON 
’ 10) Variable relief floor 
Nn J\ 
4 
- 11) Cloakrooms, rehearsal rooms, 
dressing rooms, lifts, etc. * B 
12) Helicoid general access and performance ramp 
~.
 
A
N
 
N 
7) Stage for open-air events 
7 Cité de la Musique, La Villette 
Experimental concert hall 
and theatre, March 1984

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

p many elements as possible. For the essential 
core of knowledge—and this is what is mar- 
vellous—is easy to impart. For example, if 
one talks about degree of order or disorder, 
many people know what this means, but not 
explicitly. Now, in a film like Battleship 
Potemkin (1925), Eisenstein was perhaps 
the first to create a mobile art of this kind: 
he artistically directs drifting masses of indi- 
viduals, statistical events, since we see 
crowds moving one way and then another. 
This procedure was followed by other film- 
makers in their turn, notably Abel Gance in 
his Napoleon (1926). If you tell people: this 
is what happens with clouds or galaxies or 
intrastellar gases, they understand im- 
mediately. I believe that there are fun- 
damental concepts which are communi- 
cable. 
How do you account for the central place of 
scientific thought in your musical aesthetic? 
I drew my early inspiration from the culture 
of ancient Greece, and especially that of 
Athens in the fifth and fourth centuries BC. 
This was a period of extraordinary creativ- 
ity in the history of humankind. It saw the 
birth of mathematics as we now know it. 
From a structural point of view, this ax- 
iomatic, Euclidian science is still continuing 
today. There has been no break. 
Then there was philosophy. The other 
day, I was reading an article about the 
formation of the universe, It said that the 
whole of science up till now has been based 
on causality. But, today, we are starting to 
ask the following question: can the universe 
have emerged from nothing, without a 
cause? Astrophysicists are tending to think 
that it did. Accordingly, and this is the 
interesting point, the Parmenidean tradi- 
tion is capable of changing and developing. 
Besides these influences, there were my 
contacts with certain individuals such as Le 
Corbusier and Messiaen. Even if he isnot a 
mathematician, Olivier Messiaen has a kind 
of affinity with numbers. This is apparent in 
his “modes of limited transposition”, and in 
his love of Hindu and Greek rhythm sys- 
tems. These two categories of music, 
moreover, are mathematical par excellence. 
In the sphere of rhythm, which is the hand- 
ling of temporal number in the pure state, 
no music has developed further than per- 
cussion in India. African types of percus- 
sion, which are different, are also remark- 
able. With these kinds of music, I feel per- 
fectly at home. I would even say, perhaps, 
that I have felt Western music to be more 
“exotic” than these. N 
IANNIS XENAKIS, of Greek origin, is an interna- 
tionally known composer who is also a mathe- 
matician and architect. A former professor at the 
University of Indiana, he currently teaches at the 
University of Paris | and is director of the Centre 
d'Etudes de Mathémalique et Automatique 
Musicale (C.EM.A.Mu.} in Paris, which he 
founded in 1966. His prolific output of over sixty 
works, some of them already classics, includes 
every form of musical composition. Among his 
works composed in recent years are: Polytope 
de Cluny, electronic and laser ray music (1972); 
Cendrées, for choir and orchestra (1973); Ais, for 
baritone, percussion and orchestra (1980) and 
Shaar, for string orchestra (1982). This autumn 
his Keqrops, a work for piano and orchestra, will 
be performed for the first time, by the New York 
Phitharmonic Orchestra.   
  
America and the Caribbean can be 
told in song. Apparently the slight- 
est of art forms, a mixture of words and 
music full of wit and feeling, songs illumin- 
ate the past centuries of our continent like a 
flash of lightning. They tell of arrows loosed 
against cannon, and later of peasants with- 
out land and workers without factories. 
Even more recently, they are harbingers of 
T history of the peoples of Latin 


### 68730: Nueva canción: Latin America's song without frontiers

 
Nueva cancion 
Latin America’s song without frontiers 
by Daniel Viglietti 
freedom in societies new-born. Song knows 
no frontiers: “The great songwriters trans- 
cend geography,” observed the Uruguayan 
musicologist Lauro Ayestardn. “They cre- 
ate authentic musical units in a way that p 
_El Circo (The Circus), a tapestry by Violetta 
Parra, a noted composer and singer of 
Chilean popular music as well as a collec- 
tor of Chilean folklore. 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
19
80
 
NF
C,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 68730: Nueva canción: Latin America's song without frontiers

pp races, nations or mere geographical areas 
do not (...). Folklore thumbs its nose at 
geography.” 
But not at history. Songwriters are 
perhaps the real unifying factors in the poli- 
tical and cultural life of Latin America 
today. One reason for this is the extent of 
their audience. In a continent where levels 
of illiteracy are high, songs can be read with 
the ears. As a result of technological pro- 
gress portable transistor radios are ubi- 
quitous, and consequently the popularity of 
songs is spreading like seed scattered to the * 
winds. 
This raises the question of what kind of 
seed is being sown, and what kind of harvest 
it will yield. In the countries of Latin Amer- 
ica it is impossible to ignore the pervasive 
impact of an alienating type of song, for the 
most part imported straight from foreign 
cultural capitals, or else home-produced 
with the mentality of colonized peoples. 
There is undeniable hostility to such trends 
as the nueva cancion (“new song”). Despite 
this censorship, whether direct or indirect, 
the song that speaks to the people through 
the quality of its message threads its way 
through the labyrinth of repression and si- 
lence until it finds receptive hearers. Folk- 
lore, in the traditional sense of the term, is 
very close to the strains of the nueva cancion 
or nuevo canto, questionable expressions 
but ones which were accepted by partici- 
pants in the First Festival of New Latin 
American Song, held under Unesco aus- 
pices in Mexico City in 1982. 
When a rural Ecuadorian, in the heart of 
the mountains, listens on his transistor 
radio to the Chilean Victor Jara singing his 
4 i 4 
Sy ie . 7H 
A
Plegaria de un labrador (A Farmer's 
Prayer), he is, although he may not realize 
it, listening to a piece of folklore. Such 
songs belong to a group of sometimes 
ephemeral phenomena which might be 
called “subjective folklore”, and which 
have not yet been given a place among the 
categories made by folklore specialists. 
There is also an anonymous mass of sounds 
which have left no trace at all, except in 
popular memory. To rediscover that 
memory, and to recapture the experience of 
listening to those sounds, is a task crying out 
for new generations of researchers, but 
thwarted by a chronic lack of support from 
national governments and international 
bodies. 
The thread of history that stretches un- 
broken from the sounds produced by the 
Jew’s harp to the cassette recorded by a 
singer of nueva cancion passes through 
stages which are too numerous to describe 
in this article. But mention should be made 
of the generation of composers and perfor- 
mers which provided a link between that 
past and today. And “today” will soon be 
“yesterday”, if we think of the earliest ven- 
tures of Atahualpa Yupanqui, to take one 
notable architect of this continuity between 
two periods. A few decades before the ex- 
plosion of the modern media, Yupanqui 
would have been a troubadour, a tavern 
poet, a wandering minstrel. The amplifica- 
tion of his message (by radio, records, cas- 
settes, cinema, television and video cas- 
settes) has enormously multiplied his im- 
pact. Song, that ancient form of oral com- 
munication, is also taking on a new lease of 
life by conquering new spheres of influence 
Daniel Viglietti photographed moments 
before the beginning of a concert he gave 
as part of Nicaragua’s Vacaciones felices 
(“Happy holidays”) programme. The audi- 
ence consisted of children from a poor 
district of Managua, the capital. 
7s 
> WV AF = 
0 7 
  
and new publics. Its range and its access to 
the media are giving it an added intensity of 
purpose and a new potential to affect peo- 
ple and to “heighten awareness”. 
“New song” is a river through which 
several currents swirl. In the late 1950s and 
in the 1960s, the Cuban revolution, Che 
Guevara and the Chilean experiment pro- 
vided opportunities to develop more direct 
and deliberate political messages which 
gave added meaning to the term “protest 
song”. The participants in the First Protest 
Song Meeting, held in Cuba in 1967, identi- 
fied more strongly with the aesthetic and 
ideological features of the songs than with 
the actual term “protest song”, which 
nevertheless continued to stick for some 
time. In the 1970s, other political events in 
Uruguay, Chile, Argentina, Nicaragua, 
Grenada, El Salvador and Guatemala 
boosted the development of this genre. 
To sing “from the side of power” was the 
novel experience of the Nueva Trova Cuba- 
na, “the new Cuban song” movement, 
which set to work with rigour and imagina- 
tion, determined not to yield to the tempta- 
tions of apologetics. The movement was 
most successful in the sphere of lyrics, 
where it reached poetic heights which were 
no obstacle to communication, even with 
audiences elsewhere in Latin America. In 
musical terms, working in a medium strong- 
ly influenced by the former colonial powers, 
the Nueva Trova began to find its way by 
working with the Sound Experiment Group 
of the Cuban Institute of Cinema Art and 
Industry and with Cuban composer Leo 
Brouwer guiding the first steps of the 
movement’s original singers, Pablo 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
d

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 68730: Nueva canción: Latin America's song without frontiers

a
 
} 
C
H
 
T
r
 
o
o
”
 
a 
¥ 
WW
 
» 
oa
r 
: . 
hs or 
y - / 
yy p ry 
4 bh! 
L : v 
w “+ 
. " 
} § 
fat B 
] ok 
aa
 
4 Pe
 
_: Fy
 
- 
- x . 
wy
 
a 
A
E
 
i
 
CI
T 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
Milanés, Silvio Rodriguez and Noel Nicola. 
Launched by such pioneers as Dorival 
Caymi and Vinicius de Moraes, the Musica 
Popular Brasileira—a more accurate label 
since it does not exclude the purely in- 
strumental—has become the Latin Amer- 
ican movement that boasts the richest varie- 
ty of styles and professional possibilities as 
well as arelatively wide range of recordings. 
As a result, works of great musical value, 
such as the songs of Chico Buarque, have 
become extremely popular. 
It can safely be claimed that nueva can- 
cién today exists throughout “our Amer- 
ica”, that voices travel across frontiers and 
that we are witnessing the birth of a distinc- 
tive kind of polyphony and the emergence 
of a synthesis which is still not widely per- 
ceived, except in the work of certain inter- 
nationally known artists. 
Almost all of Latin America has been 
subjected to the onslaught of cultural im- 
perialism, and in resisting this it has learnt 
to sing of the everyday lives of humble folk, 
their joys and frustrations, hopes, sorrows 
and festivities, and, when circumstances 
make this inevitable, of their suffering in 
prison or in exile. 
Little has been said of the divided world 
“of song in those countries where political 
conditions have entailed exile, either within 
the country or abroad. The nueva cancion 
of Chile, Argentina and Uruguay, to take 
only a few examples, is a kind of duet: one 
voice sings within the country, in contact 
with harsh everyday reality; the other, in 
close contact with the first, sings in exile, 
creating and disseminating an itinerant cul- 
ture of resistance. 
If we look at this two-sided process in the 
case of Uruguay, which has returned to the 
path of democracy, we need a wide-angle 
lens in order to keep in focus all those whe 
sang of freedom inside the country. And we 
need keen hearing to catch the voices of all 
the Uruguayan singers scattered among the 
exiled population throughout the world: the 
Los Olimarenos duo, Alfredo Zitarrosa, 
Portrait of Atahualpa Yupanqui, one of the 
most celebrated composers and singers 
of Argentine and Latin American popular 
music, by the Ecuadorian painter Oswaldo 
Guayasamin (Quito, 1977). 
Anibal Sampayo, and many others. The 
freedom to create was repressed within our 
country from 1973 to 1985, but so it was 
abroad, since we were all to some extent 
prisoners of a certain attitude towards ex- 
pressing our affliction in song. That “state 
of exile” left its mark on our writing. Inside 
the country, people sang out of suffering, 
but in a spirit of defiance and, with a deter- 
mined gaiety in their creation, they stood 
up to be counted in the shadow of the 
general danger. (I am thinking of such 
groups as Los que iban cantando and Rum- 
bo, of Leo Masliah and Rubén Olivera). 
Both teams worked in unison, one in the 
fiery furnace, the other in the mists of exile, 
to produce a truly passionate counterpoint. 
In 1985 the return from exile began, and a 
new era called for new songs. In our songs 
the oldest among us had to come to terms 
with a period when our model democracy 
was overwhelmed by oppression. The 
young ones, during the dictatorship, had to 
sing in a more oblique fashion. And those 
who come after us: how will they, in their 
turn, have to sing? Facing up to the immedi- 
ate past with eyes wide open? What can we 
do now, when “almost” everything is pos- 
sible? In those who chose to stay behind 
when they could have left, what strings are 
being tuned? In those returning from exile, 
what new flowers of song are budding? In 
the voices of those who have been released, 
what new dreams will take flight on wings of 
melody? After the doves and the hawks, 
what firebird will come to herald new 
songs? Singers of the nueva cancion, who 
remained, departed or returned, but who 
will never be silenced: what new movement 
shall we add to the sonata? Or, to choose an 
example nearer home, what new stanza 
shall we add to the milonga? x 
DANIEL VIGLIETTI, Uruguayan composer and 
poet, is a leading figure in Latin American music 
who abandoned a career as a classical guitarist 
in order to write and perform popular songs. A 
journalist and a researcher into folk music, he 
was imprisoned in his country because of his 
songs in 1972, and freed after an international 
campaign on his behalf sponsored by such per- 
sonalities as Miguel Angel Asturias, Jean-Paul 
Sartre and Mikis Theodorakis. Exiled in 1973, he 
settled in France, and returned to Uruguay in 
1984 where he was greeted by an immense 
crowd of fans and sympathizers. His biography 
(by Mario Benedetti) accompanied by an anthol- 
ogy of his songs, was published in French in 
1974 under the title Chansons pour Notre Améri- 
que. 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 68733: The Mystery of melody

iw 
\d 
gu od Ni 
CAN 
Bo” 
Sa 4 
Ne 
* . 
> Fy » 
Arr ’ A ft Lo I es < 
| Nal rd 
8 Nr 
LN ww 
by Anthony Burgess 
  
= ahs   
NYBODY can write a sort of 
A melody. Give, as the Chinese do, 
each note of the musical scale a 
number. Doremifasolatido:123456 
78. You can turn your telephone number 
or car registration number into a se- 
quence of notes. This is perhaps not long 
enough for a true melody, but it will yield 
a theme. A theme may be defined as a 
scrap of melody crying out to be de- 
veloped—not just into a true melody but 
into a whole symphonic movement, into a 
whole opera. All music begins with a 
germ like that, and it may lie sleeping ina 
passport number. 
But we all know that the great melodies 
of the world are not made in that manner. 
The great melodies of the world arrive 
without warning. They spring out of no- 
where, and they are only given to the 
great musical geniuses. 
Perhaps there is an analogy between 
the language of speech and the language 
of music. In every spoken phrase, evenin 
a single word, a melody may be lurking. 
Take the phrase that comesin a poem by 
Edgar Allan Poe—*"“the tintinnabulation 
of the bells”. Recite that often enough, 
and the sheer rhythm—regardless of 
meaning—will generate a musical 
phrase. 
“La ci darem la mano”. Da Ponte gave 
that phrase to Mozart in the opera Don 
Giovanni, and Mozart heard in it the 
melody which begins an exquisite duet. 
In one of Beethoven's last string quartets 
we hear the question “Muss es sein?” 
(Must it be?) and the answer “Es muss 
sein” (It must bel). Beethoven goes to the 
trouble of placing the words under the 
notes. They are not intended to be sung, 
since the musicians are string-players, not 
Front cover by Picasso for the first (1919) 
edition of Stravinsky’s piano arrangement 
of his “Rag-time”, 
~., Themystery 
8.4 
of \ 
a) a 
Xo » x, % 
in 4 . 
’ . 
< 
zd 
Text © Anthony Burgess 1986 = — fet 
    
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
S
P
A
D
E
M
,
 
19
86
, 
Pa
ns
   
 
—
 
 

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 68733: The Mystery of melody

vocalists; the composer is merely being 
honest enough to disclose the inspiration 
of his theme. 
But great melodies are not often bound 
to words. Bach’s Air on the G String or 
the marvellous theme of the Choral Pre- 
lude Wachet Auf are clearly pure sound 
which owes nothing to verbal inspiration. 
Where did they come from? Anyone 
who, like myself, has composed music 
may give some sort of an answer. A 
melody arrives in the mind. It seems to be 
something remembered, something that 
has always existed but been long forgot- 
ten. Then it suddenly appears. Occa- 
sionally this melody is genuinely some- 
thing remembered—something written 
by somebody else. This can cause trou- 
ble—lawsuits for plagiarism. There was a 
popular song in the 1920s called “Yes, 
We Have No Bananas”. This is made up 
out of Handel's “Hallelujah” chorus, the 
folksong “My Bonny Lies Over the 
Ocean”, and the aria “I dreamt that I 
dwelt in marble halls” from Balfe’s opera 
The Bohemian Girl. Plagiarism? Possib- 
ly. Popular song-writers used to plagia- 
rize all the time. Sheer memory? Possibly 
again. Who knows? These things are dif- 
ficult to prove in a court of law. 
The truly great tune resembles no 
other. It has certainly come from heaven, 
or from nowhere, and it usually comes 
when unexpected. But it sometimes 
comes when it is needed. Imagine that 
you are commissioned to compose a sym- 
phony. This is to be performed in two 
months’ time by a great symphony 
orchestra. The least difficult work will be 
the orchestration, which will come last. 
The most difficult will be finding themes 
for the first movement. Here you will 
require two main groups of themes, one 
aggressively masculine, the other de- 
licately feminine. These themes must be 
capable of development—that is, turning 
 
“Animated Music”, a drawing by the French artist Grandville (1803-1847) 
which appeared in the illustrated periodical Le Magasin Pittoresque in 1840. 
into other themes, combining in counter- 
point with other themes, turning into 
great soaring melodies. The urgency of 
the commission will sometimes force 
your unconscious mind into producing 
melodic germs full of potential. Or some 
little melody composed in childhood will 
suddenly present symphonic possibilities. 
For another great mystery about melody 
is that it is more likely to come to you 
when you are seven than when you are 
seventy. 
The mystery remains. But in an age 
like ours, which doesn’t approve of mys- 
teries, the production of great melodies is 
no longer regarded as one of the jobs of 
the composer. Be honest, and consider 
which pop or rock song of the last twenty 
years contains a genuine melody. You 
will hear fine melodies in, say, George 
Gershwin or the Beatles, but few in the 
music of the Rolling Stones. The sexual 
impulse in the rhythm, or the content of 
social protest in the words, will seem to 
the new generation more important than 
sheer melody. 
What applies to popular music applies 
even more to the music termed serious. 
The dodecaphonic composers,’ led by 
Arnold Schoenberg, showed the way to a 
mechanical mode of composition very 
popular with the young products of the 
music academies. You make a theme out 
of the twelve notes of the chromatic 
scale—a theme of just twelve notes, for 
one of the rules is that no note may come 
more than once—and then you play this 
theme backwards or upside down or up- 
side down and backwards. Your musical 
skill will lie in the management of tone 
colour, of dynamics and climax, but not 
in the creation of melody as we used to 
know it. You will find such music damn- 
ably hard to sing. 
There are people around who say that 
there can be no more great melodies. 
They say that, with so few notes in the 
musical scale, all the original themes 
must already have been written and there 
is no point in looking for new ones. This is 
nonsense. There is still an infinitude of 
books to be written out of the twenty-six 
letters of the alphabet, and there is still an 
infinitude of melodies to be generated 
out of twelve notes and the innumerable 
rhythmical combinations of these which 
wait to be exploited. We have just got out 
of the habit of thinking melodically. This 
is very bad for us, since there is nothing in 
the world more heartening than a great 
tune. 
Where would the French Revolution 
have been without the Marseillaise, a 
tune written by a soldier named Rouget 
de Lisle, who was suddenly touched by 
inspiration? Where would the communist 
revolution have been without the Interna- 
tionale (a far inferior tune to the Marseil- 
laise)? But greater than tunes are those 
fifty-minute streams of melodic invention 
we call symphonies and concertos. These 
are always the products of conscious skill 
and ingenuity, like works of engineering, 
but they could not exist without those 
spurts of melodic inspiration from the 
unconscious mind. We do not know what 
strange inner force is at work spinning 
away at themes and tunes, but we bow 
down to the results. The great mystery of 
music remains. 
 
ANTHONY BURGESS, the British novelist, critic 
and man of letters, has devoted much of his 
creative energy to music and has composed 
many full-scale orchestral works including three 
symphonies, as well as The Blooms of Dublin, a 
musical version of James Joyce's Ulysses, the 
libretto of which is to be published shortly. 
Among his most recent published works are 
Flame into Being, a study of D.H. Lawrence 
(1985), and Homage to Qwertyuiop, a collection 
of his essays (1986). 
Le
s 
Dé
bu
ts
 
du
 
Ro
ma
nt
is
me
, 
©
 
Ed
it
io
ns
 
Re
nc
on
tr
e,
 
La
us
an
ne
 
Dr
aw
in
g 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
Hi
st
oi
re
 
de
 
la
 
Mu
si
qu
e,
 
Vo
l.
 
8:

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
NE of the most common prejudices 
O governing the division of labour in 
music, as well as its marketing and 
consumption, gives rise to the splitting of 
music, musicians and their public into two 
warring and apparently irreconcilable fac- 
tions: “popular” as opposed to “classical”. 
By “popular music” I mean the forms of 
music created, sung or danced to by the 
people of a country or a region. The word 
popular refers to something that “originates 
from the people”, not something imposed 
on it. Thus I exclude from the category of 
popular music the soulless consumer pro- 
duct generally associated with the variety 
show. 
The reality underlying this sterile conflict 
cannot be reduced to a mere question of 
form. Few people are prepared to admit 
that this prejudice springs from an urge to 
segregate human beings into social categor- 
ies in defiance of that most universal of all 
phenomena—art. 
This obsolete and snobbish attitude 
stands revealed as particularly anachronis- 
ticand reactionary in this day and age when, 
one might suppose, the mass media should 
be bringing the highest forms of creative art 
of all periods within reach of their vast 
audience. 
But this is not happening. Obscure com- 
mercial arguments, which conceal élitist 
attitudes indefensible in other areas of cul- 
ture, separate consumers of music into 
those who can choose judiciously what they 
will listen to and those who are deprived of 
that right and have to be content with 
stereotyped works of inferior quality. Low 


### 68736: Music for all

Music for all 
or non-existent purchasing power and low 
standards of literacy or general education 
are at the root of this restriction. 
It is easy to picture a music-lover living in 
a capital city: he buys tickets for concerts 
and festivals at which he can appreciate the 
performances of the best modern artists and 
compare them with recordings made in the 
past. He has access to information through 
channels which do not necessarily coincide 
with the selection that the media impose. 
Both his education and the information 
at his disposal enable him to choose, and 
naturally he seeks out the highest-quality 
producers of art and strives to be actively, 
or at least passively, involved in the main- 
stream of events in the world of musical 
creation, by taking part in the rituals of that 
world—concerts. 
On the other hand, it is very difficult to 
imagine one of the thousands or tens of 
thousands of country-dwellers or labourers 
in Romania, Bolivia, Afghanistan or the 
Philippines—to take examples from diffe- 
rent continents—having any access to this 
kind of choice. Such a choice, like all forms 
of knowledge, would be one contribution to 
a universal vision of human history. And 
yet individuals such as these make up the 
majority of a country’s people. 
These population groups, dispossessed of 
their ethnic or folk styles of music and be- 
wildered by the bombardment to which 
they are subjected by the media, very often 
have no choice but to consume pseudo- 
artistic products labelled “popular music” 
by their main distributors. 
This levelling down process now unites 
 Ph
ot
o 
©
 
“M
us
iq
ue
 
Es
pé
ra
nc
e”
 
by Miguel Angel Estrella 
most of the world’s population. That which 
in the past was specific to one area, the 
industrialized countries, and to one popula- 
tion group, the city-dwellers, is now, on the 
eve of the twenty-first century, interlinking 
rural populations, factory-hands and office 
workers all over the world. Advertising, 
radio, television and records have spawned 
this civilization of sound, which is cven 
threatening to oust written language. And 
music is becoming the main vehicle of this 
kind of communication. But what kind of 
music? 
Even in the “developed” countries, we 
musicians are aware that disadvantaged au- 
diences believe themselves incapable of 
understanding the music of Debussy, Mes- 
siaen, Mozart, Schubert, Krenek or Dutil- 
leux (or Astor Piazzolla, Leo Brouwer, 
Manolo Juédrez, McLoughlin, or Charlie 
Parker). 
Nevertheless, once the barriers of con- 
vention have been broken down and pre- 
tentiousness and paternalism swept away, 
such audiences are highly sensitive to the 
essence of the message that these compos- 
ers wished to put across, miraculously trans- 
mitted by the performer. Hence the 
tremendous responsibility that devolves on 
us musicians as the fundamental negotiators 
of this social change, which entails breaking 
moulds and leaping over the barriers which 
divide us and which cut us off at the same 
time from our natural partners in dialogue: 
the public. 
It would be naive to suppose that 
preaching along these lines could bring ab- 
out any radical shift in so entrenched a 
structure. The prejudice must be attacked 
at its roots. For it is undeniable that we 
musicians are trained to fit into an élitist 
system which sets itself up as the only possi- 
ble choice. This way of thinking is tanta- p> 
“To take music to the most disadvantaged 
audiences, to go to those whose social 
and cultural background have hitherto de- 
prived them of this joy and would not nor- 
mally setfootina concert hall.” This is one 
of the aims of “Musique Espérance”, a 
movement created by the Argentine pian- 
ist Miguel! Angel Estrella. “Musique Espér- 
ance” organizes musical events in factor- 
ies, prisons and schools, and also for the 
elderly, for the sick, and for handicapped 
children. Left, Miguel Angel Estrella in 
January 1983 during a “concert-talk” with 
the children of workers at a factory in Bel- 
fort in eastern France.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 68736: Music for all

  
  
   Li A : 
“Just as it should be natural for the music 
of Berio to be heard in juxtaposition with 
that of Corelli or Mussorgsky, there is no 
reason why the music of Bach should not 
be played during a religious service with  iil iy Negro spirituals and songs by Rubén 
J ol) Blades, Leda Valladares, La Melchora 
RN Abalos or EI Negro Mamani...”. Above, The    
      
  
0 eat Te Song of Songs, an early 17th-century 
ar i hi Flemish engraving after a painting by Cor- 
A i ov nelis De Vos. On the lectern is the score of 
il . a motet for 5 voices by Daniel Raymond, | “ » 
|r wd e. cantor at Liége around 1580. Right, Pan 
h a piper in the region of Lake Titicaca, Boli- 
via, during the August festival in honour of 
the Miraculous Virgin of the Lake. Left, a p 
harpist at Cuzco, Peru. Below, aconcertof = | 
f 
    
  electronic music given by the Frenchcom- 
poser Jean-Michel Jarre in the Place de la 
Concorde, Paris, on 14 July 1979. aw 
A d    
    
  
         
 
” " ww 
PRR CT gt, 
\ 
  
      
  
~ 
| 
vil 
~~ 
0
)
 
   
— pe ——— “ a on 
’ 
- N Ls 
M 
' 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 68736: Music for all

16 
> 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
H
a
n
s
m
a
n
n
,
 
Mu
ni
ch
 
mount to the fatalistic belief that there will 
always be rich and poor. 
So first of all the performers must be 
made aware of the falsity of this division 
between “cultured”, “serious” or “intellec- 
tual” music and the other kind. It is essen- 
tial to expose the perversity of this kind of 
prejudice, which not only condemns to 
mediocrity those who are not invited to the 
feast of the elect, but also threatens with 
sterility those performers who do not 
understand that what gives music its life is 
the dialectic between the simplest and most 
vibrant forms and those which are most 
elaborate and cerebral. 
This is the story of our Western music, 
and this is the story of music as it has 
developed all over the world. 
With the exception of a few well-in- 
formed musicologists and those artists who 
intuitively realize the truth, few people are 
aware of the steady influence of traditional 
music on the works of the great composers 
of all periods. Nor are they aware of the 
social commitment made by many creators 
of genius. Each musical era has had its own 
reading of the concept of human justice and 
solidarity in the development of society. 
And each has made different uses of popu- 
lar traditions. 
Luther and, later, Bach restored the peo- 
ple to their central place in worship, 
through popular church choral music. Dur- 
ing the Enlightenment, music had its in- 
spired leaders with their vision of a society 
of greater humanity and justice for all. Such 
men as Mozart or Beethoven, each in his 
own way, rejected all forms of slavery at a 
time when the idea of the democratic State 
was beginning to take root. 
In the nineteenth century came the 
romantic transition to nationalism. And in 
our own century composers such as Stra- 
vinsky, Ravel, Bartok, Gian Francesco 
Malipiero and Manuel de Falla—all belong- 
ing to the so-called “new objectivity” move- 
ment—drew inspiration from the spon- 
taneity and immediacy of popular music. 
They were opposed to the sometimes over- 
whelming pessimism and density of other 
post-Wagnerian trends. Finally, one need 
scarcely draw attention to the role of popu- 
Flutes made of reed, bone, wood, metal or 
terra-cotta, have been a part of musical 
tradition throughout the world ever since 
prehistoric times. Below, bone flutes 
adorned with the feathers of Amazonian 
parrots and beetles’ wings (Venezuela, 
Orinoco basin). 
  
lar music in the works of Hector Villa- 
Lobos, George Gershwin and the Argen- 
tine composer Carlos Guastavino. 
Conversely, and to an increasing extent, 
musicians in all branches are exploring ways 
of developing the technical side of classical 
music, and finding in it a source of inspira- 
tion which need not conflict with their 
popular calling. 
In my country, Argentina, varied and 
distinguished branches of popular music are 
coming to grips with this influence. Ata- 
hualpa Yupanqui is well versed in Creole 
tradition but is also a performer of Bach. 
Piazzolla, whose early training was similar 
to that of Carlos Gardel and Anibal Troilo, 
later sought the counsel of the great French 
pianist Nadia Boulanger. The Anacrusa 
group, the specifically Argentine express- 
ion of that new syncretic music which ranges 
from Chick Corea to Paco de Lucia. Many 
more examples could be cited. 
So why is there this enduring dichotomy 
between classical and popular, when the 
two should be inseparable parts of some- 
thing called simply Music, without any 
hierarchical segregation? For the good of 
music, which is so closely bound up with the 
health of society, it is desirable that diffe- 
rent kinds of music should flourish side by 
side, without any prejudice between diffe- 
rent genres. 
Why should it not be acceptable to orga- 
nize concerts on a satisfactory aesthetic pat- 
tern combining Chico Buarque, Xenakis 
and Mono Villegas, Jaime Torres, the 
National Orchestra, Susana Rinaldi, 
Michel Portal, Patrice Fontanarosa, or El 
Cuchi Leguizamén, Leén Gieco and those 
fine pianists Liliana Sdinz and Maurizio 
Pollini? 
This would at any rate break down the 
tyranny of brand labels; for music is not a 
commodity. It is a passion which fires its 
apostles—musicians—with the desire to be 
witnesses in sound to the spirit of the age. 
Just as it should be quite natural for the 
music of Berio to be heard in juxtaposition 
with that of Corelli or Mussorgsky, I also 
think there is no reason why the music of 
Bach, during a religious service, should not 
reverberate in the same air as Negro spir- 
ituals and songs by Rubén Blades, Leda 
Valladares, La Melchora Abalos or El Neg- 
ro Mamani. These last, alas, are unknown 
outside the Calchaqui Valleys of Argentina. 
For the essence of music is communica- 
tion and communion, energy whose im- 
pulse is directed outwards. And the more 
people there are who take pleasure init, the 
better it is for society and, ultimately, for 
art. | 
  
MIGUEL ANGEL ESTRELLA, of Argentina, is a 
world famous pianist. As well as giving recitals as 
a concert pianist, he has always played to popu- 
lar audiences, including peasant farmers and 
Indians in Latin America. Imprisoned and tor- 
tured in 1977, he was freed in 1980 after efforts 
made on his behalf by musicians all over the 
world, and has since continued his career as a 
concert pianist. He is the founder of the Paris- 
based association “Musique Espérance” which 
aims to bring music and musicians into the ser- 
vice of human rights and to restore to music its 
role as a form of social communication.

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

B 
i ] 
Ph
ot
o 
P.
 
Po
go
si
an
 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
 


### 68738: Folklore and phonosphere

Folklore 
 
by Mikhail E. Tarakanov 
and phonosphere 
that when they listen to instrumental 
music—or “pure” music—it conjures 
up no spatial images in their imagination, and 
that they experience it only as duration. One 
thing is certain, however: it is difficult to con- 
ceive of music as a phenomenon without a 
precise image of musicians playing in a speci- 
fic place, whether an enclosed or an open 
space. By its very nature, and whatever the 
context, music is, and will remain, a perfor- 
mance. 
In the USSR, popular music occupies a 
prominent position. As we find wherever folk- 
lore has stayed alive, spontaneous musical 
improvisation, intended to be heard by a 
gathering of people and calling for certain 
spatial conditions, is still a major form of cre- 
ative art. Professional art based on oral tradi- 
tion has also been preserved over very wide 
areas, in Central Asia and in Transcaucasia, 
in the highly elaborate form of the mugam, 
epic tales told by renowned artists who have 
learned a special technique of singing and 
acquired a perfect mastery of the traditional 
instruments of the East. 
This popular music has conquered new 
territory on the stage, on radio, on television 
and in records, and in so doing has been 
assimilated into the public system of music 
consumption. This expansion has had an en- 
couraging impact on the status of music in 
general, while at the same time it has pushed 
traditional types of creation towards profes- 
T HERE will always be people who claim sionalism with the new spatial forms needed 
for producing and listening to music and the 
professional sophistication that these require. 
The creators of folk music have to learn 
musical techniques, polish their perform- 
ances and rehearse intensively to prepare for 
concerts when they use such specialized faci- 
lities as recording studios, rehearsal rooms, 
and the stages of variety theatres. A delicate 
problem arises: exposed to the limelight of 
professionalism, the spiritual nature of popu- 
lar creative art is likely to wilt, and needs 
protection. Folk song and folk dance troupes 
are as plentiful in the USSR as they are well- 
loved beyond its borders. As a consequence 
of this powerful movement to take over folk- 
lore, living folk art is tending to lose its spon- 
taneity and formal continuity and to be turned 
into a subject for study and teaching. 
Fortunately, a movement is also emerging 
to preserve the full authenticity of folk art, 
notably through staging performances that 
are faithful in all respects to the spirit of popu- 
lar festivals. In many regions folk troupes have 
sprung up which are keeping alive the old 
styles of singing. 
Lastly, new forms are taking shape which 
have their roots in oral tradition but are by no 
means identical to it. Open-air song festivals 
that attract huge crowds are one example of 
such a trend. Meanwhile, many popular sin- 
gers and vocal and instrumental groups are 
also striving to safeguard the unique charac- 
ter of folk music. 
Left, aconcert of popular music and dance 
in a vast concert hall at Erivan, capital of 
the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic. In 
the Soviet Union, popular music and folk 
music are fully integrated into the public 
system of music consumption. This en- 
courages greater professionalism but in- 
evitably creates the risk that some of the 
spontaneity and continuity in the creation 
of folk arts may be lost. 
The masterpieces of folk art are now 
reaching more and more people—millions of 
viewers through television—familiarizing 
them with the different national styles and 
encouraging contact between the hundred or 
so nations which make up our country. 
It is true that such contacts have a long 
history, as is borne out by the tradition of 
Russian music of Eastern inspiration dating 
back to Rimsky-Korsakov, Borodin and Mus- 
sorgsky; but in the age of the mass media it 
has become a phenomenon on a grand scale. 
Conversely, the increasing use of sound 
production techniques is exerting a growing 
influence on the language of music through 
the possibilities it affords for manipulating 
sound by such means as the special arrange- 
ment of instruments in the concert hall, the 
amplification of weak sounds, the “purifica- 
tion” of tone quality, the “broadening” of 
sound range, and the combination of pre- 
recorded music or sounds with musicians in 
live performance. 
Use of these techniques is not confined to 
concert performances and the broadcasting 
of concerts on radio or television. It also ex- 
tends to the use of music in other fields, some 
artistic (soundtracks of cinema or television 
films) others not (news or reports on topics of 
general interest). 
Thus the places where music is listened to 
have become more and more numerous, 
ranging from the giant stadium to the cinema 
auditorium and the radio cassette in the 
home. 
There is no longer any area of human activ- 
ity from which music can be a priori excluded. 
Music, one might justly claim, has won a total 
victory over the world in which we live: a 
“phonosphere” encompasses the planet. The 
problem today is not whether the phono- 
sphere should or should not exist, but how it 
can be made more harmonious. The pollution 
of daily life by noise, with its consequent blunt- 
ing of auditory and musical sensitivity, has 
attained alarming proportions. We must keep 
it at bay and, at the same time, allocate a 
larger share of the human phonosphere to 
music which requires us to listen to it intel- 
ligently and which is charged with meaning. Hl 
MIKHAIL EVGENIEVICH TARAKANOV is a 
director of research at the Institute of Art of the 
Academy of Sciences and of the Ministry of 
Culture of the USSR. A specialist in the theory 
and history of 20th-century music, he is the 
author of many published works including The 
Style of Prokofiev's Symphonies (1968), The 
Musical Theatre of Alban Berg (1976) and The 
Works of Rodion Shchedrin (1980). 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 68740: On wings of song: the lute and the crane in Chinese tradition

On wings of song 
The lute and the crane in Chinese tradition 
by Robert Hans van Gulik 
  
« 
j
b
)
 
| 
e
s
 
7
 
  
T
r
 
A
A
)
 
r
v
o
L
u
a
 
Ph
ot
o 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
He
av
en
 
an
d 
Ea
rt
h.
 
Lu
nd
 
Hu
mp
hr
ie
s.
 
Lo
nd
on
 
©
 
19
79
 
Jo
hn
 
A.
 
Go
od
al
l 
—— 
—
 
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
 
- 
18   
| 
h
s
 
l
b
a
t
i
a
n
d
 3 
  
HE crane is one of the traditional 
] Chinese symbols of longevity. Just 
like the tortoise, it is said to live 
more than a thousand years. The express- 
ion “crane age”, is a much-used metaphor 
for advanced years. 
The dark crane is especially credited with 
a fabulously long life. The Gu jing zhu 
(“The Encyclopaedia of the Past and Pre- 
sent”) written by Cui Biao in the Jin period 
says: “When a crane has reached the age of 
  
  
one thousand years, it turns a dark blue 
colour; after another thousand years it turns 
black, and then it is called a dark crane.” 
Ever since olden times the dark crane has 
been closely associated with music. The Rui 
ying tu ji (attributed to Sun rou chi of the 
Liang period) says: “A dark crane shall 
appear at a time when there is a Ruler who 
understands music. When in olden times 
Huangdi executed music on the Kunlun 
mountain for all the Spirits to dance, on his 
right side there flew sixteen dark cranes.” 
Sixteen dark cranes also appear in a story 
related by the great historian Sima qian: 
“When Duke Ling of the Wei dynasty (534- 
493 BC) was travelling to Jin, he halted on 
the bank of the river Bu. In the middle of 
the night he heard the sounds of a lute being 
played. He asked the members of his suite, 
but all respectfully said that no one had 
heard the sounds. Then the Duke sum- 
moned Master Juan, and said to him: ‘I 
have heard the sounds of a lute being 
played, but when I asked my suite no one 
had heard it. Thus it seems that it is caused 
by a spirit or a ghost. Write this tune down 
for me.” Master Juan assented and, seating 
himself in the correct position, having 
placed his lute before him, he listened and 
noted down the tune. The next morning he 
said: ‘I have obtained the tune now, but I 
have not yet learned it. I beg you for one 
more night to learn it thoroughly.” The 
Duke agreed, and yet another night passed. 
On the following morning he reported that 
he had mastered the tune. Then they left 
that place, and proceeded to Jin. They were 
received by Duke Ping (557-532 BC) who 
gave a banquet for them on a terrace. 
“When all had come under the influence 
of the wine, Duke Ling said: ‘When on my 
way here I heard a new tune; permit me to 
let you hear it.” When Duke Ping agreed, 
Duke Ling made Master Juan sit down by 
the side of Master Kuang, place his lute 
before him and play it. But before he was 
half through, Master Kuang put his hand on 
the strings (to deaden the sounds), and said: 
‘That is the music of a doomed State; one 
must not listen to it.’ Duke Ping asked: 
‘What is the origin of this tune?” Master 
Kuang answered: ‘It was made by Master 
Yan, to please the tyrant Zhou. When king 
Wu defeated Zhou, Master. Yan fled to the 
east, and drowned himself in the river Bu. 
Therefore it must have been on the bank of 
that river that this tune was heard. Who first 
hears this tune, his State will be divided.’ 
Illustration from a Ming dynasty encyclo- 
paedia shows a musician playing the lute 
out of doors with the instrument on his 
knees. An incense burner stands on a 
small rustic table nearby. Lute playing was 
always accompanied by the burning of 
fragrant incense.

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 68740: On wings of song: the lute and the crane in Chinese tradition

Duke Ping said: ‘I have a great love for 
music. I wish to hear this tune to the end.’ 
Then Master Juan played the entire tune. 
Then Duke Ping said: ‘Are there no tunes 
that are still more sinister than this one?’ 
Master Kuang said: “There are.’ ‘Could you 
play them for me?’ The Master answered: 
‘My lord’s virtue and righteousness are not 
great enough for that. I may not play them 
for you.’ But the Duke said again: ‘I have a 
great love for music; I wish to hear them.’ 
Then Master Kuang could not but draw his 
lute unto him, and play. 
“When he had played once, sixteen dark 
cranes appeared and alighted on the gate of 
the hall. When he played the second time, 
they stretched their necks and cried, they 
spread out their wings and started to dance. 
Duke Ping was overcome with joy, and 
leaving his seat he drank the health of Mas- 
ter Kuang. Having returned to his seat, he 
asked: ‘Are there no other tunes that are 
still more sinister than this one?’ Master 
Kuang said: ‘Yes, there are those by which 
in olden times Huangdi effected a great 
reunion of ghosts and spirits. But my lord’s 
virtue and righteousness are not great 
enough to allow you to hear this music. And 
if you hear it, you will perish.” Duke Ping 
said: ‘F am advanced in years, and I have a 
great love of music. I want to hear these 
tunes.” Then Master Kuang could not but 
draw his lute unto him, and play. When he 
had played one, white clouds rose in the 
northwest. And when he played another, 
there was a storm wind, followed by a tor- 
rent, that made the tiles fly from the roof, 
All that were present fled, and Duke Ping, 
in a great fright, threw himself down near 
the entrance of the hall. Thereafter, Jin was 
beset by a drought that scorched the earth 
for three years in succession.” 
This story, which is extremely archaic, 
not only furnishes a good example of the 
relation of the dark crane to lute music, but 
also illustrates in a striking way the awe- 
inspiring qualities which the ancient 
Chinese attributed to this music. Something 
of the ominous atmosphere of this old tale 
has been preserved in a number of later 
ghost stories connected with the lute. 
kt is only occasionally, however, that we 
find faint echos of the magical nature of the 
association between lute and crane. In later 
times literary tradition replaced this old 
belief with purely aesthetic considerations. 
When the scholar is playing the lute in his 
garden pavilion, a couple of cranes should 
be leisurely stalking about. Their graceful 
movements should inspire the rhythm of the 
finger technique, and their occasional cries 
direct the thoughts of the player to unearth- 
ly things. For even the cry of the crane has a 
special meaning. It is said to penetrate unto 
Heaven: “The crane cries in the marshes, its 
sound is heard in the skies,” and the female 
crane conceives when it hears the cry of the 
male. 
Detail from an ancient Chinese lute manu- 
al showing the finger positions required to 
produce notes similar to the sounds made 
by animals. Illustration shows “the posi- 
tion of the right thumb to obtain the crying 
of a crane about to soar”, 
The crane is described as having a great 
love for lute music. The Qing lian fang qin 
ya (“Elegance of the Lute, from the Blue- 
Lotus Boat”) relates that “Lin Bu greatly 
enjoyed playing the lute; whenever he 
played, his two cranes would start dancing,” 
And the same source says about Ye Meng- 
de: “Ye Mengde loved the lute, and would 
play for a whole day without resting, the 
tones of the lute mingling with the sounds of 
a brook. Later Ye returned to mount Lu 
and sang songs, accompanying himself on 
his lute. On one occasion there suddenly 
appeared a pair of cranes that gamboled 
about and danced in his garden. Ye kept 
them, and they did not go away, but started 
to dance every time he played.” 
Several lute tunes hymn the excellent 
qualities of the crane. One treatise that 
describes cranes in a scholar’s garden is 
entitled “Song of a pair of cranes listening 
1 
  
to the babbling of a brook”. Another tune, 
“Cranes dancing in the sky”, celebrates the 
soaring flight of the crane. The Tian wen ge 
qin pu ji cheng (“Collection of Tunes Heard 
from the Sky”) contains a tune entitled “A 
pair of cranes bathing in a brook”. The 
introductory note added to this tune is not 
without interest. “Late in spring I visited a 
friend in Sichuan province. A pair of cranes 
were dancing in a clear rivulet. I observed 
their feathers white as snow, and the top of 
their heads red like vermilion. They flut- 
tered up and down, and took their bath 
while dancing. Then they spread their wings 
and flew high up in the sky, and cried in 
harmony in the azure vault, making me 
doubt whether they were not Immortals. 
Then I drew my lute unto me, and com- 
posed this tune.” 
The Ming handbook Shen qi bi pu (“Al- 
bum of the Strange and Mysterious”) con- 
  
 
  
o
r
 
Zi EP ITY 
; CATR dS | 
EFF 
  CARERS J cd 
> 
Ph
ot
o 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
He
av
en
 
an
d 
Ea
rt
h,
 
Lu
nd
 
Hu
mp
hr
ie
s,
 
Lo
nd
on
 
©
 
19
79
 
Jo
hn
 
A.
 
Go
od
al
l

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 68740: On wings of song: the lute and the crane in Chinese tradition

Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
So
ph
ia
 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
(T
ok
yo
) 
an
d 
Ch
ar
le
s 
E.
 
Tu
tt
le
 
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
,
 
In
c.
 
[2 
20 
(R
ut
la
nd
, 
Ve
rm
on
t)
, 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
Th
e 
Lo
re
 
of
 
th
e 
Ch
in
es
e 
Lu
te
 
by
 
R.
H.
 
va
n 
Gu
li
k  
  
  
  
tains a tune entitled “Cranes crying in the 
marshes”. The second half of the introduc- 
tory text says: “The crane is a sacred bird. 
Its cries are most clear; they are heard at a 
distance of more than eight miles. The pur- 
pose of this tune is to compare the tones of 
the lute with the cries of the crane. I kept 
two cranes in the bamboo grove surround- 
ing my lute hall. Sometimes, in a shadowy 
place, they would dance together, other 
times they would fly up and cry in unison. 
But they would always wait for the 
appropriate time: they did not dance unless 
there was a cool breeze to shake their feath- 
ers, and they did not cry unless they could 
look up at the Milky Way as if they saw the 
gods. When the time was not propitious 
they would neither sing nor dance. Recog- 
nizing the spiritual quality of these cranes, 1 
composed this tune.” 
Various books give directions about how 
to rear cranes and to recognize birds of 
superior qualities. The qualities and outer 
marks of good cranes are described in the 
Xiang he jing (“The Book of Cranes”), a 
book which, though of doubtful authenti- 
city, seems fairly old, and is found in many 
  
  
compilations of ancient books. Ming trea- 
tises especially abound in discussions about 
keeping and rearing cranes, and about how 
to make them dance: they may, for in- 
stance, be trained to dance to the clapping 
of hands. Chen fu yao (born 1612) says that 
excellent flutes can be made from the thigh 
bone of a crane: their sound is clear, and in 
harmony with the sonorous tubes. 
Let me quote one final observation about 
the crane: “When staying in a country house 
in an empty wood, how could one let a 
single day go by without the company of this 
refined friend that makes one forget all 
worldly things?” [| 
ROBERT HANS VAN GULIK (1910-1967), 
Dutch writer and diplomat, was a distinguished 
Orientalist with a special interest in Chinese 
history. An authority on the Chinese language, 
he was also a skilled calligrapher. His scholarly 
works include: Sexual Life in Ancient China 
(1962) and The Lore of the Chinese Lute (1968) 
from which the present article has been extrac- 
ted. He was also the prolific author of detective 
Stories set in 7th-century China, whose hero, 
Judge Dee, ranks with such great fictional detec- 
tives as Sherlock Holmes. 
“Take your lute with you and play before 
an old plum tree,” says an ancient Chinese 
poem, and according to tradition plum 
blossoms appreciate the sounds of the 
lute just as much as cranes. The pine tree 
is also often associated with the lute, and 
when a lute-player is not depicted sitting in 
a plum grove he may be shown, as here, 
seated on a moss-covered stone beneath 
two spreading pines. In left foreground a 
man is tuning a four-stringed guitar. 
Below, page from a lute handbook show- 
ing a position of the right hand. Legend 
above the picture reads, “The right hand, 
suggesting a flying dragon grasping the 
clouds.” Written underneath is “The way 
to produce a chord with thumb and middle 
finger”. lllustrations of finger positions 
were usually accompanied by a brief ex- 
planatory note, known as hsing. The hsing 
on this page reads: “The dragon is a holy 
animal, a pond cannot contain it. Its head 
and horns show a noble shape, its trans- 
mutations are inexhaustible. Having 
ascended to the throne (an allusion to the 
fact that ‘Dragon’ is a fixed epithet for the 
Emperor), the world is prosperous. It 
ascends in the air grasping with its claws, 
the floating clouds follow it.” 
EERE 
 
 —— 
 
BIR EH PK 
Rd SO 
22Lo” 
iA 8 LEA 
PR 2 F4k FA Fe 
I AE A A 
7 TBF BB 1B JE   
 
) 
an
d 
Ch
ar
le
s 
E.
 
Tu
tt
le
 
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
,
 
In
c.
 
Ru
tl
an
d,
 
Ve
rm
on
t)
, 
ta
ke
n 
fr
om
 
Th
e 
Lo
re
 
of
 
th
e 
Ch
in
es
e 
Lu
te
 
by
 
R.
H.
 
va
n 
Gu
li
k 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
So
ph
ia
 
Un
iv
er
si
ty
 
(T
ok
yc
 
( 
  

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

  
HE 
| Stee 
In traditional Africa, the griot js a musician 
and singer who is also a kind of chronicler 
and historian of the society in which he 
lives. His art is transmitted from father to 
son. Photo above shows the author of our 
article, the noted Senegalese griot Lamine 
Konte, singing to his own accompaniment 
on a Senegalese instrument, the kora. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
M.
-R
. 
Ma
tt
er
a 


### 68742: The Griot: singer and chronicler of African life

    
aan 
The griot 
singer 
and chronicler 
of African life 
and secondly | am a Casamangais. | was 
born in the area of southern Senegal 
known as Casamance, “Casa di Mansa”, a 
name which is half Portuguese and half Man- 
dingo, and which means “the house of the 
king”. It dates back to the fifteenth or sixteenth 
centuries, when the Portuguese were in the 
region. More specifically, | come from a family 
of musicians or griots. We griots are simul- 
taneously musicians, historians and singers, 
and our artis handed down from father to son 
and from generation to generation. | grew up 
in that world. Then | became interested in 
Western culture and acquired a grounding in 
Western music, particularly classical music. 
This varied background enables me to ex- 
press rnyself authentically and at the same 
time to be on the same wave-length as a 
French audience. 
| have been told that my father was a 
famous griot. | was not fortunate enough to 
know him, since he died when | was barely 
| am, first of all, an African from Senegal, 
This article is based on an interview with Larnine Konte 
by Marc Kerfean, a French radio producer who is a 
student and broadcaster of African music, blues and 
jazz. 
by Lamine Konte 
one year old. My father is still a formidable 
competitor: all those who knew him are con- 
stantly comparing the two of us. He was an 
excellent musician. Soundioulou Cissoko, 
who was his fellow performer, is today one of 
Senegal's great players of the kora (a 21- 
stringed harp-iute). They coliaborated 
closely. 
| did not receive any musical or poetic train- 
ing as such. It comes about spontaneously 
when you are born into a family of musicians. 
A little African sociology will help to explain 
why. Since the Mandingo empire, Mandingo 
society has been organized and structured 
according to a caste system which has lasted 
from the thirteenth century to the present. 
Each caste contained men who were parti- 
cularly gifted at a certain craft: there were, for 
example, the castes of the griots, the 
weavers, the ironsmiths, and the warriors. 
When you were born into a family of griots, 
hence of musicians, you were ipso facto pre- 
destined to make music. That tradition has 
become a thing of the past, now that the 
sociological context has evoived: with coloni- 
zation, Africa started to be influenced by other 
civilizations, schools were established, and 
nowadays a child from a family of griots can pp 
  
  

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 68742: The Griot: singer and chronicler of African life

a Tare WNT NES 3 3 REL a ae > 
a1) ph #0, TI SEE } 
The kora is a 21-string instrument which 
produces a sound somewhere between 
that of the harp and that of the guitar, 
depending on the way in which its strings 
are plucked. The sound-box is made from 
half a calabash. Along the neck are strung 
21 rings to each of which a string is 
attached. There are two sets of strings, 
Separated by a bridge; each set is plucked 
by the thumb and index finger of one hand. 
To tune the instrument, the mobile rings 
are moved to tighten the strings until the 
right notes are obtained. Above, kora- 
player Arfan Kouyate and singer Penda 
Diabate, during a 1982 concert of Man- 
dingo music in a lecture hall of the Sor- 
bonne, Paris. 
P» grow up to be a schoolteacher, a mason, or a 
22 
mechanic. But originally, when you were born 
into a griot family, you devoted yourself exclu- 
sively to music. The only activity permitted 
outside music was farming, since it was for the 
common good. 
Music is a universal phenomenon, and all 
the musicians in the world began in approx- 
imately the same way: they were people who 
had the gift of combining notes in a pattern 
that was harmonious to the ear. Since writing 
was hot current in some parts of Africa, it was 
necessary to entrust a social group with the 
task of reciting history, and thus of acting as 
the memory of the African people. 
It was, accordingly, the task of the griot 
community to pass on an oral record of his- 
tory. A musical medium was needed to do 
this. The griots made instruments that were 
suited to the languages and the rhythms in 
use. We owe the griof tradition to the intelli- 
gence of the earliest politicians: they grasped 
the fact that one cannot govern a community 
without historians, and thus without music. 
There are also many legends which tell of the 
origins of the griots, but in my opinion they 
came into being quite naturally: since they 
wanted to make music, they freely indulged 
their desire. And this activity has devolved on 
them since the reign of Sundiata Keita, the 
first emperor of Mali—since the fourteenth 
century, in other words. 
The participation of the griofs was neces- 
sary at the major turning-points in a lifetime, 
such as birth and marriage. They also sang 
the praises of their hosts and knew family 
histories. They usually earned a living from 
the gifts that they received in return for their 
services. lt is possible for a griot to bear a 
grudge against an ungenerous client, for after 
all, heis aman, with a man’s weaknesses. But 
his essential role is to sing the praises of 
individuals without any discrimination on 
financial grounds; he sings for the poor fisher- 
man and the rich merchant alike. His aim is to 
bring to life the history of the family of his 
client, just as his father taught it to him. 
Some people believe that griots possess 
magic power, but in Africa, magic power be- 
longs rather to iron-smiths. Some griots have 
power, since they possess a considerable 
store of wide-ranging knowledge and are re- 
ceptive to all forms of culture; when they reach 
a certain age, they are necessarily powerful, 
but is this magical or is it another kind of 
power? It is difficult to give an unqualified 
  
answer. You need to meet a particular griot 
personally in order to find out what type of 
power he wields. 
The “story-telling” griots sing the great tra- 
ditional epics, telling of the warlike deeds of 
heroes, their native land, and love. They also 
put on shows, since in Africa, there is no 
established theatre structure. They are 
actors, poets, dancers and mimes, and they 
bring all the arts into play in their perfor- 
mances. Since they are highly versatile, one 
of their roles is to dance themselves and to 
induce a gathering of people to dance. Some, 
admittedly, specialize in one or other of these 
fields: they express themselves through 
music or dancing, or through the spoken word. 
But others, while they play music, may also 
sing, tell stories and even dance. 
In the days when the caste system was 
operating strictly, the griots used to meet reg- 
ularly in a family context. That was very com- 
mon. These family reunions were called 
“practice sessions”. The whole family 
gathered together, with all generations pre- 
sent, and they played in order to ascertain 
how high their standard was. | know a story 
about a gathering of griots in Mali. | believe itis 
true, since many people were eyewitnesses to 
it. Every seven years, the great griots of Mali 
met to repair the roof of a hut. They sang and 
played music at the same time, whereupon 
the roof flew up into the air as if by enchant- 
ment and landed on the ground. They res- 
tored the roof. Then they started singing 
again, and the roof rose up from the ground 
and settled on the hut. This phenomenon has 
something to do with magic power. But, ulti- 
mately, all forms of expression contain a grain p

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 68742: The Griot: singer and chronicler of African life

Ph
ot
o 
M.
 
Sa
lv
ar
o/
Un
es
co
 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ré
un
io
n 
de
s 
Mu
sé
es
 
Na
ti
on
au
x,
 
Pa
ri
s 
¥
 
a
 
T
r
 
a
 
a
a
 
p
y
 
  
Photo © Hoa-Qui, Paris 
  
     
3 Photo © Hea-Qui, Paris 
Four examples of Africa’s wealth of tradi- 
tional musical instruments: (1) Bambara 
wind instrument from Mali; (2) a Gabonese 
harp; (3) anthropomorphic harp from 
Zaire; (4) guitar of the Mangbetu people of 
Zaire. The neck is surmounted by a carved 
wooden head. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
A griot from West 
Africa being inter- 
viewed 
2 
o 
® 
=] 
= 
wv 
] 
Seo 
3¢ 
oT 
© 3 
28 
2% 
a Zz 
—— 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 68742: The Griot: singer and chronicler of African life

> 
b 
c 
ES] 
7) 
4 
oc 
on 
= 
on 
[ve 
< 
© 
Q 
° 
£ 
Cc 
of magic power, in that they draw on a certain 
spiritual force. And so the music and singing 
of the Malian griots was able to move the roof 
of a hut. 
African musical instruments vary from re- 
gion to region. Mali is the cradle of African 
music, and since the empire of Sundiatait has 
influenced the art of music in other regions. 
The instruments found there are more soph- 
isticated than those of northern Senegal, 
where 80 per cent of the music consists of 
rhythm—of drumming, in other words. In a 
Wolof group, in northern Senegal, there are at 
least fourteen types of percussion, whereas in 
a Malian group the percussion is accompa- 
nied by more elaborate instruments such as 
the kora or the balafon. The great musicians 
of northern Senegal play the halam (a Wolof 
name for a five-stringed guitar, a very old 
African instrument) and most of them served 
their apprenticeship in Mali. In Casamance, 
we play the bolong, a sort of three-stringed 
kora, which sounds like a double-bass; but 
percussion predominates. 
No instrument is particularly easy to play 
well, The kora, for example, poses problems, 
since its music cannot be dissociated from the 
Mandingo language. You have to know that 
Trumpet-players in the Madagascan group 
Hira-Gasy. Instruments of European origin 
are played in many parts of Africa today. 
  
language in order to play the instrument. 
There is no score, and it is played by ear. And 
so you have to remember the tunes, and in 
order to do this, you have to know the history. 
Since history is invariably recounted in Man- 
dingo or Malinke, it is indispensable to know 
the language in order to attempt to play the 
kora. However, it has recently become a little 
more accessible. Many musicians play it while 
singing in Wolof or in Portuguese Creole. My 
father usually sang in Portuguese Creole. | 
personally welcome this move towards a 
widening of horizons, and | should like the 
kora to become a universal instrument like so 
many others. 
In Africa there are many kinds of percussion 
instruments. Each ethnic group has its own. 
The Mandingo, for example, play the koutero, 
the Malinke the gjembé. In the forest regions 
of Central Africa, there are others, different 
from those of the savannah. There are as 
many types of percussion as there are ethnic 
groups. 
Until relatively recently, playing a musical 
instrument was not an activity for women, who 
were expected to sing. If necessary, they 
accompanied themselves on a primitive Ma- 
lian instrument made of iron, but that was all. 
Usually, a woman sings as an accompani- 
ment to her husband while he plays an in- 
strument. Singing is for women and instru- 
ments are for men. Male African society prob- 
ably considered that it was easier to sing. This 
situation has now changed. | was able to 
observe this in 1977, at the Second World 
Black and African Festival of Arts and Cul- 
tures, held in Lagos, Nigeria: there was an 
all-female Guinean instrumental ensemble 
playing the kora and the balafon. | have also 
seen a women's orchestra playing modern 
instruments such as the saxophone, trumpet, 
Western-style percussion, and electric guitar. 
| return to my country every year, or at least 
every two years. It makes me feel more alive, 
it's a tonic and it gives me confidence. The fact 
of being “cut off” from my African roots has a 
good effect on my music. Not being in my own 
country, | can see more clearly what is hap- 
pening there, and this gives me inspiration. 
From afar, you can see your country in a truer 
light, in greater depth and with stronger affec- 
tion. In my native land | would probably be 
taken up with concerns that have nothing to 
do with my music. What is more, | do not feel 
very far away: | am only four hours’ flying time 
from Senegal. 
In Senegal people listen to all kinds of 
mus’ 3, from James Brown to Johnny Halliday. 
It's quite a medley. Manu Dibango, the 
Cameroonian from Paris or the Parisian from 
Cameroon, whichever you prefer, is someone 
who is doing a great deal of work for Africa. He 
is a great musician. He has long defended the 
cause of African music, as | myself and other 
African musicians have done. This puts him in 
a sympathetic light. He richly deserves his 
success, for he has worked very hard. Accord- 
ing to him, we are witnessing “the birth of a 
new race, an Afro-European race”, and 
“European music must not remain in its 
ghetto”. 
| believe that neither European music nor 
African music should remain in its ghetto, for 
they both need to evolve through their rela- 
tions with each other. Staying in one's ghetto 
means failing to develop. The future of the 
world lies in the intermingling of people and 
cultures. For music, the pattern of develop- 
ment is similar. 
It is a mistake to think that for traditional

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 68742: The Griot: singer and chronicler of African life

In African music in the past the role of 
women was to sing, not to play in- 
struments. But today things have changed 
and groups of women musicians are not 
yneommon. Right, women musicians from 
ali. 
DY 
music development means deterioration. In 
Africa, traditional music associated with tradi- 
tional instruments does not rule out other 
forms of music which are played on Western 
instruments. Since colonization 300 years 
ago, traditional music has assimilated the 
accordion, the harmonica and the guitar. But 
until recently this branch of music has been 
rejected by Westerners. 
Only twenty years ago, people thought that 
Africans should confine themselves to playing 
the tom-toms! The time has come for Wester- 
ners to adjust their stereotyped view of African 
culture and acknowledge the coexistence of 
traditional music with other forms of musical 
expression. | defend traditional music, for it 
can change and develop. And | should like the 
form resulting from contact with Western 
music to win recognition in France. 
It is true that the griot’s approach is poles 
apart from that of the European musician. In 
Africa, music has a social role to play. Its 
prime function is to accompany celebrations 
and to put across a philosophy. Nothing else! 
Westerners relate to music in a wholly diffe- 
rent way. The act of listening is all-important; 
they expect the musician to deliver a dis- 
course. In the past few years, however, an 
inter-reaction has gradually been taking place 
between European and African music. Euro- 
pean audiences no longer react to African 
music as if it were a museum piece. And the 
Afro-Europeans have realized that they must 
not go on repeating the faithfully handed- 
down ancestral rhythms on their percussion 
instruments if they want to make tradition 
relevant to the circumstances of modern 
Africa and to a type of music that expresses 
urbanization and the mutual impact of 
civilizations. 
As far as | am concerned, traditional forms 
of music are the most important, since they 
underlie everything else. | have kept the 
polyrhythmic character of African music and 
our own special way of communicating with 
an audience. By playing and recording in 
Europe | have learned a great deal. Every- 
thing must be carefully set up, with studied 
arrangements and the quality of sound reg- 
ulated to suit my instruments—in short, my 
contact with Western technology has been 
invaluable. But | regard myself as a messen- 
ger with ideas to communicate to a European 
audience. | belong to a different century from 
that of my father, and | want society to change 
and develop. || 
 
LAMINE KONTE, Senegalese griot, is a storytel- 
ler, author and composer of music. The son of 
Dialy Keba Konte, a famous griot of the Casa- 
mance region of Senegal, he came to Europe in 
1971 and embarked on an international career. 
He has made more than 10 LP albums including 
Chants Negres, Chants du Monde (Negro-Afri- 
can poems and songs) and La Kora du Sénégal. 
He was responsible for the music in Bako, a film 
made by Jacques Champreux and Cheikh 
Doukoure. 
A group of traditional African musicians 
performing before an audience of 
thousands during the Second World Black 
and African Festival of Arts and Cultures 
held in Lagos (Nigeria) in 1977. 
Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Al
l 
Ri
gh
ts
 
Re
se
rv
ed
 
    
Ph
ot
o 
Ph
il
ip
 
Ga
un
t/
Un
es
co
 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

by Dominique Jameux 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 


### 68744: When opera takes to the screen

  
When opera 
takes to the screen 
LTHOUGH opera and cinema may, 
A at first glance, appear to be unlikely 
bedfellows, these two art forms 
have much in common. 
Both offer us dramatic representations 
which come close to earning the epithet of 
“total art”, uniting as they do around a 
literary text (a scenario or a libretto) and in 
a given setting, the combined glories of 
light, colour, objects and costumes, and of 
the voice and the actor’s art. And if, today, 
the cinema dominates the field of the audio- 
  
 
    
visual spectacle, opera can claim to be its 
oldest manifestation. Cross-breeding be- 
tween the two is therefore both natural and 
frequent, if at times problematic. 
The film industry's takeover bid for opera 
has a long history. In recent years we have 
been offered such opera-films as “Losey’s” 
Don Giovanni, “Bergman’s” The Magic 
Flute, “Zeffirelli’s” La Traviata and “Ro- 
si’s” Carmen. The quotation marks seem to 
imply some kind of usurpation; and quite 
rightly and logically so, since the reality of 
the opera-film lies in the adoption by a great 
film director of one of the best-known 
works of the lyric repertoire and his im- 
pression on it of a vision that is virtually that 
of an entirely different author, a phe- 
nomenon to which we shall return later. 
In an excellent study published a few 
years ago'"’, Emmanuel Decaux recalled 
the distant origins of this cross-fertilization 
between the two art forms. Starting at the 
beginning of the century, directors of silent 
film days made films based on the libretti of 
famous operas, altered or transformed in 
varying degrees. In 1909, Regina Badet and 
Max Dearly starred in a version of Carmen; 
in 1915, in the United States, the famous 
vamp, Theda Bara, took the lead in another 
Carmen, while, that same year, Geraldine 
Farrar played the same role in a Cecil B. de 
Mille production. 
These early examples of this new genre, 
from the age of the silent screen, teach us 
that, from the beginning, the makers of 
opera-films were quite happy with a situa- 
tion in which music was, to say the least, 
placed firmly in the background. Thus, un- 
wittingly, the infancy of the new genre gave 
us a foretaste of what it would be in its 
maturity. In 1943, for example, Viviane 
Romance and Jean Marais were to star in 
what was literally a “talking” version of 
Carmen, directed by Christian-Jaque. 
1. Fascination de I'Irréel (The Fascination of the 
Unrcal), by Emmanuel Decaux, Cinématog- 
raphe, November, 1979. 
The earliest filmed versions of operas took 
many liberties with libretti and even with 
the musical score. Left, the great Russian 
bass singer Fedor Ivanovich Chaliapin 
(1873-1938), who created the role of Don 
Quixote in Massenet’'s Don Quichotte in 
1910 and sang the same part in a screen 
version of the opera made in 1933 by the 
German director G.W. Pabst. The film fea- 
tured episodes sung to music specially 
composed for the occasion. ~ 
Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Ca
hi
er
s 
du
 
Ci
né
ma
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 68744: When opera takes to the screen

One method of bringing opera to the 
screen is simply to film a live performance, 
providing “an eyewitness account of an 
event and a record for the archives” and 
striking “a balance between the quality 
one has the right to demand from any 
artistic presentation and the touching pre- 
cariousness of an operatic performance”. 
A striking example of this kind of film is 
that made of Mozart's Don Giovanni af the 
Salzburg Festival in 1953 (above). 
“Since television has become part of our 
daily lives the opera film has more often 
than not been designed for showing on the 
small screen.” One of the most famous 
examples of an opera film produced for TV 
in the studio is the Swedish director Ing- 
mar Bergman's version of Mozart’s The 
Magic Flute (1975) later adapted for the 
cinema. Right, Josef Kostlinger in the role 
of Tamino. 
The filming of opera in a studio with a 
brilliant cast and a setting similar to that of 
an opera stage has become particularly 
widespread in the Federal Republic of Ger- 
many. Right, Mirella Freni (Suzanne), 
Maria Ewing (Cherubin) and Kiri Te Kana- 
wa (the Countess) in Mozart's opera The 
Marriage of Figaro, brought to the screen 
in 1976 by the French director Jean-Pierre 
Ponnelle. 
Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Ca
hi
er
s 
du
 
Ci
né
ma
 
co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Ca
hi
er
s 
du
 
Ci
né
ma
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
 
At the same time, famous singers were 
being invited by the cinema world to leave 
an enduring record of their art. One spec- 
tacular example was that of the great bass 
Chaliapin who, in 1933, appeared in a film 
version of Don Quixote, directed by G.W. 
Pabst. The film was designed to capitalize 
on his publicimage (in 1910, he had created 
the title role in this opera by Massenet, and 
had sung it again countless times), yet, pa- 
radoxically, in the film he neither sang to 
Massenet’s music nor followed the libretto 
by Henn Cain (based on Cervantes’ book). 
Instead, against a natural setting in Pro- 
vence, Pabst recreated a new story consist- 
ing of episodes sung to music specially com- 
posed for the film by Jacques Ibert. 
In this manner, the opera-film hesitantly 
groped its way forward. It was as if the film 
directors were aware that, even if opera 
offered them raw material of high dramatic 
potential (and which was sure to have an 
impact on the public), its very nature (im- 
possible libretti, the unattractive physiques 
of many singers, the artificial nature of op- 
eratic canto and other technical constraints) 
made the production of a true opera-film an 
extremely doubtful undertaking. 
At the same time, and even before the 
opera-film industry proper had developed, 
its major prerequisites, ingredients which 
are still in use today, were falling into 
place—location filming for greater realism; 
the use of playback, essential for exterior 
filming and having the additional advantage 
of enabling singers to concentrate more on 
their acting; the right assumed by directors 
to modify original libretti and to make of 
them what they considered to be proper 
scenarios. 
And what of the music in all this? One is 
tempted to utter the paradoxical assertion 
that, but for the music, the problem of the 
opera-film would have been resolved long 
ago! 
The great value of the opera-film is that it 
introduces famous singers to an infinitely 
larger public than that which frequents the 
opera houses and at the same time creates a 
permanent record of their fragile, ephemer- 
al art. But is the opera-film necessary to the 
achievement of these goals? We have film 
footage of famous singers singing their 
favourite arias, set within the framework of 
purpose-built and often rather vacuous 
stories which generally adopt the style of 
the romanticized biography. But does this 
matter? Richard Tauber, Jan Kiepura, Lily 
Pons, Georges Thill, André Baugé, Maria 
Cebotari, Enrico Caruso and many others, 
have in this way left behind them film and 
sound-track which, with clever editing, 
could become commercially viable today. 
Thus the stage had been reached in the saga 
of the relations between the two art forms at 
which the opera-film remained both a fasci- 
nating vision and an inaccessible goal. 
It would seem that the first real opera- 
film was a version of Leoncavallo’s Pagliac- 
ci, which was made in 1930 during a tour of 
the United States by the company of the 
San Carlo Theatre of Naples. In the years 
following the end of the Second World War 
the practice of filming opera became more 
widespread. In these productions three 
names frequently recurred: Verdi as com- p

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 68744: When opera takes to the screen

28 
  
p poser, Gallone as director and Tito Gobbi 
as the singing star. In 1948, a new version of 
Pagliacci was shot in the open air, with the 
actor/singer Tito Gobbi and the actress 
Gina Lollobrigida, with the dubbed voice of 
a singer. The film stated the problem and 
offered the solution—film stars, unlike 
most singers, act well and are credible even 
in close-up, whereas opera singers usually 
sing better than actors. Dubbing, therefore, 
provides the solution, and this was the 
method adopted in 1983 by Syberberg for 
his Parsifal. 
At this point we should, perhaps, ex- 
amine more closely the three types of pro- 
duction that today constitute the corpus of 
opera-films and the problems faced, and 
sometimes in part resolved, by each of 
them. 
First of all there is the straightforward 
filming of a live performance; that is, the 
film which is both, as it were, an eye-witness 
account of an event and a record for the 
archives. The most striking example of this 
type of film is that made at the Salzburg 
Festival of 1953 of Mozart’s Don Giovanni, 
under the baton of Wilhelm Furtwingler. 
Its great success was due first to the musical 
quality of the production and also to the 
discreet manner in which the director, Paul 
Czinner, handled his subject. The camera, a 
privileged, well-placed spectator, is virtual- 
ly neutral. The orchestra—the Vienna 
Philharmonic—is not, as is often the case, 
effaced in the filming. The décor and the 
costumes are traditional but beautiful. The 
singers, well-rehearsed in their roles, do not 
take on the airs of cinema actors. The 
sound, in this purpose-built setting, is of 
admirable quality. 
. Of the three types of opera-film, this one 
seems to me to be the most satisfactory. It 
respects the essential, that is to say the 
music; it enables the music-lover, to some 
extent, for a modest sum and with no major 
loss of quality, to keep abreast of the music- 
al happenings of his time; and, for the nos- 
talgics amongst us, it provides an example 
of the art of Mozartian singing of that 
period. Live recording also preserves the 
balance between the quality one has the 
right to demand from any artistic presenta- 
tion and the touching precariousness of an 
operatic performance which is, in fact, part 
of its magic. 
The second category of opera-films are 
those made in the studio setting. This has 
become an institution in the Federal Re- 
public of Germany, where large, special- 
ized production companies have developed 
a veritable “canned opera” industry. It is 
usually a by-product of a normal production 
of an opera company. A well-established 
production, with a brilliant, if not outstand- 
ing, cast, is filmed in a studio in a décor 
similar to that of an opera stage but where 
the acoustics are better for the initial re- 
cording as well as for the final production of 
the sound-track. The mobility of the camer- 
as varies. Sometimes they give the view as 
seen from a seat in the stalls, sometimes 
they appear to be moving around on the 
“stage”. The result is a product of a very 
definite type, in which the direction is of 
fairly limited importance and which is not 
without a certain touch of artificiality. 
Although they are very professional pro- 
ductions, the films produced at Hamburg at 
the instigation of Rolf Liebermann and The 
Marriage of Figaro directed by Jean-Pierre 
In recent years a number of major opera- 
films by talented directors have exploited 
all the technical and financial possibilities 
of cinema and have made a bid to stand as 
artistic creations in their own right. Shown 
here are stills from Franco Zeffirelli’s La 
Traviata (above), Francesco Rosi’s Car- 
men (above right), and Joseph Losey’s 
Don Giovanni (opposite). These recent 
productions perhaps mark the start of a 
form which can offer the widest public the 
most satisfactory “substitute” for the rep- 
resentation of traditional opera. 
Ponnelle nevertheless give the impression 
of being “opera on the cheap”. One of the 
problems of opera-films is that aesthetic 
considerations are closely bound up with 
financial, cultural and sociological factors. 
And this, perhaps, is a suitable point at 
which to open a parenthesis to consider 
exactly what is at stake in the opera-film 
“industry”. 
First of all, opera-films are aimed at a 
non-public (people who do not go to the 
opera) or at a public delighted to have the 
opportunity of seeing again the opera stars 
they like to hear singing certain arias, and 
this for a modest sum and without going to 
an opera house. 
Secondly, the enormous increase in the 
cost of putting on a opera that has occurred 
over the past twenty years has made neces- 
sary growing support from public funds. 
This has created a new situation in Europe, 
and particularly in France—the taxpayer, 
who may derive no pleasure from opera, 
finds himself paying in part for the opera- 
goer’s seat. The opera is no longer merely 
“élitist”, it has also become a tax burden. 
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Ca
hi
er
s 
du
 
Ci
né
ma
 
co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 68744: When opera takes to the screen

  
  
The scandalous aspect of this ransom de- 
manded by the operatic institutions from 
the non-public modifies somewhat our view 
of the opera-film, the justification for which 
is that it enables members of this tax-paying 
non-public also to have access to the world 
of opera. Nevertheless, despite the pay- 
ments they have already made as taxpayers, 
they are asked in addition to contribute, no 
matter how modestly, to the costs of filming 
by paying for their seats in the cinema. 
The problem has still not been resolved. 
On the contrary, the gap is widening be- 
tween the privileged minority that has ac- 
cess to operatic performances—paying a 
high price, it is true, but one which repre- 
sents only a portion of the real cost of a seat, 
the remainder being paid by taxpayers who 
are excluded from these delights—and the 
non-public which is offered instead, at the 
true cost price even if this is lower, a by- 
product of real opera. Far from contribut- 
ing to the reduction of social and cultural 
injustice, the opera-film merely emphasizes 
its intractable nature. 
The advent of television has modified 
some of the factors involved but has not 
altered the basic problem of the opera-film. 
In fact, since television became part of our 
daily lives, the opera-film has more often 
than not been designed for showing on the 
small screen. Ingmar Bergman's The Magic 
Flute is a famous example. 
The opera-film destined for television 
showing has its own aesthetic, cultural and 
economic characteristics. The small size of 
the screen encourages close-ups and inti- 29 
mate scenes; the sound is of mediocre qual- 
ity; sub-titling presents difficulties; and the 
lighting appears flat and artificial. It is true p 
_- - Ne fy er EE 
  
  
 

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 68744: When opera takes to the screen

30 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ma
x 
Re
in
ha
rd
t-
Fo
rs
ch
un
gs
 
un
d 
Ge
de
nk
st
at
te
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
, 
Sa
lz
bu
rg
 
> that the entry of opera into tens of 
thousands of homes, sometimes more, is to 
its credit, particularly since entertainment 
in the home is perceived, wrongly, as being 
free. But it cannot be denied that the “ma- 
gic” engendered by the gathering of the 
public in front of the big screen in a 
darkened cinema—already less than that 
experienced in an opera house—is totally 
absent from the home. It is well known that 
the mere fact of being in the domestic en- 
vironment is enough to remove all sense of 
enchantment from a spectacle already lack- 
ing the glitter which has traditionally been 
an integral part of it. 
Under these conditions, how can televi- 
sion avoid the charge of being associated 
with the degradation of the original operatic 
experience, which relegates the televiewer, 
like the person who sees an opera-film in 
Na 
» A . d 
a a 
One approach to bringing opera to the 
screen is to use film actors and dub them 
on the sound-track with the voices of 
opera singers. This method was adopted 
by H.J. Syberberg of the Federal Republic 
of Germany when he filmed Wagner's 
opera Parsifal in 1981. Above, on set dur- 
ing filming. 
the dark of the cinema, to the rank of a 
second-class citizen in the world of opera? 
The only way in which the opera-film can 
be presented to the consumer in such a 
manner as to make him forget that he is 
being offered only ersatz operais to devise a 
form of filming which provides a “plus fac- 
tor” unique to the cinema, so that the spec- 
tator sees something that is not a lesser 
version of the original opera, but something 
else, perhaps something better. 
This can be achieved by our third categ- 
ory of opera-films—the director’s film. A 
great film director is invited to take in hand 
a great operatic score. There will be no lack 
of resources, since once we leave the opera 
house for the film set we leave behind the 
world of public subsidies to enter the realm 
where profit is king. 
Everything is done to make the opera- 
film an original work, an artistic creation in 
its own right, standing side by side with the 
original and worthy of being called, for 
example, “Losey’s” Don Giovanni. There 
are fantastic décors, sumptuous costumes, 
operatic stars duly promoted by press and 
show-bizz. The director himself feels free to 
do what he will with libretto and score, and 
displays a daredevil insouciance that is justi- 
fied as the new approach of an artist of 
today to a work of art of the past. The music 
may often suffer, to the benefit of the spec- 
tacle, but the filmed work will be able to 
compete on equal terms with the original. 
And in this way the gap between the élite 
and the masses, between a real and simu- 
lated experience, between the genuine and 
the imitation, can at last be reduced. 
It is only fair to point out that this kind of 
opera-film is still in its infancy. Productions 
such as Bergman's The Magic Flute (which, 
to be sure, has something of both the first 
and the third of the three categories of 
opera-film we have defined above) have 
shown that they can offer us true musical 
and dramatic emotion and that those who 
have access to the privileged world of opera 
should not look down their aristocratic 
noses at productions that have given so 
much pleasure to so many. Nothing need 
stand in the way of further progress. [| 
DOMINIQUE JAMEUX is a French musicologist, 
writer and radio producer. Among his published 
works are Richard Strauss (1980, new edition 
1986), Alban Berg (1980) and Boulez (1984). His 
book Lulu (d’Alban Berg) will appear later this 
year. With the composer Michel Fano he co- 
authored a series of introductory programmes to 
contemporary music that were broadcast on 
French television in 1981. 
"A world history of music 
Specialists from all over the world and from many disciplines are 
currently collaborating on a comprehensive world history, Music in the 
Life of Man (MLM), sponsored by Unesco and administered through 
the International Music Council. Aimed at the layman as well as the 
specialist, Music in the Life of Man will deal with all types of music and 
all aspects of musical life throughout history. it will provide descriptions 
of the historical development of music and its present state in the main 
- geocultural regions of the world, taking into account the particular 
philosophies or concepts of history of each region, the factors that 
influenced its historical development, and the musical linkages within 
and between regions. Since the project was formally launched in 1982, 
a series of meetings have been held at which a president and Board of 
Directors representing six major international organizations were de- 
signated. A general co-ordinator and regional co-ordinators for the 
principal regions were also appointed and tables of contents for the 
various regional volumes drawn up. The actual writing is now well 
under way. MLM is being written “from within” by scholars from the 
cultural regions themselves and edited by an international panel of 
experts. The work is scheduled to appear in 1991, initially in 3 editions 
(English, French and German) but it is hoped that it will eventually be 
published in several other languages—Russian, Chinese, Japanese, 
Arabic and Spanish—and in two-volume condensations in as many 
tongues as possible. The present plan calls for an edition in 12 large 
illustrated volumes, accompanied by a set of recordings in cassette or 
compact disc. Ten volumes (nos. || to XI) will be devoted to the cultural 
regions, while the other two (nos. | and Xil} will contain essays and 
indexes of more general concern. At the end of each regional volume 
will be “country profiles” of each nation in the region containing the 
basic facts of its national life, its culture, its music and its history. 
In the words of Barry S. Brook, President of the Board of Directors, 
“What makes this unlike any previous world history is its commitment 
to equal treatment for all cultures and its enlistment of scholars from al! 
corners of the earth in the writing and editing process. . . The histor- 
iography of world music will be rhanged radically by the Music in the 
Life of Man project.” =

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
~—— : 


### 68775: The Modern soundscape and noise pollution

Eg B Ls Lo 
ARAN ERS 
  
The modern soundscape 
and noise pollution 
modern world, combined with the in- 
creasingly dense network of urban, 
industrial, agricultural and air traffic sys- 
tems, has generated such by-products as 
pollution and the disappearance of some 
animal species. 
Another by-product, the nature of which 
has not yet been fully explored, is the new 
soundscape, created largely by the enor- 
mous increase in non-organic and uninten- 
tional sounds. 
When such sounds become positively 
disturbing, noise limitation regulations are 
established. In this field, governments 
often have to balance conflicting rights and 
interests. To take one example, reducing 
the speed of commuter trains in order to 
bring down noise levels must be reconciled 
T- demographic explosion in the with the need to maintain an efficient transit 
system. The problem becomes compli- 
cated when intentional, organic sounds are 
objected to: limitations imposed on public 
address systems could, for example, be 
considered a violation of the right to free 
speech. 
Attempts to define what is harmful in the 
new soundscape inevitably raise questions 
of human values and human rights. To 
dispel the vague prejudices which often 
bedevil such discussions, let us first ex- 
amine, independently of political, ideologi- 
cal, ethical and socio-economic consider- 
ations, the precise effects of sound on the 
hearing system. 
Auditory loss may affect the system at 
two points: the peripheral point (that is, the 
ear) and the central point (that is, the re-p 
by Nils Lennart Wallin 
Many young people today use portable 
tape-recorders to cut themselves off from 
the clamour of the street—sometimes in 
protest against aspects of urban life which 
they find repugnant—and listen undis- 
turbed to the music they love. Above, be- 
side the grave of the American pop idol 
Jim Morrison at Pére Lachaise cemetery in 
Paris a young man listens to the famous 
singer’s voice. 
Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Ja
cq
ue
s 
Gu
il
la
um
e,
 
Pa
ri
s 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 68775: The Modern soundscape and noise pollution

   
32 
  
    
p> levant parts of the central nervous system, 
mainly the brain-stem and the neo-cortex). 
The consequences of damage are quite 
different in each case. 
Most auditory injuries consist of peripher- 
al loss, in other words reduced hearing 
capacity with respect to frequency range 
and intensity. Changes in this capacity can 
be measured and diagnosed, and norms 
for different age groups are generally 
accepted and form the basis for most leg- 
islative regulation and industrial injury 
claims. Peripheral loss depends upon two 
different kinds of pathological change: con- 
ductive loss (or deafness) is an impairment 
of one or more of the sound conductors and 
is often caused by otosclerosis. Sensoneu- 
ral loss occurs within the cochlea. One 
example of this is Méniere's disease; 
another is loudness recruitment, the prob- 
able cause of the deafness ot Beethoven, 
who complained that he could not hear 
people speaking and that when they 
shouted at him it became unbearable. The 
By the 4th month after conception the hu- 
man foetus can hear. During the 5 months 
before birth the foetus hears the heart-beat 
of the mother and from the 7th month ex- 
ternal sound stimuli are registered. The 
development of the child’s auditory capa- 
cities in the first months after birth are 
clearly influenced by the soundscape and 
the child's early perceptions of music, 
often in the cradle. Right, a Vietnamese 
mother rocks her baby. 
a 
I
N
 
> 
LE
 
- 
1
 
P
N
 
y 
K
s
 
 
\
 
—
N
 
L
e
 
A 
disease with which we are concerried here 
is the sensoneural disorder known as 
tinnitus. 
Tinnitus is noise-induced hearing loss. It 
normally occurs among the elderly but is 
increasingly found among younger people. 
By the early 1960s, 35 out of every 1,000 
Americans suffered from tinnitus to the ex- 
tent that it interfered with their work. Most 
lost the ability to hear high frequencies (the 
highest notes of the piano). 
Noise-induced hearing loss is affected by 
a combination of sound intensity (mea- 
sured logarithmically in decibels) and 
length of time exposed. The British otolog- 
ist D.R. Hanson recommends one hour as 
the maximum permissible exposure to 99 
decibels, and 88 seconds for exposure to 
135 decibels. The average sound level dur- 
ing a two-hour symphony concert can 
range from 95 to 97 decibels on the 
podium. According to this recommenda- 
tion, orchestral players should never ex- 
ceed one hour's work per day. This of 
course is unrealistic, but it does support the 
claim of most orchestras that working time 
should not exceed five hours, especially in 
view of the high: attention levels required 
 
    
   
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Cl
au
de
 
Sa
uv
ag
eo
t,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 68775: The Modern soundscape and noise pollution

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ga
il
la
rd
, 
Pa
ri
s 
° 
3] 
c 
HT] 
“ 
Jf 
oc 
=z 
= 
oud 
oc 
< 
j=] 
5] 
£ 
oa  
which can cause both auditory and emo- 
tional stress. 
Dr. Hanson has compiled data on noise- 
induced hearing loss in young people who 
have attended pop concerts and disco- 
theques or used Walkman devices. There 
are clinical cases of deafness being caused 
by a sound shock, as when entering a 
discotheque. 
Tinnitus is a failure of the haircells lining 
the basilar membrane of the cochlea. It is 
the movement of these cells, in response to 
incoming sound waves, which converts the 
signals to electrical impulses. The size of 
the movement is proportional to the ampli- 
tude of the sound. Haircells in the chinchilla 
show irreversible damage after exposure to 
pop music at 120 decibels for 12 minutes or 
90 decibels for 3 hours. Different haircells 
respond to different frequencies and tinni- 
tus occurs at those frequencies at which the 
corresponding haircell has been damaged. 
The high-pitched whistle which sufferers 
from this disorder often hear is probably a 
subjective sound produced by the brain 
itself when registering the lack of neuronal 
spontaneous background noise from that 
part of the basilar membrane where the 
haircells are damaged, as a signal to which 
the brain must respond. 
If the central brain processes are dam- 
aged (perhaps as the result of a stroke) the 
perception of sounds and music may be 
affected. The resulting disabilities may in- 
clude loss of spatial perception, raised 
threshold of attention, inability to define 
pitch and co-ordinate movements, and loss 
of memory. So far as we know, brain dam- 
age cannot be caused by too much or too 
strong sound. However, a complete lack of 
auditory stimulation can cause such 
damage, especially early in life. Sensory 
deprivation leads to the non-development 
of neuronal pathways and synapses which 
can inhibit sensitivity and the ability to reg- 
ister experience later in life. 
On the other hand, while excessive sti- 
mulation may not cause direct physical 
damage it can, if not appropriate, create 
  
stress, lack of attention, poor socialization 
and the inability to form values. There is 
disharmony between neurophysiological 
brain patterns and the surrounding social 
and biospheric conditions at crucial points 
in the development of the personality. As 
the physiologist Rainer Sinz, of the Federal 
Republic of Germany, has pointed out: 
“Early and permanent exposure to music in 
the form of a sound level background leads 
to the premature practice of ignoring the 
noise level in overcrowded urban areas. 
This not only raises the threshold of audibi- 
lity, it also reduces the differentiated emo- 
tional processing of music nuances of mod- 
erate intensity. Acoustical stress leads to a 
switch-off reaction from attention to frustra- 
tion and, furthermore, to deficit sensitivity 
and rudimentary musicality.” 
Bearing in mind the relationship between 
music as a stimulus and the inner neuro- 
physiological clocks, it would appear that 
the perfected (and thus quite artificial) 
pulse of much synthesized pop music does 
not coincide with what mankind, regardless 
of culture, has developed as music— 
breathing and developing in close interac- 
tion with our inner rhythmic pulses. its 
merciless regularity and simplified sonority 
are inhuman. The effect of this music in- 
jected directly into the ears through a Walk- 
man may cause other possibly negative 
effects. The Walkman enables a young 
person to become isolated from the throb- 
bing life of the street in all its complexity. 
Such deliberate isolation is of course in 
itself a protest at overcrowded and deindivi- 
dualizing conditions. However, the con- 
sequence will be a loss of part of the multi- 
modal perception and observation which is 
the purpose of our senses in daily life: what 
is listened to does not correspond to what is 
seen. 
The enormous and increasing amounts 
of sound which characterize today's sound- 
scape are a physical threat to the auditory 
system, when exposure is long and fre- 
quent, and a source of mental and emotion- 
al fatigue which inhibits the development of 
The sonar environment or “soundscape” 
influences the development of the audi- 
tory sensibility from childhood on. Far left, 
tranquility reigns on the shores of Lake 
Titicaca in the Andes, where the only 
sounds are made by the water, the wind, 
insects and birds. The boat, a tortora, 
takes its name from the lakeside reeds of 
which it is made. Left, a totally different 
soundscape in a modern city, where life is 
dominated by the deafening noise of 
traffic. 
ethical, social and intellectual values. 
Among the changes to be expected from 
such processes is a trend towards strongly 
standardized and simplified musical struc- 
tures. The fact that new soundscapes affect 
the small child and possibly even the foetus 
means that the process of change will 
accelerate. 
It is easier to prevent physical damage to 
the cochlea than it is to prevent tiredness, 
poor attention span, stereotyped emotional 
patterns and lowered sensitivity to sophisti- 
cated intellectual products. Hence many 
countries have enacted legislation which 
regulates exposure to high intensity levels 
and long continuous noise levels in indust- 
rial work. 
In spite of all this, | would go along with 
Hanson and Sinz in advising against leg- 
islation affecting pop music, discotheques 
and the Walkman. There are strong 
sociological reasons why (mainly) young 
people engage in these activities: the de- 
sire for solidarity, the desire to belong to a 
community, to overcome loneliness, to 
escape from and forget reality. These are 
good reasons for society not to legislate but 
to try, in spite of all the difficulties, whether 
from powerful commercial interests, mass 
media propaganda, or elsewhere, to meet 
the needs of young people by modifying 
some aspects of pop music, to offer them 
challenging alternatives, to convince 
musicians in the pop industry of the need to 
modify the music (as some musicians have 
already done) and also the industry itself. 
Let us not forget that one of the reasons 
why people like music is their need to break 
silence. We need to make noise—but pre- 
ferably below 90 decibels. | 
NILS LENNART WALLIN, of Sweden, studied 
musicology, philosophy and ethno-anthropology 
at the Universities of Uppsala and Stockholm 
and music at the Schola Cantorum, Bale. A 
teacher of music, the history of music and music 
criticism, he is a former director-general of the 
Swedish National Concerts Institute, (1963- 
1970), of the Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra, 
and of Stockholm's concert hall (1970-1978). 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 68777: 1986: Year of Peace: 4

Year of Peace: 4 
Olof Palme, the Prime Minister of 
Sweden, was assassinated on 28 
February 1986. The text below con- 
sists of extracts from a speech he 
made on 21 October 1985 at United 
Nations headquarters in New York 
during the fortieth session of the UN 
General Assembly. We publish this 
text as a tribute to Olof Palme’s life- 
long dedication to the ideals of the 
United Nations. 
... Peace is, of course, the fundamental aim 
of the United Nations. We have come to 
recognize that peace is certainly more than 
the absence of military violence. It is also 
stability in relations between States, based 
on the observance of legal principles. One 
field where co-operation between States is 
absolutely necessary is the fight against 
terrorism in all its forms, these cruel 
slayings of innocent civilians. 
The rule of law is of vital importance to 
peaceful international relations. In particu- 
lar, this is strongly felt in the smaller coun- 
tries. When the integrity and independence 
of one small country is violated, it often 
sends a vibration of anger and anxiety 
through the hearts and minds of the citizens 
in other small countries. For them, the rule 
of law and the observance of our common 
commitments under the Charter are seen 
as imperatives for a future in peace and 
security. (...) 
In our era of growing international inter- 
dependence we have to recognize that 
threats to peace frequently originate from 
conditions inside the countries. Misery, 
hunger, denial of basic human rights, are 
the causes of political and social upheaval. 
(... 
Brutal violations of human rights occur in 
many countries, butin South Africa they are 
written into the very laws of the country. In 
this way the policy of apartheid is unigue in 
all its moral abomination. Apartheid is 
doomed, as is South Africa’s illegal occupa- 
tion of Namibia. While fearing that it will end 
in a chaos of destruction and bloodshed for 
which the white régime will bear full respon- 
sibility, we should not abandon the hope 
that a peaceful transition to a non-racial 
democratic society may still be possible 
through dialogue and agreement. It is the 
duty of the outside world to assist this strug- 
gle for freedom (...). 
We are witnessing massive migrations 
on anunprecedented scale between States 
and between continents. The reasons are 
many, among them hunger, war, natural 
disasters, persecution. The cultural 
clashes that are inevitable in this process 
have led in many countries to a renewal of 
chauvinism and racism. It is time we be- 
came more attentive to this particular 
danger. We are helped in this task by the 
rising anger, enthusiasm and readiness to 
act demonstrated by some people of the 
younger generations. It does honour to 
them (...) that they have adopted the watch- 
word “Don’t touch my pal”. There are many 
adults, in and out of Government, who 
would do well to listen and take notice. 
For many people around the world the 
United Nations stands for something very 
concrete, a significant element in their per- 
sonal everyday life. 
A child in Africa learns to read in a school 
financed by Unesco. A farmer in Asia re- 
ceives a sack of seed labelled “FAO”—the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations—or “WFP”—World Food 
Programme. The United Nations Develop- 
ment Programme (UNDP), with its technic- 
al projects, touches almost every develop- 
ing country in the world. Refugees in all 
continents are protected by the activities of 
the High Commissioner for Refugees. 
Women fighting for equality and dignity are 
encouraged by discussions in United Na- 
tions forums such as the recent Nairobi 
Conference. Many civilians in many coun- 
tries have felt more secure because of the 
presence of United Nations peace-keeping 
forces. If, as we sincerely hope, the initia- 
tive taken by the World Health Organization 
(WHO) and the United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF) to immunize all children in 
the world against serious infectious dis- 
eases by 1990 is crowned with success, 
innumerable families will think of the United 
Nations as a benefactor. [| 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 78 French francs. 2 years (valid only in France): 
144 French francs. Binder for a year's issues: 56 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles reprinted must bear 
author's name, Non-copyright photos will be supplied on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed ar- 
ticles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. Photo capitions and headlines are written 
by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published 
in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance 
by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Courter is produ- 
ced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by: Unesco, 7 
Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris; (2) University Microfilms (Xe- 
rox), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A: (30 N.C.R. Microcard 
Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, New York, 
U.S.A; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, 
Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Assistant Editor-in-chlef: Olga Rodel 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
Editors: 
English: 
Roy Malkin 
French; Alain Lévéque 
Neda el Khazen 
Spanish: Francisco Fernandez-Santos 
Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Russian: Nikolai Kuznetsov 
Arabic: Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoudi 
Braille: Frederick Potter 
Research: Christiane Boucher 
Hlustratlons: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Georges Servat 
Promotlon: Fernanda Ainsa 
Speclal projects: Peggy Julien 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in- 
Chief in Paris 
Non-Headquarters editions 
German: Werner Merkli (Beme) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
(talian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Rajmani Tiwari (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili; Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: 
Bozidar Perkovic(Belgrade) 
Chinese; Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Inger Raaby (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) - Dépdt legal 1 € 1 - Avril 1986 - 
34 PHOTOCOMPOSITION : Ateliers de FUNESCO - PHOTOGRAVURE-IMPRESSION : MAURY-IMPRIMEUR S.A. Z.1. route d'Etampes, 45330 MALESHERBES.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

  
nal 
: SBE aentit — 
To urismy tu ral iden § { rans: A FREY 
tions ©. orous survey ort €OF cos Asch py 
gents a nb ist rans | note Yrans p a fon ons Aion 
por os ond Ores te TpaNSHEE and oralio 4 exa out- - 
Sn Se eporfiton 
hen en way 50C10~ » 
P d he ce 13 
jsm an en affect (riahzZe J 
e n \t 
counties: “ing COU jourist ities deyelon national OCs | identitt 
yoived } the deve rofit 
includin® wie ith PT rgant- | 
sind activ \ {0 (rial 7€ 
aking o e d 
ation’ 
ountrics: : wr 
\ — Unesco 
Ages 
4 103 pag 
{SBN 30 
francs 
AR FY 
 
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the Natlonal Distributor In your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
In local currency, wlll be supplied on request.) 
AUSTRALIA, Hunter Publications, 58a Gipps St., Collingwood, Victona 3066; 
Publications : Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW; Periodicals : Dominie Pty. Subscriptions Dept., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent : United Nations Association of Australia, P.O. Box 
175, 5th floor, Ana House, 28 Elizabeth St., Melbourne, Victoria 3000. AU- 
STRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna, BAHA- 
MAS. Nassau Stationers Ltd., P.O. Box N-3138, Nassau. BAHRAIN. The 
Arabian Agencies and Distributing Co., Al Mutanabi St, P.O. Box 156, 
Manama BANGLADESH. Bangladesh Books International Ltd., Itefaq Build- 
ng, 1, R.K. Mission Rd., Hatkhola, Dacca 3. BARBADOS. University of the 
West Indies Bookshop, Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown. BEL- 
GIUM, “Unesco Courier” Dutch edmion only : N.V. Handaelmaatschapp 
Keesing. Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurmne-Antwerpen. French edition and 
general Unesco publications agent : Jean de Lannoy, 202 Ave. du Roi, 1060 
Brussels, CCP 000-0070823-13. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, P.O. 
Box 91, Gaborone. BURMA. Trade Corporation No. 9, 550-552 Merchant 
Street, Rangeon. CANADA. Renout Publishing Co. Ltd., 2182 St. Catherine 
St. West, Montreal, Qué. H3H 1M7. CHINA. China Nationa! Publications 
Import and Export Corporation, P.O. Box 88, Bejing. CYPRUS. “MAM”, 
Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O Box 1722, Nicosia. CZECHOSLOVA- 
KIA. S.N.T.L., Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1; Ve Smeckach 30, P.O.B. 
790-111-27 Prague 1 (Permanent display); Zahranicni Itteratura, 11 Souko- 
nicka, Prague 1. For Slovakia only : Alfa Verlag .-Publishers, Hurbanovo nam. 
6,893 31 Bratislava-CSSR. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export-OG, Tidsskrift- 
service, 35 Norre Sogade, DK-1970 Kobonhavn K. EGYPT (ARAB REPUB- 
LIC OF), National Centre for Unesco Publications, No. 1 Talaat Harb St., 
Cairo. ETHIOPIA. National Agency for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis Ababa 
FINLAND. Akateeminen Kinakauppa. Keskuskatu 1, SF-00100 Helsinki 10; 
Suomalainen Kinakauppa Qy. Koivuvaarankuja 2, 01640 Vantaa 64. FRAN- 
CE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 7 Place de Fontanoy, 75700 Pans. CCP 12598-48. 
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Buchhaus Leipzig, Postfach 140, 710 
Leipzig, or from Internationalen Buchhandiungen inthe G D.R. FED. REP. OF 
GERMANY. For the Unesco Couner (German, English, French and Spanish 
editions) : Mr. H. Beum, Deutscher Unesce-Kurier Vertrieb, Besaltstrasse 57, 
D5300 Bonn 3. GHANA. Presbytenan Bookshop Depot Ltd, P.O. Box 195, 
Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Lid, P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The University 
Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape Coast; The 
University Bookshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon, GREAT BRITAIN, See 
United Kingdom. HONG KONG. Federal Publications (HK) Ltd., SA Evergreen 
Industrial Mansion, 12 Yip Fat St., Abderdeen. Swindon Book Ca., 13-15, Lock 
Rd., Kowloon. Hong Kong Govt. Information Services, Publication Contre, 
Baskervilla House, 22 Ice St. HUNGARY. Kultura-Bushimport-ABT, P.O.B. 
149-H-1389, Budapest 62. ICELAND. Snaaborn Jonsson and Co., H.F. 
Hatnarstraeh 9, Reyigavik. INDIA. Onent Longman Ltd., Kamani Marg, Ballard 
Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chitaranjan Ave., Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, 
Mount Road, Madras 2; 5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh, Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 
Mahatma Gandhi Rd., Bangalore 560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad- 
500001. Sub-depots : Oxford Book and Stationery Co., 17 Park St, Calcutta 
70016; Scindia House, New Delhi; Publication Unit, Ministry of Educaton and 
Culture, Ex, AFO Hutments, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Rd, New Delhi, 110001, 
INDONESIA, Bhratara Publishers and B , 29 Ji. Oto Iskar i 
111, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI Dr. Sam Ratulangie 37, Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. 
K Publishing and Distribution Co., 28 Vessal Shiraz St., Enghélab 
Ave., P.O. Box 314/1486, Teheran; Iranian Nat. Comm. for Unesco, 1188 
Englab Ave., Rostam Give Building, Zip Code 13158, P.O. Box 11365-4498, 
Teheran. IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, Al Rashid St., Baghdad. IRELAND. 
The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd., Ballymount Rd., Walkinstown, 
Dublin 12. ISRAEL. A B.C. Bookstore Ltd , P.O Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd., Tel 
Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Librena Commissionaria Sansoni, S.p.A.), Via 
Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence JAMAICA, Sangster's 
Bookstores Ltd, P.O. Box 366, 101 Water Lane, Kingston; University of the 
West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kingston. JAPAN. Eastern Book Service Inc, 
37-3 Hongo 3-choma Bunkyo-ku, Tokye 113. KENYA. East African Publishing 
House, P.O. Box 30571, Nairobi; Africa Book Services Ltd., Quran House, 
Mfangano St., P.O. Box 45245, Nairob). KOREA. Korean National Commis- 
sion for Unesco, P.O. Box Contral 64, Seoul. KUWAIT, The Kuwait Bookshop 
Co., Ltd, POB 2942, Kuwait, for the Unesco Couner : Faralatla Press Agency, 
P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwart. LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Centre, P.O. 
Mazenod, Lesatho, Southern Africa. LIBERIA. Code and Yancy Bookshops 
Lid., P.O. Box 286, Mcnrowia. LIECHTENSTEIN. Eurocan Trust Reg. P.O.B. 
5-9434 Schaan. LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. Agency lor Davelopment of 
Publication and Distnbution, P.O. Box 34-35, Tnpol. LUXEMBOURG. Lib- 
rare Paul Bruck, 22, Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. MALAWI. Malawi Book 
Service, Head Office, P.O. Box 30044 Chichin, Blantyre 3. MALAYSIA, 
University of Malaya Co-operative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 22-11. MALTA, 
Sapienzas, 26 Republic St., Valletta. MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30 
Bourbon St., Port-Louis. MONACO. British Library, 30 Bd. des Moulins, Monte 
Carlo. NEPAL. Sajha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. 
Keasing Boeken B.V., Joan Muyskenweg, 22, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Am- 
sterdam. NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Derp-Eddine N.V., P.O. Box 200, 
Willemstad, Curacao, N.A. NEW ZEALAND. Government Publising P.O. Box 
14277-Kibirmie Wellington, 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721 Chnstchurch; 
Alma St, P.O. Box 857, Hamilion; Pnnces St, P.O. Box 1104, Dunedin, 
NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ite; The University Bookshop of 
Ibadan, P.O. 286; The University Boekshop of Nsukka; Tha University Book- 
shop of Legos; The Ahmadu Belio University Bookshop of Zaria. NORWAY. 
Johan Grundt Tanum, P.0.8. 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1, Narvesen A/S; Subscrip- 
ton and Trade Book Service, P.0.B. 6125 Etterstad, Osle 6; Universitets 
Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Blindern, Oslo 3. PAKIS- 
TAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-i-azam, P.O. Box No. 729, 
Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for Book Development 
in Asia and the Pacific, 3% Dethi Housing Society, P.O. Box 8950, Karachi 29. 
PHILIPPINES. National Book Store, Inc, 701, Rizal Ave., Manila D-404. 
POLAND, Oman-import, Palac Kultury | Nauki, Warsaw; Ars Polona-Ruch, 
Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7. 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. Das & 
Andrade Ltda. Livraria Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, lisbon. 
FOO7SEYCHELLES. Natonal Bookshop, P.O. Box 48, Mahé; New Sarvice 
Ld., Kingsgate House, P.O. Box 131, Mahé. SIERRA LEONE. Fourah Bay. 
Nyala University and Sierra Leone Diocesan Bookshops, Freetown, SING- 
APORE. Federal Publications (S) Pte Ltd. Times Jurong, 2 Jurong Port 
Rd., Singapore 2281. SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, Modem Book- 
shop and General, P.O. Box 951, Mogadiscio. SOUTH AFRICA. For the 
Unesco Couner {single copies) only : Central News Agency, P.O. Box 1033, 
Johannesburg. FOO7SRI LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampa- 
lam Gardiner Mawata, P.O.B. 244, Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, 
P.O. Box 1118, Khartoum. SWEDEN. All publications A/8.C.E. Frizes Kungel, 
Hovbokhandel, Regenngsagatan 12, Box 16356, 10327 Stockhelm 16. For the 
Unesco Couner : Svenska FN Farbundet, Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 5-104, 65 
Stockholm; Wennergren-Wiliams, Box 30004-5-104, 25 Stockholm; Esselte 
Tidskftscentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62 - 101 20 Stockholm, SWIT- 
ZERLAND. All publications : Europa Verlag, 5 Ramistrassae, Zorich; Litvame 
Payot, Rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.C.P. 12-236; Librairies Payot also 
in Lausanne, Basle, Berne, Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and Zinch, TANZA- 
NIA. Dar-es- Salaam Bookshop, P.O B, 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. THAILAND, 
Nibondh and Co. Lid., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.0. 
Box 402, Bangkok; Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnem Ave., Bengkok: 
Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. TRINIDAD AND 
TOBAGO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St, St, Cla, 
Trinidad W 1. TURKEY. Haset Kitapew A.S., IstikdAl Caddes:, No 469, Posta 
Kutusu 218, Beyoglu, Istanbul. UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 7145, 
Kampala. UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Othoe, H.M.S.0., P.O. Box 
278, London SWB 5DT, and Govt. Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Beffast, 
Manchester, Birmingham, Bnstol; for scyentfic maps only : McCarta Lid, 122 
King's Cross Rd., London WC1X 9DS. UNITED STATES. Unipub, 205 East 
42nd St., New York, N.Y. 10017. Orders for books and pariodicals : P.O, Box 
1222, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. USSR. V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, UL. Dimitro- 
va 39, Moskva 113095. YEMEN. 14th October Corporabon, P.O. Box 4227, 
Aden. YUGOSLAVIA. Mladost, lica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankarjeva Zalozba, 
Zoptaneva 2, Lubfana; Nolit, Terazie 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National 
Educatonal Distnbubon Co. of Zambia Lid., P.O. Box 2664 Lusaka. ZIMBAB- 
WE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 87 Union Ave., Harare.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/068918engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

Acoustics, the science of sound and of its effects on people, is of f 
great importance to contemporary music in its search for new 
sound effects. These two photos show the spectrographic analy- 
BL ETO TUT TL 
(above) and (below) the phrase “Bonjour aux amis de I'Unesco” 
A Unesco”). : Photo © In Camera. P ns 
 