# [088517](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
        
| JUNE 1991 
  
* FI
 
8.
50
 -
 D
EN
MA
RK
: 
KR
35
 
FR
AN
CE
 
: 
18
 
FF.
 
AU
ST
RA
LI
A:
 
AS
6.
50
 
- 
BE
LG
IU
M:
 
BF
13
1 
- C
AN
AD
A:
 
C$
5.
25
 
- U
SA
: 
$3
.9
0 
- 
SW
IT
ZE
RL
AN
D:
 
SF
5.
70
 
- N
ET
HE
RL
AN
DS
 
  iii 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

for publication in this feature. Your photo should show 
a painting, a sculpture, piece of architecture or any other 
subject which seems to be an example of cross-fertilization 
between cultures. Alternatively, you could send us pictures 
of two works from different cultural backgrounds in which 
you see some striking connection .or resemblance. 
Please add a short caption to all photographs. 
    
    
SORTIE AU JOUR The French artist Sophie Golvin has spent several years at Karnak 
; ; in Egypt, painting among the ruins of ancien ebes. "By 
198 pe in a serosa vas (2.30 X 2.30 m) getting to know the natural cycles and physical features of this 
by Sophie Golvin district,” she writes, “and living with them over a period of time, 
y Sop : | have tried to assimilate the spirit of the forms and collective 
imagination of an ancient civilization and sought to express its 
presence.” 
 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

  
JUNE 1991 
Interview with 
JORGE LAVELLI 
 
C OO N T E 
Wr pn 
  
Thel JNESCO 
mm COURIER 
44th YEAR 
Published monthly in 35 languages and in Braille 
‘The Governments of the States 
parties to this Constitution on behalf 
of their peoples declare, 
‘‘that since wars begin in the minds 
of men, it is in the minds of men 
that the defences of peace must be 
constructed... 
‘‘that a peace based exclusively 
upon the political and economic 
arrangements of governments 
would not be a peace which could 
secure the unanimous, lasting and 
sincere support of the peoples of 
the world, and that the peace must 
therefore be founded, if it is not to 
fail, upon the intellectual and moral 
solidarity of mankind. 
‘‘For these reasons, the States 
parties ... are agreed and 
determined to develop and to 
increase the means of 
communication between their 
peoples and to employ these means 
for the purposes of mutual 
understanding and a truer 
and more perfect knowledge of 
each other's lives..." 
Extract from the Preamble to the 
Constitution of UNESCO, 
London, 16 November 1945 
MAPS AND MAP-MAKERS 
 
THE NEW HISTORY OF CARTOGRAPHY 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
by J. B. Harley 10 
IMAGINING THE WORLD 
by Catherine Delano-Smith 16 
ATLASES, WAYS AND PROVINCES 
by Sobhi Abdel Hakim 20 
THE TREASURES OF MONTEZUMA 
by Miguel Leon-Portilla 24 
ZHENG HE'S SAILING CHART 
by Mei-Ling Hsu 27 
THE PATHFINDERS 
by Alfredo Pinheiro Marques 28 
WHEN MAPPING BECAME A SCIENCE 
by Norman J. Thrower 31 
THE PERSPECTIVE FROM SPACE 
by Jean-Philippe Grelot 35 
A BIT OFF THE MAP 
by Aleksandr S. Sudakov 39 
CELESTIAL CARTOGRAPHY 
by Werner Merkli 41 
— 
45 UNESCO IN ACTION 
THE EARTH 
FROM EVERY ANGLE 
by Lydwine 
d’Andigné de Asis 
4 ho) UNESCO IN ACTION 
COPYRIGHT 
IS EVERYBODY'S 
BUSINESS 
Interview with 
Milagros del Corral 
5 0 UNESCO IN ACTION 
THE UNIVERSAL 
COPYRIGHT 
CONVENTION 
by André Keréver 
Cover: Detail of a sealskin 
and plywood map of islands 
off Greenland, made by an 
Eskimo hunter in 1925. 
Yellow represents swampland, 
black indicates lichens, and 
uncoloured wood the area 
covered by tides. 
Back cover; The Ark on 
Mount Ararat and the 
division of the world between 
the 3 sons of Noah: Shem in 
Asia, Ham in Africa, and 
Japheth in Europe. Scene 
from a 15th-century 
manuscript of Jean Mansel’s 
La fleur des bistoires, 
The Editors wish to thank 
Prof. J.B. Harley 
of the University of Wisconsin- 
Milwaukee and 
Mme Jasmine Desclaux, 
cartographer, for their help in 
the preparation of this issue. 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 88500: Interview with Jorge Lavelli

INTERVIEW 
LEENE= 
JORGE 
LAVELL] 
Jorge Lavelli is the director of the Théatre National 
de la Colline in Paris, founded in 1988, Born In 
Argentina in 1331, he has staged more than eighty 
major works in the classical and contemporary 
European repertoire, 
Since 1962 the hallmark of his productions has 
been stringency, rituality and violence in its tragic 
or absurd aspects. They have revealed the theatre 
of Gombrowicz, Arrabal and Copl, but also that of 
Seneca and Panizza, Attracted to opera, Lavelli has 
since 1975 adopted a boldly innovative approach 
to classics such as Idomeneo, Faust, La Traviata, 
Madame Butterfly, Norma and to contemporary 
works (Luigi Nono's In the Great Sun of Blossoming 
Love, Arrigo's The Return of Casanova, Sutermeis- 
ter's Berenger I, and Zygmunt Krauze’s The Star). 
Lavelli now works alternately as a theatre and 
opera producer, being especially drawn to the operas 
of Mozart (The Marriage of Figaro, La clemenza di 
Tito) and the plays of Shakespeare {The Winter's 
Tale, The Tempest, A Midsummer Night's Dream). 
RL hi  
  
g
e
 
| 
fa 
pi: 
£5 
i 
¥ % 
‘. NO 
idx 
| 
® What, in your view, is theatre? 
— Whenever you have one or more people 
performing in front of an audience, you have 
theatre. Wherever this takes place, it consti- 
tutes a theatrical act in the strict sense. If, for 
instance, at this precise moment, you were just 
listening to my words and not engaging in a 
dialogue with me, then we could talk about 
the adumbration of a theatrical act. Theatre 
is the primordial act of communication. 
Wm Will it cease to exist one day, like so many 
other forms of artistic expression? 
— No. Theatre is an exceptional, unique acti- 
. - 
  
ES - 
   
   
vity which brings together in the same place, 
within the same unity of space and time, indi- 
viduals who are to transmit a message— 
whether in the form of physical expression or 
words—to a passive audience. Once these con- 
ditions have been met, you have theatre. But 
the fact is that these conditions can be found 
in any place and at any time. This is why 
theatre cannot cease to exist. It cannot even 
appear outdated. 
It is, however, ephemeral. Hence it is des- 
tined to die, but only to be constantly reborn 
in different forms, in any form whatsoever 
that is rooted in the imagination, but always 
 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 88500: Interview with Jorge Lavelli

BR ERED : dh 
 RR CO a a i KE a Site 3, 
Jorge Lavelll recelves an 
award for his production of 
Steven Berkoff’s Greek at the 
Théatre de la Colilne, Parls. 
observing the unity of these two basic ele- 
ments: space and time. Even though, in a 
theatrical performance, time is artificial—we 
know that between eight and half-past nine 
this evening it will be theatre time—the 
audience and the actors or singers, those who 
are going to pass on the message, live in the 
same space and time during the performance, 
It 1s an ephemeral act, but it can be repeated 
ad infinitum, 
Bm Considering that, even though it is 
repeated, this ephemeral act is unique, can 
it not be said to take on an absolute value? 
— Indeed it can. A performance lives only in 
the memories of those who were there, who 
witnessed the theatrical act, and this is some- 
thing which is very specific to it. The only 
place where it can live again is in their minds. 
There is no other artistic activity about which 
this can be said. 
What's more, the time of the performance 
does not coincide with the artificial time 
created on stage. The action may unfold at a 
very remote time or in the immediate present, 
but the time created on stage is not real time 
as it is experienced in everyday life. 
W Does a man of the theatre like yourself get 
a specific pleasure from working in this essen- 
tially ephemeral medium? 
— Definitely, because each performance is at 
the same time a form of expression in which, 
as though to raise this ephemeral moment to 
the highest pitch of intensity, a large number 
of elements play a part: the actors, the per- 
formers; objects which take on a different sig- 
nificance according to how they are placed on 
stage; the architecture, the lighting; all these 
are factors that shape and determine the way 
in which the performance is perceived. 
BW You didn’t mention words. 
— Of course, words play an essential part. But 
you can have theatre without using words. A 
gesture can be just as eloquent as a speech. 
There's also dance, mime, the theatre of 
silence. But words are part and parcel of the 
dramatic art. 
BW Do you try to put on a play that will be 
the same every day or do you accept the fact 
that no two performances can be identical? 
— Every evening there will be some change, 
which may be perceptible only to me. 
Unforeseen events are bound to occur, just as 
I'm sure they do when you're preparing your 
magazine. Doesn’t a page sometimes turn out 
to be badly printed or a photo to be of poor 
quality? It’s the same in the theatre. Accidents 
may happen that are outside your control. A 
power cut or a storm if you're performing in 
the open air will alter the climate of the per- 
formance. The mood or state of health of the 
actors will also have an effect. These are acci- 
dents in so far as human beings are not the 
same every day, even though they are readying 
themselves to enact a ritual that has long been 
studied, worked at and rehearsed over and 
over again. They will also be influenced by 
the size and behaviour of the audience. As for 
the members of the audience, they will have 
their own individual interpretation of the 
play, which will depend on their own partic- 
ular sensibility, on their intelligence, on how 
concerned they feel about what they are being 
shown, and even on where they are sitting in 
the theatre, 
W Let’s talk about your personal sensibility, 
your identity. Would you say that in Argen- 
tina theatre is based on European theatre or 
does Argentine theatre exist in its own right? 
— Argentina is a country of immigration, a 
patchwork of peoples, in which Europeans 
have a special place. Needless to say, Argen- 
tines of Spanish, French or Italian origin 
brought with them their culture and hence 
their theatre. But since the mid-nineteenth cen- 
tury there has also existed a specifically Argen- 
tine theatre with its own characteristics. Why? 
Because every society finds in theatre a means 
of analysing, studying and expressing itself. 
Argentine theatre is the reflection of a culture, 
an attitude to life, a way of responding to the 
things around us. In Argentina, the French, 
English and German classics are well known, 
Goethe, Shakespeare and Moliére are regularly 
staged, but plays by Argentine writers are also 
performed. In its form, however, Argentine 
theatre 1s similar to European theatre, just like 
American theatre as a whole. It would in any 
case be rather surprising if, in Argentina, that 
farflung corner of Europe, the prevailing 
theatrical influence were Kabuki, No or 
Chinese theatre. 
Bm Who are your favourite playwrights? 
— At the Théitre de 1a Colline I have deliber- 
ately chosen to give precedence to contem- 
porary playwrights, to reveal present-day 
authors to the public. But before being made 
director, I staged a large number of produc 
tions, in Paris, in the rest of France and in var- 
tous other European countries. Where the 
choice of authors is concerned, I have always 
followed my own inclination, for there is a 
very close relationship between a producer’s 
sensibility, temperament and intellectual out- 
look and the plays he chooses to put on. Those 
that I have chosen represent so to speak the 
successive chapters of a novel that will come 
to an end when I myself leave the theatre. A 
novel that can be said to exist only for me, that 
EE TE J a PAT TT PR fr Tn ik a WTR rt dg 
byl ly ae Eh 
Cl WE UE 
  
po 
a TR R I LN Ewe 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 88500: Interview with Jorge Lavelli

Te Sa   
  
 
A monument to the Spanish 
playwright Jacinto Benavente 
(1866-1954) In Madrid. 
I alone can read from end to end. And one 
that has a secret unity, a secret consistency. 
For example, between the classical and 
modern authors whose works I've put on 
there are points of similarity. With hindsight 
I would say that they share a freedom of 
expression that enables them to go beyond 
naturalism and to penetrate into the world of 
the imagination, both in the patterns of lan- 
guage and in their musical organization. They 
all show human beings in the round, in their 
psychological and social dimensions, but also 
with their inner lives and dreams. They tran- 
scend reality in the interests of lyricism, 
expressing the inexpressible by virtue of a 
different kind of stagecraft, a different idea of 
the expressive value of gesture, a more effec- 
tive way of occupying space than would be 
possible with a purely naturalistic approach. 
B This seems particularly relevant to your 
production of Shakespeare’s A Midsummer 
Night's Dream... 
— Yes, a play dealing with love’s taboos, with 
the difficulty of being happy. I have, I think, 
in my career in the theatre, remained faithful 
to this theme of the aspiration to happiness. 
I have put on other classical works, like 
Life Is a Dream and The Wonder-Working 
Magician by Calderdn de la Barca, or The Tri- 
umph of Sensibility, a rarely performed play 
by Goethe. Among modern authors, there is 
Witold Gombrowicz, whom I introduced into 
France with The Marriage, Yvonne, Princess of 
Burgundy and Operetta, or Eugene lonesco, 
with whom I staged the first production of 
Killing Game and put on The Picture and Exit 
the King. There's also Fernando Arrabal, 
Steven Berkoff, Carlos Fuentes, Thomas Bern- 
hard, Mikhail Bulgakov, Copi of course, and 
many others... This choice of contemporary 
authors follows an inner logic, and of course 
it’s the same logic that’s behind my work at 
the Thédtre National de la Colline—where 
there’s no competition between classical and 
 
 Bh a. = mama SU eae = EL

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 88500: Interview with Jorge Lavelli

  
modern, but an exclusive concern with the 
theatre of today. 
Contemporary theatre follows on directly 
from classical theatre and can be just as 
exciting, interesting and controversial. It can 
also, by exploring new directions, applying 
new approaches and providing a reflection of 
the sensibility of our time, shed light on the 
society in which we live and guide our polit- 
ical, cultural, spiritual and intellectual choices. 
Wm But don’t you think that Shakespeare, 
Corneille and Mozart achieved such a degree 
of perfection in their art that no one can 
match them today? 
— No, this is the effect of distance, of all the 
years that have come between. The contribu- 
tion of the twentieth-century playwrights is 
considerable. Take someone like Eugene 
O'Neill: the inventiveness of his theatre and 
the vast range of his characters are staggering, 
In his work, as in that of Shakespeare, the 
mainsprings are ambition and the thirst for 
power. But at the same time he creates, in 
plays like Strange Interlude, a dreamlike 
theatre, unconfined by realism, focusing on 
extreme situations and emotional and phys- 
ical relationships of a rare violence. He opened 
up vast possibilities for those who came after 
him. 
I’m also thinking of Pirandello, one of the 
pillars of contemporary theatre. Without him 
we wouldnt have had Ionesco, nor even 
Beckett. This whole dialectic between form 
and content, this duality of man at grips with 
himself, of the individual face to face with his 
own inwardness, these are extraordinary 
insights granted to us by the contemporary 
stage. Unsuspected horizons have thus been 
revealed, bringing into the theatre the findings 
of both science and psychoanalysis—which 
was unknown in Shakespeare’s day. It is quite 
possible that in three or four hundred years’ 
time these authors will have the same stature . 
as their Greek predecessors. 
rrr TT A 
Take the case of Mozart, around whom 
a cult has sprung up in our time and who 
seems to be in the process of being redisco- 
vered. In the nineteenth century his music was 
hardly ever performed. He was regarded as a 
composer of genius but one who dealt in 
trivialities. This point of view is no longer held 
today. People have looked closely into what 
he wrote, wondered why he chose particular 
texts, and come to realize that there were the 
same relations between certain of his 
characters in many of his works and that this 
recurrence of the same themes in different 
guises was a way of developing a particular 
world-view, of putting across 2 message; and 
that this blend of seriousness and lightness 
which runs through all his work had nothing 
trivial about it. That on the contrary, there 
was perhaps no view of life more profound. 
So 1t happens that time corrects the impres- 
sion that a writer, a composer or an artist has 
made upon his contemporaries. 
Wm How do you see the role of the producer? 
— His role is to recreate the play in his imagi- 
 
nation, to situate it in his own space and time 
in order to put it across more effectively and 
to imprint upon it the colour of his own sen- 
sibility, When you are producing a play you 
are not simply piecing it together, reducing 
it to its bare bones or attempting a historical 
reconstruction; you are taking a fresh look at 
a piece of writing, reinterpreting it, mingling 
your dreams with the author's. 
Wm You don’t find this too restrictive? 
— No, certainly not. It's all part of the 
ephemeral nature of the performance, of this 
unique, fleeting moment which is theatre. 
There is always an author and a text, and the 
text is always open to new interpretations. 
Actually, a theatre producer enjoys the same 
freedom as a novelist: he can tamper with 
time, set his own pace. 
An act of theatre 1s an act of love, a work 
of creation. If I put on a play, it is of course 
because I like the play. So I bring something 
tot, the feelings and emotions that it triggers 
in me, my own way of seeing life, my own 
response to words. When all is said and done, 
it is an expression of absolute fidelity and, for 
that very reason, demands the utmost 
freedom. m

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Eh —— ——— 
-» 
~ 0) " 
Se CITRCVLS 
  
  
- J 
‘ : ; : 
rT 
% “ - 5 
: 
AT we Re RL MAREINDLCV M 
\ Lo SINVSH , “SF : cil 
-_  
  
  
   

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

  
EDITORIAL 
  
  
BA Men doubtless tried in very early times to make a 
mental picture of their spatial horizons and of the 
principal natural features they came across when they | 
journeyed by land, sea or river. Not that a need for 
landmarks is an exclusively human characteristic. 
When herds of wild animals make their annual trek 
across the vast distances that separate their winter 
= -% quarters from their summer pastures, what do they 
do but follow a map of their territory mysteriously /| 3) 
engraved in their memory? 
Man, however, has made it his business to depict 
the world around him in durable form. Using rudimen- 
tary instruments he began to reveal a kind of map- 
ping impulse by scratching symbolic representations 
of his environment on cave walls and the bark of 
trees. This impulse may have sprung from a need to 
record for later generations the location of hunting = 
grounds and springs, hazards and havens. Perhaps = 
it was also part of an innate human desire to achieve | 
intellectual mastery over a world where unknown 
lands stretched far beyond familiar landscapes. 
As the centuries went by, human knowledge and 4% 
* productive capacity increased, instruments for meas- = 
NS ) 3 —g uring distance were invented a d improved, travellers === 
by ; ¥ = 4 = I i ¥ ~~ oh covered ever greater distances. The need to record S- 
x ve : # space visually according to increasingly formal rules == 
was extended to continents and then to the Earth in 7 
its entirety. Methods and techniques of map-making == | 
3 gradually became more sophisticated and accurate = 
- thanks to the dedicated work of pioneering scientific Bes 
i map-makers engaged on projects which in some 
il 
   
  
    
  
  
kg 
  
  
   
Za 
   
 
      
  
  
     
     
   
   
   
   
— 
cases lasted for many years. 
The story of cartography has been an epic of human 
perseverance in the face of natural obstacles— *'& 
: deserts, mountains, oceans. The longest and most 3 7 
4 arduous task of map-makers, however, has b en that 
-= N of overcoming the distorted visions and cultural 
| prejudices inherited from a past in which each people Ey 
An 
    w Ixvailcuce Baue 
  
    
  
 
ne rrr gianin gill ox nang que claus fevecos ha : Ws: cl ~ naturally saw itself at the centre of the universe. This 
flee weanencue harum weolac an- HiY issue of the UNESCO Courier shows how cartographers 
tl 1 mes a ESE 
Romp have grappled with these and other problems and   
presents some of their remarkable achievements. 
  
The Miller Atlas (1515-1519), a Portuguese nautical chart 
of the Indian Ocean.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 88504: The New history of cartography

10 
The new history of cartography 
by JB. Harley 
Long portrayed as essentially 
European, cartography 
is now seen as a much more 
universal visual language 
A world map dating from 
1109. It belongs to a 
tradition of rectangular maps 
that can be traced back to a 
now-lost prototype In the 
Commentary on the 
Apocalypse of Saint John by 
the Spanish monk Beatus 
of Llebana. 
vi
f 
fe
 
r
i
a
n
 
» » 
inten 
Nel ena 
 
   

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

J 
F ats, 
  
  
\ 
4 oinb §
1 
erie Naf pre infula 
I the beginning there were maps. There has 
always been a mapping impulse in individual 
consciousness. The sensing of space and the 
development of cognitive structures to under- 
stand it can be traced from the earliest societies 
to the present. It was, however, only with the 


### 88504: The New history of cartography

first visible act of cartographic representation— 
the drawing of a map on whatever medium was 
to hand—that a documented step in abstract 
thinking initiated the history of cartography. 
By substituting an analogical space for a real 
space in the process of mapping, human beings 
acquired intellectual mastery over their world. In 
many societies maps preceded both writing and 
mathematical notation. Only much later in the 
te > 3 
3K a TL 
  
        
      
       
  
   
    
 
 
1 
4 -a § 
d r 2 
( - 8 
5 ot 
“2 
yg— . 8 
mer CW i: 
“ra Ferrie -— 
13 7 
2 E 
<3 
. 
Ar ae on “an A 
] 
Kumgdye 
Maurie my’ fin uff ger me wef 
Mal ren wm qemtls odl waar oof. rene 
Manrtenna ng na 
  
. 
A - 
        
4 re diforwn 
 
    
. 
y 4 
& 
=
 
r
e
f
o
r
m
 
8 a
e
v
n
e
r
a
 
‘ 
1 
d
u
e
 
w
y
 
d 
c
o
w
s
 
f
i
l
 
luda 
1h
 
el
k 
9
 
el
 
  
- 
i; 
- 3 + 
-3 2 -3 
-2 3 3 
Cal 4 
= i 
RF E 
“ TF : « 
4 - » 
$F i : 
x 'g & 
sc 3 £ 
BF - 
Mg» 5 
g « - 
3 ¢— F + 
2 90 2 vd 
+» = §£ = 
ho ] 
2S idk i 
vt hey TQ z 
IT} 
of 2 
+. 3. i 
a : I=} i 
& - 
wn x 
o SE. 
«. = 2 x   
nineteenth century were they associated with the 
modern disciplines we now call cartography. Yet 
maps produced before then penetrate to the 
deepest roots of our culture. 
What may be regarded as the oldest authen- 
ticated map in the world, dated to approximately 
6000 BC, was unearthed in an archaeological exca- 
vation at Catal Hiiyiik in west-central Turkey in 
1963. Its subject was the neolithic town of that 
name. Painted on a wall, it showed the streets and 
houses in plan form, lying beneath the profile of 
the mountain of Hasan Dag with its volcano 
erupting. But though this map, which shows a 
layout corresponding to that of the excavated 
town, bears some resemblance to a modern plan, 
its purpose was very different. The site from 
which it was excavated was a shrine or holy 
room, and the image was created as part of a ritual 
act, as a “product of the moment”, and not 
intended to last beyond that event. 
A Eurocentric vision 
Only in recent years have maps such as that of 
Catal Hiiylik—and comparable engravings and 
paintings in the rock art of Africa, the Americas, 
Asia, and Europe—been studied as a distinctive 
category of prehistoric cartography. That this 
should be so is not merely a reflection of 
problems of identifying maps in these early cul- 
tures. It is also an expression of a more deep- 
seated tendency in the history of cartography that 
has restricted the canon of “acceptable” maps. 
From the nineteenth century the history of 
cartography has been portrayed largely as that of 
.a Western tradition, originating in the ancient 
Near East, Egypt, and in the Greco-Roman era, 
and reaching its culmination via a European 
pedigree in the developed world of today. Though 
interrupted in the Middle Ages, and exhibiting 
both minor reversions and major revolutions, 
that cartographic history was seen as proceeding 
developmentally from simple forms toward a 
more advanced level of numerical application. 
Maps were assigned a position in the evolu- 
tionary sequence. The corollary was to exclude 
from serious study those maps judged to show 
no signs of progress toward the goal of objec- 
tivity. Even some of the earlier maps of Euro- 
pean culture, like the great world maps of the 
Christian Middle Ages, were once dismissed as 
being unworthy of study. Thus, at the beginning 
of the present century, Charles Raymond Beazley 
could describe two of the most celebrated world 
maps of the later Middle Ages, the Hereford and 
Ebstorf maps as “‘non-scientific...monstrosities”, 
and write of their “complete futility”. 
Maps in non-European cultures were consi- 
dered even further alienated from the epicentre 
of cartography. Traditional approaches to the his- 
tory of Islamic cartography, for example, reflect 
this tendency of European scholars to see the 
world in their own image. The maps of Islam 
were explained largely as a Greek heritage, 
ignoring the extent to which translations into 
Arabic of works such as Ptolemy’s Almagest and 
Geographia had been ingeniously appropriated 
and adapted to the specific purposes of Islamic 11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 88504: The New history of cartography

culture and religion. Arab maps such as those of 
the Balkhi School of geographers in the tenth cen- 
tury were assessed by a Ptolemaic yardstick rather 
than being understood as a fusion of mapping tra- 
ditions, even though they embodied Persian as 
well as Greek elements. 
The maps of non-European cultures were 
only allocated more space in Western histories 
when they revealed features similar to those deve- 
loped on European maps. The focus was on car- 
tographic similarities in these distant cultures 
rather than on their differences. Thus the rich his- 
tory of Chinese cartography—with datable 
artefacts surviving from the fourth century BC— 
was recognized by one leading scholar as “the 
same science’ that had earlier developed on the 
European scene. Much emphasis in this compara- 
tive cartographic history was placed on the iden- 
tification of mathematical aspects of mapmaking, 
on the codification of methodological principles 
for cartography (such as those of Pei Xiu 
[223-271], the “father of scientific cartography” 
in China), and on the appearance of technical 
wr 
LL 
x : 
A ng A He Gan 3 
es thr ae op 
SEALY 
[A 
Ry 
innovations such as grids, regular scales, abstract 
conventional signs, and even contours—all aspects 
that fitted the Western model of cartographic 
excellence. Thus the maps from the Han dynasty 
found in a tomb near Chansha in Hunan 
province were seized upon by both Chinese and 
Western scholars as confirmation of an early 
scientific development of cartography. They 
became the lineal ancestors of the modern map. 
The “scientific” traditions of mapping in 
China—and their diffusion into Japan and 
Korea—received an attention that was not 
accorded to cultures that had no analogy with 
Western mapping practices. Thus the indigenous 
maps drawn in India before the British occupa- 
tion, with their unfamiliar signs and pictorial 
style, have found no place until recently in con- 
ventional accounts of cartographic history. They 
were either not recognized as maps at all or dis- . 
. . oe. . Detail from the mosalc map of 
missed as quaint curiosities, to be collected with magaba, which formed the 
other ethnographic specimens. Lowest of all on floor of a 6th-century church 
the ladder of rational progress were the “primi. In Madaba (Jordan). it shows 
5s n the estuary of the river 
tive” maps of preliterate non-Western cultures. jordan. 
WR 
an 
HIN 
FE MME . id 
JANG ALR E01 
y 0 
   

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

Ranging from paintings produced by the 
Aboriginal peoples of Australia to maps of the 
Native Americans, and from the stick-charts of the 


### 88504: The New history of cartography

Marshall Islanders to the battle plans drawn on 
the ground by Maori warriors in New Zealand, 
they were widely regarded as an inchoate stage 
in the cognitive history of cartography. To the 
extent that they lacked orientation, regular scales, 
and the Euclidean geometry of modern maps, or 
were drawn on unfamiliar media, little effort was 
made to crack their codes of representation. They 
remained on the periphery of Western carto- 
graphic achievement. 
In such ways, the history of mapping became 
a prisoner of the categories and definitions of 
scholars. The rich variety of ways in which space 
has been represented in the global mosaic of 
human culture still had to be recorded. It was to 
remedy this Eurocentric perspective that in 1987, 
in the first volume of a new History of Cartog- 
raphy, we adopted a definition of maps that would 
allow a measure of relativism into the study of 
the history of maps. 
A universal language 
In the belief that each society has, and has had, 
its own natural ways of seeing and producing 
images of space, we came to define maps simply 
as “graphic representations that facilitate a spa- 
tial understanding of things, concepts, conditions, 
processes or events in the human world.” The 
rationale of such a broad definition was that it 
applies to maps in all cultures at all times, and 
not only to those of the modern age. Moreover, 
it allows the writing of a more contextual history, 
by treating maps as a form of “knowledge” as 
a whole and not solely as the products of long- 
term technological diffusion from a European 
hearth. 
So, a new shape is starting to emerge for the 
history of cartography, one in which cultures 
speak for themselves. It has two main strengths. 
First of all, there is now a growing awareness that 
cartography is not only much older but also, 
despite the many gaps in the artefactual record, 
a much more universal visual language than was 
formerly supposed. By accepting some of the pit- 
falls of cross-cultural comparison and by 
expanding the definition of what a “map” can 
be—so that it now embraces, for example, cos- 
mological and celestial representations as well as 
those of the Earth—we are beginning to inscribe 
mapping traditions that were previously blank 
spaces in the history of cartography. The develop- 
ment of mapping in India serves as an illustra- 
tion of these changes in the writing of the his- 
tory of maps. 
Despite India’s major contribution to the 
development of the mathematical sciences, rela- 
tively few geographical maps have survived from 
the pre-European period. What fills the carto- 
graphic archives are largely cosmographical maps. 
All three of the main ancient religions of India— 
! . 
4 
Ny © ‘ EN 
A 
x + % 
 
Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainism—have left a 
complex legacy of cosmographical representation. 
In some maps, the Earth and the universe are 
often centred on the axis of Mount Meru 
(Sumeru) around the base of which the continents 
are arranged. On other maps, the universe is ver- 
tically stratified, with graphic representations of 
numerous heavens and nether worlds through 
which the soul could travel. 
Natural features might be given fabulous sizes 
and shapes: in Buddhist cosmography, for 
example, the world containing India was known 
and portrayed as Jambudvipa, the Rose-apple 
Island, after the jambu tree which grew at its 
centre. To judge India’s cartographic history in 
the light of the European tradition of terrestrial 
mapping is to misunderstand fundamentally the 
Weltanschauung of Indian culture and to fail to 
grasp concepts of space and time that are 
unfamiliar to Western eyes. 
Not only are traditional histories of cartog- 
raphy dramatically enlarged by embracing this 
“new” corpus of cosmological maps—and estab- 
lished concepts vastly enriched by the Asian map 
experience—but we learn also a new respect for 
maps from other regions. As we extend our car- 
tographic encounter into Southeast Asia and into 
Tibet, into pre-nineteenth-century Africa, or into 
Sumerlan terra-cotta tablet 
(c. 2100 BC) showing plots of 
cultivated land belonging to 
the city of Umma (today Tell 
Jokha, southern Iraq). 
J. B. HARLEY, 
of the United States, is 
professor of geography at the 
University of Wisconsin- 
Milwaukee and director of the 
Office for Map History in the 
American Geographical Society 
Collection of the University’s 
Golda Meir Library. He is co- 
editor, with Prof. David 
Woodward, of a multi-volume 
History of Cartography of 
which vol. 1, Cartography in 
Prehistoric, Ancient, and 
Medieval Europe and the 
Mediterranean was published 
in 1987 by the University of 
Chicago Press. Further 
volumes are scheduled for 
publication from 1991 
onwards. The History of 
Cartography project is 
supported by the National 
Endowment for the Humanities 
of the United States 
Government and by several 
private foundations. 13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

Jain mandala (Gujarat, 
18th-19th century). 
The 7 oceans and the 
divisions of time are disposed 
around Mount Meru, the pivot 
of the world. 
hy 4 r SE 
» As TL 4 
Maw 
Ama : 
pre-Columbian America and the Pacific realm 
before Cook, we meet other map traditions that 


### 88504: The New history of cartography

bear no resemblance to modern European maps 
but that are no less valid cartographies. The old 
preconceptions about the scope of maps in 
human history have been challenged and the old 
histories of cartography are in continuous 
revision. 
Thus the second strength of the new history 
of cartography is a greatly enlarged understanding 
of the purpose to which maps have been put. 
There are few aspects of human action and 
thought that have not been mapped at one time 
or another. The more we explore the terrain of 
maps across the major cultures of the world, the 
longer the list becomes of different activities to 
which they may have “made a difference”. Uses 
Sy 
Fy cl) ele hu, Pav 
he 
TR Sh 
NA v 1 
MS) cardbug mith 
wail 
Nx wn 
a . NL 4 
ue ww 
ss we =e 
range from the prosaically practical to the seem- 
ingly speculative. 
In ancient China, for instance, the utility of 
maps as instruments of political power—as 
boundary and cadastral maps, as bureaucratic 
record, as diplomatic protocol, as plans for water 
conservancy, as a means of assessing taxes, as stra- 
tegic documents in military logistics—are all well 
documented. Equally, Chinese maps enter into 
other cultural dialogues. Far from being just a 
science of measurement, maps have been closely 
linked to literature and painting. They have been 
integrated into historical scholarship; they have 
been used to reconstruct geographies of the past 
and have been carved on stone in public places 
as witnesses to cultural continuity. They have 
been used in ritual, as is confirmed by their 
» 
ARTY TUT le 
Sale wh 
ghee Jum pv 
9. “A 
omni AM 
Bunk) fay 
2%. TTL AL 
Ae 
as a 
AR = 
om 5 Arid 
’ ee -" " 
aa 
2g 0 
3 
Ahn 
: 
| J : 
Gamitncim pv YT 
50 » - 
LLL 
» 
Le BTV oll 
Te as 
nal ah 
GE a EE ne 
atre ahs 
ATI, TU LAR
tae Sk > 

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

presence in tombs; they became tools of divina- 
tion or were used as talismans to mediate between 
unseen forces. They have been used in the astro- 
logical prediction of celestial events. 
Mental images 
China was by no means unique in the range of 
uses it developed for maps. In Western as much 
as Eastern societies, maps have resulted in a car- 
tography that invariably combines the objective 
with the subjective, fact with value, myth with 
documented event, and locational silence with 
coordinated place. If in traditional Eurocentric 
histories we have neglected the mythic, the psy- 
chological, and the symbolic uses of maps in 
favour of the practical, it is our obsession with 
scientific models rather than with the actual his- 
tory of cartographic practice that is to blame. 
The insights thus gained from the study of 
non-Western mapping traditions and practices 


### 88504: The New history of cartography

can be applied to the history of maps throughout 
the world. As we identify many more local tra- 
ditions of mapping, cartographic history can no 
longer be seen as part of a one-way process by 
which cultural hegemony was exercised by Euro- 
peans over colonized peoples. In the Americas, 
for example, evidence is mounting of the extent 
to which maps of colonial territories published 
in Europe from the sixteenth to the nineteenth 
centuries were underpinned by geographical 
knowledge contributed by indigenous peoples. 
Even in situations of conflict, maps in many parts 
of the world were a means of cultural exchange 
that reached over the barriers of language. And in 
other cases, maps were also a means of resistance 
by which colonized peoples sought to oppose the 
appropriation of their culture and territory. 
In order to explore these new directions, map 
historians are embracing theories derived from 
the humanities and social sciences at large. The 
well-worn story of the achievements of 2 numer- 
ical technology in the way the world is 
represented is being challenged. No longer are we 
content to accept that even our modern maps, 
though generated by Landsat satellite and com- 
puter graphics, are above the machinations of 
power. No less than a map of an Indian cosmog- 
raphy or an Aztec map of the universe, these 
satellite-based maps are socially constructed. Car- 
tography, we now begin to realize, is the product 
of wider discourses, a form of power-knowledge 
caught up with the major transformations of 
world history, created and received by human 
agents, exploited by elites, to materialize as a 
world seen through a veil of ideology. 
From the beginning maps have been a mental 
image. Today they are still recognized as a way 
of seeing, but we begin to understand what 
“seeing” 1s. Rather than thinking of maps as the 
mirror of the world, we now see them as a 
simulacrum: sometimes preceding the territory; 
constantly redescribing the world in all its cul- 
tural diversity. n 
hl a 
\ ’ 
HL | YY" 
ha 
Redrawing the Earth 
in 1973, a German cartographer, Arno Peters, unveiled a new map projection which 
he had devised In an attempt to give a true representation of the relative sizes 
of the Earth's land masses. One of the avowed aims of the Peters projection is 
to eliminate the ‘‘geographical superlority’ enjoyed by countries of the northern 
hemisphere In a number of other projection systems, Including that established 
by the Flemish cartographer Gerard Mercator In 1569 and described In the text 
below. However, it is impossible to reproduce the spherical Earth on a flat sur- 
face without some kind of distortion, and the Peters projection has stirred up 
vigorous controversy in many quarters, including within the United Nations system. 
The Mercator projection 
The Mercator projection (Map 1) provided European seafarers with the 
fidelity of angle they needed to line up their compass bearings with points 
on the map. But to achieve this Mercator had to place the lines of latitude 
progressively further apart as they moved away from the equator. This 
makes Greenland and all northern hemisphere countries grossly exagger- 
ated in size, and Europe appears to be at the centre of the world. 
The distortions of Mercator's map did not seem strange to Europeans 
in the sixteenth century, an era of expanding colonial empires. Yet today, 
although European colonialism belongs largely to the past, Mercator’s 
sixteenth-century map still retains much of its grip. 
Many attempts have been made to improve on Mercator, for example 
by using a rounded grid as in the Winkelsche projection (Map 2). But this 
means that north-south and east-west directions are lost. Also the coun- 
tries on the edges of the map are distorted in shape. 
Things would be simpler if we could replace these various versions with 
just one projection reflecting what most people actually want from a world 
map. This is precisely what Arno Peters has tried to do. 
Fidelity of area and direction 
Peters fixed on two things which a world map must have to be interna- 
tionally acceptable: fidelity of area and true north-south and east-west direc- 
tions. Beyond these two fixed principles, the compromises have to start. 
As no map can give any country exactly the same shape it has on the globe, 
the ideal is to minimize distortion. 
The Peters map 
On the Peters map (Map 3) the maximum shape distortion occurs in the 
polar region where countries like Iceland tend to be flattened, and along 
the equator, where Zaire and Sumatra look longer than we are used to. 
But maximum shape distortion on the Peters map is never more than 2:1, 
compared with a 4:1 distortion of Europe on the Mercator map. 
This new, equal-area map is the first fruit of what Peters sees as “a 
new cartography", free of the historical perceptions that have shaped 
earlier world maps. 
Source: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 88505: Imagining the world

16 
Imagining the world 
hy Catherine Delano-Smith 
The maps of yesteryear 
often recorded myths 
and legends as well as 
hard facts. How far have 
things changed today? 
| I. has played a key role in the his- 
tory of cartography. Long before the fifth cen- 
tury BC, when Greek scholars found the Earth 
to be a globe, and in far corners of the Earth never 
touched by their learning, people imagined the 
shape of the Earth they lived on. The Aztecs saw 
their world as five squares; ancient Peruvians as 
a box; ancient Egyptians as egg-shaped. Some 
early Chinese also believed the Earth to be like 
an egg or like a ball, and derided those who 
thought of it as flat and square within circular 
heavens. In Japan, before Christian missionaries 
arrived at the turn of the seventeenth century 
bringing with them the notion that the world is 
round, there seems to have been at least one 
theory of the Earth as a cube. 
Such ideas have been expressed in map form 
from prehistoric times onwards all over the 
world. In rock art, circles and squares, thought 
to represent the world, are common motifs in 
cave paintings or on carved rocks from Scan- 
dinavia to India and from Asia to the Americas. 
The Korean Ch’ian Chin’s image of a cubic 
Earth is found in a manuscript of 1547. The five 
squares of the Aztec “world” were painted on 
the opening page of the Fejérviry Screenfold, a 
ritual book of the pre-conquest period. 
To some early societies, symmetry was 
important. In pre-classical Greece, at the time of 
Homer, the circle of the world was divided by 
an equator, roughly along the line of the Mediter- 
ranean Sea. The ancient philosopher-geographers 
of classical Greece drew lines around the sphere 
dividing the Earth into parallel zones or climata, 
all places within one zone having roughly the 
same length of day. Some of the global symmetry 
“was lost when Pliny divided the part of the Earth 
best known to the Greeks and Romans into seven 
zones, all north of the equator, in order to allow 
three for the “wilderness” of the far north. 
In Hindu India, some authorities depicted the 
world with four continents, corresponding to the 
four cardinal points, although they had as yet no 
“knowledge” of the Americas. Geographers in 
the Roman period illustrated their textbooks with 
diagrams of a spherical Earth subdivided into the 
three continents they knew about (Asia, Africa, 
Europe). Some, like Strabo in the first century 
AD, suspected the existence of other land masses, 
perhaps even a fourth continent, and a few early 
historic maps from Europe seem to suggest this. 
It was not, however, until after the last decade 
of the fifteenth century that Europeans could 
start to put the Americas onto their maps of the 
 
world because some of them had seen the “new 
lands” for themselves. Even so, it was not always 
easy to know just what to draw. One map of 1502 
(the Cantino map) shows the two Americas 
widely separated; another (1528, by P. Coppo) 
shows North America as a group of small islands; 
yet another (1548, by G. Gastaldi) depicts North 
America as a continuation of Asia. 
Several sixteenth-century maps showed a 
Mare Indicum or Sea of Verrazano, almost 
bisecting the northern continent. This was the 
result of one voyager’s too-hasty identification of 
a stretch of inland water along the eastern sea- 
board of North America with the Pacific. Yet 
other geographical myths concerned the penin- 
sulas of Florida and Yucatan, discovered by Euro- 
peans in 1513 and 1518-1519 respectively but first 
charted as islands. Then there was the problem 
of California, first correctly charted as a penin- 
sula after a Spanish fleet sent by Cortes had suc- 
cessfully navigated to the head of the Gulf in 
1540, but nevertheless shown as an island on

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 88505: Imagining the world

   
      
  
  
   
 
| pore 
bilhfimo 
bo al rg 
A lumyperare: Rll: 4 
many seventeenth- and eighteenth-century maps. 
A similar misconception was a belief in a con- 
tinuous northwestern sea passage across North 
America, providing a northern route to China. 
Ortelius showed it clearly on a map of 1564. In 
1592 a Greek sailor reported he had reached its 
western end. Thereafter, for three centuries, 
Europeans vied with each other to find this 
mythical passage, driven by the hope of gain 
through the trading advantage the way through 
to the Pacific was thought to bring them. 
The location of legends 
Many maps depict famous events. These events 
may be historically testifiable ones such as the 
sites of recent battles. Others show where a 
historic event was thought to have taken place. 
Some Indian maps from the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries show not only Vraj (the 
birthplace of Krishna) but also a host of places 
sacred to Hindus as part of the Krishna legend. 
SAueito cxcellenflimo ¢ 
Tmo tperador cl quale 
ha lyae ve corona foto glh as 
ommo quam clna a 
$5 4. elicncatun caro mor oe pag. f 
10 ornado ve coue 
. lequal eicenha ic! cquel’ : 
car OME MeNae tuumoe ] A; 
re uiclo.e ba mild R my Lj i ; p 
cl fuoregno n per Cnt: & » 
; [ dix reqend quelto caro. cl A 
“Yn Liane auana. con aff Je 
MImero oO homenm oar An ¥ 
nana ¢ taericdo © qm fone il l/ 
SAA tunpracen gmalgge ccoltu it =! 
2 Pa el moto \ i ¥ 
m - AY 
ia txdificio nok 
bilg wx idols N 
% A 
i i 1 
   
    
mg 
Nl wanglu 
Se AIO © 
a A A 
   
Lprich 
rin 
Bo Nrchan vas. 2 -'
7 
J: a 
Tle. or 
   
Sull others show—without any annotation or 
stylistic differentiation—the location of wholly 
imagined events. Atlantis and a host of other 
legendary islands were shown on maps of the 
Atlantic in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries 
especially. 
Long-lived legends about famous personages 
such as Alexander of Macedonia are other 
examples of the historical imagination which 
were depicted on maps. The “Alexander myth” 
is seen on Ptolemy’s maps of Asia in the Columns 
of Alexander (representing the Caspian Gates 
through which Alexander was said to have 
passed). It is found too on a late eighteenth- 
century Indian map of the world on which Alex- 
ander is seen with the men who allegedly asked 
for his help against the mythical giants Gog and 
Magog and with the wall he was said to have built 
to imprison the accursed ones. A Christian map- 
pamundi of the thirteenth century depicts just 
such a Wall of Gog and Magog in northeast Asia, 
probably an echo of the real Great Wall of China. 
  
      
          
   
  
wel 
S—_— i 
a 
o
e
 
a A
S
S
 
r > 
4]
 
-y
 
- 
L
e
i
 
& 
      
  
" i ¢ 
Detaii of the Fra Mauro worid 
map of 1459. The map is a 
compendium of geographicai 
sources, including Portuguese 
expeditions to Africa, 
Ptolemy's Geography, the 
Marco Polio narratives, and 
portuian charts. 
3 
J 
- 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 88505: Imagining the world

Asia was also supposed to be the home of the 
priest-king Prester John, an early medieval Euro- 
pean legendary hero who would, it was said, help 
the Christian world against the Muslims in the 
Holy Land. By the mid-fifteenth century, though, 
Prester John’s kingdom was believed to be in 
Ethiopia, part of an India which extended over 
much of Africa as well as Asia. After 1488, by 
which time the Portuguese had opened a new 
seaway to India round the southern tip of Africa 
and past Abyssinia, maps of Africa showed an 
enthroned Prester John, his palace, or the royal 
mountain, Mount Amaro, in which his sons were 
supposed to have been incarcerated until the 
order of succession called each to the throne in 
turn. 
Fictional as well as philosophical literature 
has spawned a different category of imagined 
historical places, where the entire country or 
region depicted on the map is mythical. An early 
example is the woodcut map produced by Hans 
Holbein in 1518 for the second edition of Thomas 
More’s Utopia. The tradition continues today. 
Imagination and power 
Maps have also carried graphic messages about 
the imagined political supremacy of nations or 
societies. They may have been drawn to back ter- 
ritorial claims or support chauvinistic notions 
about status (such as maps drawn by Nazi 
archaeologists to show the distribution of 
Neolithic “Germans” in Greece and Bronze Age 
“Germans” in Scandinavia). 
One traditional conception of China placed 
the heartland of the royal domains in the centre 
of four concentric zones, the outermost of which 
represented the zones of “allied barbarians” and, 
most distant of all, of “cultureless savagery”. The 
Chinese were thus less than impressed when the 
Jesuit missionary Matteo Ricci arrived and 
showed them maps of the world in which Europe 
and the Atlantic occupied the central positions. 
Tactfully, Ricci drew another map centred on the 
Pacific Ocean. 
Maps may reflect the economic competition 
that so often underlies political concerns. Maps 
from the period of European discovery 
represented the often fabulous mineral wealth of 
the “new” lands to justify the discoverers’ 
exploits and to encourage further investment in 
their voyages. 
From the Americas came the legend of the 
alluring Kingdom of Gold and the even more 
attractive El Dorado. The latter was the legen- 
dary city of the king of “Manoa”, situated on the 
shores of an equally mythical “Lake Parima”, 
which the Spaniards heard about in 1530 and 
which they supposed to lie in the basin of the 
Orinoco river. The legend gave rise to numerous 
expeditions to the highlands of Guiana, one of 
which was dispatched from England by Sir 
Walter Raleigh. Part of Raleigh’s manuscript map 
(1595) survives, showing “that mighty, rich and 
beautiful Empire of Guinea, and...that great and 
18 golden city which the Spaniards call El Dorado 
Detail from the 13th-century 
“Psalter Map’ in the British 
Library shows part of the 
legendary wall buiit by 
Alexander the Great around 
the kingdom of Magog to 
keep out the “barbarians’’. 
____________ ] 
CATHERINE DELANO-SMITH, 
of the United Kingdom, has 
taught historical geography at 
a number of British universities 
and is currently Visiting Reader 
in London University's 
Department of Mediterranean 
Studies. Her special interests 
in the history of cartography 
include prehistoric maps, the 
history of map signs before 
1800, and maps in bibles. 
   
   
  
XY 13 
o£ 2 / £8 - 
ot + ns 
and the naturals [call] Manoa”. The Frenchman 
T. de Bry engraved a copperplate map in 1599 
on which the elusive Lake Parima was promi- 
nently shown, with equally fabulous creatures 
nearby, such as headless men and fearsomely 
armed women—the Amazonians of another 
ancient myth. 
A new world 
seen in terms of the old 
Similar reasons of self-interest led European map- 
makers to represent the landscapes of what was 
to them a new world in terms of the old. To 
avoid alarming prospective colonists, maps por- 
trayed the landscape as gentle: open parkland, 
dotted with round trees like the familiar oaks and 
elms of the undulating plains of southern England 
or lowland France. Colonial settlements were 
ranked in terms of the European social order; 
native settlements were discreetly marked. In fact, 
the existence of natives was altogether better 
ignored, according to this view. The myth of a 
European, not an Indian, country was thus early 
perpetrated by maps. It is still there, in the Euro- 
pean place-names which dispossessed the Indian 
ones. 
Even in their own countries, European map- 
makers could be equally selective in what they 
put on or (just as significant) omitted from their 
maps. In the seventeenth century, the neat, ord- 
erly and wholly bland appearance of the early 
atlases portrayed an imaginary landscape that 
pushed the social and economic contrasts and 
political disorders of real life out of mind. By the 
late eighteenth century, standardized shading had

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

reduced the entire urban scene, with the houses 


### 88505: Imagining the world

and workplaces of the great and the poor, to a 
mythical uniformity, another landscape of the 
mind. 
In search of an earthly Paradise 
Finally, but fundamentally, maps have been used 
from the beginning to portray the imagined 
worlds of religious man. Like the question of the 
shape of the geographical world, the structure of 
the cosmos has varied according to the sacred 
myths and the teaching of the gods in each 
society. 
Cosmological maps tend to be schematic in 
style and often symmetrical. Common to many 
cosmologies, especially in Asia, dominated by the 
heights of the Himalayas, is the concept of a cen- 
tral mountain, the vertical axis of the cosmos, like 
the Mount Sumeru of the Buddhists and the 
Mount Meru of the Hindus. Muslim cosmolog- 
ical maps placed Mecca at the centre of the Earth 
because of its position opposite the centre of the 
sky. 
Of vital concern to every believer is the 
journey from this world to the next. Maps have 
been made to guide the newly dead. In the New 
Hebrides early in the twentieth century, the 
labyrinth design was still being sketched out in 
the sand to teach initiates The Way. The route 
had to be memorized. From Australia to Siberia, 
complex designs painted on shamans’ drums 
served as aide-mémoires. In ancient Egypt, maps 
were painted on the outside of coffins together 
with relevant extracts from The Book of the 
Dead. Here word and image were inscribed 
together to ensure the individuals safe journey 
through the underworld. 
Maps of the geographical world have also 
been richly, sometimes excessively, invested with 
religious myth and symbolism. Christians came 
to identify each of the three continents of the Old 
World with one of Noah’s sons (Shem for Asia, 
Ham for Africa, and Japheth for Europe). From 
the eighth century AD onwards, their figures or 
names were sometimes included in diagrams 
drawn to illustrate, in the Roman tradition, new 
copies of older written geographical descriptions 
of the world (the so-called T-O maps). 
Another feature imposed on European 
regional and world maps by the Christian theo- 
logical imagination has been the terrestrial para- 
dise or Garden of Eden. In the fifth century AD 
an Irish monk, St. Brendan, sailed westwards to 
find what he believed were the Isles of Paradise. 
St. Brendan’s islands remained on maps for many 
centuries, even when, as on the Hereford map- 
pamundi, Eden was marked in the east. St. 
Brendan’s islands (sometimes marked as the For- 
tunate Isles) were often confused with real 
Atlantic islands. Usually, though, in accordance 
with the description in Genesis chapter 2, Eden 
was placed in the east. On medieval maps it was 
placed prominently at the edge of the map. 
With the emergence of Protestantism in the 
sixteenth century, and especially John Calvin’s 
insistence on 2 literal interpretation of the bib- 
lical text, Eden had to be shown close by the Tigris 
and Euphrates, two of the four rivers said to water 
it. The religious drive to find an earthly Eden 
could be strong. Despite increasingly detailed 
knowledge of real world geography, the search 
continued to recent times. In 1666, M. Carver 
published a map in his book showing Paradise 
in Armenia, and in 1882 General Gordon put for- 
ward his idea that, before the Flood (yet another 
of the world’s “great myths”) Paradise had been 
situated on Praslin in the Seychelles. 
Perhaps we should not dismiss the topic of 
imagined worlds too lightly, as if it illustrated 
merely some of the quainter sides of human 
nature or human history. We still often prefer to 
imagine the world or to lead others to see it in 
a preferred way. National maps may present a 
“scientific” face but it is not difficult to deduce 
omissions, such as military installations, airfields, 
or politically sensitive targets such as biological 
research centres. Nor is it difficult to discern the 
way modern geographical “myths” are created 
through, for example, the removal from the map 
of settlements after rumours of certain types of 
man-made disaster, or the translation of sea or 
city names on the map as a cartographic substi- 
tute for political aggression less easily achieved 
overtly. In modern as in ancient maps, myth and 
legend remain ingrained. n 
Wa 
’ 4 
7 
  
  
of. 
. 
  
Above, a map of the world 
embellishes an Initial capital 
letter In a 1417 manuscript 
of the De Chorographia, 
a treatise by the Latin 
geographer Pomponlus Mela 
{1st century AD). 
Detail from an atlas by the 
French sailor and 
cartographer Gulllaume Le 
Testu (1556). 
vd - i a 5 ; 
or 1 | A 
hE Ae 
 J 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 88506: Atlases, ways and provinces

20 
Atlases, ways and 
provinces 
by Sobhi Abdel Hakim 
Building on the heritage of Antiquity, the Arabs made their own original 
contributions to cartography, ushering in a golden age 
|] 
SOBHI ABDEL HAKIM, 
of Egypt, is professor of 
human geography at Cairo 
University, of which he was 
formerly Vice-President. 
I: is very difficult to form a value judgement 
of the Arab maps produced in the Middle Ages 
since, despite all the searches made, only a very 
small number of originals have been found. 
The maps constructed by al-Khwarizmi (the 
planisphere drawn at the request of Caliph al- 
Ma’mun), al-Balkhi, al-Istakhri, Ibn Haukal, al- 
Magqdisi and the anonymous author of the Limits 
of the Universe, have been lost. Even al-Idrisi’s 
famous map is only a copy dating from the 
fifteenth century. 
The history of cartography among the Arabs, 
as among all other peoples, is closely bound up 
with the development of geography and its many 
related fields. From ancient times the Arabs too 
needed precise bearings to regulate the course of 
their lives and their activities. The advent of Islam 
made this all the more necessary. In order to fulfil 
the obligations of prayer, fasting and ritual pil- 
grimage, they had to be able to decipher the 
cosmic clock and know which way to turn to face 
Mecca. 
Heirs and successors 
However, it was not until Arabic translations 
were made of ancient books, especially those of 
the Greeks and of Claudius Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy) 
in particular, that Arab cartography became a 
major field of scientific study. These translations 
were made possible by the generous patronage 
of the caliphs, who understood the value of the 
knowledge built up by the ancients. Wishing to 
incorporate that knowledge into Muslim culture, 
they provided a variety of rewards for those who 
translated the scientific works of Antiquity into 
Arabic. Caliph al-Mam’un, for instance, paid 
translators an amount of gold coins and bars 
equivalent in weight to the works translated. 
The Arabs were careful to preserve this 
heritage and throughout the Middle Ages cons- 
tantly added to it, both with contributions of 
at {gg 
tr 
T
T
T
 
— 
their own and drawing on the work of Indian 
scholars. In the period extending from the 
seventh to the twelfth centuries, the pole of 
geographical learning thus shifted. From Europe 
it moved to the great centres of scientific study 
and investigation of Baghdad, Cordoba and 
Damascus. It can therefore be said without risk 
of error and despite the lack of direct contact 
between Arab and European cartographers, that 
the resurgence of mathematics and astronomy in 
Rome, Oxford and Paris in the thirteenth cen- 
tury was simply the direct result of the advances 
made by the Arabs in cartography. The Arabs 
kept the torch burning and paved the way for 
the great blossoming of science that occurred in 
the West during the Renaissance. 
The Arabs were right to regard the work of 
Ptolemy as the peak of the achievements of the 
Greeks and Romans. Yet they did not follow 
blindly the teachings of the great Greek 
astronomer, mathematician and geographer. The 
 
AL 
Fo 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

  
&AT 
' 
LN 
* 
£X\ 
 
Dle) Tr 
  
acyl}   
i
a
l
 
o
t
 
i
 
  
  
Ve FRI 1%   ! oud Ss SEE Weld 
Arab travellers disputed a fair number of his ideas. 
The Arab astronomers for their part calculated 
anew the distance represented by a degree and 
arrived at very precise results. They were not 
merely. links in the transmission of learning, 
Eager to build on what was already known, they 
naturally started out from where their 
predecessors had left off. 
These efforts culminated in the writings of 
al-Battani and al-Mas’udi in the tenth century. 
Al-Battani questioned many of the hypotheses 
put forward by Ptolemy. Unlike Ptolemy, who 
thought that Africa and Asia were joined near the 
Malaysian peninsula, he believed that the Indian 
Ocean was an open sea. Al-Biruni’s writings on 
the East and those of alldrisi on the West 
rounded off the Arabs’ knowledge of the world. 
Several factors, which it would take too long 
to list here, contributed to the development of 
the geographic and cartographic sciences among 
the Arabs. Islam, which had become their religion, 
encouraged them to pursue knowledge to the 
four corners of the Earth. Huge expanses of land 
had been won through conquest, and the 
resources they contained needed to be assessed 
in order for the most suitable tax system to be 
introduced. In addition, three of these territories 


### 88506: Atlases, ways and provinces

(Mesopotamia, Persia and Egypt) were cradles of 
civilization. If the Arabs were to govern them, 
they had to know about them. 
Travellers and cartographers 
So big did the empire become that a postal service 
and a road system became necessary. These in 
their turn were instrumental in developing trade, 
fostered by the unification of language and 
religion. Increasing numbers of books described 
“the ways and provinces”. The pilgrimage to 
Mecca also played a great part in developing the 
Arabs’ taste for travel and for geography. The pil- 
grim would converse in the same language with 
Detail of a map by the Arab 
geographer Ibn Haukai 
showing part of centrai Asia 
and Transoxiana, the land 
between the Oxus and the 
Jaxartes rivers. Samarkand, 
the chief city of Transoxiana, 
Is shown at centre of map. 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 88506: Atlases, ways and provinces

other Muslims from different places and from 
different social backgrounds. These pilgrimages, 
which took up a considerable amount of time, 
often afforded invaluable opportunities for study, 
exploration and trade. Upon their return, the 
travellers-cum-pilgrims-cum-traders wrote 
accounts of their experiences that were mines of 
geographical information. There were many car- 
tographers among their number, including Ibn 
Haukal, al-Mas’udi and al-Idrisi. 
More than one Arab geographer was marked 
by the teachings of Ptolemy, which served as the 
starting-point for the mapping of the heavens and 
the Earth alike. 
Mohammed Ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi laid the 
foundations for Arab geography. His Book of the 
Configuration of the Earth (Kitab surat al-ard), 
written in the early half of the ninth century, 
incorporates and amends the findings of Ptolemy. 
He is believed to have designed his work, together 
with his celebrated planisphere, in collaboration 
with other scholars, at the request of Caliph al- 
Ma’mun. Unfortunately, most of the maps that 
al-Khwarizmi helped to construct have been lost. 
Only four of them have come down to us. They 
are the oldest Arab maps known to exist. 
In the tenth century the most famous Arab 
cartographer was Abul Hassan Ali al-Mas’udi. 
Born in Baghdad, he spent his early years travel- 
ling, visiting in turn India, Ceylon, the China Sea, 
Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, Zanzibar, 
Madagascar and Oman. Towards the end of his 
life he went to Egypt where he met his death, 
at al-Fustat. Al-Mas’udi must have read a large 
part of the geographic literature then available. 
He mentions a large number of works which 
have since disappeared. His major work, The 
Meadows of Gold and Mines of Gems (Muruj adb- 
dhahab wa ma’adin al-jawabir), is a conspectus of 
his experiences. Al-Mas’udi wrote several other 
works. His planisphere of the then known world 
ts one of the most accurate Arab maps of the 
time, He believed that the Earth was a sphere. 
He added two continents to the known world, 
one in the South Seas and, for the sake of balance, 
another on the opposite side of the globe. 
A new kind of map, more like a cartogram, 
then made an appearance with Ibn Haukal’s map 
of the world, which was a treasure house of eco- 
nomic information. This was an expanded ver- 
sion of al-Istakhri’s Atlas consisting of a simpli- 
fied outline in which shores are shown as curves 
or straight lines, and islands and inland seas, such 
as the Caspian Sea and the Aral Sea, as circles. 
The Golden Age 
The golden age of Arab cartography, which had 
started to develop a century earlier, was the tenth 
century (fourth century of the Hegira). It was sig- 
nalled by the publication of a series of maps— 
the Atlas of Islam—which were inseparable parts 
of a large number of works on “the ways and 
22 provinces”. The method employed to describe 
the Muslim world, introduced by a man hailing 
from Balkh (al-Balkhi), was taken up and deve- 
loped by a Persian scholar from Iran (al-Istakhri) 
whose work served in turn as a starting-point for 
a great traveller and geographer born in Baghdad 
(Ibn Haukal) who revised, corrected and consider- 
ably expanded it. 
There was no longer anything in common 
between these maps and the Ptolemaic models. 
The Atlas of Islam still contained twenty-one 
maps, in an order laid down once and for all, with 
the first showing a spherical world in its entirety. 
This was followed by six maps representing 
Arabia, the Persian Sea, the Maghreb, Egypt, 
Syria and the Mediterranean. The last fourteen 
maps represented the central and eastern parts of 
the Muslim world. The aim was to show exclu- 
sively the Muslim world as understood by al- 
Istakhri and, especially, Ibn Haukal: “I have con- 
sidered in detail the lands of Islam, province by 
province, region by region, district by district...” 
All this cartographic activity focused mainly 
on the eastern part of the Muslim world, but the 
western part was not forgotten. The final 
flowering of Arab cartography, represented by 
the work of al-Idrisi (twelfth century), occurred 
in the Muslim west. 
After studying in Cordoba, al-Idrisi settled in 
Sicily, where the Norman king Roger II commis- 
sioned him to prepare a giant planisphere and to 
write a detailed commentary on it. The 
planisphere showed the entire globe including, 
in the geographer’s own words, “the regions 
together with their countries and cities, rivers, 
lands and seas and roads, with an indication of 
distances and all that was to be seen there”. It 
has been lost, but al-Idrisi’s commentary has 
come down to us in a work entitled The Pleasure 
Excursion of One Who is Eager to Traverse the 
Regions of the World (Kitab nuzhat al-mushtaq fi 
ikhtirag al afaq), better known by the name of 
The Book of Roger (Kitab Rudjar). 
This work helped Western geographers to 
widen their field of knowledge, and also helped 
the Portuguese explorers to find their way around 
unknown regions in the fifteenth century. For 
 
Al-Istakhrl’s world map 
(12th century). According to a 
convention of Islamic 
cartography, the south Is at 
top of map. 
  
  
  

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 88506: Atlases, ways and provinces

al-Idrisi, the Earth was ““as round as a ball; water 
adhered to it naturally and did not fall off; and 
land and water were suspended in the cosmos like 
the yolk of an egg in its shell”. Al-Idrisi appended 
an atlas of the world to his commentary, with 
some maps in colour. 
The work of al-Idrisi, which is the crowning 
glory of Arab cartography, also marks the begin- 
ning of its decline. The concepts of latitude and 
longitude are missing. The Ptolemaic “climates” 
are shown, but in bands of equal breadth, with 
no regard for astronomical data. Details are not 
as clearly identifiable as on al-Khwarizimi’s maps. 
There are also certain errors of calculation in the 
distances and contour lines. But we must be indul- 
gent towards the cartographer: King Rogers 
death and the ensuing unrest prevented him from 
making the necessary corrections to his atlas. Al- 
Idrisi stands at the meeting-point of two worlds, 
the Christian and the Muslim. Small wonder then 
that he was known as the “Arab Strabo”. His 
atlas, which is regarded as the major work of 
Arab cartography, is also the one that enjoyed 
the greatest success in the West throughout the 
Middle Ages. 
So far, but no further 
Despite all these efforts, Arab contributions to 
cartography are few—to the amazement of all 
those who study its history. Why should this be 
so? The Arabs were familiar with the whole of 
Europe (except for the northernmost part), the 
southern part of Asia, North Africa as far as lati- 
tude ten degrees north, and the east coast of 
Africa. Their geographic knowledge was not 
  
r 
Heri y. ! Le u 
hal TE pa i. he Fog oA 
A a | i Fn 3 
a Fup a Cyaan ai —r + oo ¥, 
eo  ——— 
confined to the Islamic countries. It extended far 
beyond that of the Greeks, who were very 
roughly acquainted with the regions beyond the 
Caspian Sea and were completely ignorant of the 
east coast of Asia north of Indochina. The Arabs 
for their part were familiar with both the land 
route leading all the way to the sources of the 
Yang-Tse and the east coast of Asia, as far as 
Korea. It is true that their knowledge of Japan 
was uncertain. The Japanese archipelago was 
already shown on eleventh-century maps, but 
there can be no question that the Arabs ever 
reached it by sea. Their image of Japan was 
perhaps based on the information they had 
picked up in Central Africa, a region they knew 
well. As for Africa, the Arabs were the first to 
describe it in detail and their description was to 
serve as a bench mark until the arrival of the 
European explorers in the nineteenth century. 
These fabulous journeys, which could not 
have been undertaken by any of their European 
contemporaries, should have been a matchless 
source of information for cartographers. But such 
was not the case. Arab cartography, which had 
managed to produce the wonderfully accurate 
Atlas of Islam, did not prove able to produce its 
equivalent, even in the form of loose maps, for 
the other parts of the world, highly knowledge- 
able about them though it was. It no longer 
benefited from the accumulated stock of 
geographical knowledge; instead of breaking new 
ground, the most recent maps did no more than 
copy earlier ones. It is true that at that time Euro- 
pean cartography did not show much originality 
either and was just as much out of touch with 
the latest advances in geography. L 
ar. 
World map by the Arab 
cartographer al-idrisi 
(12th century). 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

24 
The rich and little- 
known cartographic 
heritage of the Aztecs 
and Maya of Mexico 
« > - 'N - ve 
oF ' a 
— Cw ar 
» 
Ww oi YH 
ps 
Se TR U gi 3 
n 
A (05 
ah 
Cl 
  
2 » 
UNIT HTT 
. ¢-hy 
    
  
  
    
    
  


### 88507: The Treasures of Montezuma

The treasures of Montezuma 
by Miguel Leon-Portlla 
_______ — 
MIGUEL LEON-PORTILLA 
of Mexico, is currently serving 
as his country's ambassador 
and permanent delegate to 
UNESCO. Professor emeritus at 
the Autonomous National 
University of Mexico, he is the 
author of a number of books, 
articles and papers on pre- 
Columbian cultures, which 
have been translated into 
several languages. 
Ao the gifts that Hernan Cortés, the 
Spanish conqueror of Mexico, sent to the 
emperor Charles V in 1522 were two maps of the 
lands he was then engaged in conquering in the 
name of Spain. The maps had been painted by 
Indians on cotton fabric. 
These maps, so different from those to which 
Europeans were accustomed, were much admired 
at the court of Valladolid. One of the first people 
to see them, the Italian humanist Piero Martir de 
Angleria, noted in his “Decades of the New 
World”, “We have examined one of the maps of 
these lands, thirty feet long and almost as many 
wide, on which all the territory is traced in great 
detail on a piece of white cotton, with the 
friendly and hostile peoples of Montezuma. Also 
shown are the great mountains which surround 
the plain, and the southern coastline.... We have 
also seen another, smaller map, which is no less 
interesting and shows the same city of Tenustitin 
(Mexico City-Tenochtitlan), with its temples, its 
bridges and its lakes, all hand-painted by 
natives....” 
Cortés describes in his detailed letters to 
Charles V how, two years before, he had received 
another map from Montezuma, the last Aztec 
emperor of Mexico: “I asked the said Montezuma 
if there was anywhere on the coast an estuary or 
a creek through which vessels could come and 
go, and he told me that he did not know but that 
he would provide me with a painting of the coast 
with its rivers and bays... The next day, a

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

  
 
  
    
  
  
 


### 88507: The Treasures of Montezuma

representation of the whole coast was brought 
to me on a piece of material, showing the estuary 
of a river which seemed much wider than the 
others.” 
The speed with which Montezuma produced 
this map for Cortés shows that the Aztecs kept 
original manuscripts in accessible places in which 
they could quickly be copied. Perhaps the storage 
place in this case was the “house of books” (amox- 
calli in Aztec) which contained what Bernal Diaz 
del Castillo described in his Historia verdadera de 
la conquista de la Nueva Espafia (“True History 
of the Conquest of New Spain”, 1568) as “the 
many collections of paper folded like Castilian 
linen”. ‘ 
Equally striking is the copyist’s scrupulous 
attention to detail, which was remarked on by 
Bernal Diaz del Castillo who wrote of this map 
that “All the estuaries and creeks of the northern 
coast could be seen painted and indicated natur- 
ally, from the rio Panuco to Tabasco, a distance 
of 140 leagues” (some 600 km). 
What has become of the painted manuscripts 
and maps which the Indians preserved in their 
archives? Only fifteen or so survived the con- 
quest. Two of them, the Fejéruary-Mayer and Tro- 
Cortesianus codices, seem to be symbolic 
representations of the world as it was envisioned 
by the peoples of pre-Columbian Mexico. 
At the centre of these maps which show in 
symbolic form the cemandhbuac (the land mass sur- 
rounded by water), the gods preside over the 
cosmic division of the world into regions directed 
towards the four cardinal points of the compass. 
Each region has its own specific attributes, 
colours, flora and fauna. Glyphs designating the 
north, east, west and south show that the Maya, 
the Aztecs and other Mexican indigenous peoples 
used signs to indicate the cardinal points. 
Manuscripts of great historical and genealog- 
ical interest produced by the Mixtec people of 
Oaxaca have also survived. Two of them, the Nu:- 
tall and Vindobonensis codices, contain many 
symbolic depictions of places where important 
events took place, while towns, villages, moun- 
tains, rivers, lakes, roads and coastlines are named 
and their location shown by patches of colour. 
An aerial view 
of the valley of Mexico 
The colonized Indians of Mexico continued to 
produce documents which were to some extent 
cartographical in the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries. Some were made at the instigation of 
the Spanish authorities and of missionaries. 
Others were drawn to define the boundaries of 
estates. 
Some maps showed entire regions, complete 
Detall of the Codex 
Vindobonensis, a historic 
manuscript of the Mixtec 
people (1200-1500). Above, 
symbols designating towns 
{1), small settlements (2, 3, 
4), and the cardinal points {5, 
6, 7 and 8). 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

Fragment of a painting on 
vegetable fibre shows part of 
the clty of Mexico- 
Tenochtitlan. The manuscript 
Is probably pre-Hispanlc, with 
post-conquest additions. 
with towns, forests, roads and rivers. Others, such 


### 88507: The Treasures of Montezuma

as that which the lords of Xicalango provided for 
Cortés before he set out on his expedition to 
Honduras, as he describes in his “Letters”, were 
route-maps. Yet others were cadastral maps 
which were also valid as title deeds for pieces of 
land. When these maps are compared with their 
pre-Columbian models, a definite European 
influence can often be seen. 
One particularly interesting document is the 
Xolot! codex, an early copy of a pre-Columbian 
manuscript. Named for an indigenous chief men- 
tioned in it, this document preserved in the Bib- 
liotheque Nationale in Paris consists of eight full 
pages and two fragments, each of which consti- 
tutes a kind of aerial view, as if taken from a satel- 
lite, of the valley of Mexico at various moments 
in its history. 
Equally interesting is the Teozacualco Map, 
which represents a part of the Mixtec country of 
Oaxaca and was sent as part of a report to Philip 
II of Spain. It ircludes genealogies which are 
depicted in the form of figures associated with 
their respective villages or fiefs. It is accompanied 
by a Spanish text which is the key to the hiero- 
glyphics denoting the names of members of the 
different lineages. The Teozacualco Map is thus the 
Rosetta Stone of the pre-Hispanic manuscripts 
from this region. 
The notion of scale seems absent from the 
maps mentioned so far. In them exaggeration is 
used to show the importance of features such as 
rugged terrain or settlements. 
  
 
However, some chroniclers claim to have 
seen maps or plans in which scale was used to 
show the limits of seigneurial jurisdiction or 
estate boundaries, with signs indicating the 
perimeter of each plot. All settlements of a cer- 
tain size had archives in which these plans were 
deposited for consultation or modification as the 
need arose. 
In the National Anthropological Museum of 
Mexico there is a fragment of a large map (2.38 
m x 1.68 m) on locally produced paper. It is a 
scale representation of Mexico city before the 
arrival of the Spaniards, with its system of canals, 
street layout and property boundaries. Although 
the notes scribbled in the margin date from after 
the conquest, the style and appearance of the 
document show that it is of indigenous origin. 
In the archives, libraries and museums of 
Mexico and elsewhere an abundance of still 
unstudied documents testify to the cartographical 
activity of the Amerindians of Mexico. Even if 
most of them date from the sixteenth century, 
and thus from the colonial period, they are 
largely inspired by pre-Columbian concepts and 
representational techniques. 
Study of these documents would shed more 
light on an ancient cartographic tradition which 
was independent of that of Europe. It would be 
an opportunity to analyse the form of cultural 
intermingling between Hispanic and Indian tra- 
ditions which took place in cartography as a 
specific example of the encounter between two 
worlds. | 
  
 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 88508: Zheng He's sailing chart

Lheng He's sailing chart 
by Mei-Ling Hsu 
A nautical guide 
which retraces the 
last epic voyage 
of a Chinese 
Admiral in the 
fifteenth century 
Above right, detail of the 
chart portraying Chinese 
Admiral Zheng He's last 
voyage (1431-1433) shows 
the coast of Indla (above left), 
Africa (below) and Srl Lanka 
(right). it is taken from Wu 
Bel Zhl (“Treatise on 
Armament Technology’, 
1628). 
________ 
MEI-LING HSU 
is professor of geography at 
the University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis (USA). Of Chinese 
origin, she is a specialist in the 
geography of China, computer- 
assisted cartography, 
cartographic design and 
communication, and the 
history of cartography. She 
has published a number of 
studies and articles in 
specialized journals. 
T.. earliest surviving Chinese sea map is the 
celebrated sailing chart of Admiral Zheng He, 
which was made in the mid-fifteenth century. A 
script map measuring 20.5 cm by 560 cm, it por- 
trays the voyage between the Chinese city of 
Nanking and Jazireh ye Hormuz, in the Strait 
of Hormuz, and ports on the east African coasts. 
At the request of emperor Yongle, Zheng He 
(1371-1435), undertook seven expeditions between 
1405 and 1433 and travelled as far as the Strait of 
Hormuz and the coasts of east Africa. The expe- 
ditions were on a grand scale. The first comprised 
a fleet of 317 ships, including 62 large “treasure 
ships”, the largest of which was about 100 m long 
and 50 m broad, and displaced 3,100 tons. 
The sailing chart mainly portrays Zheng He’s 
last voyage in 1431-1433, but it also includes infor- 
mation accumulated on his earlier voyages and 
from voyages by other sailors in and prior to the 
fifteenth century. Originally a strip map that 
could be rolled up, it was later divided to fit into 
forty pages to be printed in a book, Wu Bei Zh: 
(“Treatise on Armament Technology”, published 
in 1628). 
From right to left, the chart portrays the 
12,000-km voyage between China and ports along 
the Arabian and African coasts. It reaches the 
western extremities at Khorramshahr and Jiddah 
in Asia and Kilwa Kisiwani Island in Africa. It 
is most detailed along the coasts of China and 
southeast Asia. 
Using diagrammatic and side-view symbols, 
the chart shows, besides sea routes, several other 
types of features, including shore lines, bays, estu- 
aries, capes and islands; ports and mountains 
along the coasts; important landmarks such as 
pagodas, temples, official buildings, flagpoles and 
bridges; and other information useful to sailors 
such as havens, shoals and half-tide rocks. Many 
other features and places are not symbolized but 
are named at their respective locations on the 
chart, Enclosed in rectangles are the names of 
many places such as provincial capitals, defence 
sites, and foreign countries along the coastline. 
In sum, the chart contains over 500 place names 
and over 40 names of landmarks. About 300 of 
the named places are outside China. 
RT 
   
  
  
RA \ 
x Li2 SH pa Vath i. 
ALR he ii J 
aa" 
i r] 
SG =) 
X ries, 
£ (Eh Qs ig 
1. 8 
The most valuable contents of the chart are 
the sea routes, which are shown by dotted lines. 
Sailing instructions are also given. From the 
mouth of the Yangzi river to Sri Lanka where 
ships sailed mostly near the intricate coastlines 
and in shallow waters around islands and reefs, 
detailed sailing instructions are noted along the 
sea routes. These instructions are given in a con-- 
cise form: “from A, steer X degrees, after Y 
time/distance, the ship reaches B.” Sometimes 
depth soundings are also provided. 
The steering instructions are mostly accurate, 
and expressed in terms of the Chinese zben lu 
(compass direction) system. They are the 
products of a wealth of knowledge of navigation 
and the use of the magnetic compass. The 
compass rose consists of 24 divisions of 15-degree 
increments, and a supplement of 24 subdivisions. 
Thus one can read 48 directions with 7.5-degree 
increments. 
The final section of the chart covers a large 
area, which extends from the tip of India to the 
Arabian and African coasts, where ships sailed on 
the open seas. Instead of information on land fea- 
tures and on compass directions between short 
distances, fifty notes on stellar altitudes are given 
along the sea routes from which the latitude loca- 
tion and orientation of the ship can be calculated. 
Like other pre-modern charts, Zheng He’s 
chart is less detailed in depicting areas far away 
from China but is remarkable for the accuracy 
with which it depicts the coasts of China and 
nearby regions of Asia. | 
       
  
  
 

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 88509: The Pathfinders

28 
The pathfinders 
by Alfredo Pinheiro Marques 
Portuguese navigators made great maritime discoveries, brought 
innovations to map-making, and propagated a new geographical 
vision of the globe 
| 
ALFREDO PINHEIRO MARQUES, 
of Portugal, is professor of 
history at the University of 
Coimbra. A specialist in the 
cartography of the great 
voyages of discovery from the 
14th to the 16th centuries, his 
most recent publications 
include Origem e 
desenvolvimento da cartografia 
portugesa na época dos 
descobrimentos (Lisbon, 1988), 
and, in English, The Dating of 
the Oldest Portuguese Charts 
(1289). He is currently 
preparing an International 
Bibliography on the Discoveries 
and Overseas Encounters. 
Ecrnoronas developments in geography 
took place in Ancient Greece and the Hellenistic 
world. The work of Claudius Ptolemy, the Greek 
mathematician and geographer who lived in Alex- 
andria, Egypt, in the second century AD, was a 
major landmark in this intellectual enterprise. He 
described the projection methods used in cartog- 
raphy and drew the first maps of the world as 
it was then known to scholars of the eastern 
Mediterranean. This corpus of knowledge disap- 
peared in the West with the barbarian invasions 
and was only rediscovered in the late Middle 
Ages. 
A new type of map, the portolan chart, 
appeared in the thirteenth and fourteenth centu- 
ries. Essentially destined for use at sea, its distinc- 
tive feature was a system of rhumb lines, lines 
that radiate from a centre in the direction of wind 
or compass points, Pilots used these lines to chart 
courses which could be followed by compass 
navigation and by estimating distances. 
The great Mediterranean cartographers at 
that time were the Italians (above all the Genoans 
and the Venetians), the Catalans and the 
Majorcans. The Catalan Atlas, one of the most 
"famous of its time, is attributed to the school of 
Abraham Crescas, a cartographer of Majorcan 
origin. 
The portolan marked a new departure from 
Ptolemaic cartography, which was exclusively ter- 
restrial, accepted the sphericity of the Earth, and 
even represented the world by a system of projec- 
tion of latitudes and longitudes, but only showed 
Europe, the Mediterranean, the Near East and 
North Africa. The Indian Ocean was a closed sea 
and the configuration of Asia was purely 
speculative. 
Throughout the fifteenth century, long 
before the voyages of Christopher Columbus, it 
was the Portuguese who opened up the era of 
great transoceanic voyages by undertaking a 
       y § Oy ., BCA AD hd ny 
| 
%/ & ji Wy 
gy +. «Ne 
: ~ 
systematic reconnaissance of the west coast of 
Africa and the Atlantic islands. Courage was at a 
premium in these early voyages, which were not 
associated with any decisive technical innovation. 
The Portuguese had learned from the Majorcans 
the techniques of nautical cartography, and their 
maps resembled the Mediterranean portolans. 
Navigation by the stars began to be practised 
by the Portuguese in the second half of the 
fifteenth century, during thé reign of John IL 
This new method made it possible to establish 
a ship’s position in relation to the height of stars 
on the horizon and thus to sail far out to sea.

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

TT 
Ara 
wpe ull 
    
HITTER 
HHI 
ph 
Mw 
  
      
HIGH y 
i : 1 . 
| 
: HALOUTH 
AG 
’ i I 
 
  
    
    
 


### 88509: The Pathfinders

    Cartographically speaking, it led to the introduc- ~~ Ptolemy’s world map from 
tion into the portolan of a graduated meridian Conceant edition of his 
phia published In Uim, 
which gave the latitude. This was a major con- 1482. 
tribution by the Portuguese to the techniques of 
navigation and cartography. 
The scale of latitudes found on Ptolemaic 
maps was unusable at sea. In the Mediterranean 
sailors did not stray far from the shoreline. The 
Portuguese navigators found new solutions to the 
new problems posed by ocean navigation. They 
took aboard and adapted to nautical use, astro- 
nomical instruments, notably the astrolabe, 
which were already known to the Arabs. 
By opening up the way to the great maritime 
discoveries at the beginning of the fifteenth cen- 
tury, the Portuguese inventors of astronomical 
navigation propagated a new geographical vision 
of the globe which was taken up by the other 
European cartographic schools. 
Many Portuguese cartographers worked in 
other lands and spies were common in Lisbon. 
The findings of Bartolomeu Dias, the Portuguese 
The Catalan Atias of 1375 1s Navigator who had become the first man to sail 
attributed to the school of the around Africa, can be seen in a map drawn in 
Ca a An Italy in 1489—only a year after Dias’ exploit— 
parchment glued to wooden by the German cartographer Henricus Martellus. 
Borviving European map to Later, an Italian agent named Cantino took into 
show the world extending as his pay a Portuguese royal cartographer, who 
far eastwards as China. passed on to him an anonymous map which was 
sent to Italy. Known as the “Cantino Map”, it 
is still preserved at Modena. 
The Cantino Map is possibly the most impor- 
tant map in the history of cartography. The first 
known planisphere, it gives an almost complete 
image of the world. It presents in recognizable 
form the New World, Africa, India and a rough

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

Martin Waldseemiiller's world 
map of 1507. This was the 
first map on which the New 
World was named ‘America’, 
in honour of the Ralian 
navigator Amerigo Vespucci, 
who is shown (top right) with 
Ptolemy. 
  
 


### 88509: The Pathfinders

outline of the Far East. The only map which can 
be compared to it is the Spanish map of 
Christopher Columbus’s pilot, Juan de La Cosa, 
which depicts the islands and coasts of central 
America—although Africa is very roughly drawn 
and Asia is quite imaginary. 
The geographical discoveries of the Por- 
tuguese and the Spaniards made a decisive con- 
tribution to the renewal of Ptolemaic cartography, 
which was itself revolutionary in comparison with 
the maps produced in medieval monasteries. But 
information derived from the voyages of dis- 
covery had to be incorporated into Ptolemaic car- 
tography and this took time. The humanists who 
were reviving Ptolemaic geography through the 
spread of printing and the navigators who were 
actually making the discoveries were separated by 
different traditions of thought—the former scho- 
larly, the latter empirical—which did not facili- 
tate communication. 
After 1490, there was a long gap before 
the publication of new editions of Ptolemy's 
Geographia. The reasons are not hard to find. In 
1488, Dias sailed round the southern Cape of 
Africa, in 1492 Columbus sailed to America, and 
in 1498 Vasco da Gama arrived in India. 
Prolemy’s work was not republished until 1507, 
with new “modern” maps which take account 
of the Portuguese and Spanish voyages. 
In the early sixteenth century, the Spaniards 
occupied central America, but the Portuguese 
were present in many parts of the world: in India 
(1498), Newfoundland and South America (1500), 
in Persia, at Hormuz (1507), in Indonesia and 
China (1513), and in Japan (around 1542). Most 
of the maps printed in Europe in the sixteenth 
century were based on surveys made by Por- 
tuguese navigators, the age’s leading suppliers of 
geographical information. 
This knowledge was propagated by the 
humanists, aided by the development of printing, 
and paradoxically it was in Italy and northern 
Europe that the new cartography inspired by the 
Portuguese emerged. The map showing the New 
World which appeared in 1507 in the expanded 
edition of Prolemy’s Geographia was by Johan 
Ruysch. Another edition of the same work 
produced at Strasbourg in 1513 with maps by 
Martin Waldseemiiller circulated widely. In 1507 
Waldseemiiller published a map on which the 
word “America” appeared for the first time, and 
in 1516 an important planisphere, Carta Marina 
Navigatoria Portugallensium. +, : 
Dominated in the fourteenth and fifteenth - 
centuries by the Italians and the Catalans, cartog- 
raphy thus had its golden age at the Renaissance 
under the impulsion of the Portuguese. Then 
came the turn of the Dutch, who systematized 
the use of printing and introduced such innova- 
tions as Mercator’s projection, the basis of 
modern cartography. 
But the Dutch cartographers developed their 
work throughout the sixteenth century through 
contact with the Portuguese. The projection 
devised by Gerard Mercator is an application of 
the theoretical principles set forth much earlier 
by the Portuguese mathematician and astronomer 
Pedro Nunes. n 
Os 
(a 
es ¢ > 
LR. « “e 
a 
   
  
  

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

    
  
  
name i Ny EE LL iki A Baad 
S
a
a
i
b
d
a
d
i
a
e
e
 
R
n
 
S
N
 
ar
 
    
Ei — 
Modern scientific 
cartography was 
born in eighteenth- 
century Europe 
Above, frontispiece of the 4th 
edition (Amsterdam, 1619) of 
the Atlas of Gerard Mercator 
(Gerard de Cremer). Mercator 
is shown at left and the 
geographer Jodocus Hondius 
at right. 
  
bh 
Ee. 
Ad 
gy 7 
3 
hii 
 
  
    
  
~ SI EIT) 
y Norman J Thrower 
D URING the eighteenth century, France 
became the leader in topographic or general map- 
ping. The foundations of this achievement were 
laid in the preceding century when the 
astronomer Giovanni Domenico Cassini 
(1625-1712) came from Bologna to the newly- 
founded Paris Observatory. Through Cassini and 
his successors France became the first country to 
produce a detailed and accurate map of its national 
territory in multiple sheets, based on triangula- 
tion, and using uniform symbols for roads, set- 
tlements, forests, rivers, and other features. A first 
step was the accurate measurement of the length 
of a degree-of latitude near Paris where mapping 
was begun. 
After the death of his father, the survey of 
France was continued by Jacques Cassini 
(1677-1756) under whose direction the triangu- 
lation network was greatly extended. In this work 
the second Cassini was assisted by his son, César 
Frangois (1714-1784) who carried the 
topographical mapping of France to virtual com- 
pletion following his father’s death. A few sheets 
not finished by the third Cassini before his death 
were completed by his son Jacques-Dominique, 
comte de Cassini (1748-1845). Thus it took the 


### 88510: When mapping became a science

When mapping became a scence 
 
dedicated work of four generations of the Cas- 
sini family over more than a century to produce 
the 182 map sheets on the large scale of 1:86,400 
which constituted the first true, topographic map 
of a country, 
A topographic survey of Britain (Ordnance 
Survey) was begun in 1783 under the direction 
of General William Roy (1726-1790). The French 
and British triangulation networks, which are 
fundamental to this type of mapping, were con- 
nected across the Channel in 1789. The value of 
topographic mapping was quickly appreciated by 
many rulers and administrators who introduced 
the new survey in their realms. For example, 
topographical mapping on the European model 
was shortly initiated in Bengal, which led to the 
Great Trigonometrical Survey of India. 
Geodesy 
and thematic maps 
If more accurate maps of world or continental 
areas were to be made, knowledge of the shape 
of the Earth was necessary. As a result of the 
French topographic survey doubts had been 
raised about this. Isaac Newton (1642-1727) had 31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 88510: When mapping became a science

Measuring longitude. Detail of 
an llluminated manuscript of 
the French mariner Jacques 
de Vaulx's treatise on 
hydrography (1583). The 
illustration shows the Sun, 
Moon, and stars useful to 
navigators. 
postulated from the behaviour of the pendulum 
at different latitudes that the Earth was a spheroid 
flattened at the poles. Measurements taken on the 
equator and in the high northern latitudes by 
French scientists during the 1740s affirmed the 
general correctness of Newton’s hypothesis. 
In his great work the Principia, Newton exa- 
mined many fundamental problems of physical 
science and numerous mappable phenomena. 
This work was promoted by Newton’s younger 
contemporary, Edmond Halley (1656-1742), who 
made signal contributions to cartography, 
including thematic or special-purpose maps. 
During a year spent on St. Helena, Halley 
prepared, and soon published, a southern 
hemisphere star chart, and a terrestrial map which 
has been called “‘the first meteorological [really 
climatological] chart” —of the trade and monsoon 
winds. After two years at sea in the Atlantic on 
a scientific voyage Halley also published in 1701 
the first printed, isogonic map, i.e. a chart of mag- 
netic variation. Shortly after this he published a 
map of the variable heights of tides in the English 
Channel. Later, in 1715, Halley made a map of 
the shadow of the eclipse over England in that 
year, before the event it depicted. Halley became 
Astronomer Royal at Greenwich Observatory in 
1720, in which capacity he conducted investiga- 
tions into the problem of finding longitude at sea, 
on the nature of the core of the Earth and other 
geophysical phenomena. 
Nautical charts, 
longitude and the chronometer 
As in the case of topographic mapping, the 
French were the early leaders in scientific coastal 
charting. The accurate mapping of the shorelines 
of France led to the establishment of an official 
hydrographic office in the country in 1720. In 
Britain, much coastal surveying was at first 
unofficial or quasi-official, with the East India 
Company playing a prominent role in producing 
nautical charts of overseas areas before the 
founding of the British Hydrographic Office in 
32 1795. During the eighteenth century, the maritime 
nations of the world charted many coastal areas 
of special interest to them. 
Determination of latitude both on land and 
at sea could be accomplished with considerable 
accuracy from a fairly early date. This was made 
possible by the use of a variety of instruments 
such as quadrants and sextants which were 
improved after telescopic sights were fitted to 
them. Longitude measurement on land was 
feasible by astronomical means provided the 
observer had appropriate tables and referred to 
a specific prime meridian. There is a natural 
Chart of magnetic varlation 
was drawn by the English 
astronomer Edmond Halley In 
1700 and corrected in 1756 
by William Mountalne and 
James Dodson. 
a Tr H] . 4 | 
  
 
NE BRITAIN 
Rowimars 
| 
! 
ADOR = 
| 
| 
 
    
  
      
  
  
  
  
        
  
 
 
    
  
  
  
i wu   
* » 
AMERICA 
- wv 
  
  
       
 
 
{| 
  
  
 
24
 
>
 
  
                      
~~,
 g
i
 
  
4 
I
 
| 
—
—
 a
 
or
 
          

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 88510: When mapping became a science

starting-point for latitude: 0° latitude equals the 
equator—equidistant from the poles. By contrast, 
the origin of a system of longitude is quite 
arbitrary. 
Through the centuries a number of prime 
meridians have been used and in the eighteenth 
century a line running through the Observatory 
in Paris or Greenwich Observatory was gener- 
ally employed. The problem of finding the lon- 
gitude of a place is basically simple since 15° of 
longitude equals one hour of time. Therefore, one 
needs only to know the time at a chosen prime 
meridian and the local time, wherever the 
observer might be. But at sea the unstable deck 
of a ship made impossible the necessary observa- 
tion, or the use of a pendulum clock. The 
problem was solved only after the invention of 
the marine chronometer by John Harrison 
(1693-1776), an English artisan, in the second half 
of the eighteenth century. 
Captain James Cook (1728-1779), a trained 
marine surveyor who charted much of the 
world’s unexplored coastline, took two chronom- 
eters on his second Pacific voyage (1772-1775). 
One of these was set for Greenwich time and one 
adjusted to local time with which he was able to 
determine longitude at sea with great accuracy. 
Cook’s and other voyages also disproved the age- 
old idea of balancing continents, with equal land 
masses int the northern and southern hemispheres. 
They revealed that the southern hemisphere is 
predominantly water-covered, and that most of 
the land is in the northern hemisphere. 
Except in relatively shallow waters, the con- 
figuration of the ocean floor remained unknown. 
However, Nicholas Cruquius (1678-1758) pub- 
lished an isobathic (depth) chart of a distributary 
of the Rhine in 1729 and Philippe Buache 
(1700-1773) one of the Channel in 1732. 
Other developments in the eighteenth cen- 
tury included the invention of several ingenious 
map projections. The Swiss/German mathema- 
tician Johann H. Lambert (1728-1777) con- 
tributed more than any other individual in this 
    
  
”, go , Iw ~* 4 
DE._MERWEDE Fd 
-. 
de Oude Wiel 
aad fair 14M 
  
 
   
  
          
" 
  
5 rd 
aries : 
NORD 
ats ps 
NTT, 
< =’ 
  
 
Cadastral map showing land 
use in the village of Banhars, 
Aveyron (France, 1807). 
Detail of an Isobathlc chart of 
the river Meuse by Nicholas 
Cruquius (1729). 
field—the conic equal area, conic conformal, 
cylindrical equal area, azimuthal equal area, and 
the transverse Mercator projections all being 
attributed to him. A tradition of globe making 
established by the Venetian, Vincenzo Coronelli 
(1650-1718), continued during the eighteenth cen- 
tury with celestial and terrestrial globes of 
different sizes and for different purposes being 
produced in a number of centres. 
The nineteenth century: 
expansion, consolidation and diversity 
The story of mapping in the nineteenth century 
begins when Alexander von Humboldt 
(1769-1859) landed in South America. Early in the 
year 1800 Humboldt made a reconnaissance map, 
based on his own explorations, of the drainage 
between the Orinoco and Amazon river basins. 
He then travelled in the Andes before arriving 
in New Spain (Mexico) in 1803. During a year 
spent in the area he compiled a map of that large 
colony which served as a model for similar maps 
of other continental interiors—Africa, Asia, 
North and South America and Australia—as 
explorers from many countries provided the 
necessary data. It would be many years before 
these surveys were superseded. 
Meanwhile, the coastlines of the continents - 
and islands continued to be charted, as, for 
example, in Matthew Flinders’ (1774-1814) map- 
ping of the Australian coasts. Occasionally a great 
breakthrough was made, as with the work of the 
American, Matthew Fontaine Maury (1806-1873). 
Following his appointment in 1842 as Superin- 
tendent of the Depot of Charts (later divided 
between the United States National Observatory 
and the Hydrographic Office) in Washington, 
Maury devised maps showing the quickest pas- 
sages for sailing ships between specific ports based 33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

on winds, currents, etc. These routes were not 
normally great circles (the shortest distance 
between two points on the globe). Many lives 
were saved by Maury’s work before steamships 
superseded sailing vessels in the second half of the 
nineteenth century. 


### 88510: When mapping became a science

Climatic maps became more common as offi- 
cial weather stations were established. A wind 
scale which bears his name was devised by Francis 
Beaufort (1774-1857), head of the British Hydro- 
graphic Office, and is still in use. For a short time, 
Washington, D.C. was used as a prime meridian 
on maps of the United States. But as the result 
of an international conference held in 
Washington in 1884, the problem of a universally 
recognized prime meridian (0° longitude) was 
resolved when Greenwich (UK), was selected. A 
great advantage of this is that the antipodal inter- 
national date line (180° longitude) runs essentially 
through oceanic areas. 
Cadastral and geological mapping 
An extremely ancient genre in cartography is the 
cadastral map, which is concerned with land 
ownership and taxation. Over most of the world 
unsystematic land subdivision by metes and 
bounds has been used. In a few areas, notably in 
the western two-thirds of the United States, 
cardinally-oriented, systematic, rectilinear surveys 
were required. This resulted in a great flurry of 
surveying and mapping activity as settlers 
clamoured for land in the nineteenth century. 
Similar rectilinear surveys were undertaken in 
western Canada and some other more recently 
settled, primarily agricultural areas of the world. 
Economic exploitation of the land in the 
nineteenth century also led to the development 
of geological mapping. The father of geological 
mapping is William Smith (1769-1839), who pub- 
lished his map “The Strata of England” in 1815 
after nearly a quarter of a century of research. 
Soon European scientists not only mapped their 
own countries geologically, but were employed 
in this work in Russia and elsewhere. In the 
United States, geological mapping began in the 
eastern states but it was in the west, in the second 
half of the nineteenth century, that it came into 
its own. So important was this activity considered 
to be that when the United States established its 
primary topographic mapping agency in 1879, it 
was designated the United States Geological 
Survey (USGS). This is in contrast to earlier 
topographical surveys which had a geographical 
or military foundation. 
Censuses and thematic mapping 
The holding of regular censuses as we know them 
began in Sweden in 1749, in the United States in 
1790, and in Britain in 1801. Other countries soon 
followed so that in the nineteenth century a great 
mass of statistical data became available for map- 
34 ping. This included not only population but 
education, crime, disease and other phenomena. 
Henry Drury Harness, a pioneer in this field 
employed by the Irish Railway Commission, 
published in 1837 a series of highly original 
thematic maps in which several quantitative tech- 
niques now employed in small-scale mapping 
were used to show population density and traffic 
flow. In 1855, Dr. John Snow (1813-1858) used 
uniform symbols to show deaths from cholera 
in London and thus identified a lethal water 
pump in that city. 
Atlases, globes and projections 
Much of the geographical knowledge of the 
period was disseminated and popularized through 
atlases, which were produced in increasing 
numbers in the nineteenth century. The inven- 
tion of lithography, which gradually replaced the 
earlier copperplate and even earlier wood 
engraving, facilitated the production of atlases. 
Approximately 4,000 county cadastral atlases 
were produced in the United States in the 
nineteenth century. Some state and provincial 
atlases were published and the first true national 
atlas—that of Finland in 1899. Globes of many 
sizes continued to be produced, including giant 
spheres which were a feature of the expositions 
that characterized the nineteenth century. 
Among the new projections which were devised 
in this period were the Albers conic, Molleweide 
(homolographic) named for their inventors, and 
the Polyconic invented by Ferdinand Hassler. 
These projections remain popular today. H 
i i 
1 
 
 
Terrestrial and celestial globe 
made In 1786 for Louls XVI of 
France by Edme Mantelle. 
NORMAN J.W. THROWER, 
of the United States, is 
professor of geography at the 
University of California, Los 
Angeles, and has been 
appointed director of the 
University's 1992 Columbus 
Quincentenary Programs. 
Trained in geography and the 
history of science, he is the 
author of many scholarly 
articles and books. He has 
recently edited a series of 
essays, On the Shoulders of 
Giants: Newton and Halley, 
1686-1986 (1990), and is co- 
author of A Buccaneers Sea 
Atlas: The 1680 Waggoner of 
Basil Ringrose, which will be 
published later this year.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Advances in computer 
science and the mass 
of data transmitted 
from remote-sensing 
satellites are taking 
cartography into a 
new era 
Aerlal photography is used 
systematicaily in map 
production. Partly overlapping 
photos are assembled in a 
mosalc (above). 


### 88511: The Perspective from space

The perspective fom at 
by Jean-Phil pe Grelot 
Cassocmams is a very ancient art. As long 
ago as the time of the Pharaohs, surveyors were 
drawing up plans of plots of cultivated land in 
order to re-establish property boundaries or 
replace cornerstones buried under the silt brought 
down by the floodwaters of the Nile. 
The great voyages of discovery of the fifteenth 
century led to the transformation of world maps. 
Returning from their voyages, the great navi- 
gators of those days recounted their experiences, 
which cartographers working quietly in their 
homes incorporated into more accurate maps. 
The emergence of modern cartography, 
however, dates from the eighteenth century, 
when scientific expeditions such as the French 
expeditions to Lapland and Peru finally con- 
firmed Newton's hypothesis that the world was 
shaped like a sphere slightly flattened at the poles. 
It was through these expeditions that cartog- 
raphy acquired the mathematical basis it needed 
to become the instrument for the accurate, 
graphic, scale representation of our knowledge 
of the Earth that it is today. 
The starting-point of all cartography is the 
science of geodesy—the determination of the size 
and shape of the Earth and the exact position of 
a series of reference points on its surface. By 
means of successive readings taken in turn from 
each of these points, the co-ordinates of these 
points on the surface of the Earth are determined 
and then transposed to a flat surface. 
Today, methods and instruments have com- 
pletely changed. Using a small calculator linked 
to an aerial, geodesists “listen” to the specialized 
satellites of the Global Positioning System, which 
give them their precise position immediately. 
During the previous three centuries, however, 
they would have had to take readings with the- 
odolites of the various topographical features 
around them. On the basis of these reference 
points, topographers would have made a detailed 
examination of the terrain so as to locate the 
roads, houses, forests, rivers, etc., that they had 
observed. 
From about 1930, aerial photography, a tech- 
nique which had been perfected during World 
War I, radically modified this painstaking work 
and signalled the end of direct accumulation of 
data by observation on the ground. Aeroplanes are 
flown in a series of straight lines and photographs 35

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

In the 1980s computers invaded every sphere 
of cartography, including photogrammetry. Like 
the micro-computer, equipment for computer- 
assisted design became smaller and smaller and 
at the same time more and more powerful. Par- 


### 88511: The Perspective from space

ticularly spectacular progress was made in the 
development of conceptual models and data 
banks and in numerical data-handling capacity. 
Computerized cartography has developed into a 
full-scale “Geographic Information System” with 
its own data banks and its own equipment and 
application programs. 
With their powerful analytical capacity, com- 
puters have considerably reduced the time 
required to produce a map; but the demand is still 
for faster results. To meet it, cartography is 
turning towards a new tool—remote sensing by 
means of Earth observation satellites. 
  
  Geodetic surveying afloat. 
Remote sensing satellites are taken at fairly close intervals. Each section 
of terrain flown over is photographed twice, from 
different angles. In this way the aerial photo- 
graphs provide the binocular effect of human Below, members of a 
vision, which makes possible the appreciation of scientific expedition climb 
What are the broad principles of this new and 
revolutionary technique? Remote sensing satel- 
lites capture by means of scanning sensors the 
Mount Pelvoux, France’s varying electromagnetic radiations emitted by the 
distance and relief. highest geodetic point (1910). points the satellites observe on the Earth’s surface. 
The cartographer makes use of this 
stereoscopic effect which, used in conjunction 
with extremely precise measurement techniques, 
gave rise to the science of photogrammetry (the 
measurement of photographs applied to sur- 
veying and mapping, as well as for engineering 
and other purposes). Through the twin eyepieces 
of their photogrammetrical reconstitution equip- 
ment, each of which is focused on one of the two 
successive aerial photographs, the stereo-operators 
get a true picture of the terrain in relief, with its 
heights, its valleys, houses and trees. All that then ol \ 
has to be done is to trace the relief with a cursor, 
whilst operating certain controls, for the co- 
ordinates of the various features to be recorded. : 
However, a certain amount of fieldwork 
remains necessary to check the correct identifi- 
cation of detail, to fill in details not visible in areas 
in shadow, or to add information such as place- 
names or administrative boundaries that aerial 
photographs cannot supply. 
The documentation thus produced is cor- 
rected by the map editor and then printed. The 
process calls for great care and precision and is 
quite lengthy. About two years should be allowed 
from the taking of the aerial photographs to the 
publication of the map. 
   EE — 
  
The computer invasion 
Computers came upon the cartographical scene 
in the late 1950s. They were first used in geodetic 
calculations. Some ten years later experiments 
were begun with computer-assisted design, 
although this did not go beyond the laboratory 
stage. Then, in the 1970s, the data on maps were 
recorded in numerical form, which greatly eased 
36 their use and updating. 

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

  
Torr 
TTR 
     
  
Top, the site of the 1992 
Winter Olympics at Albertville 
(France) as viewed from the 
SPOT satellite. Altimetric data 
are used to make a numeric 
model of the site In which the 
relief is depicted In grid form 
{middle photo). The model Is 
then combined with the SPOT 
Image to obtain a perspective 
view (bottom). 
The nature of the electromagnetic radiation 
emitted by a given point on the Earth’s surface 
depends upon the characteristics of the Earth’s 
surface at that point—factors such as temperature, 
humidity, the presence or absence of vegetation, 
and the nature of rock formations. 
The satellite then transmits the data it has 
obtained to a ground station, either in photo- 
graphic or numerical form. Analysis of this data 
enables the characteristics of the points observed 
to be deduced. Thus, like aerial photographs, 
satellite images require interpretation by a 
specialist, but with the aid of a computer. 
Broadly speaking, satellites may be classified 
into three groups according to the orbits they 
follow: 
» Low-orbit satellites, like the American space 
shuttle and like most military observation satel- 
lites, circle the Earth at an altitude of between 


### 88511: The Perspective from space

200 and 300 kilometres. Subject to the braking 
drag of the atmosphere, they have an effective life 
span which varies from a few days to a few weeks. 
The photographs they take are of a scale of the 
order of 1:100,000, which means that objects of 
a metre or more can be distinguished. The pho- 
tographs are transmitted during the satellite’s 
return to Earth or when a capsule fitted with a 
parachute is ejected. 
o Satellites in beliosynchronous orbit circle the 
Earth at an altitude of 800 to 900 kilometres. 
Those in the American Landsat (or ERTS) series 
(five satellites since 1972) or the French SPOT 
series (two satellites, one in 1986 and one in 1990) 
have a life span of a few years and record numer- 
ical images each of which covers an area of from 
3,500 to 35,000 square kilometres. Their resolu- 
tion varies from about fifty metres for Landsat 
to about ten metres for SPOT, which, using 
stereoscopic methods, is the first system of Earth 
observation to “see” in relief. They pass over the 
same point of the Earth at the same time in rela- 
tion to the Sun (hence the term heliosyn- 
chronous) approximately every twenty days. By 
orienting the mirrors of its sensors, SPOT can 
record details of a given zone every three days, 
meteorological conditions permitting (SPOT 
satellites cannot pierce cloud cover). The whole 
of the Earth’s surface is covered in a period of 
two to three weeks. 
* Geostationary satellites, like Meteosat, are placed 
in an equatorial orbit at an altitude of 36,000 
kilometres. They record numerical images 
covering a quarter of the globe with a resolution 
of about five kilometres. Since their position in 
relation to the Earth is fixed they are within cons- 
tant view of a ground reception station to which 
they transmit images every half hour. They are, 
however, unable to scan the polar ice caps. 
Satellite images make possible the continuous 
updating of maps, with a reduction in the margin 
of error and in the time span. A satellite like 
SPOT makes possible the updating of the car- 
tographical cover of a country in a matter of 
months, as compared with ten years or so using 
classic methods. 
Today evolving computer technology has 
combined remote sensing and cartography and 
taken advantage of their complementarity. As a 
result, now that we can handle both cartographic 
data and the images on which they are based, 
whether these be numerical or graphic, we talk 
nowadays in terms of “integrated” geographical 
information systems 
Practical applications 
The first field of application for geographical 
information systems is resource management in 
both urban and rural areas. Now that it can pro- 
vide the most accurate information about the con- 
dition of a given area and furnish a visual and 
data-based synthesis of it, cartography is in a 37

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 88511: The Perspective from space

  
sim lla LL heat 
- : 
ol NRRL /, xalasankoRo 
position to optimize the efficiency and cost- 
effectiveness of that area’s management. 
The supply and waste utility networks of an 
urban area (water, electricity, telephone and tel- 
evision cables, waste water conduits, household 
waste collection and road networks) are all inter- 
twined within a restricted space. As they become 
older they have to be renovated and adapted to 
meet new needs. Work of this kind has to be care- 
fully planned to cause the least possible distur- 
bance to users, to reduce the risk of accidents and 
to keep costs to a minimum. Cartography also 
has a part to play in other sectors, such as public 
transport and the siting of medical and educa- 
tional facilities. In fact, all aspects of the life of 
the community are involved. Three-quarters of 
the data handled by urban authorities are local- 
ized data and thus come within the sphere of 
geographical information systems. 
In agriculture, the main application of car- 
tography is in the study of land-use and cultiva- 
tion methods, monitoring plant cover, harvest 
forecasting and the assessment of the conse- 
quences of such climatic hazards as drought or 
floods and of the incidence of such events as epi- 
demics or fires. 
Coupled with management is development, 
on which the whole aspect of an area depends. 
This includes town planning, the construction of 
the road infrastructure and agricultural improve- 
ment. Here, project mapping, which is limited 
in both space and time according to the nature 
and scope of the project envisaged, is used as well 
38 as overall, basic cartography. This is a specific 
type of cartography based on a specific range of 
data. It is dependent upon precision, constant up- 
dating and a permanent observation system. In 
this domain, aerial photography and satellite 
imagery play a decisive role because of the speed 
with which they can furnish information. 
Lastly, understanding and control of the 
environment—a more recent concern directly 
connected with development—call for broad car- 
tographical involvement, for here too thinking 
must be in terms of spatial analysis. The factors 
that have to be borne in mind are multiple and 
complex yet they require simple formulation, 
The areas involved are becoming larger and larger 
so that the interactions and spread of phenomena 
can be taken into account. Satellites that roam 
in space unhampered by national boundaries are 
the ideal tool for the acquisition of the necessary 
global information. This is even more true now 
that computer science is beginning to provide the 
means (vast storage capacity thanks to the new 
optical disks, rapid data handling by means of 
parallel processors, transmission by local net- 
works and integrated service networks) for rapid 
and efficient handling of the vast mass of data 
these satellites transmit. 
Cartography still retains its essential didactic 
function. A synthetic science that reveals the lines 
of force of global phenomena by demonstrating 
their spatial relationships, it also pioneers the way 
to new horizons of knowledge. And, feeding back 
to us as it does the image that we are giving to 
our land, it has become a prime witness to our 
cultural development. u 
A satellite image forms the 
basis of this map of Bamako 
(Mali). 
|] 
JEAN-PHILIPPE GRELOT, 
French geographer, is sales 
director of his country’s 
National Geographical Institute. 
He teaches cartography at 
France's School of 
Geographical Sciences, and is 
vice-president of the 
International Cartographic 
Association. He has published 
many articles on cartography 
in French and other journals.

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

For years the excellent 
maps produced in 
the Soviet Union were 
not accessible to the 
general public 
Below, a Soviet tourist map 
dating from 1963. The scale 
Is not Indicated. 
AML 
_ Boelkoe / X\ 
W Fa A 


### 88512: A Bit off the map

  
A bit off the map 
by Aleksandr 5. Sudakov 
¢ 
M.. and plans that are a secret for the 
country’s population are an absurdity, a torch 
kept extinguished,” wrote the Soviet geologist 
A.P. Gerasimov seventy years ago. Unfortunately 
this was the case for years in the USSR, where 
the achievements of Soviet cartography were not 
generally accessible to the public. To take one 
example among many, people often used a 
detailed up-to-date Hungarian plan to find their 
way around Moscow, rather than the official 
Soviet tourist guide which showed only the main 
thoroughfares. 
Today, however, the notion that Soviet maps 
are primitive and distorted is becoming a thing 
of the past. One result of current changes in the 
USSR is that some of the detailed maps which 
were once unavailable can now be bought over 
the counter. New maps of regions and cities are 
being produced and published which are more 
informative than those published ten or twenty 
years ago. 
Paradoxically, Soviet cartography has been a 
victim of its own success in making extremely 
accurate and informative maps. In pre- 
Revolutionary times, detailed maps only existed 
for the European part of the Russian empire. Sur- 
veying the hitherto unstudied regions in the years 
after the Revolution was a great scientific feat. 
Work went on over a vast area and had to 
be done in harsh climatic conditions in such 
regions as Siberia, the deserts of Central Asia and 
the mountains of the Caucasus. Geodetic work 
had to cover 22.4 million square kilometres to 
provide a single system of co-ordinates and 
ams «2 Ba A 2H > - SRR RET NAL ae. SARA 
: 10 : yok \3 Ra 
4 “ 3 Nr A oak 
  
Ki IPMANCAK QD 
  
v RE 
.- 
3 
2 Sw a 
y ’ 
aah 
pasty 
> 
¥ 
: wt - \ § Y * . 
pi 0 CoA foun 
A ) RS 
- i i oe Mi ve A ad 
: . 4 Rr 3 + 8 JD £3 Al - 
. n . fl A ”~ f — 
-— 4 I — 
» “. Vd ; 
EE ¥ We 7 \ i 
by oA ad vl 
“ P \\ .¥ AN 
4 \ pr 
[4 FT a = 
| 7 
/ ' 4 
i Ras A, = og 
39

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### 88512: A Bit off the map

  
| 
ALEKSANDR SERGEEVICH 
SUDAKOV, 
of the USSR, is the editor-in- 
chief of the Central 
Department of Geodesy and 
Cartography, which is 
responsible to the USSR 
Council of Ministers. He is a 
member of the editorial boards 
of a number of major 
cartographic publications and 
the Soviet Union's permanent 
representative on the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR) working 
group on geodesy and 
geological information. 
Below left, a detalled plan of 
central Moscow, avallable 
since 1989. Previous plans 
(right) were vague and 
heights for the entire area of the Soviet Union. 
Heights and co-ordinates throughout the country 
had to be determined with great accuracy in rela- 
tion to the Baltic Sea and the reference point at 
Pulkovo near Leningrad. This in turn required 
astronomic and gravimetric work throughout the 
country, the development of triangulation and 
levelling grids, and the construction of tens of 
thousands of geodetic signs, some of them over 
40 metres high. 
The late 1930s and the eve of the Second 
World War were a time of universal suspicion, 
mistrust and spy mania in our country. Measures 
were taken to protect information, including 
information about topography. Detailed large- 
scale maps that had had limited circulation were 
made secret. But the objective formulated for 
Russian cartography over 150 years ago, “the col- 
lection and distribution in Russia and beyond of 
as full and reliable data about our native land as 
possible”, was never abandoned. In 1947, the 
Chief Department of Geodesy and Cartography 
was awarded the Gold Medal of the Geographic 
Society for having completed the state map of the 
USSR to a scale of 1:1,000,000. 
This success made it possible to start work 
on a new 1:2,500,000 (1 cm = 25 km) map, which 
in the 1950s served as the basis of a series of 
detailed regional maps. These years also saw the 
other country: large-scale (1:25,000, i.e. 1 cm = 
250 m) surveys of the entire territory of the Soviet 
Union. The effort took some forty years and over 
250,000 maps were produced. 
In the early 1960s, certain maps began to dis- 
appear from the shops. The small-scale maps that 
were produced to replace them inherited old mis- 
takes and distortions and incorporated new ones. 
The location of sites in relation to the carto- 
graphic grid was changed. Geographical co- 
ordinates were no longer shown on maps that 
were transformed into schematic representations 
of low, information value. This practice was 
rendered meaningless by the development of 
space imagery, but we continued to publish maps 
of the Aral Sea coast as it was traditionally seen, 
for instance, while maps produced in other coun- 
tries using space technology showed its actual 
state. 
Although some restrictions have now been 
lifted, there are still many problems. The mili- 
tary think that circulation of detailed 
topographical maps is premature, especially those 
on the 1:100,000 and the 1:25,000 scales. But 
tourists are attracted above all to little-known 
forests and mountains, the parks near Leningrad, 
the towns and countryside of old Russia. People 
want to get to know their own country, and to 
be able to explore it on foot. For this they need 
sometimes Inaccurate. start of planning for a project unheard-of in any reliable large-scale maps. n 
ok a — oh a LTA ~ uv - 
Bis = a 3. off Botintesk) Z (Vioroy, £3 = ——t % ? Le ; > . ~ 2 MoU 
per < 1 re | - - 
, - 2 > ue < wv - 
rvy)) = a - : ~ “ La = = eric ¥® ~ y 
w - — : ~~ 
um Nos " A ° 
Samotéénaja > - Oo ~ bo 
- —piz = =Saduvaizs } a¥ v ap 4 
. : " har ats { Samolecn ul skai 1a ™ Mal Kolhoznaja : 0 va Sea > > ~ A 
Z pL Bol. Kolko, OT, ot 
¥ : = * Koloznaja @~ 1), othoz : « a Q 
Cvelnoj bul'var = : Chenin ® Ry % - a ar ' 3 Ky Cvelno) Bul'var c 
- 3 ad “el. v Ss J - - t — oo UT 3 = o Kolhoznaja = u Rl a 
- up + 
-! nated pat Sut De % BY bei > - * “va 7 ha S pet n - = Py - Cc Q J 4 
iW) n Ss W ® hy ! 3 » 1 mm ry i. « Bol Sergrevsky peor — ~~ L Fe 
-~ . Roy Oaloy a“ A ~ ~ e 
y Kat & K 5 ny Hm on co g ® - Q 
nt - * "a ’ NS 
A en pF vol Serglevs] 5 L Q Py A ~ - \ 
‘ Kol TL ri > WN 0 Oy Ski J s > < Ne 0 . - 3 “ IIE Q - -. ‘ Ox . ovskil builw ~ 
CUFT eubha ja Peat En J S an Roda, . . ol . Se pl PR “ § * ? oo eag, 3 ° * S - 0z » A | h = x oO ~ " N a 8 k b destvensk J pl dre fenskij RN ® A 8 © > Ya 
¥ § -« Sretenskih ; buj’, T ers kala q © o aay, > ~ ~ reeneysKal « 
: She WF <2 Vorotg =, org fl Ritovskih © ~ ~ > Su, ° 
AR Nal & , “pel 3p, Ki TE <r = Turgenevskaja ‘© 8 - ui ® Torgenevskaja Krovshaa 
~ yi pes << Ni Ron 2 A — = \ Ki k “" \ o ~ -~ 0) 0) 
2 ul Per’ ) Fg rovs aja , ~ A { 
* Petr wh - oy “ op < ~ ad 
Lani 1 Regline y Ny a % as (4 per Q % ~ ott 2 . c 
: 2p wv R % 
pl p “o, ~ N° » y -_ 
: ~ Vorovskogo 2 Ae 2. o - N “ 
a i ‘ JR - ! ¢ Por / Ld < ® + % 
d > Kugneckij Most "+ P pne Ch 1" Mogi, oe X 3 Le 1 > ¢ hr ® SA 3 * 7 A c S Pr \ . ® Q af 
¥ EPuid 1 S A» ’ . -. o 9 2 3) Kezoecky Most o*® ) ut » : = Ah hos 3 Paeriinskaja ol Kirov a 3 , pl % - > = \ * v 
= = i ¥ ~ T\ > - Pp rn < = (vw) v, 
: Pl. : - 3 <a Dzerzinskogo % ; okroy sk , s a v) u . % } 
Sverd! Math oO ou = % Vorot o ® \ k 
verdiova Pt : S@Dzertinskaja wg 0% 4 G 
[A] WN A > A dn : os a7 oT. a - / Seerdiova > pi Diertinshogo 3 \ NT OD ?.& A A & BY A 2 5 o v # Sverdlova® “1% L857 WE Ey He A > OW i 
pl. Revoljucii CW Ldana Mm et S y o } 7; Whnskih \ Bog : ® or ® ! \ : orol A ’ v (W) Pr Nogina 
uf 2 Pl. Nogina + a = Pi Revohuc v : 
Pl. ReSjucii 2 7 @ I % Per - a: ta © ’ 
letija) » oo oT) g 4 a ke » ® EY 
bria 
a > of 5 oN ot - ~ 
a? A ’ : 2. ¥ v

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=41) 0

### 88513: Celestial cartography

Celestial cartography 
by Werner Merkli 
Astronomical map-making from the star 
catalogues of Antiquity to the electronic 
images of today 
  
Eon very early times, the stars in the firma- 
ment have held a strong fascination for man. In 
the movements of the stars the Ancients saw the 
operation of supernatural forces which could 
influence human destiny. Believing that there 
were portents to be read in the stars, our distant 
ancestors began to observe and make precise 
descriptions of the heavens. 
Thus astronomy has a very long history. Ves- 
tiges of astronomical observatories and instru- 
ments dating back to 3000 BC have been found 
in Sumer, Babylon, China, Egypt, Mexico, Peru 
and the United Kingdom. 
The earliest known star catalogues were the 
work of Babylonian astronomers and date back 
to about 1700 BC, during the reign of the great 
Babylonian monarch Hammurabi. Calculations 
concerning the movements of the Moon and of 
the planets, especially of Venus, were almost cer- 
tainly made for astrological purposes. For the 
Egyptians, Sirius, the Dog star, to which they 
accorded divine attributes as “Sothis”, or the 
“Star of Isis”, was “the bringer of the new year 
and of the floodwaters of the Nile”. In fact, the 
day of the year on which Sirius was first visible 
on the horizon, just before sunrise, usually coin- 
cided more or less with the rising of the Nile 
waters, on which subsequent sowing and then 
harvesting of crops depended. 
It was not long before the Ancients became 
aware of the slow progression of the Sun, the 
Moon and the five great planets of the solar 
system (Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and 
Saturn) along a regular path across the heavens. 
This belt around the sky, first observed by the 
Babylonians and later by the Greeks, is divided 
into twelve segments, or astrological signs, which 
correspond to the constellations which occupied 
these segments some 2,000 years ago (Taurus the 
bull, Cancer the crab, Leo the lion, etc.). The 
Zodiacal belt corresponds to what modern 
astronomers call the “ecliptic”, the apparent 
annual path followed by the Sun. 
The Greek astronomer Hipparchus (161 to 
127 BC) was the first to draw up a star catalogue 
worthy of the name. He indicated the position 
of about a thousand stars, attributing to each of 
them a magnitude based on its luminosity, or 
brightness. 
- 
 
  
   
  
  
Star catalogues 
An accurate listing of the stars was essential for 
navigation on the open sea and for making large- 
scale land measurements. Until the end of the 
Middle Ages the Almagest, an astronomical and 
mathematical encyclopaedia compiled by 
Ptolemy around 160 AD, remained the authorita- 
tive reference book for astronomers. The 
Almagest, which survived in an Arabic transla- 
tion, is a digest of the mathematical knowledge 
of Antiquity. It contains a catalogue of forty-eight 
constellations and 1,022 stars with their ecliptic 
co-ordinates and magnitudes. 
The first really usable astronomical atlas, 
however, was the German astronomer Johann 
Bayer’s Uranometria, which was drawn up in 
1603. It consisted of fifty-one maps and listed 
1,277 stars, with the stars in each constellation 
being designated in decreasing order of brightness 
by the letters of the Greek alphabet. When fur- 
ther letters were needed, the Latin alphabet was 
used. 
With the aid of the telescope at the Green- 
wich Royal Observatory, the English astronomer 
John Flamsteed added considerably to the 
number of stars listed. His Historia Coelestis 
In this [lluminated design from 
the psalter of Blanche of 
Castile (1230), an astronomer 
makes observations with an 
astrolabe. He Is assisted by a 
clerk and a computist. 
| 
WERNER MERKLI, 
Swiss printer and publisher, is 
editor of the German-language 
edition of the UNESCO Courier. 
He has produced astronomical 
maps of the stars, the planets 
and the Moon. 41

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=42) 0

### 88513: Celestial cartography

ITY 
a OAS is TRE, 
Civ be 
re SATY wd | 8 
  
  
  
  
  
» 
. 
. 
- 
- 
» 
» 
- 
- 
    
  
Britannica, published in 1725, designated some 
3,000 stars by number and exceeded all earlier 
catalogues both in accuracy and in the number 
of stars listed. 
For a long time observation was limited to 
the northern skies. The explorers and navigators 
of the sixteenth century were the first Europeans 
to see the southern skies and constellations in 
their totality. The first catalogue of the stars of 
the southern skies, complete with the positions 
of 341 of them, determined by telescope, was 
drawn up in 1676 by the English astronomer 
Edmond Halley from the south Atlantic island 
of St. Helena. 
During an expedition (1750 to 1754) to the 
Cape of Good Hope, the French astronomer 
Nicolas Louis de la Caille listed some 10,000 stars 
grouped in fourteen constellations, as well as 
several new nebulae. His star catalogue was pub- 
lished in 1756. 
The Bonner Durchmusterung, established in 
the middle of the nineteenth century under the 
direction of the German astronomer Friedrich 
Argelander, is still today a basic reference work 
for the stellar astronomy of the northern skies. 
Based on observations made at the Bonn obser- 
vatory, it gives the position and characteristics 
of some 350,000 stars. After Argelander’s death, 
the “BD” catalogue was extended to cover the 
42 southern hemisphere, with a listing of some 
500,000 stars being added by observatories in Cor- 
doba (Argentina) and Cape Town. 
During the last century visual observation of 
the stars was largely replaced by the use of pho- 
tographic plates. Objects whose luminosity is too 
faint to be registered by the human eye can be 
photographed, and the introduction of this form 
of observation led to the discovery of millions 
of previously unknown stars. For practical pur- 
poses, rather than referring to star maps 
astronomers tend to make use of star catalogues 
and listings of stellar co-ordinates, whether these 
be exhaustive catalogues or what are called fun- 
damental catalogues which furnish extremely 
accurate details of the positions and motions of 
a reduced number of selected stars well dis- 
tributed over the sky. 
Flattening the sky 
It is impossible to produce a projection—a sys- 
tematic representation on a flat surface of the 
features of a curved surface, such as that of the 
Earth—which is both complete and wholly 
accurate. Even using Mercator’s famous cylin- 
drical projection, which presents the globe as 
though it were an unrolled cylinder, there is 
inevitably a degree of distortion of angles, dis- 
tances and surfaces. Similar problems arise in 
mapping the sky. 
  
  
Above, the world-system 
devised by the Portuguese 
cosmographer Bartolomeu 
Velho In 1568 reflects the 
close links between 
cosmography and cartography 
at the Renaissance, 
Above right, detail of one of 
the *“Original drawings of the 
patches of the Moon’ made 
after observations by Giovanni 
Domenico Cassinl between 
1675 and 1677. The date and 
hour are Indicated by 
annotations In Cassini's own 
hand. 
Right, component of an 
astrolabe made at Louvain in 
1565 In the workshops of 
Gauthler Arsenius, geographer 
of the emperor Charles V.

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=43) 0

### 88513: Celestial cartography

  ’ - 
'" 3 ] b \ 5 - v . 
¥ LRT BF : ph MPa EN 
| C3 Ematire — , 
4 » v7, p¥ wit én VE i wisy «A 
Ve uO 
Aad aA 
y A 3 
WF : , Carried . 
a 
_~ 
red rat? 
MV Mach Dy { Ne 
Wn apmdio (0 As 1d 
4 Cana ig SER 
ds 25 ! = ake 
Pra oy 
Ai + x + 
YIN / 
3 Vad 5 
& 
pe 
AIO CR Er Rr Ph 
7 ae 
Soha iakers Dawg 
- 3: TI | or - 
ww, en Sa #0 Na 
yo 
ye 
Cn 
EY : 
» 
4 
-< 
ium 
— : : dd, ¢ Joo 
  
     
The planets, air, fire, sky 
and water are disposed 
around the Earth In 
concentric circles In an 
Illuminated design from a 
manuscript (1245) of 
L’'Image du Monde 
(‘The Mirror of the 
World”), a treatise 
about the universe by 
Gossuin de Metz. 
To draw up a map of the celestial sphere, the 
positions of the stars are established in relation 
to two arcs which are perpendicular to each other 
and which are analagous to terrestrial longitude 
and latitude. Individual heavenly bodies, such as 
the Sun, the Moon or the planets, are usually 
represented in the form of a sphere in perspec- 
tive, as though the observer were situated some- 
where in space, like a camera aboard a spaceship. 
The hidden or the visible face of the star is shown, 
as, for example, in the case of the Moon, or else 
the sphere is shown cut up into three segments, 
with two additional segments for the poles. Points 
or surfaces at the eastern and western extremi- 
ties, or at the top and bottom of the sphere, will 
be seen in extremely foreshortened perspective. 
For scientific purposes a Mercator projection is 
used with the addition of separate representations 
of the poles. 
The inconceivably huge distances that are 
involved in stellar systems, like those that separate 
the planets of our solar system, with their rings 
and moons, cannot be reproduced without great 
distortions. However, mathematically calculated 
reduction scales enable us to have some idea of 
the positions, trajectories and revolution phases 
of these bodies. 
Movement in the Universe 
Though we speak of “fixed” stars which rise each 
night above the horizon, the universe is in per- 
petual movement. The Sun, the Moon and the 
planets, comets and shooting stars soar through 
space but leave no trace of their passing. How 
can such movement be mapped? In ancient times 
astronomers constructed armillary spheres, com- 
plex assemblages of moving rings which 
represented the movement of the planets, and 
astrolabes, which furnished a picture of the sky 
at a given moment. These instruments remained 
in use until the seventeenth century. 
For centuries the Earth was depicted as a flat 
disc, situated in the centre of the universe, above 
which moved the majestic span of the celestial 
vault with its fixed stars. Yet, in ancient times, 
Greek sages such as the Pythagoreans Hipparchus 
and Erastosthenes had observed the curvature of 43

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=44) 0

### 88513: Celestial cartography

the Earth’s surface and had deduced from this that 
it was probable that the Earth was spherical in 
shape and moved like a planet round the Sun. 
Anaxagoras found himself accused of atheism 
and banished for maintaining that the Sun was 
a ball of fire bigger than the Peloponnese. Some 
1,500 years later the Italian mathematician and 
astronomer Galileo (1564-1642), in his turn, was 
forced to foreswear his discovery that the world 
was a sphere. The heliocentric model of the 
universe had failed to gain acceptance in Antig- 
uity and the geocentric vision of the universe held 
undisputed sway from the days of Ptolemy to the 
Middle Ages, being defended by the Church with 
increasing vigour. It was only after the publica- 
tion of the works of such famous astronomers 
as Copernicus, Galileo and Kepler, who estab- 
lished the laws of gravity that rule the movements 
of the planets, that the heliocentric model finally 
triumphed. 
Signs and images 
Exploration of our solar system by spacecraft, 
both manned and unmanned, and by the Hubble 
space telescope, has given fresh impetus to the 
mapping of the Sun, the planets and their moons. 
Electronic video cameras send a constant stream 
of high-definition images back to the Earth, 
where they are juxtaposed and mounted, usually 
in the form of spherical projections or as Mer- 
cator projections. 
  
—_ 
i alk oe 
The Chinese used to represent the stars as 
circles or dots, the Arabs depicted them as small 
coloured discs and the Egyptians and the Greeks 
as radiant star shapes. Until the modern age, 
European cartographers followed the Egyp- 
tian/Greek example, but since the introduction 
of stellar photography, the stars have been shown 
as dots proportional in size to their luminosity. 
It 1s more difficult to depict the nebulae, 
galaxies, binary stars, star clusters and comets, and 
harder still those heavenly bodies such as pulsars, 
quasars and black holes, that are beyond the 
reach of optical astronomy and whose existence is 
revealed to us by the radio waves they emit. 
Special charts are used to portray magnetic fields 
and solar winds, which are depicted as curves. 
The US National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) has also published 
colour maps showing mineral formations on the 
surface of the Moon. 
The nomenclature used to designate the relief 
features of stars in the solar system is governed 
by the Paris-based International Astronomical 
Union (IAU), the highest authority in the field 
of astronomy. One of IAU’s achievements has 
been to establish a common nomenclature for the 
main relief features of the Moon. To facilitate 
international understanding of sky maps all the 
names on them are usually written in Latin. With 
the same objective in mind, each star listed in 
the star catalogues has its own identification 
number. | 
 Meitner, 
Cr 
Preliminary topographic map 
of Venus drawn from data 
transmitted by the US space 
probe Pioneer in 1980. 

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=45) 0

### IGNORE

W
r
z
 
  
<=
 NESCO IN ACTION 
Soil, mineral deposits, tectonic 
structure, vegetation, climate... 
many chapters in the story of the 
planet recorded in scientific maps 
and atlases produced by UNESCO 
Ls the earth sciences, the maps produced by 
UNESCO are mainly geological, tectonic, 
metallogenic or metamorphic. These maps 
generally show a continent in its entirety, 
hence their small scale—usually 1:5,000,000 or 
1:2,500,000. 
GEOLOGICAL MAPS 
The first map in this series is of Europe. The 
innovations it contains paved the way for a 
new generation of geological maps. For 
example, the Pleistocene cover (major part of 
the Quaternary), which is relatively thin in 
the area of the Baltic Shield and the British 
Isles, 1s not shown. In areas where this cover 
is thicker, however, it is shown either by trans- 
parent signs or by full colour, if strong tec- 
tonic activity played a decisive role in the 
process of sedimentation. 
In addition, intrusive magmatic rocks 
(rocks produced by molten matter being 
forced up from the Earth’s interior into pre- 
existing formations) and volcanic magmatic 
rocks have been subdivided according to age, 
chemical composition and relation to orogeny 
{process of mountain formation). Generally 
speaking, age is shown by colour and the 
nature of the rocks or lithology by over- 
printed signs. 
The map of Africa was the first to show 
|]
LYDWINE D'ANDIGNE DE ASIS 
is a programme specialist with UNESCO's Division 
of Earth Sciences. 


### 88514: The Earth from every angle

The Earth from every angle 
hy yin fy Asis 
  
  
  
    
  
i (| 5S» s X 
=n 617 . I, 
ju] Ae 
2/3 .) be 1 
a) an ! 1 {1 § as |1 
. 
1} Sor) 
ry 23 
= 7 
T 
¥ iil 7 
| IN ; 
| 
| 
J 
i bao L420), : A 
: — 
Gr 
PG 
1 
ty 
3 ECAY 
3 1 ie. yo ¥S +17 
2 3G Te 
IS Na (on 
 
o 0 00® - 
NN uh ® 
  
r
~
 
  
  
1 3 : 
> 4 By { 
17 A 
¢ ) 
i | 
2 
| : 
] \ | 
C ~ Ny) "WN ” 
A . 
3 AY 
; f 
— / 
G s 1 
hc . (hy J 
Qrirery a i < J 
T 
“mol | : | NN 
J - x SN 
N RANDY, // < x 
Nise y 
® WW, 
li AS 
4 J re 
NS ek E A — pe” 
Detall of sheet 22 of the geological world atlas (1:34,000,000). 
 
45

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=46) 0

### IGNORE

the geology of the continental shelf and the 
seafloor. Along with depth measurements 
(bathymetry), it shows the age of the crust, 
magnetic lineation, fracture zones, isopachs 
(sediment thickness), the siting of drillings, the 
limits of volcanism and thrust sheets and the 
epicentres of earthquakes. 
Besides the geological map of Africa on 
a scale of 1:5,000,000, UNESCO has recently 
published a map of South and East Asia on 
a scale of 1:5,000,000 and a geological map of 
the world on a scale of 1:25,000,000. 
TECTONIC MAPS 
The tectonic map of Africa which, as its name 
suggests, shows distortions in the earth’s crust, 
also contains some decisive innovations. For 
the first time in the history of cartography, 
the signs and symbols of the Precambrian are 
entirely based on geochronology, ie. on 
“absolute ages” (expressed in thousands or 
millions of years) determined radiometrically 
on the basis of certain properties of isotopes. 
The various orogenies are shown by 
specific colours while overprinted conven- 
tional signs represent the ancient structures. 
The depth of the basins and the thickness of 
the surface cover are indicated by gradual 
shading rather than by isobathic curves. 
Tectonic maps provide a considerable 
  
          
   = 
  
S
E
E
 
SE
 
Sa
l 
SE
 
EE
 
T
E
 
LE
 
$1
 «
7
 
   
    
/ — IN ) — A pa 
Detail of sheet 2 of the Metaliogenic map of Europe 
(1:2,500,000). 
  
  
S # . . ol 1 
SE Sly i 
& TalaX YC 
= Eo rm 
VW. =. : 
Det. 
(spprox. 1:5,000 
ondon, "| Chandoiour 
all of sheet Hi of the Soll 
 
amount of data not given by geological maps. 
Dynamic geology serves as a means of 
explaining structures and is a source of insights 
into the laws governing the evolution of the 
Earth's crust. This knowledge is useful in par- 
ticular for a more practical approach to 
prospecting. 
METAMORPHIC MAPS 


### 88514: The Earth from every angle

These maps show the metamorphic belts, 
which are rock masses altered by heat and 
pressure, highlighting mineral associations and 
facies (sediment characteristics, considered 
from the point of view of their development). 
The spatial distribution of these facies is a 
source of significant information concerning 
the thermal history of the Earth. In some 
cases, on account of the scale used, various 
types of facies corresponding to a given tem- 
perature have had to be grouped together, 
irrespective of the pressure undergone. 
Pressure-induced facies are also considered 
together, in terms of temperature and pressure 
gradients. 
METALLOGENIC MAPS 
These maps represent a big step forward in 
metallogenic studies and the methodology of 
prospecting. They show the principal litho- 
logical, tectonic, magmatic and palacogeo- 
  
map of the world 
 
Detail of sheet 9 of the International Quaternary map 
of Europe (1:2,500,000). 

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=47) 0

### 88514: The Earth from every angle

- 
N
N
 
A
r
c
 
  
NESCO IN ACTION [=
 
graphic features contributing to strata forma- 
tion and indicate the limits and specific charac- 
teristics of mineral provinces. 
They also show other important features, 
namely, age of orogeny and the various sur- 
face irregularities, age of contours and 
lithology of platform cover, mineralizations 
with the mineral content and its importance, 
and age of the mineralization along with its 
genetic type. 
Work is in progress towards the publica- 
tion of 2 map of the mineralizations of Africa, 
the first sheet of which is in press, and the 
mineral atlas of the world, for which the signs 
and symbols have been defined. 
THE SOIL MAP 
OF THE WORLD 
This original map in eighteen sheets is accom- 
panied by a volume of explanatory text for 
each continent: the legend covers no less than 
5,000 physico-chemical soil types or pedolog- 
ica] units. It provides a means of arriving at 
an initial estimate of world soil resources and 
opens the way for more extensive studies. 
Since its publication, other projects have been 
launched, in particular a world desertification 
map and a world map of soil degradation. 
THE QUATERNARY MAP 
In this series only the map of Europe has so 
far been published. The information presented 
is not limited to glacial phenomena but’ 
includes fluvial, lacustrine, marine and aeolian 
deposits, whether of detrital or chemical 
origin, and volcanic rocks. Certain geomor- 
phological features are also shown on these 
maps, together with the limits of marine trans- 
gressions and ice movement, 
Designed for specialists, but also for 
teachers, to whom they should be of invalu- 
able assistance, UNESCO maps provide a 
state-of-the-art overview of our knowledge of 
the Earth while opening the way for ever 
more precise local investigations on an increas 
ingly large scale. One of their aims is to trans- 
late a maximum of scientific data into an inter- 
national language understandable to all earth 
scientists. u 
Eee vS yvevwidorw 5 . 
Shree dgoenvones 
"OTN 3 
The international 
language of maps 
Situated at the interface of art and science, 
cartography offers an irreplaceable syn- © 
thesis of information scattered through - 
numerous books, articles and documents. & 
it therefore calls for the co-operation of 
specialists In a variety of fields from all over 
the world. The unique position occupied by 
UNESCO among scientific institutions 
enables it to take an active part in this type = 
of activity. 3 
UNESCO plays a major role in the publi- | 
cation of continental maps and world maps 
covering such scientific fields as the earth 
sciences (see article page 45), the water and 
environmental sciences and seafloor geology. 
These maps are based on national docu- 
ments prepared by UNESCO member states 
themselves and then compiled and assem- 
bled by international drafting committees, 
In the water sciences, UNESCO is con- 
tinuing to prepare hydrogeological maps of } 
the European and African continents and of | 
Latin America and the Caribbean. 
The maps published by UNESCO make =f 
use of the most modern techniques of satel- = 
lite imaging, data processing and scanning. 
The trend as regards traditional maps 
printed on paper Is towards the preparation *:. 
of supplementary or derived maps, prepared :*:: 
to order on the basis of computerized data. 
UNESCO's vast cartographic programme 
Is being carried out in close co-operation 0 
* with such bodies as the Commission for the 
Geological Map of the World (CGMW), 
UNESCO's main partner for thematic earth 
science maps, the FAO (the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United =\\:"¥N.-:5 
Nations) and the International Association = 
for Quaternary Research (INQUA), which co- 
publish soil and Quaternary maps with 
UNESCO, the International Association of 
Hydrological Sciences and the International SFpoS: 
Hydrographic Organization. 
UNESCO maps can be ordered from 
the Office of the UNESCO Press, 
1 rue Miollis, 75015 Paris (France) 
and the Organization's sales 
agents worldwide. 
A small brochure in English, Scientific Maps 
and Atlases, UNESCO Catalogue, contains 
a detailed, illustrated inventory of UNESCO 
maps and atlases. Copies may be obtained 
from the UNESCO Press, Sales Division, 
1 rue Miollis, 75015 Paris (France). 
Detadl of sheet D2 of the International hydrologeological 
map of Europe (1:1,500,000), 
  

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=48) 0

### 88515: Copyright is everybody's business

"Copyright is everybody's business 
For almost forty years UNESCO has been working to promote a universal copyright system which protects the rights of creators, 
facilitates the diffusion of their work and contributes to international understanding. In this interview Ms Milagros del Corral, 
director of UNESCO'S Book and Copyright Division, describes what is at stake. 
m Why is UNESCO concerned with 
copyright? 
— Copyright, the legal framework for the pro- 
tection of literary, artistic and scientific works, 
is a human right and as such is recognized in 
Article 27 (2) of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, which states that “Everyone 
has the right to the protection of the moral 
and material interests resulting from any scien- 
tific, literary or artistic production of which 
he is the author”. The right of creators to the 
protection of their works is an aspect of the 
right to culture. A delicate balance exists 
between copyright protection and access to 
culture, education, information and scientific 
research. Copyright protection and access to 
culture are also crucial to the development of 
any country. In view of UNESCO's constitu- 
tional concerns in these fields and with the 
defence of human rights, one might well ask 
how UNESCO could fail to be closely 
involved with copyright. 
® Could you tell us more about the role of 
copyright in today’s world? Who is affected 
by it? 
— Everybody is affected, whether they realize 
it or not. The copyright chain is a very com- 
48 plex one. In the first place, of course, there 
are writers, musicians, creators of the plastic 
arts, software authors, photographers, and 
translators, Their work is made available to 
the public by a large number of “mediators” 
who acquire copyright by contractor licence 
and assume the risk of producing and dis- 
tributing their work. Traditional mediators 
include the publishers of books, periodicals 
and newspapers, radio and television broad- 
casters, programme producers, cinema and 
video corporations, theatres, and the adver- 
tising and show-business industries. Relative 
newcomers to the field are distributors of 
programmes by cable television, satellite trans- 
mission and the software industry. 
In short, there is a very wide range of cul- 
tural industries that use protected works as the 
raw material of their commercial activities. In 
the industrially developed countries, industries 
working on the basis of copyright contribute 
between 3 and 6 per cent to the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). Last in the 
copyright chain comes the general public. 
When we read a book, a magazine or 2 
newspaper, listen to the radio, watch televi- 
sion, use a personal computer, or attend a con- 
cert or theatre performance, we are “con- 
suming” copyright materials. 
The role of copyright is to ensure that 
authors are recognized by society and 
remunerated for the use of their works. The 
law should also prevent any distortion that 
may prejudice an author’s reputation. In an 
increasing number of countries the rights of 
performing artists are also protected. 
Wm So the sale of every single copy of a 
work should provide remuneration for 
the author and in some cases for the 
performer? 
— Exactly. Unfortunately, however, copyright 
is very vulnerable and the development of new 
reproduction and communication technologies 
represents a challenge to it. Unauthorized 
copies can be produced very cheaply and can 
compete illegally in the market, representing 
immense losses for authors, copyright and 
other intellectual rights holders throughout 
the world. 
Piracy represents a clear violation of 
authors’ rights and is causing enormous 
damage. Free private copying authorized by 
national laws has also attained dangerous levels 
in many countries as it has gone far beyond 
the original intentions of legislators. It is 
impossible for authors to control the 
increasing number of uses of their work, and 
collective administration of rights by authors’ 
and performers’ societies is the only reasonable 
way of coping with the problem. At the inter- 
national level much work has already been 
done to solve these problems, but they remain 
on the agenda because of the speed of techno- 
logical change. It is not always easy to adapt

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=49) 0

### 88515: Copyright is everybody's business

legal notions to these changing scenarios and 
we have to proceed with caution. 
Wm What you bave said relates to protection 
at the national level. How can copyright pro- 
tection be ensured internationally? 
— This is a very important point, since the 
circulation of protected works knows no 
frontiers. The use of protected works in for- 
eign countries is governed by two major inter- 
national conventions, the Berne 
Convention—the International Convention 
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic 
Works, which 1s administered by the World 
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO); 
and the Universal Copyright Convention 
(UCC), which was adopted under the auspices 
of UNESCO. 
The Berne Convention seeks more exten- 
sive and stronger protection. To take one 
example, it requires recognition of moral 
rights and a fifty-year term of protection fol- 
lowing the author’s death. The UCC is more 
sensitive to the needs of developing countries, 
many of which are net “copyright importers” 
and seek easier access to copyright materials 
for educational purposes. The UCC is less 
extensive in its recognition of rights, allows 
more exceptions from protection, and the 
term of protection is twenty-five years after 
the author’s death, 
Mm What are UNESCO's activities in the 
copyright field? 
— UNESCO’s copyright programme is 
divided into three principal areas. First, 
encouraging accession to international conven- 
tions. UNESCO also encourages its member 
states to adopt legal measures in conformity 
with certain recommendations adopted by 
A 
UNESCO IN ACTION 
N
W
I
 
  
The French mime 
Marcel Marceau 
uses gestures to explain 
copyright. 
UNESCO's General Conference, with regard 
to the protection of translators, the 
safeguarding of folklore, the status of the artist 
and the safeguarding of works in the public 
domain. 
Second, UNESCO has recently embarked 
on a major effort to introduce the teaching of 
copyright into university studies. A syllabus, 
a textbook and a basic bibliography have been 
prepared, and universities in Latin America, 
the Arab countries (and soon Africa and Asia) 
are being encouraged to use them. The 
training programme also includes seminars for 
judges and magistrates, who play a key role 
in law enforcement, and for journalists and 
librarians, who can do much to increase social 
awareness of copyright matters. 
UNESCO’s third concern is to inform 
specialists and the general public. We publish 
a quarterly Copyright Bulletin in English, 
French, Spanish and Russian, in which the 
main principles and problems of international 
copyright are discussed by experts from 
different regions. A data base on copyright 
legislation, including a detailed analysis of 
national legislations and international conven- 
tions, 1s being compiled for CD-ROM publi- 
cation in 1994-1995. We also intend to include 
a compendium of selected case law along with 
a bibliography in the copyright field. This 
ambitious project has been made possible 
through voluntary contributions from the 
USA, the UK and, we expect, from Spain and 
France. It 1s a huge task but we are confident 
that this data base, once completed, will prove 
an irreplaceable tool for governments, 
decision-makers, lawyers, and users of 
copyright works all over the world. 
We are also trying to heighten public 
awareness of copyright through video cassettes 
that make the principal copyright notions easy 
to understand. The first one is a remarkable 
twelve-minute performance by the French 
mime Marcel Marceau, who explains with 
humour and sensitivity what copyright is and 
why it needs to be protected and respected. 
Finally, UNESCO is making preparations 
for an international debate on the role of 
copyright in the societies of today and 
tomorrow, on an interdisciplinary basis. All 
the international organizations involved, as 
well as a number of famous authors, 
producers, publishers, television stations, 
copyright experts, sociologists and economists, 
will be invited to discuss how copyright could 
help to foster sound cultural and economic 
development and to establish an open dialogue 
for better eo-operation between developed and 
developing countries. We feel this could also 
be the best way to commemorate the fortieth 
anniversary of the Universal Copyright Con- 
vention in 1992. m 49

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=50) 0

### 88516: The Universal Copyright Convention

The Universal Copyright Comvention 
by Andre Kerever 
Tee Universal Copyright Convention (UCC) is 
an international instrument which was drawn up in 
1952 under the auspices of UNESCO. If it were to 
be as universal as its title claims, the Convention not 
only had to recognize copyright as 2 human right 
but also to act as a kind of bridge between the 
world’s different legal and social systems. As an 
attempt to devise a legal common denominator 
which would foster respect for the rights of creators 
and also encourage the international circulation of 
literary, scientific and artistic works, the UCC had 
a dual thrust. 
Before the Second World War, steps had already 
been taken to remedy the paradoxical situation 
whereby the United States was cut off, legally 
speaking, from the countries of Europe and Asia 
which since 1886 had become signatories to the 
Berne Convention—the International Convention 
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works. 
Under United States law authors could only be 
protected if they carried out certain administrative 
formalities such as registering their work with the 
US Copyright Office. This legislation had affinities 
with that relating to industrial property, which only 
recognized an inventor’s rights if his or her inven- 
tion had been registered. This requirement stood in 
the way of the United States’ accession to the Berne 
Convention, which enshrines the principle that 2 
work Is protected purely by virtue of its creation. 
There was thus no legal mechanism whereby a 
work originating in the United States could be pro- 
tected in Japan or in the countries of Western 
Europe, or whereby a work originating in the latter 
countries could be protected in the United States 
except when the requirements of American law were 
observed. 
The Universal Copyright Convention of 1952 
provides a simple and ingenious solution to this 
problem. It prescribes that the formalities required 
by the national law of a contracting state shall be 
considered to be satisfied if all the copies of a work 
originating in another contracting state carry the 
symbol ©, accompanied by the name of the 
copyright owner and the year of first publication. 
Ratified by the United States and by almost all 
the states parties to the Berne Convention, the UCC 
S50 has successfully served its purpose as a pathway of 
NL 
m
m
 
3 
|S J 
UNESCO IN ACTION 
communication between different legal systems, 
while also improving the international protection 
of intellectual works. 
The creators of the UCC set themselves another 
goal in relation to the universality asserted by its 
title. They wished to anticipate and provide for the 
prospect following the Second World War of a con- 
siderable increase in the number of sovereign states 
as a consequence of decolonization. Legal norms for 
the protection of authors should be sufficiently flex- 
ible and open to accommodate states at different 
stages of development, or states belonging to 
different economic and social systems. These norms 
could thus not be as precise and restrictive as those 
of the Berne Convention, while nevertheless 
providing sufficient recognition of authors’ rights. 
The 1952 Convention satisfies these two condi- 
tions. Its protective norms are expressed in the form 
of general principles which can be given different 
shades of interpretation depending on the specific 
identity of each state. The Convention limits the 
term of protection of copyright to twenty-five years 
after an author’s death, thus permitting the acces- 
sion of the USSR. But correlatively the Convention 
provides for the works of the citizens of each con- 
tracting state the same protection in other con- 
tracting states as it does for the works of authors 
belonging to those states. The prohibition of any 
discrimination in a given state between authors who 
are nationals of that state and foreign authors who 
may invoke the Convention is evidence of a 
universal concept of the protection of intellectual 
works. 
The 1952 Convention created a legal structure 
which could accommodate the United States, the 
USSR, the industrially developed countries and the 
developing countries. It also influenced i 
predecessor, the Berne Convention. Fruitful co- 
operation led to the closer alignment of the two 
Conventions, which were revised in 1971. This revi- 
sion gave concrete form to the twofold movement 
initiated in 1952 by the UCC: furtherance of the 
legal rights of creators and acknowledgement of the 
specific needs of developing countries. = 
|
ANDRE KEREVER is a former member of the Conseil 
d’Etat (France). 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Cover, page 3 (right): © Explorer 
Archives. Library of Congress, 
Washington, D.C. Back cover: 
© Bibliothéque Royale Albert |, 
Brussels. Page 2: © Sophie 
Golvin, Paris. Pages 3, 7: All 
rights reserved. Page 4: 
© Bernand, Paris/Thééatre 
Nationa! de fa Colline. Page 6: 
© Murios de Pablos, Paris. Pages 
8-9: © Edimedia, Paris. Pages 
10-11, 18: © British Library, 
London. Page 12: Erich Lessing 
© Magnum, Paris. Page 13: Erich 
Lessing © Magnum, Paris/Louvre 
Museum. Page 14: © Jean-Loup 
Charmet, Paris. Page 15: 
© UNDP, Geneva. Pages 16-17: 
© Dagli-Orti/Marciana Library, 
Venice. Page 19 (above): 
© Explorer Archives/Rheims 
Library, France. Page 19 (below): 
© Service Historique de ‘Armée 
de Terre, Vincennes, France. 
Pages 20-21: ©R. and S. 
Michaud/Suleymanie Library, 
Istanbul. Page 22: © R. and S. 
Michaud/University Library, 
Leyden. Pages 22-23: Oronoz 
© Artephot/instituto de 
cooperacién con el mundo érabe, 
Madrid. Pages 24-25: 
© Osterreichische 
Nationalbibliothek, Vienna. Page 
26: © Instituto Nacional de 
Antropologia e Historia, Mexico 
City. Pages 27, 30, 32 (above), 
42: © Bibliothéque Nationale, 
Paris. Pages 28-29: © Explorer 
Archives, Paris. Page 29: © Jean- 
Loup Charmet, Paris/Bibliothéque 
Nationale, Paris. Page 31: 
© Jean-Loup Charmet, Paris/ 
Bibliothéque Mazarine, Paris. 
Pages 32 (beiow), 33 (beiow): 
© Norman JW. Thrower, from 
Maps and Man: An Examination 
of Cartography in Relation to 
Science and Civilization, 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 
1972. Page 33 (above): 
© Musée de I'Histoire de France, 
Archives Nationales, Paris. Page 
34: © Dagii-Orti/Chateau de 
Versailles. Pages 35 to 38, 43 
(beiow): © I.G.N., Paris. Pages 
39, 40: UNESCO Courier, 
Moscow. Pages 41, 43 (above 
right): © Edimedia/Bibliothéque 
Nationale, Paris. Page 43 (above 
left): © Paris Observatoire. Page 
44: © DITE/NASA, Paris. Pages 
45 to 49: © UNESCO, Paris.

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

44th YEAR 
Published monthly in 35 languages and in braille 
by UNESCO, The United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
31, rue Frangois Bonvin, 75015 Paris, France. 
Director: Bahgat Elnadi 
Editor-in-chief: Adel Rifaat 
EDITORIAL STAFF (Paris) 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
English edition: Roy Malkin, Caroline Lawrence 
French edition: Alain Lévéque, Neda El Khazen 
Spanish edition: Miguel Labarca, Araceli Ortiz de Urbina 
Studies and research: Fernando Ainsa 
Art Unit/Production: Georges Serval 
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey, Carole Pajot-Font 
(Tel: 45.68.46.90) 
Documentation: Violette Ringelstein (Tel: 45.68.46. 85) 
Liaison with non-Headquarters editions and press: 
Solange Belin (Tel.: 45.68.46.87) 
Secretariat: Annie Brachet (Tel: 45.68 47.15), 
Mouna Chatta 
Administrative assistant: Prithi Perera 
Selection in Braille in English, French, 
Spanish and Korean: Marie-Dominique Bourgeais 
NON-HEADQUARTERS EDITIONS 
Russian: Alexander Melnikov (Moscow) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Arabic: El-Said Mahmoud El-Sheniti (Cairo) 
Ralian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Ganga Prasad Vimal (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Persian: H. Sadough Vanini (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu: Wali Mohammad Zaki (Islamabad) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Yi Tong-ok (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwa (Dar-es-Salaam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, 
Slovene: Blazo Krstajic (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarlan: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J). Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish: Manni Kossler (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larrafiaga (San Sebastian) 
Vietnamese: Do Phuong (Hanoi) 
Pashto: Zmarai Mohaqiq (Kabul) 
Hausa: Habib Alnassan (Sokoto) 
Bangla: Abdullah A. M. Sharafuddin (Dhaka) 
Ukrainian: Victor Stelmakh (Kiev) 
Czech and Slovak: Milan Syrucek (Prague) 
SALES AND PROMOTION 
Manager: Henry Knobil (45.88 45.88), 
Assistant: Marie-Noélle Branet (45.68.45.89), 
Subscriptions: Marie-Thérése Hardy (45.68.45.65). 
Jocelyne Despouy, Alpha Diakité, Jacqueline Louise- 
Julle, Manichan Ngonekeo, Michel Ravassard, 
Michelle Robillard, Mohamed Salah El Din, 
Sylvie Van Rijsewjk, Ricardo Zamora-Perez 
Customer service: Ginette Motreff (45 68.45.64), 
Accounts: (45.68 45.65), 
Mail: Martial Amegee (45.68.45.70) 
Shipping: Hector Garcia Sandoval (45.68,47.50) 
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
Tel: 4568.45.65 
1 year: 139 French francs. 2 years: 259 FF 
Binder for one year’s issues: 72 FF, 
Developing countries 
1 year: 108 French francs. 2 years: 194 FF 
Payment can be made with any convertible currency 
to the order of UNESCO 
Indwvidual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted 
providing the credit line reads ‘Reprinted from the UNESCO Courier 
plus cate of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the editor 
Signed articles reprnnted must bear author's name Nan-copyright 
photos will be supplied on request, Unsolicited manuscripts cannot 
be returned unless accompanied by an international reply coupon 
covering postage. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO or those 
of the editors of the UNESCO Courier. Photo captions and headlines 
are written by the UNESCO Couner staff The boundanes on maps 
published In the magazine do not imoly official endorsement or 
acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations. The UNESCO Courier 
is produced in microform {microfilm andior microhehe) by (1) UNESCO, 
7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, (2) University Microtiims (Xerox), 
Ann Artior, Michigan 48100 USA. (3)N.CR Microcard Edition, Indian 
Head, Inc . 111 West 40th Street, New York, U S A | (4) Bell ang Howell 
Co. Olc Mansfield Road, Wooster Ohio 44691. USA 
IMPRIME EN FRANCE 
(Printed in France) - DEPOT LEGAL C1 - JUIN 1997 
COMMISSION PARITAIRE NO 71844 - DIFFLSE PAR LES NMPP 
Photocompaosition: The UNESCO Couner 
Photogravure-impression: Maury Impomeur SA 
Z| route d'Etampes, 45330 Malesherbes 
ISSN 0041-5278 NOG-1991 OP -91-3 493A 
 
NATURE & 
RESOURCES 
UNESCO's quarterly review of research for 
sustainable development, has been relaunched 
in a well-illustrated format, with a carefully 
focused editorial policy. 
It provides in-depth reviews of environmental 
issues from an international perspective, thanks 
to its reliance on both established and new 
authors from around the world. 
Annual subscriptions 
£25 individuals 
£50 institutions 
for the English, French and Spanish editions: 
Parthenon Publishing 
Casterton Hall, 
Carnforth, Lancs. 
LAG 2LA United Kingdom 
For details on special rates for readers in less 
developed countries and on the Arabic, Chinese 
and Russian editions: 
Editor 
Nature & Resources 
UNESCO 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 
75700 Paris, France 
Loewe ———— — — 
NATURE & 
RESSOURCES 
 
  
  
Qualité et disponibilité de l'eau 
Loew o   
IA NATURALLZA 
y sus RECURSOS 
nesen AT ts TT Wo | TO 
—  
NATURE & 
RESOURCES   

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/088517engo.pdf#page=52) 0

### IGNORE

       
    
   
  
  > A
H
 
A 
4: 
    
  
          
  
     
4 parece fine ef apelee auf Lavetze| 
Rvs eze Ne ¢ imnologues 1 Hl ¢riope fa tezce Pais die Lee fron] 
Yc monk eft Suns th trons + : | pasties ne furent jue Jrufecs eqgau 
i 3 
: - i * - y 
» » ’ 
” i. y 
“a : 
Aad 3 - 
~~ 
FN 
N ' a 
- 
. » fo ‘ . ~ RE _— _ - " Oi - J 
. - oo B7 : * 2% % ° Xt % 5 y » - ~y a } a . " - y . » ’ % 1 Yo 4 8 or v 2 \ X | fF ’ ’ 
> ot) » AS - 
. J . ’ 
; — f 0 * * | - 
r - 3 
     
al o> WILE EPE 4 
&N A . X onli | 
hl Al Ek 
d yk 