# [035706](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
       
     
    
APRIL 1 961 
(14th year) 
Price : |/-stg. (U.K.) 
30 cents (U.S.) 
0.70 NF (FRAN CE) 
   
  
- - — 
™ 
  
$ ' 
y bd wi 
" ” 
   
  
 
SCOOTER SCHOOL 
TEACHES SAFETY 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

A LITTLE SAFETY 
PREVENTS A BIG 
ACCIDENT 
Accldents are the world's third worst killer. While medical 
science makes great progress in combating disease and 
illness, the mounting toll from accidents shows no signs of 
decreasing. With this in mind, the World Health Organi- 
zation has chosen as a theme for World Health Day, April 7, 
1961, “Accidents and their Prevention.” In this issue The 
Unesco Courier presents a series of articles dealing with this 
important subject. The questionnaire below will test your 
resistance to the seven main kinds of accidents shown on 
the graph at the right. Answer the questions yes or no as 
honestly as you can. There can be no half-and-half responses. 
The difference between yes and no in accident prevention 
may sometimes be the difference between life and death. 
Do you use safety matches in the kitchen, stored in a metal 
container? 
€) Have your furnace, chimney, stoves and flues been cleaned 
during the past year? 
€) Do you keep poisons and harmful drugs stored apart from 
everyday toiletries ? 
O's your shower or bathtub provided with handrail and rubber 
mat? 
© Do you make it a rule never to smoke in bed? 
[6] When lighting the gas-oven do you first strike the match and 
then turn on the gas? 
© if you possess firearms do you keep them unloaded and locked 
up? 
Q Are knives and other sharp instruments kept out of reach of 
children? 
0 Do you try to obey traffic signs, signals and traffic officers ? 
(10) Do you cross streets only at corners or stay within pedestrian 
crossings? 
1) Where there are no pavements, do you walk facing the traffic? 
® When walking on unlighted streets or highways at night, do you 
wear or carry something white or use a lantern or flashlight? 
® Are all stairwells in your home well lit with a switch at the bottom 
and the top of the stairs? 
@ Are you careful never to have oily rags, old clothes or bundles 
of newspapers stored in your home? 
15) Do you keep perfumes, cosmetics, needles, pins, scissors and 
spare buttons in places inaccessible to children? 
10) Do you always wait at least one hour after eating before going 
swimming ? 
@ Do you always take a life jacket when you go boating on rough 
water? 
@ When cooking, do you keep pot handles turned away from the 
edge of the stove to avoid knocking them off? 
O's your kitchen stove placed well away from windows where 
curtains might blow across it and catch fire? 
QD Do you make it a rule never to use a radio in the bathroom ? 
€D If you must do cleaning at home with inflammable fluids, do 
you always do it out of doors? 
    
   
   
1009, 
FIREARMS 
rx. 
| i 7 BEN \ POISONING 
    
       
FIRE- 
EXPLOISIO 
OTHER 
VEHICLES 
MOTOR 
VEHICLES. 
THE SEVEN 
MAIN KINDS 
OF ACCIDENTS

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

Y Th ro
 
I\
 a 
  
Contents 
No. 4 
PUBLISHED {IN 
EIGHT EDITIONS 
English 
French 
Spanish 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
American 
Japanese 
: 
. 
i 2 = 
"a 
es y     
= i 
COVER PHOTO 
 
Young learner-riders practise 
manoeuvring their machines 
around obstacles at a Lon- 
don driving school. A good 
driver knows |ust as much 
about road safety first rules— 
and follows them—as he does 
about handling a machine. 
WHO photo by Philip Boucas 
m(Courier 
Page 
4 
24 
26 
27 
31 
33 
34 
APRIL 
14TH YEAR 
ACCIDENTS: WORLD’S THIRD WORST KILLER 
Accidents rank after heart disease and cancer 
By M.G. Candau 
WHERE RISKS ARE GREATEST 
Home is not the safest place 
THE DANGEROUS WORLD OF CHILDHOOD 
EDUCATION: THE BEST VACCINE AGAINST ACCIDENTS 
WHOSE FAULT IS IT? 
Spotlight on highway accidents 
DID YOU KNOW THAT...? 
DEATH STRUCK THEM DOWN ON THE ROAD 
SAFETY IS THEIR FINEST PRODUCT 
Guarding against mishaps in the factory 
DANGER STALKS THE FARMER 
Hazards in field and forest 
A WORD OF WARNING FROM STAMPS 
By C.W. Hill 
TREASURES FROM THE PARTHENON 
JAPAN MISREPRESENTED 
A look at foreign textbooks 
By Tatsumi Shimada 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
(M.C. 61.1.157 A) 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
Gordon Behrens 
Associate Editors 
Layout & Design 
Robert Jacquemin   
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Célia Bertin 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Russian Edition : Venlamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Amin Chaker (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Scientific and Cultural 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itis bi-monthiy ([ 1 issues a year) in English, French, Spanuh, Russian, German, 
Arabic and Japanese. In the United Kingdom it is distributed by H, M, 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, S$. EL 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may te reprinted providing 
the credit line reads “Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER", plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER, 
The Unesco Courier is indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Pariodical Literatures published by H, W. Wilson Co.,, New York, 
Annual subscription rates: U.S, & 3.00; 10/-stg.; 7.00 
New Francs or equivalent, Single copies I/-stg. 30 
cents (U.S) ; 0.70 New Francs. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°. 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief. 
19 61 
 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 78182: Accidents: world's third worst killer

ACCIDENTS 
WORLD'S THIRD 
WORST KILLER 
by Dr. M. G. CANDAU 
Director-General, 
World Health Organization 
In the world today, accidents cause more deaths than 
any single illness except cancer and cardiovascular 
disease. (See graphs below.) In many countries aceldents 
kill more children from 5 to 19 than all other causes 
combined. They take a greater toll in young lives than 
any war the world has yet known. Yet accidents have 
been less studied than has any fatal disease of equal gra- 
vity. It is only recently that scientific research on this 
subject has been undertaken. 
Too many people still unthinkingly accept accidents as 
misfortunes over which the individual has no control. 
“Accidents will happen”, they say, as if that excused 
everything. Yet whenever studies are made of accidents 
in home or school, on the road, in factory or farm, or 
of any other sort of accident, ways can always be found 
to reduce their number and seriousness. Accidents are 
not chance events, they do not just “happen”. Every 
one of them is the outcome of a chain of causes and most 
of them can be prevented. 
There is evidence that the majority of accidents happen 
in situations which are generally thought to be “safe”. 
About half of all accidents happen in the home, and 
children are the principal victims. Two-fifths of all fatal 
accidents to children between one and four years of age 
take place in or around the home. Prominent causes are 
burns and poisoning which, even if not fatal, are generally 
serious. Yet almost all these accidents could be avoided 
‘WORLD HEALTH DAY — APRIL 7 
by a little extra vigilance and a few simple precautions. 
A thousand people a day die on the world's roads—half 
of all accident deaths. Road accidents are the most 
talked-about and most written-about of all, yet little is 
really known of the multiple factors which interact to 
produce them. 
Occupational accidents have been more thoroughly 
studied than any others, and in many industries strict 
safety regulations are enforced. Notwithstanding this, in 
the United States of America alone it is estimated that 
in 1959, the working time lost because of accidents was 
220 million man-days. 
Here then is one of mankind’s greatest scourges. Yet 
in our era of scientific progress, we have scarcely begun 
to think about combating it. 
Accidents have more in common with diseases than the 
simple fact that both can be deadly. The epidemiological 
methods used to study the distribution of disease can use- 
fully be applied to them, but uniform methods of accident 
reporting must first be adopted. It will then become 
possible to define the situations in which they are likely 
to occur, in the same way as for the etiology of diseases. 
It is not suggested that such research Is easy, but it can 
and must be carried much further than at present. 
In the meantime there is still much that can be done. 
Most countries already have a safety code for road users; 
HOW DEATH STRIKES AT THE DIFFERENT AGES OF LIFE 
Out of 100 deaths (all causes) Out of 100 death) (all causes) 
they have legislation intended to reduce occupational 
accidents and also, In some cases, regulations concerning 
the safety of home appliances, electric fittings, and so on. 
The best present hope of accident prevention is cer- 
tainly through safety education. Innumerable accidents 
are due, at least in part, to some action or omission of the 
victim himself--the pedestrian who crosses the road 
without looking; the boy who tries te change a fuse 
without turning off the current; the workman who falls 
to observe the factory's safety rules. Safety should. of 
course, be taught in schools, but also in factories, on the 
farm, and, perhaps most important of all, in the home 
In economically developed countries some progress has 
now been made. But what of those countries in the 
process of rapid industrialization, which do not yet have 
any statistics to guide them, where legislation is insuffi- 
cient or not enforced, and where the tdea that anything 
at all can be done to prevent accidents is accepted only 
by the few? To them I would say: Face up to this situn- 
tion and act quickly, avoid the bitter mistakes made in 
those countries where industrialization began over a cen- 
tury ago, and profit from thelr experience. 
On World Health Day 1961, 1 would urge all peoples, 
whatever their stage of economic progress, to open thelr 
eyes to the plain fact that accidents have now become 
a leading cause of death, disablement and economic loss, 
and to realize, once and for all, accidents need not happen 
Out of 100 deaths (all causes) 
  
a 
=
 
W
E
E
 
E
S
E
 
 
y 32% 0 
0-1 year 
v 
1-4 years 
    
28.4% 
41.4% 
  
| 
! 
] | 25.71% 
a 1 
f A : 
5-14 years 15-44 years 45-64 
SL re    ~~ 
  | | 9.8% | 
BN 3% 8 A 2 
years 65 years and over 01 year 1-4 years 5-14 
  
,
 
- 
X { . Lb _ 
ain & 
45-64 years 65 years and over 0-1 year 
CANCER 
49.2% 30 
Set 3.2% LN i oy 
1-4 years 5-14 years 15-44 years 4564 years 65 years and over 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 78182: Accidents: world's third worst killer

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 63835: Where risks are greatest: accidents in the home

ACCIDENTS IN THE HOME 
WHERE RISKS ARE GREATEST 
   
  
sie kitchen, the stairs or the bedroom of a modern 
‘house hold more dangers than the fastest car or 
‘plane, the steepest mountain, or a ship in a storm. 
wud Simple things like a tube of aspirin left lying on 
a table, a kettle of bolllng water, a forgotten edge tool, 
will make more cripples and kill more children this year 
than will poliomyelitis and tuberculosis together. 
Perhaps It Is because the dangers are so commonplace 
that accidents in the home seem hard to avoid. Even 
the absent-minded or reckless will look before crossing 
a road; even the most prudent will unthinkingly run 
across a polished floor to answer the 'phone. 
Take Mrs. Ruth Galley, 75 years old, llving alone In 
her room In Lewisham, England. She Is In perfect health, 
yet every day for years she has risked a fatal accident. 
Like many English houses, hers has a coln-in-the-slot 
gas meter. For some mysterious reason, the meter Is 
so fixed that she has to climb on a chalr to put In 
the shilling. There she was one day when a health visitor 
called. A telephone call to the gas company, and the next 
day, Mrs. Galley’s meter was flxed where she could reach 
it easily. At the same time, the rubber pipe of her gas 
cooker, which was just as old and even more fragile than 
its owner, was replaced. All free of charge of course, 
So her name will probably not be among thr 4,500 or 
so persons above the age of 65 who dle every year in 
Great Britain as the result of a fall or among the 1,500 
  
Beware of 
leaving Irons 
and other heavy 
objects 
lylng about 
   
 
persons who dle as the result of poisoning by gas or other 
substance. 
In the United States of America, there were nearly four 
million home accidents In 1959, whereas the total of road 
and industrial accidents for the same period was reckon- 
ed to be only 3.350,000. If we take Into consideration the 
2.000,000 victims of accidents occurring outside thelr 
homes but not at work. or In automobiles, it would seem 
that twice as many people are hurt in the United States 
during occupations that are commonly supposed to be 
more or less safe than at thelr jobs or In traffic, It is 
true that proportionally as well as In absolute numbers, 
there are more deaths In industrial and traffic accidents 
(50.000 In the United States of America In 1959); yet 
there were no fewer than 43,500 deaths in accidents of 
other kinds, of which 26,000 occurred In homes. 
A survey made In 1955 in Stockholm showed that of 
ke Swedish capital's 227,000 children, 24,466 had had accl- 
cents of which 29 were fatal; l.e. a proportion of one fatal 
accident to 240 less serious ones. Previously it was esti- 
mated In Sweden that there were between 100 and 400 
lezs serious accidents for every fatal accident. And 
Sweden has one of the world’s lowest accident rates. 
Safety of the home Is a question of at least national 
dimensions. In the view of the Royal Soclety for the 
revention of Accldents, whose home safety department 
* serlous 
extends Its activities throughout the United Kingdom. 
The people whom It Is Important to reach are those who 
are naturally careless. It Is usually the very poor who 
need help most—those who do not go to safety meetings 
organized by the 135 local home safety committees In 
Great Britain. They nelther read the pamphlets nor see 
the films nor visit the exhibitions. These potential victims 
of accidents must be sought out in their own homes. A 
neighbourly visit by a member of the local home safety 
Always take 
proper 
precautions 
against scalds 
  
committee or an Inspection of the gas and electricity 
Installations will do more good than all the public lectures 
In the world. 
Door-to-door visiting Is not always enough however. 
Some problems require a more massive attack on old in- 
grained habits. In 1958, for example, the Royal Soclety 
for the Prevention of Accidents with backing from the 
Home Office launched a nation-wide campalgn to provide 
all open fireplaces with safety screens in order to bring 
down the number of serious burns, which over the years 
had been remaining fairly constant. 
Similar campalgns could well have been launched In 
many other countries, for a bad burn Is one of the most 
horrible accidents. The pain suffered by the victim, 
whether burnt by fire, acid, boiling water or steam, Is 
only the beginning. Then comes treatment lasting on 
an average from one to three months, while subsequent 
operations and grafts are sometimes spread over several 
years. Furthermore any permanent infirmity or mutila- 
tion may lead to psychological consequences, the serlous-. 
ness of which is only now beginning to be realized. 
Every year, five to ten times as many children as adults 
  
Smoking In bed 
Is a 
  
tire-hazard 
  
 
  
suffer burns. In Great Britain, only 700 persons dle of 
burns every year, but 550 hospital beds are permanently 
occupied by the. victims of burns, and 126,000 persons 
alive today have at some time been In hospital for the 
one single reason that their clothes caught fire. 
The problem is even more severe in some of the rapldly- 
developing countries because of the wldespread use of 
gas and explosive substances (acetylene, butane or pro-

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 63835: Where risks are greatest: accidents in the home

pane lamps, flreworks, etc.). Everywhere, bolling liquids 
claim innumerable victims. 
After the children, It is the elderly who most frequently 
suffer these terrible accidents. Indeed the number of 
fatal burns is even higher among the old than among the 
young. In Great Britaln, victims of burns over the age of 
65 are three or four times as numerous as those among 
young adults. Twice as many women as men suffer burns 
from clothing that caught fire: dresses, skirts and night- 
gowns, particularly when made of cotton, are much more 
likely to catch fire than men's clothing. 
In Great Britaln today, a highly developed system of 
rules and regulations provides some guarantee of safety. 
Every heating appllance—electric, gas, oll or other—has 
to meet certain well-defined standards of safety, and it 
is against the law to expose a child to an insufficlently 
protected fire. 
Dr Leonard Colebrook, who is one of the ploneers of the 
prevention of burns, In England, conslders, however, that 
this Is not enough. He has expressed surprise that certain 
highly flammable textlles have been put on sale without 
the public belng warned of their potentlal danger; for 
the quicker the material burns, the worse the damage. 
Says Dr Colebrook, “If we want to fight effectively, we 
should collect maximum information on the most flam- 
mable textiles, reach International agreement on ways of 
indicating the degree of flammability of each textile and 
the rapidity with which it burns, and get the safest tex- 
tiles used for children’s and old people's clothing.” 
Dr Joan Woodward, a psychlatrist attached to the Burns 
Research Unit in Birmingham, England, considers that 
after the accident has happened no effort should be 
The proper way 
to lift pans 
\ is with 
LN a potholder 
\ 
A
T
O
,
 
—
—
 
w
e
r
o
 
  
  
spared to soothe the anxlety and gullt feelings of the 
parents. She recently examined 200 chlldren that had 
had severe burns two to flve years previously. Accord- 
Ing to their mothers, 80 per cent of the children still 
suffered emotionally from the effects. 
But during her survey, Dr Woodward was to realize that 
many of the mothers suffered in this respect at least as 
much as their children. “They all without exception feel 
guilty and ashamed,” she says. “Many mothers read in 
the newspapers about accidents caused by fire. But they 
cannot believe that such a thing could happen in thelr 
own family.” 
It cannot be sald too often: watch that fire, careful 
with that boiling water. And an absolute rule for baby’s 
bath: always put the cold water in first before the hot 
water. If possible, do not have children around the 
kitchen when the meal is being cooked. The handles of 
pots and pans on the stove should not point outwards. 
Do young girls really have to wear nightdresses? A pair 
of pyjamas, which catch flre much less easlly, may mean 
the difference between life and death. Spot removers, 
floor polish, paraffin oll or petrol should be kept In 2a 
safe place and in small quantities only. Such simple pre- 
cautions can save life and prevent ruined lives. 
This is even more obvious when one comes to another 
great class of home accidents: poisoning. Again It is the 
children and to a lesser degree the old people who are 
the main victims. Unlike other home accidents, polsonings 
generally increase in number with a rise In the standard 
of living. Enforcing strict regulations concerning the 
The Unesco Courier, — April 1981 
description and packing of poisonous substances Is one 
obvious way of helping to prevent polsonings In the home. 
But even here much remains to be done. International 
standards are urgently necessary In the description and 
labelling of polsons, whether they be medicines, cleaning 
flulds, Insecticides or other dangerous chemicals. Paint 
used Inside the house should be free of lead, as should 
all toys. This already is a law In a number of countries. 
A country policeman in southern Sweden recently in- 
vented a special kind of lateh for closing a cupboard. 
To release it, two separate movements are required. Al 
the tests have shown that this Is too difficult for a child 
under four. The device Is quite inexpensive and has ad- 
Bo sure your 
children 
know how 
to call 
the Fire Dept 
  
  
vantages over the key that so often gets lost, or that 
people sometimes, perhaps on the fatal occaslon, forget 
to turn in the lock. 
Working along similar lines, a young pediatriclan has 
invented a stopper for a bottle that simply goes on turn- 
Ing round with a clickety-click nolse when a child trles 
to open it, and an aspirin tube made of plastic which 
has to be squeezed slightly before a tablet will come out. 
These two Inventions stood up very well to tests with 
children. 
It Is necessary to know which products to keep out of 
children's reach. Who thinks of locking up cosmetics and 
perfumes? Barbiturates and the family pharmacy In 
general should be carefully tidied away where they are 
inaccessible to a child. The same Is true of polish and 
cleaning products. On no account should toxic substances 
such as paraffin oll, petrol or aclds be kept in containers 
originally intended for other purposes—lemonade bottles, 
jam jars, etc. 
Falls, burns and polsonings are not the only risks that 
must be guarded against. The greatest enemy of famlly 
safety, and one from which the others stem, Is negligence, 
A house with 
no lightning 
rod Is exposed 
to danger 
 
with its corollaries, untldiness and dirt. A badly-lit room 
may cost much more than would a brighter lamp. A prop- 
erly insulated electric plug, a step repalred in time, a 
safety bar or wire netting fixed In the window—Iit 1s on 
“detalls” such as these that the life of a child may 
depend. 
Turn off the mains switch before mending a fuse, wipe 
up Immediately a spot of grease fallen on to the kitchen 
floor, leave the window ajar In a room where a gas or 
coal stove Is allght—attention to these seeming trivialities 
will transform a house Into a true home where a family 
can llve In security Instead of In constant danger.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 63837: The Dangerous world of childhood

BREATH OF LIFE 
  
   
   
    
   
     
3 
_ -~ 3 4 - al por i BEN ar NA SP ow 
ha wr : 
  
This little boy, a victim of drown- 
ing, is being resuscitated by an 
ancient method, once abandoned 
and now considered by the Red 
Cross and the World Health Or- 
ganization as more effective than 
usual push-pull methods. The 
boy is placed on his back and 
his mouth cleared of any obstruc- 
, tion. The rescuer then lifts the 
boy's jaw with one hand, exerting 
slight pressure below the ribs with 
the other, and at the same 
time breathes into his mouth. 
© Scope Weekly, Mike Shea 
 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier, — April 1961 


### 63837: The Dangerous world of childhood

THE DANGEROUS WORLD 
OF CHILDHOOD 
its first breath. The whole of human life is indeed, 
in a sense, an unceasing struggle against danger. 
During his first year, a child is incapable of judgment. 
Unable to move or to do anything for himself, he depends 
entirely on his mother, who has to think and act for him, 
and protect him against all the dangers to which he is 
exposed. 
Din surround a child from the moment it draws 
There Is one particular danger against which the 
mother must be constantly on guard—suffocation. The 
first precaution Is to make sure that within the baby’s 
reach there is nothing that might interfere with his 
breathing. Eiderdown pillows should be banished. 
In recent years, a new danger has appeared in the 
shape of plastic curtains, trimmings, ete. Static electri- 
city may cause this fllmy substance to cling tightly to 
the face of a new-born child, blocking its nose and mouth 
and suffocating it rapidly. In the Unlted States, plastic 
bags bear a notice drawing attention to this danger and 
warning parents to keep them out of baby’s reach. 
Food Is the second great cause of suffocation. Even an 
overworked mother should realize that she ls running 
a terrible risk if she leaves her baby alone to suck his 
bottle. Thirdly, far too many mothers appear not to 
know how easy it is to stifle a baby sleeping in the same 
bed with them, 
agalnst danger during the first months of his 
life, it Is very important for her to start letting 
him fend for himself when he Is about one year old. 
Little by little, she should lose the hablt of doing things 
for him, of fussing over him. A mother who Is over- 
worrled and over-careful Is perhaps the child's greatest 
danger; for the moment he escapes her supervision—as of 
course he will sooner or later—he is likely to assert his 
freedom by some forbidden and perhaps fatal action. 
W a mother should always protect her child 
One precaution against this instinct for self-assertion 
Is to make the child’s environment as safe as possible. 
But passive protection is not enough: it Is necessary for 
the child to learn to understand the risks he runs. Adults 
frequently make one of two mistakes: either they credit 
the child with more intelligence than he possesses, or 
they assume he is quite unable to think for himself. In 
both cases they fall to understand that they are dealing 
with a mind and a body in constant development. 
Between 12 and 15 months, the child is absorbed in 
examining the world around him. He will explore the 
house. He will try to touch everything he comes across, 
particularly if it is on a level with his eyes. Almost every- 
thing he will try to put in his mouth. Around two, he 
becomes capable of opening a door. He likes to lift up a 
11d and empty a box, only to fill it up again afterwards. 
He has little idea of distance and tries to climb here, 
there and everywhere. To play with water becomes a 
favourite pastime. At about three, he is surer of his 
movements and likes to go walking. le learns to dis- 
tinguish right and left. le enjoys feeling responsible and 
making himself useful. At the age of four or so, he 
thinks of nothing but running about and playing ball. 
He can ride a tricycle and climb trees. le can concen- 
trate mentally for longer periods. 
Should all this exploration and these increasingly dan- 
gerous activities by prohibited? “No,” says Monsleur 
Robert Sallé, head of the education and publicity section 
of the French Institut National de Sécurité. “You cannot 
base accident prevention on the principal of taking no 
risks. In life you get nowhere if you don't take risks.” 
Safety education should accordingly be pursued along 
two lines: teach the child to distinguish between the risks 
he may take and those he had better avold; teach him the 
best way of dealing with dangers that cannot be avoided. 
blend of advice, reprimand and prohibition, they must 
learn to know thelr children better. They should 
for Instance admlt once and for all that, as the statl- 
stlcs show, boys are more liable to have accidents than 
girls. Not as an excuse for resignation or inaction but 
as a gulde to where preventive efforts should be used. 
F parents are to provide their children with a judiclous 
An Important factor in accidents Is the time of day. 
The survey carried out In 1955 In Stockholm by the 
Swedish Committee for the Prevention of Accidents in 
Childhood showed that a large number of accidents oc- 
curred between 10 am. and 8 p.m. with a slight In- 
crease from 11 a.m. to midday and a very marked Increase 
between 3 p.m. and 6 p.m. In Stockholm, these are the 
hours immediately preceding the midday and evening 
meals, and are probably also those during which children 
are less well supervised. Hunger and fatigue, particularly 
towards evening, make the children more accldent-prone. 
Similarly in France it was noted by Dr Gravel that under 
the age of 15, most accidents occur around 5 p.m. 
The time of year also plays a part. According to 
Dr Barbara J. van den Berg, summer 1s the season in 
which most of the accidents among children between 
the ages of 1 and 14 occur in the Netherlands. 
erica on children who repeatedly sutfered accidents 
revealed a number of psychological factors. It was 
found that hostility to the environment, a conflict with 
the parents, or simply a state of tension within the family 
may create a predisposition to accldents. Also that a 
child who strains his powers In order to gain acceptance 
by a group of older children may take dangerous risks. 
A pllot study carried out in the United States of Am- 
In different regions, children are exposed to different 
dangers. In Scandinavia and in the Netherlands, drown- 
Ing Is the most frequent cause of accidental death among 
children of pre-school age. Among home accidents in 
Great Britain, burns are second only to suffocation. 
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### 63837: The Dangerous world of childhood

THE DANGEROUS WORLD OF CHILDHOOD (cont) 
In all countries where motor traffic Is intense, it is 
responsible, perhaps not for the most frequent, but cer- 
tainly for the most serious accidents. In Sweden, 40 per 
cent. of childhood accldents occur in or around the home 
and only 10 per cent. occur in traffle; but 34 per cent. 
of accidental deaths among children are due to traffic. 
In the Netherlands, among children of pre-school age 
who are hurt In a traffic accident, most are on foot. 
It has often been sald that the education of the children 
starts with the education of the parents. This is especlal- 
ly true In matters of safety. “If I had only known, ..” 
says the mother in despair after her child has been 
crippled or killed in a traffic accident. Why did she not 
know that a child under five should never be allowed 
to venture alone on the road? 
She should have known that there are a number of 
simple things a four-year-old can be taught. The great 
thing In road safety for children is to get them to stop 
and think. According to British experts a “Kerb Drill” 
to teach children how to cross a street has already saved 
thousands of lives in the United Kingdom during these 
last 30 years. As the British drive on the left of the 
road, the drill goes like this: 
“At the kerb, HALT! 
Look to the Right, Look to the Left, 
Look to the Right again, 
If all clear, Quick March.” 
It would, of course, need adaptation In countries where 
trafflc moves on the right. 
According to Monsieur Robert Sallé of the French Insti- 
tut National de Sécurité, safety education must not be 
based on fear: 
“we all know what a deep Impression terror storles 
can make on the young mind. The child is prepared to 
accept them as real, even if the stories speak only of ima- 
ginary dangers. We also know that childhood terrors 
may make a lifelong impression, even though, during ado- 
lescence and later, efforts may be made to overcome the 
bad effects. This belng so,-it would be just as stupid to 
frighten a child with real dangers as with imaginary ones. 
What is needed is to get the child to acquire habits of 
simple self-defence.” : 
Safety education must therefore be considered part of 
general education and should certainly be included in 
the school curriculum. It Is also an essential part of 
that “savolr vivre” that the child acquires mainly from 
his parents. : : 
The motorist or the cyclist driving in town traffic must 
have his eyes everywhere, right, left, in front, and behind. 
This kind of attention Is exactly that of an animal, or 
a man for that matter, moving through a probably hostile 
forest. Schooling on the other hand tends to develop 
concentrated attention. A strong case can be made out 
for training this diffuse kind of attention and one of 
the best ways of doing so is probably through team games 
and sports. 
Sport indulged In reasonably may help young people 
to avold traffic accidents, not only because it sharpens 
reflexes, but because it accustoms to the observance of 
rules, and encourages a well-balanced way of life, healthy 
food habits, and moderation in drinking. The best way 
of substantially reducing the number of drowning accl- 
dents is to teach swimming at school. 
As regards falls, an analysis of industrial and home 
accldents shows the usefulness of distinguishing two 
kinds: falls on the level and falls from a height. The 
large number of falls in all human activities and the sta- 
tistical predominance of falls on the level suggest that 
one remedy might be to give young people the right kind 
of physical tralning—perhaps including elementary judo 
(Japanese wrestling) and simple acrobatic exercises on 
the ground. 
Accidents are fewer following any efforts to make 
children realize the risks they are running and to teach 
them how to meet the dangers they encounter. 
Education offers the only hope of, little by little, over- 
coming this great malady of our times without detriment 
to courage, initiative, and other human values. 
  
 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63837: The Dangerous world of childhood

  
     T
R
 
—
—
—
—
 
  
Curiosity killed the cat, according to the 
old saying. Carelessness on the part of 
adults combined with the natural curi- 
osity of growing children can make any 
~ house a perilous place. Simple things 
like a tube of aspirin left lying on a table, 
a saucepan of boiling water or unpro- 
tected electric power points (photos on 
these pages) hurt, cripple and kill count- 
less children every year. Below, kinder- 
garten children out for a walk not only 
observe proper traffic discipline by using 
pedestrian crossing, but also keep in a 
compact group within protective “reins” 
leading to the teacher's guiding hand. 
  
  
  
 
V/HQO and ILO ghotos 
 
1

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 63839: Education, the best vaccine against accidents

  
EDUCATION 
THE BEST VACCINE 
AGAINST ACCIDENTS 
  
If the accident is a disease, education is its 
vaccine and can be administered to every school- 
age child. Each year thousands of English 
youngsters visit the H.Q. of the Royal Society 
for the Prevention of Accidents in the heart 
of London for safety first lessons. With its 
magnetic table on which typical road accident 
situations are enacted (above), its many tests, 
its bicycles running on endless belts (below) 
the centre is a real Arabian Nights palace for 
modern boys and girls and gives them valuable 
training. Centres like this are still too few. 
 

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 63839: Education, the best vaccine against accidents

     
Riding a motor-scooter has become a teen-age 
craze around the world. But dash and daring 
are not substitutes for driving skill, and the 
number of accidents involving scooter riders 
has risen alarmingly in recent times. Photos 
on this page show young learners getting the. 
right kind of driving instruction at a scooter 
school in Wembley, England. In Great Britain 
beginner drivers are required to carry a letter 
“L” prominently -displayed on their vehicle. 
Belgium has a similarrule. This regulation could 
usefully be extended to other countries. 
rr 
WHO photos by Philip Boucas 
  
A 
 

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

  
had 
T
S
 
    
    
very ninety seconds on the average, a man, woman 
or child is killed outright or fatally injured on the 
world’s roads. The mishaps in which these 1,000 
people die each day represent one-third of accident 
deaths of all kinds. Everyone talks about road accidents 
and deplores their ever-mounting toll, yet relatively little 
is really known about the multiple factors which interact 
to produce the most common cause of accidental death 
in the twentieth century. 
Some statistics tend to incriminate drivers. Nine out 
of ten accidents are the driver's own fault, they say, and 
only one in ten is due to defects in the automobile or 
the road. The logical conclusion is that the driver Is to 
blame for nearly 100% of all mishaps. 
The truth is much less simple. Though any traffic 
accident depends on three main factors—the driver, his 
vehicle and the road—all are involved in varying degrees, 
and other factors have also to be taken into account. 
How all these combine to cause an accident can only be 
explained by a stringent and scientific study made by 
teams of the kind that Harvard Medical School in the 
United States has set up to probe the causes of fatal road 
accldents. This 18-man medical and scientific team 
includes pathologists, blood chemists, tissue specialists, 
psychiatrists and a soclologist. ’ Co 
As soon as a fatal accident occurs in its area the team 
immediately goes to the spot and makes a thorough In- 
vestigatlon—mechanical inspection and testing, checking 
of alr Inside the car for carbon monoxide, study of tyre 
tracks, examination of clues like paint chips on the dam- 
aged car, a study of surface conditions and road contours, 
interviews with survivors, autopsy of victim, ete. 
Each case investigated is a detailed, exhausting pro- 
  
cess. From hundreds of cases completed during a five 
years’ inquiry will come knowledge to make life safer for 
drivers and pedestrians. 
The part played by speed, for Instance, has always been 
over-simplified. There is evidence that, taken over a 
driver's total mileage, most accidents on modern high- 
ways occur at lower speeds. The Harvard investigation 
showed that many fatalities occurred at speeds of only 
30 and even 15 m.p.h. 
Other investigations have shown that a driver's accident 
rate drops as his speed rises and reaches a minimum at 
about 65 m.p.h., but rises sharply again at higher speeds. 
In Britain it was found that twice as many casualties 
occurred on roads with speed restrictions as on roads 
without, but on the derestricted roads, 33% of the casual- 
ties were fatal as compared with 22% on restricted roads. 
Facts like these need to be analysed and explained, and 
although the answers to many questions are still not 
known, basle research is being carried out In most 
countries of the world. Great Britain's Road Research 
Laboratory, for example, has a traffic and safety section 
doing research on roads, vehicles and their users, an 
economic and statistical section, and one dealing with 
road bullding methods and materials. 
To keep a check on the intensity and characteristics of 
traffic of different types, the Laboratory maintains a 
large number of automatic counters in continual opera- 
tion. Observations from fixed points and from moving 
cars, and aerial photographs are used to study cross- 
roads and roundabouts, to measure how often and how 
fast pedestrians cross the highway, and to assess the 
types and speeds of different road vehicles. An electronic 
RUSH HOUR IN TOKYO is a scene repeated daily In cities across five continents whose highways are now 
used by more than 100,000,000 four-wheeled and as many two-wheeled vehicles. The fact that one thousand 
people die on the world's roads each day shows how traffic accidents have become a modern scourge. 
Lob at —. Ee i » Na Lia 
— 4 asd re 
XM LRA E %—§ \ Sa 
wh MATL we 
all 
WA WA WI A WI (WW RO 
hE. \ a wmea sy RW 
+ \ 
\ ul 
yr 
To ) 
 
a a St Yt 


### 63840: Whose fault is it? Why do car accidents happen?

o> 
ST RlETa 
WHY DO CAR ACCIDENTS HAPPEN? 
WHOSE 
5 » 
Pan Asia Photo News © Rapho, Paris 
 
Fo i a 
he Ld 
~~ 1 
- - 3 w- 
No : Dn 
pe Se 
  

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

  
The Unesco Courier. — April 1961 


### 63840: Whose fault is it? Why do car accidents happen?

FAULT IS IT? 
brain gives precise information concerning the effect of 
traffic lights on the flow of traffic at cross-roads. 
The Road Research Laboratory also undertakes sta- 
tistical analyses of the effect of different types of road 
junctions, compares the frequency of accidents before 
and after changes in the design, surface or lighting of a 
road, and studies the influence on accidents of speed 
limits, pedestrian crossings, the removal of tram lines, 
the construction of double carriageways, etc. Intensive 
research is being carried out on street lighting and road 
surfacing. 
The Road Research Laboratory has done remarkable 
work in connexion with road surfaces and skidding. Step 
by step each aspect of road surfaces is minutely examined 
to reveal defects and show the way to improvements. 
More than a thousand tests are carried out every year 
on wet roads (a wet road being more slippery than a dry 
one) in a car equipped with a fifth wheel connected to a 
special recording device. 
devised by which road engineers or public works depart- 
ments or firms can measure the skid-resistance of roads 
without having recourse to laboratory studies. 
Sections of roads, representative of the British road 
network, have been tested every fortnight for three and 
a half years, making it possible to measure, and to some 
extent to predict seasonal variations in the skid- 
resistance of roads. The summer months appear to give 
more trouble than the winter, for when a road which 
kas long remained dry is moistened by a sudden shower, 
it becomes very much more slippery than one subjected 
to regular rains. 
The Road Research Laboratory has also come to the 
conclusion that special non-skid surfaces could become 
   
  
   ISS 
A portable apparatus has been 
more slippery than smooth surfaces if the sharp edges 
of the gravel used in them became worn down. Far from 
improving the grip of tyres on the road, they would, on 
the contrary, act like smooth beads and increase the risk 
of skid. Even the best of surfaces, of course, will not 
prevent an accident caused by weak braking or worn 
tyres. 
Research probes into each aceldent factor separately 
but the final solution must be a function of all the 
factors involved. At the Road Research Laboratory the 
behaviour of a vehicle and the qualities of the road itself 
are therefore studied in close conjunction, one of the 
essential alms of the work being to ensure that in an 
emergency the driver of a car can pull up in the shortest 
possible distance without danger to himself or to others. 
But the ideal is still a long way off. The first studles 
carried out by the Road Research Laboratory showed 
that the average braking distance for a car travelling 
at 30 m.p.h. is 75 feet; for 10 per cent. of the cars tested 
it was over 100 feet. The Highway Code lays down a 
distance of 45 feet. Moreover, when a driver brakes In 
an emergency the wheels frequently lock, and thls not 
only upsets the stabllity of the car but reduces the 
effectiveness of the brakes to zero, the course of the 
vehicle being slowed down only by the resistance offered 
by the road. Other experiments have conclusively shown 
the importance of tyres for road safety. It is common 
knowledge that worn tyres are highly dangerous, but 
few people realize that a complicated tread Is of no 
particular advantage. All that matters is that the tread 
be deep. 
Then there is that great unknown, the human factor. 
Here too there is need for research and co-ordination of 
 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
 
WHO photo by Eric Schwab 
EET EE Erg 
: 
I
E
S
E
 
ACCIDENT PRONE. Why some drivers 
are more likely to have accidents than others 
is a problem now occupying investigators in 
many countries. An exhaustive inquiry recent- 
ly made in Finland revealed, for example, that 
thirty-year-old drivers were involved in twice 
as many accidents as forty-eight-year-old driv- 
ers, irrespective of driving experience, Left, 
in a Swiss laboratory a driver's reactions are 
tested with an apparatus which simulates 
driving conditions. With 726,000 vehicles 
registered (one person in seven), Switzerland 
had 42,500 road accidents in 1958, in which 
31,000 persons were injured and 1,136 killed. 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63840: Whose fault is it? Why do car accidents happen?

16 
WHOSE FAULT IS IT ? (Contd) 
research. If the psychologist is to be able to put forward 
anything better than mere theories, he must work 
closely with the engineer, the policeman and the doctor. 
Some not very successful attempts have been made to 
draw up a composite picture of the man who is “accident- 
prone” on the roads, as has been done for other types of 
accidents. It has not been possible to establish any 
certain link between accident-proneness and physical or 
psychophysiological falllngs. One series of tests will 
show that quick reactions lead to accidents, while another 
demonstrates that quick reactions and slow reactions 
cause about the same number of accidents. One medical 
report will state that it is dangerous for people with high 
blood pressure to drive; another that persons with low 
blood pressure are liable to accidents. The one conclusion 
to be drawn from these few examples is that interpreta- 
tions of tests of psychomotor ability seem peculiarly 
llable to error. 
There is both a simpler and a better way of looking at 
the human factor. As an expert of the Harvard School 
of Public Health has put it, “People drive as they live.” 
Dr. L. G. Norman, Physician-in-Chief to the London 
Transport Executive, considers that a man's temperament 
and his psychosocial qualities—were they measurable— 
would make a better yardstick by which to tell a “bad” 
driver. 
From experience with London bus drivers, Dr. Norman 
observes that given equal experience, the older driver 
(even over 65 years old) is a better one than the younger 
man, despite slower reactions and less acute sight and 
hearing. He {s more watchful and takes more care to 
anticipate dangerous situations, and in many cases this 
more than makes up for deficlencies due to age. 
According to another expert, marital status has a 
definite influence on accident-proneness. Married per- 
sons are less liable to accidental death than widowers, 
who are in turn safer on the roads than divorcees. The 
only exceptions to this rule are people under 20 years 
of age: people in this age group have a higher percentage 
PEDESTRIAN PERILS 
Today, no country can afford to neglect the safety-first education 
of the man in the street as well as the man at the wheel. Growing 
incidence of traffic accidents in Africa is reflected in poster 
(below) which tells parents: “Don’t let your children play in the 
street.” The problem is far more serious in traffic-thick Euro- 
pean and American countries. In Great Britain, for example, 
pedestrians are involved in nearly one-half of all road fatalities. 
A frequent cause of such accidents is lack of discipline when 
crossing the street, like the case of the woman pedestrian 
(right, rear of photo) who fails to use the proper crossing place. 
  \IEI LICCET RL 
of accidents when married than if they are single. 
Alcohol, fatigue and sheer lack of attention are, 
obviously, responsible for a very large number of 
accidents but little systematic study has been made of 
the causes underlying these factors whether physio- 
logical, or social. 
From tests carried out by a special committee of the 
British Medical Association it was concluded that a 
concentration of 0.05 per cent of alcohol in the blood (one 
and a half pints of beer or three small whiskies) is “the 
highest that can be accepted as entirely consistent with 
the safety of other road users.” 
Until a clearer light can be thrown on these obscure 
matters, more limited but more immediately realizable 
goals may still be pursued. The Road Research Labora- 
tory, for instance, has just begun a study on “the driver,” 
in the course of which they propose to investigate, 
separately and together, the driver’s receptiveness to 
instruction, his control over the car, and his behaviour 
at the wheel. A special car will record and transmit 
his reactions over four simultaneous radio circuits. This 
experiment is still in a very early stage and its importance 
cannot yet be judged, but at the very least it will be a 
first step towards a real rather than a theoretical and 
subjective picture of the car-driver’s personality. 
Other contributions to a more thorough knowledge of 
the road-user include a study of the overtaking driver, 
which 1s now well-advanced, and research Into the 
behaviour of pedestrians. 
In Great Britain the proportion of casualties to every 
1,000 vehicles has steadily declined since the war. This 
is attributed to road safety campaigns, improvements in 
vehicle design and education of road users—especlally 
children. 
When all possible information has been obtained, it 
may at last be possible for effective prevention to be 
undertaken and for the roads of the world to be made 
reasonably safe. 
   
W
H
O
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courler, — April 1961 
DID YOU KNOW THAT? 
POISON HAZARDS: In the Uni- 
ted States, 1,200 people died from 
accidental poisoning in 1959 and 
about 200,000 were ill from the 
same cause. A New York inquiry 
showed that half the victims of 
poisoning are under the age of 21, 
three-quarters of them being less 
than four years old. Poisoning risks 
would be immeasurably reduced if 
the wrapping of dangerous subs- 
tances gave clear warning of dan- 
ger, named the poison involved and 
identified the correct antidote to 
be given in the case of an accident. 
HIGH SCHOOL DRIVERS: Some 
12,000 high schools In the U.S.A. 
provide driving courses for 1,500,000 
students and research has shown that 
there has been a 40-66 9 reduction 
in accidents and traffic violations 
involving students who have completed 
a driver-training course. Courses 
utilize the services of police officials, 
judges, traffic and highway engineers, 
and include visits to traffic courts and 
freeway construction sites. Related 
projects include traffic surveys, vehicle 
checks. Students who pass the tests 
also pay smaller insurance premiums. 
hn TP Se MO eM I cma it 
~~ HOME, RISKY HOME: Moré men 
~ aged |5 to 64 have fatal accidents 
at home than do women in the 
same age group. But the over 65’s 
and the pre-school child fare worst. 
These elderly people account for 
~ more than half of the fatalities and 
about one out of every four victims 
is a young child. Commonest non- 
~ fatal home accident is a cut, but the 
biggest home danger is a fall. 
Smokers are largely responsible for 
another home-hazard—fires, which 
are also often caused by children 
who find and play with matches. 
NEW WORD NEEDED: The ambi- 
guity of some words can lead to acci- 
dents. “Mummy” says the small child, 
it says ‘inflammable’ on this tin. Does 
it mean the stuff inside will burn?” 
“Don’t be silly, darling”, sometimes is 
the reply, “inflammable means that it 
won't burn”. Unfortunately, Mummy 
is wrong, though can she really be bla- 
med when the language is full of oppo- 
sites? A World Health Organization 
meeting has now recommended that 
“flammable” should be used to des- 
cribe something that ignites easily 
with as an opposite “non-flammable”. 
Lexicographers are asked to note. 
DEFECTS THAT KILL: Defec- 
tive brakes, tyres and steering gear 
are the most frequent mechanical 
causes of road accidents, although 
head and rear lights too are often 
found to contribute to highway 
mishaps. In one country a safety 
check showed that at least one In 
five automobiles was not being 
maintained in a safe running condi- 
tion, and one out of every four trucks 
checked was in need of maintenance 
before being mechanically fit for safe 
driving. In Great Britain today all cars 
over ten years old must pass a 
compulsory road-worthiness test. 
THE DEADLY DARE: Small ba- 
bies need complete protection, but 
as they get older they should learn 
to cope with danger. Over-pro- 
tecting children may lead to an over- 
development of the dare-devil spirit 
which plays a part in many accidents. 
In England, two boys lay down on 
the railway tracks to play “last-off- 
wins.” They both won; no blame 
attached to the engine driver. A 
child may be more liable to have 
accidents because of a conflict with 
his parents or just simply because 
tensions exist within the family. 
’ 
DON'T PULL THEM OUT: If 
you are first at the scene of a car 
crash your Instinctive reaction Is to 
“get them out.” Eighty per cent of 
the people hurt are pulled out by 
frantic rescuers and many are made 
worse or even killed. . Help out the 
uninjured, but [eave the injured for 
trained first ald workers to move. 
Some more precautions: park your 
car some distance away, turn off the 
ignition of the wrecked vehicle, 
warn any approaching traffic. In case 
of fire disconnect battery, attack fla- 
mes with extinguisher, dirtor blanket 
WORLD ON WHEELS: The num- 
ber of automobiles running on the 
world’s highways has increased tre- 
mendously since the Second World 
War. Between 1938 and 1959 the 
number of cars in France rose from 
2,250,000 to 5,650,000 and of 
motor cycles from 500,000 to 
6,400,000. In the United States 
there were 29,000,000 cars in 
1938 and 70,500,000 in 1959. 
The cost of road accidents has risen 
proportionatly: $6,200,000,000 for 
the United States alone in 1959 
and £ 100,000,000 for Gt. Britain. 
SOFTENING THE FALL: A 
French school for building workers 
has developed special methods for 
teaching apprentices to fall even 
from a Reighe of two stories without 
injury. Accidents of this kind are 
less frequent than falls on the level, 
but the results usually include at 
least a broken bone or two. An 
International Labour Convention 
concerning safety provisions in the 
building industry has now been 
ratified by eleven countries which 
maintain laws concerning scaffolds, 
hoisting gear and safety equipment, 
STAY SEATED: Auto crash Injury 
researchers In the United States found 
that 12.89, of car occupants ejected 
through open doors were killed, but 
only 2.69%, of those who remained in 
the cars were killed. In a car crash the 
motorist without a seat belt flies for- 
ward at unreduced speed until he hits 
something solid. This Is the impact 
that kills and malms. lt is the violence 
of the reduction In speed, not the 
speed Itself, which kills. Even low- 
speed collisions can produce high dece- 
leration rates... and serious injuries. 
SAFETY AND SCIENCE: Safety 
first can be made a fascinating and 
Interesting subject in school science 
lessons. In the Physics class pupils 
may calculate reaction-time distance 
and braking distance. Chemistry 
students may learn what makes the 
chemicals used in fire extinguishers 
effective, how a fire involving “hot” 
electric wires should be dealt with 
and what should be done if fire 
breaks out under the bonnet of a 
car. Safety precautions in the labo- 
ratory itself should be discussed 
before and during experiments. 
YOUR BEST FRIEND, BUT... In 
the United States 600,000 persons 
were bitten by dogs In 1957 and the 
medical costs amounted to 85 million. 
- Many dog bites could be avoided if the 
following rules were observed: Don't 
glve a dog to a child under the age of 
six, Don’t wake a dog suddenly. 
Be careful of the mother when picking 
up her puppies, Be careful when handling 
sick dogs. Discourage your child from 
riding a bicycle near an excited dog. 
Teach children how to care for pets 
and not to abuse or tease dogs. Don't 
pet or startle a dog while feeding 
im. Don’t Intervene in a dog fight, 
17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

‘RUCK 
oe Bifano oe THE RG 
avy, 
  
    
  
  

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier, — 
“The citizens of an area in the United States 
‘recently agreed to enact a grim scene. For a 
few moments they became the “victims ” of all 
the fatal road accidents which had occurred in 
‘their region in one year. Here, the sight of all 
‘these bodies sprawled on the highway around 
“a battered automobile brings home perhaps 
‘more vividly than could any statistics the full 
Apnl 1361 
  O 
U.
P.
L

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### 63842: Safety is their finest product in the factory

IN THE FACTORY 
SAFETY IS 
  2 pr 
HEADS Modern safety helmet, complete with HANDS Heavy gloves protect workers handling 
lamp, protects miner's head; breathing radioactive materials. This danger is 
mask defends his lungs against dust. Comprehen- now understood, and due to stringent precautions 
sive safety regulations are required for coal-min- proportionately fewer accidents and injuries 
ing—still one of the word's most hazardous jobs. occur in atomic plants than in ordinary industry. 
AND FEET Wooden clogs (below left) protect steelworker from 
searing heat of coke ovens beneath him. Protectors, 
slipped on over ordinary shoes, are a vitally important item of safety 
equipment in atomic plants where floors may be contaminated by radiation. NO hots 
      
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courler. — April 1961 


### 63842: Safety is their finest product in the factory

THEIR FINEST PRODUCT 
or injure him, the industrial worker is his own worst 
enemy. Evidence shows that a “human factor” is in- 
volved in more than 80 % of occupational accidents. The 
man, therefore, and not the machine he operates is the 
chief culprit responsible for the tremendous annual toll 
of deaths and Injuries among Industrial workers. 
One International Labour Organization (ILO) report 
published shortly after the last war showed that between 
1939 and 1945, industrial accidents In the United States 
and Great Britain had killed more people than the war 
itself. Yet these two countries were already at that time 
well advanced in industrial accident prevention. 
Flgures for industrial accident rates since 1938 reveal 
a strikingly small improvement over the pre-war situation. 
Even in the United States and Britain the Incidence of 
accidents only decreased by 38% between 1938 and 1958. 
Today's figures are equally disturbing. Each year in 
Europe, between one-ninth and one-quarter of all workers 
have a disabling accident. On an average between one 
and four workers and sometimes as many as ten out of 
every 10,000 are killed while at their jobs. 
In the United States of America, out of a total of 91,000 
accidental deaths from all causes, almost 14,000 are due 
to industrial accidents. In France, a serious accident, 
causing death or permanent invalidity, occurs every two 
minutes, and even a small country like Switzerland has 
an annual toll of over 200,000 occupational accidents, bet- 
ween 300 and 400 of them fatal ones. In countries that 
are in the process of rapid industrialization the problems 
are totally different both In magnitude and urgency. 
Between 1938 and 1958 in India, for instance, the accident 
rate increased in the proportion of from 100 to 240. 
I terms of the kinds of accidents that can kill, disable 
been made to ascertain what kinds of accldents 
occur, in what numbers, to what types of people 
and from what causes. The first and most surprising fact 
revealed by an analysis of all types of Industrial acci- 
dents is that only one in eight Is caused by machines. 
A LREADY a vast amount of statistical research has 
Vehicles, electricity, sources of heat and similar causes 
are responsible for more than one-quarter of the total. 
More than half are caused by what one expert has called 
the Big Five: falls from a height; falls on the level; 
handling materials; falling objects; hand tools. The 
claim by one technician that today there are fewer risks 
in manufacturing a sensitive explosive like nitro- 
glycerine than in transporting a heavy crate is perhaps 
not as astonishing as would appear. 
Statistics are indispensable for measuring the success 
of preventive efforts and discovering the weak points to 
which these efforts should be directed. 
Here is how one of the largest chemical firms in Britain 
deals with this problem. Every day from the firm's 110 
factories and works, a sheaf of pink forms arrives on the 
desk of Mr. J. St. Brown, who is head of Its Safety 
Division. Each one reports a “dangerous occurrence.” 
Copies of these reports are circulated to the Safety 
Committees in each of the company’s factories, together 
with precise recommendations in each case. 
The results of this company’s far-sighted policy speak 
for themselves. Among the 73,000 workers in the 110 
factories for whose safety Mr. St. Brown is responsible, 
there were In 1959 only 386 accidents causing temporary 
absence from work, nine serious accldents and five fatal 
ones. These were the lowest figures in the company’s 
history and showed more than an 80% Improvement on 
1945, and 25% improvement on the 1957 figures. 
On the national scale it is much more difficult to 
collect such exact information as this. As Mr. Marcel 
Robert, Chief of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Division of the ILO, sald recently: “In compiling 
statistics, an accident is generally attributed to only one 
cause, the most obvious one. In the great majority of 
cases this is completely misleading because potentially 
important accident factors are left out of account.” 
wo different lines of approach have developed in 
T industrial safety efforts. One is towards more and 
more detalled legislation and towards measures to 
improve the physical conditions of work. 
The other Is towards education. According to partisans 
of “education first,” preventive measures should rather 
be directed towards the worker. Moreover, they say, when 
legislation and Inspection procedures become too complex 
and cumbersome, they are no longer respected. 
These two approaches are of course complementary. No 
accldent is entirely due either to an outside cause or to 
a human failing. Most experts on the question agree 
today that Industrial accidents, llke all other accidents, 
have multiple causes. 
“Most of these,” says Professor Victor Raymond, Medical 
Adviser to the French Institut National de Sécurité, “are 
potential causes, they exist only as possibilitles. No 
accident will actually happen unless in one glven place 
and at one given moment, the different potential causes 
come Into operatlon together.” 
One day at a certain moment a man falls into a hole. 
The hole Is certainly a cause of the accident, for had 
there been no hole there would have been no accident. 
Yet it 1s only a potential cause, for plenty of people pass 
by unprotected holes without falling in. 
actual, there must be this conjunction between the 
vietim and the material cause, which supposes a 
precipitating factor. This factor may be independent of 
the victim—a falling stone or other object, a plank that 
gives way, or a machine that breaks down. But frequent- 
ly this factor is simply a movement or act of the victim 
himself. For this, Professor Raymond has colned the 
phrase le geste néfaste—“the fatal action.” 
Most often, this fatal action is an uncorrected condition- 
ed reflex. By thelr very repetition, many work movements 
become stereotyped. The man becomes a kind of robot, 
slave of the machines and objects he works with. His 
work movements become mechanical, and always follow 
the same pattern. Now suppose that the machine or the 
objects the worker Is concerned with suddenly present 
some departure from the usual pattern. Unless the 
worker's conditioned reflex is quickly corrected, the “fatal 
action” will be made. 
F* the accident to cease to be potentlal and become 
  
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 63842: Safety is their finest product in the factory

ACCIDENTS IN THE FACTORY (cond) 
Fortunately, the human being possesses protective 
mechanisms against these “fatal actions.” First there are 
the primary reflexes which produce an “instinctive” 
withdrawal from a danger usualiy perceived through the 
sense of touch. Conditioned reflexes can also produce 
similar protective reactions. “Once bitten, twice shy” says 
the proverb. Reaction to fire is the classical example. 
A child who actually touches a burning object will 
withdraw his hand by a primary reflex action. An 
association between the sight of fire and the sensation of 
burning is established, and a conditioned reflex is created 
which lasts throughout his life. Whenever he sees a 
burning object getting too close, he withdraws. 
Such protective reflexes can be developed by creating 
assoclations between a danger and certain sights and 
sounds—warning by sirens or bells, and, very important, 
notices and labels. 
Finaily the instinct of self-preservation that everyone 
possesses can be strengthened and trained so that it 
corrects, checks or co-ordinates habitual actions and 
prevents them from becoming “fatal actions.” 
Yet this instinct of self-preservation cannot be relied 
on ahsolutely—there will always be occasional eclipses. 
When these happen, technical and mechanical safety 
measures can often save the situation. To be effective 
such measures should protect all workers alike and should 
require no effort or co-operation from the individual. 
They are based on the elimination of all risk. An example 
is the prohibition of the use of white lead in paint, which 
has automatically prevented white-lead poisoning among 
the people working with paint. 
Safety devices built into machines relieve the worker to 
some extent of the need to be careful. Of course the 
workers know about these safety devices and their role, 
and it sometimes happens that they resent them because, 
they say, they complicate their work. So they sometimes 
A 
Spd i i 
a Sia 
; 1 LR —— 
nel we + 
Laing x 
ji’ 
wot TT 
A 
Y 
    
remove them or put them out of action, temporarily or 
permanently. Machines should therefore always be 
provided with an automatic stop that operates whenever 
their safety devices are not working. The less such a 
device interferes with the worker's habits, the more 
easily it will be accepted and used by him, 
These safety measures are collective and do not require 
the co-operation of the individual. There are others 
which do require this. It is difficult enough to obtain 
even the worker's passive co-operation, for instance in 
following certain rules or going for a medical check-up. 
If he is asked to take more active precautions, like 
wearing gloves, special glasses or a mask, experience 
shows that the results are usually unsatisfactory. 
It is essential for each worker to know and understand 
the risks to which he is exposed. Instructions must be 
complete, detailed and precise in order not to create 
simply a vague, uninformed fear of accidents. For 
example, everyone knows vaguely that electricity is 
dangerous. But it is not enough for someone to know 
the dangers of lightning, or of high tension currents, if 
he does not realize the dangers of the common 110 volt 
or 220 volt household electricity supply. 
Again, it is not enough just to tell people about such 
risks—they must really understand their nature. It is 
for this reason that too much dependence cannot be 
placed on rules, warnings, “forbidden” notices, etc. They 
become so familiar that after a while they have no 
further effect in preventing the “fatal action.” 
None of these “individual” safety measures can be 
really effective unless the person they are intended to 
protect is made to feel a partner in the scheme, and this 
will depend largely on the attitude of the works manager. 
He must set the pace. If he is genuinely concerned about 
safety measures, the engineers and foremen will follow 
suit, and the accident rate will soon reflect the success 
of their combined efforts. 
CAREFUL 
WORKERS HIT 
THE JACKPOT 
Workers in a cement plant near Paris 
nave an extra incentive to avoid acci- 
dents. Each year the management puts 
up one million francs (10,000 New Francs) 
into a special fund. For every man-day 
lost through accidents 135 francs are 
deducted and, at the end of the year, 
the remainder is divided among the 
workers, excluding office staff and fore- 
men. Left, how the plan pays off. In 
1951 a total of 7,411 working days were 
lost through accidents. But during the 
first half of 1952, the total was only 209 
and there were still over 970,000 francs 
in the jackpot. Sign below says there 
has been no accident for past 24 days.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### 63842: Safety is their finest product in the factory

EVERY POSTER 
TELLS A STORY 
Graphic, dramatic and hard-hitting, posters are ideal for transmitting the 
safety-first message in factory and workshop. Busy workers have no time 
to read detailed or long-winded explanations. But a quick glance at a 
poster whose message has been expressed simply and directly, immedi- 
ately brings home an essential safety rule in a form that sticks in the mind. 
Sometimes a wordless poster is equally effective and offers a practical 
solution to a problem in rapidly developing countries where countless 
people work efficiently with modern machinery but still cannot read. 
  
/, "Watch out for the hoist” says this Polish poster, using 
) an ant and elephant to symbolize a common threat to 
workers—that of heavy objects falling on them from above, 
\ sa, 
Jil ve | og 
FONT. LES BONNES BEQUILLES 
“Bad scaffoldings make good crutches” is the reminder 
of French poster (above) and “Don’t walk under 
overhanging loads” warns the Italian one (below). 
  
Yr A LA MAE 
“Watch where you put your feet.” A Spanish poster illustrates some common 
hazards for the worker, from open trapdoors to nails sticking out of planks.   23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63843: Danger stalks the farmer: hazards in field and forest

  
HAZARDS IN FIELD AND FOREST 
DANGER STALKS THE 
aceldent risks than perhaps any other section of the 
population, a survey by WHO reveals. The farmer’s 
home is also his work-place and combines the dangers 
of both. 
Agricultural accidents—like those In the home, the 
workshop or the factory—have much In common the 
world over. This has been shown by studies carried out 
both in countries where agriculture has undergone 
revolutionary changes in the past century and in others 
where farming methods still follow traditional paths. 
For example, Investigations made In the United States 
into the frequency and type of agricultural accidents in 
7,000 Indiana farms showed that nearly 30% were due to 
falls, most of them and the most serious being falls from 
ladders. This situation can well be compared to Ceylon 
where, out of a total of 2,800 deaths from all accidents 
in 1957, 554, or nearly 20%, were caused by falls. In 350 
cases the men who fell were tapping palm trees or picking 
coconuts or fruit. Despite the dissimilarity of thelr 
occupations, it looks as though the Indlana farmer and 
the Ceylonese plantation worker run just about the same 
risk of a fall, 
In Great Britain, too, it 1s estimated that about one- 
quarter of agricultural accidents are caused by falls. In 
the same country a further 15% of accldents are caused 
by handtools, 18% by light agricultural equipment, 18% 
by burns and poisons and 10% by domestic animals. 
Ts farmer and the farmworker are more exposed to 
“Never hold a sharp instrument pointed towards 
yourself. Don’t leave your pitchfork lying about. Test 
your axe-handle before you use it. Never leave a scythe 
standing in such a way that it can fall blade upwards. Be 
André Gamet © Rapho, Paris 
a 
careful with storm lanterns in hay barns. Don’t try to 
mend your ladder with a couple of nails and a plece of 
twine...” 
Though adages like these are continually heard from 
childhood, they seem not to prevent overconfidence. 
Trusting, consclously or not, to hls own cleverness or 
physical strength, the worker on the land, like the house- 
wife in her kitchen or the workman at his bench, all too 
often forgets the risks with which he is over familiar. 
The farmer trusts his “instinct” and the pragmatic 
knowledge handed down from older generations—he is 
somewhat suspicious of the city expert. Yet good advice 
that otherwise would be ignored will be listened to If it 
comes from a respected elder or young farmer. 
This is something that an agricultural safety campaign 
must take into account. For to be effective such a 
campaign should be entrusted to a man of the soil 
Unfortunately only in a few countries have existing safety 
organizations set up special rural or agricultural sections. 
Far too many countries still neglect the problem, although 
there is much that could be done. For example, rural 
schools should be provided with textbooks describing 
hazards encountered on farms, and rural councils might 
promote adult education on similar lines. 
Nowadays the introduction of mechanized farming 
brings fresh dangers. New machines, freeing the agri- 
cultural worker from the most arduous tasks and increas- 
ing his productivity, demand much greater vigilance and 
care on his part. A sort of “sixth sense” of self-defence 
which helps to guard the farm worker against the usual 
kinds of accidents gives little protection against threshers 
or mechanical harvesters. 
Goursat © Rapho, Paris

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63843: Danger stalks the farmer: hazards in field and forest

FARMER 
Although he may be careless about it, the peasant 
knows very well that his horse may kick him; but when 
he gets his first brand-new tractor he little suspects that 
this machine he 1s so proud of may have a deadly habit 
of tipping over at the least expected moment. 
One way to help counter these new risks would be to 
require the manufacturer of agricultural machinery to 
fix clear, legible and indelible safety warnings on his 
products. Certaln countries have also considered in- 
troducing agricultural driving licences which would 
provide an opportunity to give agricultural workers the 
safety training they so badly need. In Great Britain, 
for example, agricultural safety advisers are trained and 
do effective work in showing the farmer how to avoid 
accidents with his new machines. 
A start has already been made in applying industrial 
accident-prevention methods to agriculture. With the 
collaboration of the International Labour Organization, a 
joint working party on forestry from the Economic 
Commission for Europe and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization studied the felling and sawing up of trees 
and the carriage of logs to sawmills by land and water. 
Its report provides detailed accident statistics, summarizes 
safety regulations and describes provisions for inspection, 
education, professional training, research, safety at 
logging camps and sawmills, medical assistance, housing 
and feeding. 
Viewed in this light, agricultural accident prevention 
becomes far more than merely protecting the rural popu- 
lation from accidents; it raises the whole question of 
the adjustment of the agricultural worker to the present- 
day economy and in so doing tends to lessen the difference 
between him and the man in the workshop. 
 
Janine Nwepce OO Rapho, Paris 
Overconfidence in using traditional cutting tools and careless- 
ness in operating powered machinery like threshers (below 
left) are two basic causes of accidents that occur on farms. 
Timber felling and log-sawing are occupations in which a 
moment of neglect or inattention can spell disaster, Men 
who work with sharp-edged axes or biting saw blades need 
protection through the same kind of accident prevention 
methods and regulations that have become required in industry. 
Ciccione © Rapho. Paris 
 

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 63844: A Word of warning from stamps

A WORD OF WARNING 
FROM STAMPS 
by C.W. Ill 
xiBITIONs, radio and television pro- 
E grammes, newspaper advertising and 
poster campaigns are used regularly 
in many lands to promote the cause of safe- 
ty in the home, on the road and at work. 
Few methods of publicity, however, reach 
so many pcople at so small a cost as the 
postage stamp and the postmark. In 
recent years several countries have issued 
stamps in aid of accident prevention and a 
collection of these, when displayed at a 
Safety Exhibition, always arouscs consid- 
erable interest. 
Argentina, in 1948, was the first country 
to issue a stamp proclaiming the nced for 
care on the road (1). The design showed 
a raised hand, familiar symbol of caution, 
and the inscription “June 10—Road Safety 
Day.” 
When the United States issued a stamp 
commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of 
the American Automobile Association, the 
opportunity was taken of including in the 
design a young safety warden holding back 
two schoolgirls, while cars of 1900 and 
1950 pass on the road. Two children 
correctly using a road-crossing are depict- 
ed on a Swiss stamp of 1956 (2), but a 
provocative West German stamp underlines 
the perils of the road by showing a mother 
mourning over her injured child (3). 
“Care on the Road,” symbolised on an 
Italian stamp of 1957, is a message which 
has also appeared in slogan postmarks 
from many countries.  ‘“Motorists—Care- 
lessness Kills!” says New Zealand; “Keep 
Death off the Roads!” asks Great Britain; 
a aes A le NE 
  
UNITED STATES stamp issued in 
1950 pays tribute to American 
‘railway engineers. It bears the 
portrait of Casey Jones, the famous 
~ American engine driver who met 
his death in a railway accident 
~ which occurred in 1900. Heroic 
Casey ordered his fireman to jump 
to safety while he remained at 
the contivls of his locomoti 
= 4. rr oi 
“Stop Accidents before they stop YOU!” 
warns Australia; while Rhodesia’s postmark 
message is a little kindlier: “Drive Safe- 
ly—Rhodesia needs you alive!”. 
Railway signalling equipment, which 
plays so important a part in the preven- 
tion of accidents, is featured on many 
stamps, There is an interesting link be- 
tween safety on the railways and safety in 
the coal-mines, for George Stephenson, the 
British builder of the first successful rail- 
way locomotive, also invented a safety 
lamp for miners. A portrait of Stephen- 
son (4) and one of a coal-miner with a 
modern safety lamp are to be found on 
Hungarian stamps. 
Many accidents in the home are caus- 
ed by fire, and several stamps have been 
issued to give warning of its perils. Brazil 
marked the centenary of the Firemen’s 
Corps in 1956 with a large stamp, print- 
ed in fiery red, showing a fireinan 
rescuing a child from a blazing building. 
The International Fire Brigades’ Congress 
in Warsaw in 1957 was also marked by a 
scries of three Polish stamps, all in vivid 
designs depicting the tragedies which may 
be caused by fire (5). 
A collection of stamps symbolising acci- 
dents and their prevention ought perhaps 
to end on an optimistic note with some of the 
many issues which illustrate the efficiency 
of the Red Cross and hospital services. 
These range from the speeding ambulance 
on a Finnish stamp of 1944 (6) to the 
nurse giving a blood transfusion shown on 
a Yugoslav stamp of 1953. 
CORREO AEREQ— tic x i 
4 MEXICO has honoured Heroic con- 
duct of Jesus Garcia, a railwayman 
~ who drove a burning train loaded 
‘with explosives out of the goods 
rd at Nacozari, in north-west 
exico, half a century ago. As the 
~ stamp shows, the train blew upand 
Garcia was killed, 2ut his action 
saved the greatecs part of the 
i ftown of Nacozari. and many li 
  
         
  
2 SWITZERLAND | 
      . NU 419 
 
3 FED. GERMAN REP. 
  6 FINLAND 
 

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier. — April 196) 


### 63845: Treasures from the Parthenon

reasures from 
| the Parthenon 
  
  
  
  
~ For twenty-four centuries the Parthenon has reflected the 
~ glory of ancient Greece in her Golden Age of artistic achieve- 
~ ment. Conceived and constructed by Pericles and the 
~ sculptor Phidias in the 5th century B.C., it was completed in 
only 15 years in a frenzy of creative activity involving hundreds 
of architects, sculptors and artisans. Today, although it 
EEL EU Wiig on and bereft of almost all its sculptures 
the purity of its lines and its harmonious proportions still 
~ bear witness to its former splendour. The world's great 
~ museums now house statuary, the bas reliefs and friezes 
with which it was once richly ornamented. Masy of these 
sculptures have been photographed by A CLEFT 
~ gathered into a handsome album entitled ‘Classical Greece: 
he Sculpture of the Parthenon” (. Few of the pieces of 
~ sculpture are undamaged, but even in their present state they 
~ provide an imposing alray of Greek plastic art at its finest. 
(o'R UTR CUT TE pages THe Unesco Courier presents a few 
of the Parthenon's former treasures, which are reproduced 
from this album with the kind permission of the publish 
- - RN oi EN el Ew RR we | ET a 
era er Ere antocs oT i ries St. London. E.G, Sana, under | 
‘Society, Greenwich, Conn., U.S. A. Text by Nicholas Yalouris, all photos « F.L. Kenett. 
rn! i «ais TR ll ip FA br RCS i i in  
© Philips Lumidre, Paris

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### IGNORE

28 


### 63845: Treasures from the Parthenon

treasures of the Parthenon coy 
dionysius 
The drawing at top of page shows the east 
pediment of the Parthenon with sketches of 
statues which still exist today. Figures are 
larger than life size. The reclining figure of 
Dionysius, god of wine and ardent living 
(right), is one of the best preserved and is 
housed with others from this pediment in the 
British Museum. In the drawing, the figure 
of Dionysius is depicted on the extreme left. 
 
  
  
  
demefer and 
persephone 
Next to Dionysius are the seated 
figures of Demeter, goddess of earth, 
and her daughter Persephone who 
reigned over the underworld, (left), 
both carved out of the same block of 
marble. Although they faced outward 
in their original setting, in this rear 
view one can see the painstaking 
detail in flowing robes, arms and 
cushions which no one but birds was 
intended to see. Phidias is believed 
to be the sculptor responsible for 
some of the statues on these pages. 
   
   
  
   

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 63845: Treasures from the Parthenon

  
  
 
 
    
The goddess Iris (right) approaches the seated 
Demeter and Persephone, one of whom turns 
toward her. The central section of the pediment 
exists no more. It was destroyed along with 
the central figure of Zeus enthroned (not 
shown in the drawing above) during the time 
when the Parthenon became a church in the 
early Christian era. Other figures which appear 
on the far right of the drawing are now in the 
British museum. Of the west pediment, nothing 
now remains except fragments of statuary. 
All photos © by F.L. Kenett. Published 1960, by 
Oldbourne Book Co., Ltd.,, London and New York 
Graphic Society, Greenwich, Conn.. U.S.A. 
 
3 
: 
Bd 
ie 
§ 
i 
centaur 
and lapith 
The metopes, or bas reliefs, 
like the one at left, originally 
surrounded the entire Parthe- 
non in five foot square blocks 
fitted between the capitals of 
the outer doric columns. Only 
about a dozen of these still exist, 
all depicting battles between 
centaurs and men of Lapith, 
Most of them are attributed to 
the school of Krites or Myron, 
but a few like the example shown 
here have such fluid lines they 
are believed by some authorities 
to be the work of Phidias himself. 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 63845: Treasures from the Parthenon

TREASURES OF THE PARTHENON (Cont'd) 
lowing at the skies a heifer 
      
  
a - #” 
pi re) 
5 
¥ - 
A ye " * po rg & : 
 - hes = bh | 4 
BY 4 : 
> + By EA \ ey on 
  
ho 
5 
4 
3 
“ 2 
- ty dB 
£ 2 Neth = “ 
30 
When Keats saw this section of the Parthenon frieze in 
London, he was moved to write, in his Ode on a Grecian 
Urn, “To what green altar, O mysterious priest/ Lead'st thou 
that heifer lowing at the skies; And all her silken flanks with 
garlands drest ?”" The scene, depicting two Athenian citizens 
leading a heifer destined for sacrifice, is one section of more 
than 400 feet of the Parthenon frieze still in existence, most 
of it In the British Museum, The frieze which originally was 
five hundred feet in length circled the inner wall of the 
Parthenon above the capitals of the second row of columns, 
It depicts a long procession of warriors, charioteers, bearers 
of food and wine, virgins, citizens and mythological figures. 
The frieze contained more than three hundred human 
figures, and many animals. Although it was done by many 
different sculptors, it retains a harmony of line, movement 
and detail, and is unique because of its single theme.

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### IGNORE

The Unesco Courier, — April 1961 


### 63846: Japan misrepresented; a look at foreign textbooks

JAPAN MISREPRESENTED 
A LOOK AT FOREIGN TEXTBOOKS 
- by Tatsumi Shimada 
This article is © 1960, by the Asahi Shimbun-sha, Tokyo. 
opnAY, when the other side of the 
moon is visible to us through 
photographs, one would expect 
people on one side of our own 
globe to be well acquainted with the 
opposite side. In fact, though, there is 
a surprising lack of accurate knowledge. 
With countries like those of Western 
Europe, which are extremely close to 
each other, and where travel is un- 
hampered even by the necessity for 
visas, understanding between nations 
can be hoped for. 
However, greater distance—not . to 
mention differences in ways of life, reli- 
gion and cultural forms—soon reduces 
this understanding to a far from satis- 
factory level. Even in such cases, a 
constant supply of accurate information, 
together with efforts toward comprehen- 
sion by both sides, ought to make it 
possible to maintain a satisfactory degree 
of understanding. In fact, however, 
things do not work out this way. 
People tend to have preconceived 
ideas about distant countries. In particu- 
lar, inhabitants of far-off Europe and 
America who have never seen Japan 
seem to include such preconceived ideas 
in the image they cherish of this coun- 
try. The unsavoury picture of Japan as 
a country of militarists doubtless still 
persists, and, along with it, the romantic 
ideas associated with Madame Butterfly. 
Not infrequently, Japanese who 
happened to be travelling in foreign 
parts have been taken by surprise by 
the questions put by the local inhabi- 
tants. These range from specialized 
queries on, say, “the role of Shintoism” 
to elementary ones such as “does Japan 
have trains and streetcars?” 
There are many books on every coun- 
try written either by its own people or 
by foreigners well versed in its affairs. 
Perusal of them would normally suffice 
to erase mistaken impressions. Unfor- 
tunately, people are seldom willing to 
make a special effort to find out what 
is happening in other countries unless it 
directly concerns themselves. As a 
result, no matter how many excellent 
introductions and travel books appear, 
the number of readers is restricted. In 
view of this unsatisfactory situation, the 
question arises of what should be done 
to foster a correct knowledge of each 
other at a more general level among the 
peoples of the world. 
In the case of Japan, about which 
accurate knowledge tends to be very rare 
and misapprehension common, the ques- 
tion of what practical steps can be taken 
to improve this situation is a matter of 
serious concern. A small number of 
enthusiasts, therefore, recently made a 
start—albeit a very unspectacular one— 
toward remedying the situation, by 
making a thorough investigation of in- 
accurate accounts of Japan in school 
textbooks in use in foreign countries. 
Textbooks, unlike specialist works, are 
compulsory reading for schoolchildren 
  
AREER 
From Japanese Family (England, 1950) 
and students. This means that when 
they misrepresent the truth about Japan 
their harmful influence is extremely 
pervasive. Once errors have occurred 
in the basic facts given to children in 
primary and middle schools, it is well- 
nigh impossible to erase these first im- 
pressions. Yet a survey of textbooks, 
collected from 31 countries, which was 
begun in 1948, shocked those responsible 
by the depressingly large number of 
distorted views of Japan it revealed. 
The need of some means to remedy this 
situation was evident, and in April 1958, 
the “International Society for Educa- 
tional Information” (1) was established 
in Tokyo. 
The textbooks gathered together by 
this Centre via the Foreign Ministry, 
(1) The address of the Society is: Yamate 
Kaikan, 22-7 Yotsuya l<home, Tokyo, Japan, 
and the director is Nishimura Kumao. 
the Japan Red Cross and private firms 
and organizations already total 925 
volumes from 16 countries in Europe 
(including the Soviet Union), four in 
the Middle East, ten in Asia and five 
in the Americas. Comprising primary, 
secondary, and high-school textbooks 
mostly published between 1955 and 
1959, they arc the works at present in 
use in those countries. 
In accordance with the purposes of 
the survey, the majority of them are 
textbooks of geography, history and 
social science. The materials thus 
collected have been studied by specialist 
professors and linguists in Japanese 
universities. The morc their investiga- 
tion proceeds, the more apparent be- 
comes the large number of inaccuracies 
and outright errors in the contents of the 
articles on Japan. Many cases have 
also been discovered where very old 
photographs and illustrations depicting 
Japan in the Meiji or Taisho Period are 
presented as if they showed modern 
conditions. 
Such cases have come as a shock to 
those taking part in the survey, 
The most conspicuous among them are 
the photographs and illustrations used 
in the textbooks, the photographs gen- 
erally being extremely old and many of 
the illustrations showing strange people 
and ways of life which suggest a mixture 
of Japanese and Chinesc cultures without 
representing cither of them accurately. 
The carly Meiji Period—roughly 
from the 1870s into the 1890's—saw 
work started on the Panama Canal in the 
New World (1881) and on the Trans- 
Siberian Railway in the Old, while in Asia 
Burma was annexed by Britain in 1886. 
If, in the case of any other country, 
street scenes or local manners of this 
period were represented as those of 
today, it would cause no little surprise. 
In most countries there are even con- 
siderable differences between ways of 
life before and after the Second World 
War. This being so, it would bec a 
shock to anyone, let alone the Japanese, 
to find children being shown without 
any explanation conditions as they 
existed nearly a century ago. 
In the case of Japan, however, moder- 
nization started late, and astonishing 
CONT'D ON HMHEXT PAGE 31 

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63846: Japan misrepresented; a look at foreign textbooks

32 
JAPAN MISREPRESENTED (Cont'd) 
changes occurred cven within fifty years. 
The large towns change in appearance 
from year to year, and even in country 
towns and villages a constant transfor- 
mation is in progress. All this is ignored 
in many foreign textbooks, however; 
children are presented with any material 
that comes to hand, however old, and 
told, “This is Japan.” 
One example is an English textbook 
called Japanese Family (2). Though 
comparatively new—it was published 
only ten years ago, in 1950—the Japa- 
nese family life shown is a most peculiar 
mixture of Chinese and Japanese styles, 
and of the old-fashioned. The illustra- 
tions, for instance, show father and 
daughter riding in a rickshaw—a thing 
onc would have difficulty finding in 
Japan today—while a family like 
something out of a fairy tale is shown 
gazing over the sca wondering whether 
there will be an earthquake or not! 
One shudders to think of English chil- 
dren getting the idea that the “quaint 
Japanese” are like this, but what is 
still worse is that the writer of the text- 
book seems to be unaware that such 
things never existed at any period in 
Japan. I am not, of course, picking out 
this English textbook for particular cri- 
ticism. Endless examples of much the 
same kind of error can be found in those 
of other countries too. 
For instance, an Italian high-school 
geography textbook entitled Le Parti del 
Mondo (3) carries the Kambara print 
from Hiroshige’s Fifty-three Stages on 
the Tokaido with the caption “Snow 
Scene in Hokkaido, or Ezo.” One 
wishes the author would let Italian 
children know that this particular ukiyoe 
was published in 1833! Pictures such 
as the Hiroshige arc acceptable any- 
where provided they are clearly labelled 
as works of art. 
However in works such as a primary- 
school reader (4) published in Egypt in 
1957, in an Indian geography textbook 
entitled Over Land and Sea (5), in the 
Australian This Modern Age (6), and in 
the American The Background of 
Modern Nations (7), one can only pre- 
sume that the illustrations were free 
  
From a primary school textbook (Egypt, 1957) 
SUPERFICIES COMPAREES   
” 
JAPON 362.000 rr? FRANCE 551.000 km? 
fantasies by artists who had never been 
to Japan. 
Some of the incorrect accounts of 
Japan deal with things which, though not 
completely unknown in Japan, are by 
now far from common sights. For 
example, in an Italian geography text- 
book for readers at secondary-school 
level there appears a photograph of a 
Japanese woman with her back covered 
all over with tattooing, over the caption: 
“In Japan there is a general tendency 
for women also to tattoo themselves.” 
Not only is this astonishing in a text- 
book published in 1957, but it will cer- 
tainly make Italian children start off 
from the first year of secondary educa- 
tion with the impression that Japan must 
be a very savage country, There would 
be no objection if it were used in a book 
with some such title as “Believe it or 
not”, but a school textbook about a 
country should stick to the customs 
prevailing among the larger part of its. 
population. 
In practice, though, the compilers tend 
to pick out only the odd and peculiar 
customs in order to stimulate. the 
curiosity of the reader. This is true not 
only of books on Japan: it is a point on 
which all the nations of the world should 
exercisc care, for each other’s sakes. 
In Japan's case, for instance, something 
should be done about the tendency in 
the tourist posters and leaflets she her- 
self puts out to over-emphasize the old, 
traditional Japan. 
Here is one of the reasons why the 
modern Japan (which admittedly, being 
Westernized to a considerable extent, is 
less interesting to foreigners) is reported 
incorrectly. Here is something for Japan 
herself to remedy; it remains true, 
however, that the compilers of text- 
books abroad should realize the im- 
portance of their mission in promoting 
mutual understanding among the youn- 
ger generation in different countries, and 
work harder to present the true rather 
than merely the curious. 
The International Society for Educa- 
tional Information is at present con- 
sidering various ways of pointing out 
existing errors and helping to compile 
~ POPULATIONS COMPARELES 
{en millions d'habitants) 
From Les Grandes 
Puissances  Economi- 
ques (France, 1957) 
  
JAPON FRANCE 
eg 43. 
better textbooks in the future, for 
example, by transmitting directly the 
views of Japanese specialists, by drawing 
the attention of firms publishing text- 
books to the matter, and by sending 
correct information from Japan. 
The textbooks being published in 
Japan are also, quite possibly, out-of-date 
or incorrect in some respects. Gradually 
to reduce the number of such errors on 
all sides would help greatly in supplying 
the young folk who will form the next 
generation with the correct information 
necessary for judging international 
affairs, and for this, international co- 
operation on a wide scale is most 
desirable. 
It may be added in conclusion that 
the same Socicty also held exhibitions 
  
  
  
  
        
  
From Over Land and Sea (England, 1956) 
in Tokyo and Osaka in late 1959 and 
early 1960, entitled “Japan Misrepre- 
sented: A Look at Foreign Textbooks,” 
which put on public view the textbooks 
so far gathered together. The exhibitions 
drew large crowds and attracted much 
interest in newspapers and periodicals. 
Reproduced from the Japan Quarterly, April- 
June 1960. 
(2) Japanese Family, by L.S. Eliott, published 
by Frederick Warne and Co.Ltd. 
(3) Le Parti del Mondo, by Manfredo Vanni, 
Milan 1955. 
(4) Elementary Book, By I. Mustafa and 
others, Dept., of Education, Egypt 1957. 
(5) Over Land and Sea: The Foundation of 
Geography. by B.G. Hordingham, B.Sc., Thomas 
Nelson, 1956. 
(6) This Modern Age, by Donald McLean, 
Shakespeare Head Press, 1953. 
(7) The Background of Modern Natlons, by 
C.H. Mclare, PhD. and others, Laidlaw 
Brothers, 1951.

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

NEW VIEW ON THINGS 
Sir, 
Since 1957 I have been a constant 
reader, and with the exception of one 
or two issues and articles, I like the 
contents and make-up. I particularly 
liked the issues of a “thematic” 
character such as: “The Rights of 
900 Million Children” (October 1957), 
“East-West” (December 1958), 
“Science and Humanity” (February 
1959), “Cinematography” (April 
1959) and “The Art of Czech Glass- 
Blowers” (March 1960), and an article 
about Sholem Aleichem in the same 
issue. It is also noticeable from the 
point of view of humanism that the 
magazine tells its readers about the 
life of other peoples, the problems 
which face them, about little-known 
civilizations and the latest achieve- 
ments in science and technology. 
The magazine gives me fresh know- 
ledge and sometimes helps me to see 
things with new eyes. Its support for 
the ideals of peace, humanism and 
friendship among peoples deserves 
high praise. 
While noting the good points of 
the magazine, I would like to make 
some suggestions which might im- 
prove it. I think the time has come 
to increase the size of the magazine 
and introduce a regular page of hu- 
mour, to pay more attention to the 
everyday life and culture of peoples 
and their traditions. For instance, 
one issue could be devoted to the 
Russian school of ballet which has 
been made famous the world over by 
such great ballerinas as Anna Pav- 
lova, Galina Ulanova and Olga Lep- 
eshinskaya. 
A Kilunov, 
Sverdlovsk, U.S.S.R. 
VELAZQUEZ AND HIS ART 
 
Sir, 
Allow me to congratulate you on 
the excellent special issue on Velaz- 
quez and his art (Dec, 1960). Paint- 
ing, when it is not cranky, is a uni- 
versal language, and (like the word 
of God) creates not only light but 
life also at the same time. It is capa- 
ble of linking eternity with the work- 
a-day world. 
In a madding and maddening world 
wherein neurotic men sit on atomic 
weapons (always in limelight) and 
look down upon men with wiser 
counsels with a devilish leer, the 
saner people will find painting as one 
of the good things of life. What is 
needed in the organ of the world 
forum is emphasis on the essential 
beauty, unity and sublimity of the 
human soul. 
Special issues such as these might 
really serve as links between the dif- 
ferent peoples of the world and their 
The Unesco Courier, —  Apnl 
Letters to the Editor... 
cultures and might be able to turn the 
“still sad music of humanity” into 
a triumphal march of love, harmony, 
understanding and co-operation among 
the nations of the world. I hope you 
will publish more issues on art, Eas- 
tern as well as Western, every year. 
D. Viswanadha Babu 
Vizayanagaram, India 
Sir, 
It is an exaggeration to devote a 
whole 40-page issue to Velazquez. 
Whatever the talent of this artist, 
there are much wider and more im- 
portant questions to present in your 
magazine and such specialized studies 
as those concerning a painter's life 
and work should be restricted to a 
few pages. 
A. Kilunov 
Sverdlovsk, U.S.S.R. 
Sir, 
That you should have devoted the 
whole of the issue to one great paint- 
er is In itself gratifying and typical 
of the cultural work of Unesco, but 
the way you have treated it really is 
outstanding. 
Reg IHolmes 
London, United Kingdom 
PERU'S TREASURES IN DANGER 
Sir, 
In Tue Unesco Courler, for Feb- 
ruary 1960 (Save the Treasures of 
Nubia), the articles rightly reflect the 
concern we all feel about the fate of 
the prehistoric buildings in the Nile 
valley, as they are in danger of being 
destroyed or irretrievably lost when 
work on the high dam of Aswan is 
completed. 
In Peru, which, like Egypt, is a land 
of great archaeological riches, some- 
thing similar is happening. On the 
one hand, the economic and industrial 
interests invade the sites, in spite of 
the excellent law that exists to prevent 
it. On the other hand, the personal 
ambitions of certain individuals who 
traffic in antiques, breaking all rules 
and regulations, stimulate the activi- 
ties of the wakeros, or tomb-thieves, 
by means of bribes or presents. In 
the outskirts of Lima, the capital of 
the Republic, the “wakas” or archaeo- 
logical sites and buildings, are being 
destroyed under the pretext of town- 
planning developments. Incaic and 
pre-Incaic burial grounds that exist in 
the coastal valleys, are being destroy- 
ed with the excuse of irrigation pro- 
jects or the installation of factories. 
May UNEsco turn its eyes to this 
corner of the American continent, to 
co-operate with the Government of 
Peru in the protection and rescue of 
the prehistoric monuments of the An- 
dean Civilizations. 
M. Toribio Mejia Xesspe 
Archaeologist, Lima, Peru 
WESTERN ETHNOCENTRISM 
  
Sir, 
I buy Tne Usrsco COURIER now 
and again for the pictures. 1 try to 
assimilate a bit of the information 
which glimmers through the articles, 
steeped, as they are, in Western ethno- 
centrism. For example, “7 Million 
Forgotten Indians in the Andes”: 
your constant use of the word *prob- 
lem”; your gross judgment of their 
“unclean” living conditions and 
“promiscuous” sleeping arrangements: 
your proud advertisement of the fact 
that they have been forced to admit 
to their “ignorance” (of what? Catho- 
licism? John Locke? how to live at 
high altitudes?); your insistence that 
the rest of us admire and support 
you in your glorious duty to inflict 
your values on these Indians only 
show forth your small minds which 
rest in, no doubt, comfort-conditioned 
bodies. Does the United Nations stand 
for coexistence of values or only of 
peoples? 
Dorothy K. Billings 
New York, US.A. 
SHOW US THE SORBONNE 
 
Sir, 
We are regular readers of your very 
interesting magazine and would be 
glad if you could give a detailed des- 
cription of the Sorbonne University in 
Paris, with pictures of the Sorbonne 
itself, its sections for the humanities, 
the university library and the Assem- 
bly IIall. 
A group of students 
Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic 
HEN WITH THE GOLDEN CHICKS 
Sir, 
In connexion with the Visigothic 
treasure trove which, according to the 
article in your November 1960 issue, 
is known in Rumania as “The Ilen 
with the Golden Chicks,” a legend 
from Gotland seems significant. 
On this mid-Baltic ancestral home 
island of the Goths a golden bird and 
24 smaller ones are said to have been 
found under loosened stones from the 
chance] wall in St. Clement's, Visby. 
As for the link between Gothic and 
Lombard art, mentioned in your fasci- 
nating feature, another fine treasure 
comes to mind. San Giovanni Battista 
at Monza comprises such ancient ob- 
jects as the ones given to the cathe, 
dral by the 6th century Queen Theo- 
dolinda: a votive golden crown, the 
celebrated Iron Crown of Lombardy, 
and a plate with a golden hen and 
chicks! 
Pefer Ratazzi 
Have, United Kingdom 
1961 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco New 
C LOAKING THE STEPPES: Forest 
planting has now begun on the plains of 
the southern Ukraine, in the Odessa region 
on the slopes of hills where fertility is 
low and on soil which is susceptible to 
erosion. The forests, covering a total area 
of 600,000 acres, are to be planted by 
1965. Forest oases of quickly-growing 
trees—poplar, aspen, maple and acacia—- 
will reach from the mouth of the Danube 
northwards to the Bug, creating a micro- 
climate and protecting the soil from ero- 
sion. At the same time the cultivated fields 
will be bordered by protective belts to 
shield them from frost and the spring dust 
storms. 
m UNESCO'S 100 MEMBERS: Unes- 
co has now 100 Member States. The 
latest country to join the organization, 
and thus bring Unesco its century of 
members, is Cyprus. 
WwW ORLD WEATHER DAY: The im- 
portance of meteorology in the lives of 
everyone was highlighted last month by the 
first annual celebration of World Meteoro- 
logical Day on March 23—anniversary date 
of the creation of the World Meteorologi- 
cal Organization (WMO) in 1950. At that 
time, WMO (a U.N. Specialized Agency) 
took over the work which the International 
Meteorological Organization had been 
doing since 1878 to perfect and standardize 
meteorological activities, especially services 
to maritime navigation, agriculture and, 
increasingly, to aviation. WMO’s far- 
flung activities today include: water re- 
source development, technical assistance in 
meteorology and hydrology, weather fore- 
casting for jet aircraft, tidal wave study 
and warning service, maritime and fish- 
eries meteorology, and the publication of 
cloud and climatic atlases. 
MH EVOLUTIONS ‘SHOW WIN- 
DOW: The Charles Darwin Founda- 
tion for the Galapagos Isles, which is 
now developing the world's first inter- 
national biological station, has receiv- 
ed a grant of $ 6,500 from the National 
Science Foundation in Washington. 
The Darwin Foundation, established in 
1959 one hundred years after the pub- 
lication of Darwin's “Origin of Spe- 
cies”, has been set up under the joint 
sponsorship of UNEsCo and the Inter- 
national Union for the Conservation of 
Nature and Natural Resources. At pres- 
ent Mr. Raymond Levéque, a Swiss 
biologist, is in the Galapagos on a 
UNESCO technical assistance mission— 
the third scientist to be sent by UNESCO 
to these islands off the coast of Ecua- 
dor, where Charles Darwin gathered a 
rich harvest of knowledge. The recent 
grant of $6,500 will be used to build 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
appointed by Unesco. 
been published in The Unesco Courier, 
RITCHIE CALDER AWARDED 
KALINGA PRIZE 
A lifetime spent roaming the world and exploring its scientific frontiers to make them 
less remote for the general public was honoured last month in Paris when Unesco 
announced the selection of Ritchie Calder, leading British science writer, as winner of 
the annual International Kalinga Prize for the popularization of science. 
Widely known as a radio and television broadcaster as well as an author, Mr. Calder is 
the ninth winner of the prize of 1,000 pounds sterling, offered by the Kalinga Foundation. 
The purpose of this award, donated by Mr. B. Patnaik, an Indian industrialist, is to offer 
recognition to leading interpreters of science and also to strengthen links between India 
and scientists of all nations. The prize is awarded every year by an international jury 
Mr. Calder was science editor of the News Chronicle in London from 1945 to 1956 
and of the New Statesman and Nation from 1945 to 1958. His fifteen books on scientific 
subjects ranging from medicine to the struggle for life in the Arctic have been translated 
into a dozen languages. Mr. Calder has gone on extensive missions for Unesco and other 
United Nations agencies to tell the story of their field work. Many articles by him have     
laboratories at the station, and UNESCO 
has granted $9,000 for scientific equip- 
ment. One of the aims of the foun- 
dation, and of UNESCO's aid, is to save 
the unique wild life of the Galapagos 
which have been termed a “show win- 
dow of evolution.” 
Mos TRANSLATED AUTHOR: 
With translations of 198 of his works and 
speeches published in 1959, Nikita Krush- 
chev became the most translated author for 
the year, topping Vladimir I. Lenin (174 
translations) who has headed the list in 
previous years. Most of the works were 
translated into the various languages of 
the Soviet Union. Both these authors are 
immediately followed by a book of which 
there was no single author—The Bible— 
which was translated 171 times in 1959. 
These figures are listed in the twelfth edi- 
tion of Index Translationum published an- 
nually by Unesco (price $ 18.50; 92/6 stg.). 
In the latest edition a total of 29,661 trans- 
lations are recorded, nearly all of them 
appearing in 1959, : 
mW THREE-DIMENSIONAL TEXT- 
BOOKS: The days are past when 
sombre, cloth-covered textbooks with 
closely printed pages made studies seem 
like a punishment rather than a quest 
for knowledge. That, at least, is the 
impression given by a recent exhibition 
in London where textbooks from several 
European countries revealed the many 
qualities of good modern publications 
with their attractive covers, profuse 
illustrations and clear typography. 
Among them was a manual on architec- 
tural geometry with three-dimensional 
diagrams. Seen through red and green 
glasses, the trapezoids, rhomboids and 
parabolas stand out like models from 
the pages. 
 
Unesco 
Blind children in Ceylon, Pakistan, Poland and 
the Philippines are being helped by young 
people in France who have raised §12,000in a 
nation-wide campaign organized by French 
Unesco Clubs. Unesco Gift Coupons for this 
amount were presented to representatives of 
the four countries during a recent ceremony 
in Unesco House. Above, Madame Anil de 
Silva, Unesco Liaison Officer for the Govern- 
ment of Ceylon, receives Gift Coupons from 
Dr. ). Zuckerman, of Unesco. Through the 
Unesco Gift Coupon Plan over $800,000 has 
been raised to help educational projects in 
some 50 countries during the past nine-years, 
Imp. GEORGES LANG, PARIS. IMPRIME EN FRANCE.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Binders for your 
collection of 
‘Unesco Courier’ 
We offer subscribers a special binder for their copies 
of THE UNESCO COURIER holding a year's issues of 
the magazine. Handsomely produced in halfcloth 
with the spine in an attractive blue and the title (in 
English, French or Spanish according to the edition 
to which you subscribe) and Unesco colophon 
embossed in gold, these convenient and attractive 
binders, costing $2.50; 12/6 stg.; or 6 NF, can be 
ordered from UNESCO Agents, below, 
Just Published: 
VACATIONS ABROAD 
Vol. XIll, 1961 
Courses, Study Tours, Work Camps 
Do you want to plan your 
vacations to the best advan- 
tage? Do you want to make 
friends of your own age in 
foreign countries? Do you 
want to know about all the 
opportunities that are open 
to you? If so, you will be 
interested in the latest volume 
of VACATIONS ABROAD. 
It will give you information on 
over 1,500 educational and 
cultural vacation activities open 
to young people, students, 
teachers and workers wishing 
to combine their holidays 
abroad with educational travel. 
Over 770 institutions have con- 
tributed information on vaca- 
tion activities In 1961 in approxl- 
mately 75 countries. 
Order your copy of VACA- 
TIONS ABROAD now from 
the Unesco national distri- 
butors below.   US $1.25; 6/-(stg.) ; 4.50 NF   
Vacations 
Abroad XII 
1961 
  
Where to obtain Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller, or write 
direct to the National Distributor 
in your country. (See list below 
names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) 
Payment is made in the national 
currency ; rates quoted are for an 
annual subscription to THE UNESCO 
COURIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. ~— Panuzal, Press 
Department, Royal Afghan Ministry of 
Education, Kabul. 
AUSTRALIA. — Melbourne University 
Press, 369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, 
C. |, Victoria. (A. 15/-). 
AUSTRIA, — Verlag Georg Fromme 
& Ceo, Spengergasse 39, Vienna V (Sch. 
50.-) 
BELGIUM. — For The Unesco Courier: 
Louis de Lannoy, 22, Place De Brouckére, 
Brussels, C.C.P. 338.000, (fr. b, 100) 
Other publications: Office de Publicité, 
| 6, rue Marcq, Bruxelles, C.C.P. 285.98; 
N.V. Standaard-Boekhandel, Belgiélei [51, 
Antwerp. 
BURMA. — Burma Translation Society 
361 Prome Road, Rangoon. 
CANADA. — Queen's Printer, Ottawa 
Ont. (§ 3.00). 
CEYLON. — The Associated Newspapers 
of Ceylon Ltd, Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Co- 
lombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
CHINA. = World Book Co, Ltd.,, 99 
Chungking South Rd., Section I, Taipeh, 
Taiwan (Formosa), 
CUBA. — Libreria Economica, Pte Zayas 
S05-7, Apartado 113, Havana. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. — Arcia Ltd, 30 
Ye Smeckich, Prague 2, 
DENMARK. = Ejnar Munksgaard. A/S 
Tidsskriftafdelingen, 6 Norregade, Copen- 
hagen K, (D.kt, 12). 
ETHIOPIA. — International Press Agen- 
cy, P.O. Box 120, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND, = Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 
2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. (F.mk. 540). 
FRANCE, — Unesco Bookshop, Place de 
Fontenoy, Paris, 7¢. C.CP. 12598-48. 
(7 NF.) 
GERMANY. — R. Oldenbourg K.G., 
Unesco-Vertrieb fir Deutschland, Rosen- 
heimerstrasse 145, Munich 8. (DM. B). 
GREAT BRITAIN. — See United Kingdom. 
GREECE, — Librairie H, Kauffmann, 28, 
rue du Stade, Athens, 
HONG-KONG, — Swindon Book Co., 28, 
Nathan Road, Kowloon. 
HUNGARY. — Kultura, P.O. Box 149. 
Budapest, 62. 
INDIA. = Orient Longmans Private Ltd. 
Indian Mercantile Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay |; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, 
Calcutta 13; Gunfoundry Road, Hyde- 
rabad, I: 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asal Ali Road, P.O, 
Box 386, New Delhi, |; Sub-Depot: 
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 17 Park 
Street Calcutta 16, Scindia House, 
New Delhi, (Rs. 6.70). 
INDONESIA. — Bappit Pusat *'Permata”, 
Djalan Nusantara 22, Djakarta. 
IRAQ. =— Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad. 
IRELAND. — The National Press, 2, Wel 
lington Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin, {(10/-). 
ISRAEL, = Blumstein’s Bookstores Ltd., 
35, Allenby Road and 48, Nahlat Benja- 
min Street, Tel-Aviv {1£ 4.-}. 
JAMAICA. — Sangster's Book Room, 91 
Harbour Street, Kingston, 
Knox Educational Services, Spaldings.(10/-) 
JAPAN. — Maruzen Co. Ltd, 6 Tori- 
Nichome, Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 
Tokyo Central, Tokyo. {Yen 500). 
JORDAN. — Joseph L. Bahous & Co., 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.O.B. 66, 
Amman. 
KOREA. — Korean National Commission 
for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. 
LIBERIA. = J. Momolu Kamara, 69, Front 
and Gurley Streets, Monrovia, 
LUXEMBOURG, — Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grand-Rye, Luxembourg. 
MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. — Federal Publications 
Ltd., Times House, River Valley Rd., 
Singapore, 
MALTA. — Sapienza's Library, 26 Kings 
way, Valetta. (10/-). 
MAURITIUS. — Nalanda Company Ltd. 
30, Bourbon Street, Port-Louis. 
MONACO, = British Library, 30 Bld des 
Moulins, Monte-Carlo. (7 NF). 
NETHERLANDS, — N.Y. Martinus Nij- 
hoff, Lange Yoorhout, 9, The Hague. (fl 6) 
NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES, — 
G.C.T. Van Dorp & C* (Ned Ant) N.V. 
Willemstad, Curacao. 
NEW ZEALAND. — Unesco Publications 
Centre, 100 Hackthorne Road, Christ- 
church, (10/-}. 
NIGERIA, — C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 
174, Lagos. {10/-). 
NORWAY. — A.S. Bokhjornet, Lille Gren- 
sen, 7, Oslo. (N. kr, 13.20), 
PAKISTAN. — The Waest-Pak Publishing 
Co, Ltd.,, Unesco Publications House, 
P.O. Box 374, 56-N Gulberg Industrial 
Colony, Lahore. 
PANAMA. — Cultural Panamena, Avenida 
73, No. TI-49, Apartado de Correos 2018, 
Panama, D.F. (Balboas 3.-). 
PHILIPPINES. — Philippine Education Co. 
Inc, 1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, P.O, Box 
620, Manila. 
POLARD, — ** RUCH" ul. Wiloza Nr. 46, 
Warsaw. 10 (ZI. 50). 
PORTUGAL. — Dias & Andrada Lda, 
Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, 
Lisbon. 
RHODESIA & NYASALAND. — The 
Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, 
Southern-Rhodesia. ] 
SWEDEN, For The Unesco Courier: Svan- 
ska Unescoridet, Vaiagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C {Kr. 7.50); other publications 
A/B C.E. Fritezes, Kungl. Hovbokhandel, 
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm, 
SWITZERLAND. — Europa Verlag, § 
Rimistrasse, Zurich. 
Payot, 40, rus du Marché, Geneva. C.C.P, 
1-236. 
Courier” only: Georges Losmaz, |, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva. C.C.P, 
1-4811, (Fr, S. 8). 
THAILAND, — Suksapan Panit, Mansion 
9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. 
TURKEY, — Librairis Hachette, 469 Isti- 
klal Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul. 
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA. — Van 
Schaik's Bookstore, Libri Building, Church 
Street, Pretoria. (10/-). 
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC (EGYPT). — 
2 Renaissance d’Egypte, 9 Sh, Adly-Pasha, 
2Ir0. 
UNITED KINGDOM. — H.M. Stationery 
Office, P.O, Box 569, London, S.E.L(10/-), 
UNITED STATES. — Unesco Publications 
Center, 801 Third Avenue, New York, 
22, N.Y.($ 5.00.) and (except pariodicals): 
Columbia University Press, 2960 Broad- 
way, New York, 27, N.Y. 
U.S.S.R. = Mezhdunarodnaja Kniga, 
Moscow, G-200. 
YUGOSLAVIA, — Jugoslovenska Knjlga, 
Terazije 27/11. Belgrade.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/035706engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

— = tl SL 
Photo '@ F. L. Kenett. Published 1960 by Old- / 
, bourne Book Co, Ltd., London, and New Yor K
Graphic Society, Greenwich, Conn. U.S.A., inf J 
the book *‘Classical Greece". 
eT aia Fat * ” $ = d Ls ™ - 4 = 3 Aig 
5 Lae (Eo 0 BREE a a er SS EY  