# [074013](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf) 5

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### 74015: UNESCO creates Regional Office in western hemisphere

COU 
  
  
 
  
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Volume II.—No 6, Price: 10 Cents (U.S), 6 Pence (UK.), or 25 Francs JULY 1949. 
What 
   
NE of the most impertant sessions 
'D in the history of Unesco’s Execu- 
tive: Board came to an end last 
month after a seven-day meeting in Paris 
from June 9 to 15. During this period, 
the Unesco Executive body approved in 
its entirety a programme for this Or- 
ganization's participation in the United 
Nations plan {or technical assistance to 
under-developed countries, agreed to the 
opening of a Unesco regional office in the 
Western Hemisphere, and voted the 
allocation of special funds to help refugee 
children in the Middle East and Greece. 
In addition, the Executive Board heard 
and approved a report on the concrete 
and practical work achieved by Unesco 
in the past four months, and approved a 
draft programme and budget for Unesco 
during 1950. 
The Board also completed plans for 
the Foucrth Session of the General Con- 
ference which is to take place in Paris 
from September 19 to October 5, three 
days longer than was originally planned, 
in order to allow for a full discussion by 
all member countries of the plan for 
technical aid to under-developed coun- 
tries. 
The Executive Board of Unesco, which 
includes 18 members elected by the 
General Conference, acts as a Board of 
D:rectors for the Conference between its 
annual meetings. Though each of its 
members is from a different country, the 
group represents the Conference as a 
whole and its members are elected as 
individuals and do not act as representa- 
tives for their own governments. This 
‘year, the Executive Bodrd is being led by 
one of India’s most distinguished men of 
learning, Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, 
and the noted Venezuelan inter- 
nationalist, Dr. C. Parra-Perez. 
Technical Aid Programme 
NESCO'S plan for an extended 
[ B programme of technical aid to 
under-developed countries was 
approved in its entirety by the Executive 
Board at its meeting last month. 
Other UN Specialized Agencies such as 
the Food and Agriculture Organization, 
the International Labour Organization 
and the World Health Organization have 
also been examining the technical aid 
plan, and a joint report. containing their 
views and suggestions along with those 
of Unesco will be presented by Trygve 
Lie, UN Secretary-General, to the Eccno- 
mic and Social Council which is meeting’ 
in Geneva on July 4. 
The sum suggested for the first two 
years of the over-all programme is 
~~ 8 
r - 
. 
oo. 
RE 
The Tragic > 
Plight 
of Greece's “2 
Children. in 
- 
Cultural Duties Has the State? 
UNESCO FORUM THEME 
SET FOR 
N international “town meeting” on what 
A every nation can do ‘and should do in 
order to ensure a better understanding 
between peoples will mark Unesco’s fourth annual 
Conference shortly after it opens in Paris next 
September. 
The Fourth Session of Unesco’s General Con- 
ference will take place at Unesco House from 
September 19 to October 5, the Executive Board 
of the organization decided last month. Perhaps 
the most important feature of the Paris Con- 
ference will be a three-day debate by distinguished 
personalities of international reputation on the 
following theme : 
“What are the duties of the State in regard 
to education, science and culture for the purpose of 
ensuring a better understanding between peoples. 
and what practical steps should be taken in order 
to discharge these duties?” 
SEPTEMBER 
The debate will be held in a large Parisian 
lecture hall, rather than Unesco House itself, in 
order to allow a large public to participate in 
the discussions. The three evenings of September 
27, 28 and 29 have been set aside for the occasion 
so that Conference delegates. intellectual groups, 
student organizations and the general public may 
hear leaders from different parts of the world 
debate the subject. 
HE discussions will be broadcast by the 
1) Radiodiffusion Francaise and international 
radio hook-ups will make the programmes 
available to listeners in other parts of the world. 
In this way it is hoped to arouse a strong current 
of interest im Unesco and the things it stands 
for and give emphasis to the contribution that 
culture. science and education can make for world 
peace understanding. 
 


### 74014: UNESCO Board votes emergency aid for Greek refugee children

Unesco Board Votes Emergency 
Aid For Greek Refugee Children 
$ 85,000,000, Unesco’s share of which has 
been estimated at $16.855,500. 
Unesco’s aid programme provides for 
assistance in technical, elementary and 
fundamental adult education : the pro- 
duction and use of materials for educa- 
tion, including mass communication 
materials, the technical needs of press, 
radio and film ; training of teachers and 
other specialized personnel ; planning and 
organizing of scientific research and 
training laboratories; and help in the 
protection of national cultures. 
In carrying out thls programme, Unesco 
will make use of diiferent methods, 
depending on the needs and requirements 
of the under-developed countries, 
The most direct and immediate form 
of technical aid that Unesco can offer is 
to send advisers and consultants whose 
work would range from administrative 
advice to direct responsibility for estab- 
lishing new types of institutions (such as 
teacher training centres or scientific 
laboratories) and guiding them for one or 
two years. 
Other methods Unesco can oifer 
include exploratory missions, permanent 
regional] services through field science 
offices, and a broad training programme 
covering fellowships, seminars. symposia, 
experimental or demonstration projects 
-in fundamental education, and regional 
training centres. Unesco also hopes to aid 
under-developed countries by the distribu- 
tion of educational. scientific and tech- 
nical books and periodicals, the publica- 
“tion of special pamphlets and mono- _ 
graphs. and the setting up of scientific 
and technical institutes. 
{Details of Unesco’s proposals for 
technical development will be found on 
Fage 11 of this issue.) 
If Unesco’s General Conference con- 
firms the proposals already approved by 
the Executive Board and if the Economic 
and Social Council ratifies the general 
plan for technical assistance, Unesco 
will be ready to act in 1950. 
Unesco Creates Regional Office 
in Western Hemisphere 
N important step towards giving 
ON Unesco a more direct representa- 
tion in the Western Hemisphere 
was taken by the Executive Board when 
it approved the establishment of a Unesco 
Regional Office with its headquarters, 
for 1949, at Havana, Cuba. 
The Havana Office, which is Unesco’s 
first experiment in regional centres, is 
scheduled to open on September 1st. Its 
main task will be to make Unesco better 
known throughout the Western Hemis- 
phere, to increase contacts between 
Unesco's Member States and the National 
Commissions in the region, and to enlist 
their full support in carryicg out Unesco’s 
programme of cultural co-operation, since 
this work is already being done by the 
Inter-American Cultural Council of the 
Organization of American States. 
(Continued on Page 2) 
  
Elsingse 
Canference 
on (dult 
Education 
* | 
Read Torres Bodei’s 
address on ‘Adult 
Education and the 
Future of Our Civili-| 
zation’ on Cenire Page § 
of our Supplement. 
    
Four delegates at the Elsinore Conference. From left to right: M. A. Basdevant (France), M. R. K. 
Gardiner (Gold Coast), Miss Goold-Adams (G.-B.), and M. E. A. Corbett (Canada). 
  
  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=2) 3

### 74014: UNESCO Board votes emergency aid for Greek refugee children

### 74015: UNESCO creates Regional Office in western hemisphere

UNESCO COURIER 
 
  
(Continued from page 1) 
The Office is being set up in agreement 
with the Cuban Government, which has 
offered a yearly contribution of $10,000 
towards its cost. Cuba has already placed 
at the disposal of the new Office an 
impressive building facing the Plaza del 
Mayo and the large Havana bay, and has 
agreed to provide diplomatic privileges to 
the staff as well as customs and postal 
franchise. 
In the initial stages, the Regional 
Office will concentrate its work on the 
States of the Caribbean area (Antilles, 
Central America, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Mexico and Venezuela). Later, when it 
has had more experience of regional 
problems, this radius of action will be 
gradually extended. During 1949, the 
Regional Office will be limited to a staff 
of four, including a specialist in funda- 
mental] education. 
The question of establishing regional 
offices or regional centres has been a 
subject marked by stormy discussions at 
Unesco's General Conferences during the 
past two years. Certain delegations have 
strongly opposed the idea 
of de-centralizing Unesco 
through the creation of such 
centres. The idea was first 
proposed at the Mexico City 
Conference in 1947 and after 
much discussion agreed to in 
principle, subject to consul- 
tations and agresment be- 
tween Unesco, the United 
Nations and its Specialized 
Agencies and the Organiza- 
tion of American States 
(OAS). 
Last year, at the Beirut 
Conference, the presentation 
of the results of these con- 
sultations and a resolution 
to create a R2gional Centre 
in Cuba again found dele- 
gates divided in heated de- 
bate. When it came to the 
vote, however, the Confer- 
ence adopted a resolution 
instructing the Director-Gen- 
eral “to establish as soon 
as possible a Regional Office 
in the Western Hemisphere” 
in consultation with the 
OAS and the UN family. 
Before the Executive Board 
finally approved the setting 
up of the Havana Office last 
month some of the nesita- 
tions which had previously 
marked the General Con- 
ference meetings again were 
felt. Although Mr. Tecrres 
Bodet stated that neither the 
OAS nor the UN or its Agen- 
cies opposed the creation of the Regional 
Office, some members of the Board ex- 
pressed the view that a Regional Office 
in the Western Hemisphere should be set 
up with the technical and financial co- 
operation of the Organization of American 
States, which they pointed out, had great 
educational possibilities for America and 
“its close co-operation with Unesco would 
be the best method of spreading Unesco’s 
ideas and action in North and South 
America.” 
In agreeing, finally, to the immediate 
establishment of a Unesco Regional 
Office in Havana, the Executive Board 
expressed its thanks to the Government 
of Cuba for the assistance and facilities 
it was extending for the opening of the 
office and asked the Director-General to 
consult with the OAS on the best ways 
of collaboration between the two orga- 
nizations, The Executive Board also asked 
M. Torres Bodet to submit a repoet to 
the Fifth General Conference, to be held 
in Florence, Italy, next year outlining the 
achievements of the Office, the expe- 
rience gained through it and the possi- 
bility of entrusting to it creative activities 
within the framework of the Unesco 
programme, 
Aid te Refugee Children 
In Greece and Middle East 
OLLOWING an appeal by the United 
Nations calling on Unesco for aid 
in caring for Greek refugee 
children, the Unesco Executive Board last 
roonth approved emergency steps to help 
these children, 
The UN appeal, which was communicat- 
ed to Unesco by Trygve Lie, following a 
report by the UN Special Committee on 
the Balkans, reported the news that the 
number of refugees in Greece has in- 
creased from 18,600 in January 1947, to 
666,000 in January 1949. This represents 
one-tenth of Gireece’s population. How- 
ever, since this figure covers only those 
who have claimed assistance and proved 
their need, the actual total of refugees 
in the country is estimated at nearer one 
million, 
The exact number of refugee children 
is not known, but it is known that their 
situation is one of the most tragic in 
Europe today. Since October 1940, Greece 
has been racked by war and upheaval. 
The little ones under the age of nine have 
vet to learn the meaning of the word 
“peace”. Over two years ago, Unesco 
field workers had carried out a short 
survey of the educational losses of the 
country, and one of them reported: “It is 
impossible to exaggerate the educational 
losses”. Unesco’s “Book of Needs I”, 
published in 1947, states. “the saddest 
sights in Greece are to be seen in the 
institutions and schools for war-handicap- 
ped children.” 
But what about today, and the thou- 
sands of new homeless refugee children ? 
The Unesco Executive Board felt that 
the United Nation's call for help could 
not b2 ignored by an organization which 
 
  
    
is dedicated to the preservation of real 
values in tomorrow's generations. 
One fact, however, was sadly clear fo 
all the members of the Board, With its 
very limited Reconstruction budget— 
almost all of which had already been 
allocated for other aid purposes earlier 
this year——Unesco obviously could not 
provide the sums needed to meet even 
the minimum requirements of these re- 
fugee children. 
The Board felt, however, that if it 
could at least make a small gesture—even 
a symbolic gesture—this might spur on 
its National Commissions and Unesco 
clubs and other national and internation- 
al organizations to make other gestures. 
And these when added up from all the 
groups in different parts of the world, 
could go'into a fund which would really 
achieve positive results. 
The Executive Board, therefore, voted 
to make an initial grant, from Unesco’s 
Reconstruction Fund reserve, of $ 10,850, 
“for emergency help of an educational 
and cultural character, as a means of 
providing a concrete token of Unesco’s 
desire to aid these refugees, in the field 
  
 
The picturdi:que Cathedral Plaza, in Havana, a short distance from Unesco’s Regional Office, 
to be set up in the Cuban capital in September. 
July 1949 
which is its special concern, and along. 
side the other United Nations Agencies 
which have come to their aid.” 
On the recommendation of Unesco’s 
Director-General, the Executive Board 
also agreed that one of its members, 
Professor Paulo de Berredo Carneiro, of 
Brazil, would go to Greece, subject to the 
approval of the Greek Government, to 
enquire into the present-day educational 
needs of the child refugee victims in the 
country. The small sum of $10,850, which 
Unesco has voted, will be placed at 
Professor Carneiro’s disposal for use by 
him in the manner and through the 
channels he considers appropriate. 
In the light of the information that 
Professor Carneiro obtains, M. Torres 
Bodet will draw up a plan of action 
whereby Unesco, its National Commissions 
and the international and national or- 
ganizations which are associated with its 
reconstruction campaign, can contribute 
to the solution of the educational 
problems of the Greek refugee children. 
And as soon as the required information 
is available, Unesco will launch a special 
appeal to these organizations. 
[A description of some of the condi- 
tions in the Middle East refugee camp 
school, written by a Unesco representa- 
tive who visited them recently will be 
jound on Page 3 of this issue along with 
an urgent appeal made by Unesco 
to raise $25,000 order to continue oper 
ation of refugee schools in the Lebanon, 
- Syria, Transjordan, and in the Jericho 
and Gaza areas of Palestine.] 
Proposed Programme 
and Budget for 1950 
HE Executive Board, during its week- 
1 long session last month, had before 
it for consideration a proposed 
programme and budget for 1950 which 
the Director-General had submitted for 
its examination. The Board approved the 
proposed programme for Unesco’s fourth 
year of activities and decided to recom- 
mend to the Paris General Conference 
the adoption of a budget totalling 
$ 8.962,220, representing an increase of 
$ 1,200,000 over the 1949 budget. 
In its report to the General Conference, 
the Executive Board stated its conviction 
“that the activities and the funds pro- 
posed remain at a moderate scale in 
relation to the world’s needs for educa~ 
tion, science and culture.” 
It should be pointed out that the pro- 
posed 1950 programme does not represent 
any drastic revision of the one adopted 
at Beirut, which was designed to cover 
at least two years’ activities, Adressing 
the Executive Board’s Programme Com- 
mittee, M. Torres Bodet described the 
fact that he was presenting a smaller 
programme while asking for a larger 
budget, as “a realistic move.” “For if 
tangible aims are to be achieved,” he said, 
“fewer projects and larger credits will be 
necessary.” Final decisions as to the 
1950 programme and budget will rest 
with the General Conference when it 
meets in Paris this September. 
EE IIA 
The resources of Unesco will be 
devoted, en the one hand, to the 
maintenance ef approved eon- 
tinuing services, and, on the 
other hand, to the execution of 
a limited number of special preo- 
jects determined by the General 
Conference from time to time, 
All these activities should form 
a coherent whole and relate to 
matters of evident importance 
and usefulness, 
In all spheres of cemmon jn- 
terest, Unesce will co-operate 
closely with the United Nations 
and its Specialized Agencies. 
Unesco will seek t¢ associate as 
closely as peossible in the execu- 
tion eof its programme thcse in- 
ternational governmental and 
non-governmental organizations 
pursuing, in specialized fields, 
ends similar, or related to, its 
own, 
Unesco will, if necessary, assist 
in the establishment, the develop- 
ment and the co-ordination of 
international organizations, whose 
aims and activities are in con- 
fermity with its own, 
Unesco will seek to utilize, 
through the National Commis- 
sions of Member States, the ser- 
vices of the national organiza- 
tions and institutions concerned 
with education, science, culture 
and mass communications, in 
order te associate such bodies 
and institutiens in the general 
task ef international co-opera- 
tion, 
In Education, Unesco will act as 
a center for the exchange and 
dissemination of ideas and prac- 
tices, in order te encourage the 
Fa growth of effective systems of 
education, seeking especially to 
bring people fo understand one 
another, to train good citizens 
and io give every person, rich er 
poor, in tewn or country, without 
distinction of colour, race, sex er 
creed, the opportunity for an 
education which best assures him 
the possibility to develop his 
personality and carry out his 
social responsabilities. 
As a contribution te intellectual 
progress and te the Improvement 
of the living cenditions eof 
cultures, the consciousness of 13 
human solidarity. 
10 
To assist people to develop 
greater understanding of ether 
nations through personal con- 
tacts, Unesco will encourage 
projects which promote {ravel 
abroad for purposes of study, 
research and teaching. 
11 
Unesco will encourage the spread 
of information among peoples 
by seeking te facilitate, increase 
and impreve their mutual 
knowledge through such methods 
 


### 74016: A Blueprint of directives

A BLUEPRINT OF DIRECTIVES 
"THE most important new feature of Unesco’s draft 
programme for 1950, approved by its Executive 
Rcard last month, is a code of 18 directives which, if 
adopted by the General Conference in September, will 
become basic principles for Unesco. The directives will 
serve as a -‘bridge’’ between Unesco's in generalized 
form by its Constitution and the specific programme 
resolutions. These directives, it is hoped will assist in 
tbe orientation of Unesco’s work and should, at the 
same time, give the general public a clearer understand- 
ing of the Organization’s aims and activities. 
 
mankind, Unesco will encourage 
international enterprises which 
seek to increase and disseminate 
scientific knowledge. 
Unesco will seek to improve and 
make better known the methods 
and findings of the Social Scien- 
ces; and, in particular, their 
possible contribution te the de- 
velopment of international ceo- 
operation and understanding. 
Unesco will encourage intellec- 
tual and artistic exchanges 
between peoples, to develop, in 
mutual respect for their several 
as the press, radio, the film and 
television. The Organization will 
urge those in charge of these 
media of information to assist in 
promoting international under- 
standing and social progress. 
12 
Unesco, taking inte considera- 
tion primarily the needs of the 
war-devastated countries, will 
broaden progressively, within the 
limits of its resources, into a 
more general activily for the 
raising of standards in educa- 
tion, science and culture, the 
energies mow devoted to recon- 
struction, 
The educational scientific and 
cultural needs of economically 
underdeveloped countries will 
receive increasing attention from 
Unesco, which will continue to 
respect the individuality eof their 
cultures, 
14 
Unesco will direct constant at- 
tentien to the problems within its 
competence arising in Trust and 
Non - Self - Governing territories, 
with due regard for the needs 
and traditions of their pepula- 
tions, and in co-operation with 
the local authorities, through the 
States responsible for the ad- 
ministration of such territories. 
15 
Unesco will take special measures 
te associate young people as far 
as possible, both in the 
execution of its programme and 
in making widely knewn the 
principles upen which it is bas- 
ed. For this reason Unesco will in 
particular seek the ceo-eperation 
of teachers and others active in 
directing youth movements, 
16 
Unesco will maintain liaison 
with international nen-govern- 
mental labour organizations, in 
order te encourage them to take 
an active part in the execution 
of the programme of Unesco. 
17 
Unesco will seek te make better 
known the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights, to win con- 
sent for the principles it en- 
shrines and to assist in bringing 
about the educational, scientific 
and cultural conditions which 
the fuller realization eof these 
principles requires. 
18 
In all its activities, Unesce’s 
prime concern will be to serve 
the cause of peace fo which MN 
is dedicated. ’ 
ag EY  

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

July 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
 
WILLEM 
VAN VLIET 
O reach El Shune, we 
left Amman early one 
morning while it was 
still cool. Traffic on 
the road to Jerusalem 
was rather quiet now 
that there were no 
troops. Occasionally, 
when a herd of goats 
barred the way, our 
car had to come to a halt, but 
w.th much shouting and arm waving the 
shepherd drove his charges to one side 
of the dusty highway and we were away 
again, 
We passed a sign marked “sea level” 
and it began to grow hotter and hotter 
as we drove down into the vallzy, leaving 
behind us the few colourful villages of 
Transjordan. 
Towards eleven o'clock we arrived at El 
Shune, a cluster of low-built huts on the 
edge of the Jordan Valley. On out left lay 
the shimmering Dead Sea, while on our 
right stretched the endless rows of white 
tents, dazzling under scorching sun. This 
was the El Shune refugee camp, where 
20,000 people were barely subsisting on a 
ration of 1,500 calories a day—about half 
the normal requirements. 
Baking Hot Sand 
i was welcomed by the camp manager, 
    
  
a young Hungarian volunteer, who 
‘ed the way into a tent and in- 
troduced me to the Danish camp doctor 
and his team of British nurses. From thém 
I heard the latest news, That mornirg two 
refugees had been kidnapped by a Bedsuin   
5 | AidioM iddle East 
Fattah Nounih, 
Desert Headmaster Fe : 
of El Shune | 
ie 
School- 
ME WILLEM VAN VLIET, a member of Unesco’s Reconstruction Depart- 
ment, recently returned from the Middle East after spending one 
month visiting Unesco-sponsored refugee schools, set up by voluntary 
organizations, in Lebanon, Syria, Palestine and Transjordan. 
In the following article, he gives a graphic account of some of the 
things hz saw during a visit to one of the camp schools at El Shune, in 
the Jordan Valley, and describes similar problems facing educational 
workers in other parts of the Middle East. 
    
  
Jeo 


### 74017: The School-bell in the wilderness: aid to Middle East refugee schools

Bell In The Wilderness 
  
tribe and 300 men had set out to rescue 
them. There was the usual crop of snake 
bites to attend to, they told me, and they 
had heard rumours that the camp might 
be moved further north. 
Outside the heat had become unbearable 
for it was now midday. With the camp 
manager, I trudged across the sand 
towards the camp “school.” The use of the 
word school would only be justified by 
the definition “a place where children are 
taught,” for I saw none of the things one 
usually associates with a school. 
There were no buildings, nor were there 
any at all within a fifty-mile radius or 
more, This was the desert where John the 
Baptist had lived and wandered, “a voice 
crying in the wilderness.” 
There was nothing for the childeen to 
sit on but the baking hot sand. We went 
from class to class; from group to group 
of boys and girls of different ages. For 
the little ones there were tents, but the 
rest were being taught in the open air 
under the blistering sun. 
Teachers and pupils alike showed great 
imagiration and resource. They had to, 
because there was nothing to write on. 
Wr. ting was reduced to spelling and all 
their arithmetic was done mentally. 
Se¢ap Box Table 
Ne class of thirty boys was learning 
© “English and the difference between 
  
    \¥ a Va 
new word he would ask hig perspiring 
charges: “How do you spell it?” 
“L-A-U-G-H” “Good, now “S-P-E-A-K"— 
“How do you spell that?".. 
There was not even a blackboard at El 
Shune to lighten their task. 
After inspecting all 32 classes in the 
school, we made our way to the tent 
where Mr. Fattah Nounih, the head- 
master, had set up his office. Here, im- 
provisation was still an essential factor, 
for the headmaster was obliged to use an 
old soap box as a writing table. 
Mr. Nounih’s immediate worry that 
| morning was the fact that the two note- 
| books in which he kept his school records 
were almost full. Each morning, he told 
me, his 32 assistant teachers handed in 
their attendance figures for the day and 
that particular morning, 1.946 bovs and 
g'rls had answered the roll call. 
I took notes on the equipment needed 
in the El Shune school: 32 blackboards, 
6.000 copybooks, 2,000 pencils, Arab 
readers, English New Method Readers. 
When I had finished, Mr. Nounih added 
wistfully, “And a school-bell. please”. 
I thought he was joking. “De you really 
want me to note that too?” I asked. “Oh 
yes.” he replied emphatically, “a school- 
bell is most essential” SRR 
-—0—- 
the spelling and the pronunciation 
of this language has perhaps never been 
more painfully realized than by the young 
Palestinian teacher in charge. After each 
Not even the scorching desert sun can 
diminish the “education hunger” of these 
Arab boys in a “classroom” of a Unesco 
refugee school in the Jordan Valley. 
Two weeks later, when I had returned 
to Paris, I could hear Mr. Nounih's in- 
sistent voice: “and a school-bell, please.” 
A school-bell! It seemed such a bizarre 


### 74018: UNESCO sponsors camp schools for Middle East refugee children

Unesco Sponsors Camp Schools 
For Middle East 
gg HIRTY-ONE Unesco-sponsored schools are now 
ad providing educational {facilities for over 11,000 
refugee children in the Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, 
and Transjordan under Unesco’'s programme of assistance 
to Middle East refugees. Teachers have been recruited 
from among the Palestine refugees themselves. 
Unesco’s contribution to relief work in the Middle East 
wa; made at the request of the Third General Conference 
at Beirut, last December, which led to the creation of 
a $45.00 fund to support the ‘Unesco’ schools. 
From its own budget, Unesco gave $15,000. A further 
$20.000 was provided by the Lord Mayor of London’s 
Fund while the Norwegian United Nations Appeal for 
Children (UNAC) Committee made a donation of $10.000. 
This fund was designed to allow the schools to operate 
until August 31. at which date the United Nations Relief 
Programme in the Middle East was also due to end. As 
this Programme will now probably be carried on until 
the end of 1949, Unesco is trying to raise a further 
$25.000 to maintain the schools programme until the 
same date. 
After hearing a report on the Middle East situation, 
at its meeting last month, Unesco’s Executive Board 
made an appeal to the Lord Mayor of London’s Fund for 
a further donation of $20,000 which would allow the 
Refugee Children 
schools to remain open until November 15. 
The Board also asked Member States to raise the 
remaining $5,000 which would provide for the needs of 
the schools until December 31. 
The ‘‘Unesco’’ schools, for which these funds are 
intended, are being operated by the three voluntary 
agencies in charge of the United Nations. Relief for 
Palestine Refuzees: the League of Red Cross Societies. 
in the Lebanon. Syria and Transjordan; the International 
Committee of the Red Cross, in Palestine; and the 
American Friends Service Committee in the Gaza Area 
of southwest Palestine. 
The voluntary agencies have found that education is 
vitally important to their work, now that regular food 
supplies and shelter are being provided under the United 
Nations programme. Schools have greatly raised the 
morale of camps where they have been established and 
are everywhere in great demand by the refugees them- 
selves. 
Schools have been started by the Palestine Committee 
in the Jerusalem, Nablous and Bekaa areas, and by the 
refugees themselves with the aid of Voluntary Agencies. 
All these schools need basic equipment, such as black- 
boards and exercice books, and will have to close down 
if more outside help does not materialize,   
Refugee Schools 
request. A school-bell ringing in the 
wilderness. 
I also thought of the other schools I 
had visited in Transjordan, in southern 
Palestine and in the Lebanon. Some were 
in army barracks, some under tents and 
others in the open air, vet everywhere 
the picture was essentially the same— 
children sitting on the ground, the com- 
plete absence of equipment, but in spite 
of this, the attention with which the 
children followed the lessons. 
‘Education Hunger’ 
VERYWHERE 1 went I found the 
| same symptom of “education hun- 
ger”. I remember the girls in the 
Neuserath Camp school, rear Gaza, in 
southern Palestine, who had just been 
vaccinated against typhus. When their 
teacher told them they could go home 
not one of the girls would leave. “We 
have had enough holidays,” they pro- 
tested. 
One of the reasons for this “appetite” 
for education is, I believe, that the people 
had grown to appreciate the value of edu- 
cation long before they became refugees. 
The school system under the British 
administration in Palestine was above all 
a practical one; basic instruction was 
given in elementary schools, with lessons 
in agriculture and often school garden- 
ing. 
Palest‘ne teachers in refugee camps 
are now trying to copy this system as 
closely as possible, 
The impression which remains upper- 
most in my mind is something I felt 
rather than saw or heard in the camps. 
It was the striking difference between 
the undoubtedly better morale in camps 
where educational activities had been 
started and that in camps still without 
emergency schools, 
Unesco, together with the Lord Mayor 
of London's Appeal for Children, and the 
Norwegian UNAC have provided over 
11.000 of the refugee children with desks, 
notebooks, pencils, textbooks and black- 
boards. But more than 15.000 children 
are still attending schools which have no 
equipment and -an additional 150,000 re- 
ceive no instruction at all. 
French Children 
Help War Orphans’ Camp 
BY donating at least one franc 
each, school children in towns 
and villages all over France have rais- 
ed over 1,500,00 francs (about $4,500) 
during the past few wecks towards the 
cost of holding an international war 
orphans’ holiday camp in southwest 
France. 
Cost of building and running the 
camp, to be held during August in the 
Moulin Vieux Republic, a children’s 
community twenty-eight miles from 
Grenoble, is estimated at 3,000,000 
franes (39.000). 
The French children’s contribution, 
made in response to an appeal from 
the French National Commission for 
Unesco, will, therefore, cover half the 
total cost. 
Sponsored by the International Fe- 
deration of Children's Communities 
the camp will be attended by fifty 
“delegates,” aged from 12 to 17, 
coming from children’s communities 
in sixteen European countries.     

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER July 1949 
 
 
UNESCO HEAD 
ASKS PRIORITY 
FOR PRESS WIRES 
Priority wire facilities for the 
press were recommended by M. 
Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-Gen- 
eral of Unesco, in a statement he 
addressed to the International Tele- 
graph and Telephone (I.T.T.) 
Conference in Paris, on July 1. 
The press, said M. Torres Bodet, 
“requires preferential wire facilities 
everywhere to fulfil its function of 
providing adequate and ample 
information to the public.” 
M. Torres Bodet also pointed out 
to the Conference, which was drase- 
ing up new communications regula- 
tions, that the press is one of the 
“principal clients of existing tele- 
communications services”. He 
added that priority lines would be 
“of great importance to the free 
flow of information between the 
peoples.” 
Other points emphasized in the 
Director-General’s statement ere: 
1) The press should obtain 
priority over private wire messages 
and preferential allocation of 
teleprinter circuits since it provides 
a service to the general public. 
2) Press messages should be 
transmitted at reduced rates. 
3) To obviate restrictions in the 
use of wire services because of 
foreign exchange difficulties, the 
“Collect System’. permitting pav- 
ment at the receiving end, should 
be extended as far as possible. 
4) Press messages should be 
understood to cover a larger field 
than merely political and com- 
mercial information.     
Unesco To Start Feature Service 
» 
ee 
LED " 
RY" 2 


### 74019: UNESCO to start Feature Service for world press on July 15

For World Press On July 15 
weeks thereafter, Unesco will be 
providing a world-wide service to 
the press to be called Unesco Features. 
This fortnightly service is to be part of 
a scheme to supply highly readable ma- 
terial about the sciences, education and 
culture, to over 2,000 publications in the 
Member States of Unesco, as well as 
Germany and Japan. Texts will be offer- 
ed in English, French or Spanish. 
In addition, Unesco will make available 
[ TARTING on July 15, and every two supplied free of charge to the press, will be 
an attempt to help fill this gap for editors 
and the reading public. 
Although of interest to newspapers in 
large cities, the service will be produced, 
in the main, for provincial publications 
and especially the press in lesser develop- 
ed areas, 
Each issue of Unesco Features will con- 
sist of about 5,000 words, containing short 
items, telling of interesting and important 
events in education, science and culture, 
phasis will be given to stories about 
techniques used in different parts of the 
world which have some particular local 
application, ie. the successful efforts of 
a community to educate children for 
better citizenship. 
Those of Unesco’s activities of general 
interest to the public will be included in 
the service, as well as features on 
Unesco’s major themes, such as “Food 
and People” and “Human Rights”. 
It is hoped that such articles will focus 
  
to publications supplementary (feature that occur in various parts of the world, public attention on these problems which 
articles from time to time. Unesco is currently stressing. 
These may be either original — A regular column, “World 
pieces written exclusively for -— ab leahbs., a ' Books”, will review works from 
the new Unesco service ot pub- Feat he i oh SB Ba ia Aa ~. various countries which con- 
lished articles for which Unesco - + tribute to international under- 
has secured reproduction rights. oe 
The new [feature service will 
offer to the press the same type 
and quality of material— ) 
although in expanded form-— “- 
that radio networks acre receiv- 
ing from the now popular 
Unesco World Review which is 
standing. Each issue of Unesco 
features will also contain a 
section devoted to the science 
and their role in fostering world 
err Reng ver Bn) sh Spin 4 Sulpt ~¥-. 
LT A Fo rtnightly 5 5 cooperation. : 
being broadcast weekly to au- |   diences of millions in 35 coun- & 
tries. Unesco features has re- 
sulted from the same intensive 
preliminary research that was 
made before the Unesco radio programme 
was undertaken, 
ASS communications experts in fact, 
N have noted that while some publi- 
cations already have excellent sections 
dealing with education, science and cul- 
ture, many others have been unable, un- 
til now, to obtain such material regularly. 
The new feature service, which will be 
Press Service. | 
and longer articles, along the same lines. 
All of these will be readily adaptable for 
use by editors. 
The new press service wil] include spe- 
cially written features giving striking 
examples of how nations are working 
together in the fields of education, science 
and the arts and examples of national 
achievements in these fields which can 
serve as guides for other countries. Em- 
a 
  
CHOOL broadcasting is becom- 
ing an institution which js 
needed by the children of to- 
day. It stands at the side of parents and 
teachers as a well-informed friend, acting 
swiftly and surely, co-operating in the 
creation of an atmosphere favourable to 
present-day children.” 
The former director of school broad- 
casting in Czechoslovakia who wrote 
these words was expressing, in general 
terms, the importance which this branch 
of radio is now assuming in world 
education. 
Yet despite the importance. the progress 
made in its development by different 
countries has been far from uniform. 
Some have reached full stature, others 
are now learning to walk avhile there are 
‘many who have still to take their first 
steps. 
~@ @ 
HE school broadcasting services of 
some countries, Great Britain, the 
United States and Canada, for example, 
can now be said to have reached their 
full maturity, due in part to their 
extremely flexible school programmes, 
which are easily adaptable to school 
radio. 
In other countries, the “rigidity” of 
school programmes accounts for the 
relatively underdeveloped state of such 
radio programmes or even their non-exis- 
tence. Finally, there are countries where 
the defectiveness of the school system 
and the lack of teachers hampers the 
rational development of a system of 
school broadcasts, which could meet the 
‘needs of the school population as a 
whole. 
In many of these countries. however, 
there is a strong interest and a general 
wish to start producing radio programmes 
- for schools. 
What prevents them from following 
the lead of others? Sometimes they have 
not sufficient funds or equipment to set 
up the specialized organization which is 
required. or else their school syllabi make 
it difficult to fit in broadcasting periods. 
There is even a psychological obstacle to 
overcome—opposition to the idea because 
of its novelty. 
Obstacles to School Radio 
NE of the greatest obstacles, however, 
is lack of knowledge on how to 
organize a school radio service, knowledge 
. which the British Broadcasting Corpora- 
tion and other well-developed radio 


### 74020: School broadcasting: experts urge creation of UNESCO world information centre

SCHOGL BROADCASTING 
Experts Urge Creation of Unesco World Information Centre 
To Spur Development of Radio Programmes for 
organizations have gained through 15 
years’ experience: 
The need to prepare and supply data 
to broadcasting organizations in order 
to promote the development of education 
by radio was stressed last year by the 
Radio Sub-Commission of Unesco's Com- 
mission on Technical Needs in Press. 
Film and Radio. : 
Following up its recommendations, 
Unesco approached some of the radio 
organizations, having thorough experience 
in the field, for information on every 
aspect of school broadcasting, so that 
this knowledge could be passed on to 
other nat.ons wishing 10 start new services 
or expand existing ones. 
From its survey. which covered Belgium, 
Great Britain, Poland, Sweden. and 
Switzerland, in Europe, and Canada, 
Mexico, the United States and Brazil in 
the Americas, as well as India, Australia 
and the Union of South Africa, Uaesco 
received sufficient material to fill an 
850-page report. 
Twelve Countries Report 
AST month, therefore, Unesco called 
a meeting of its Consultative Com- 
mittee for Educational Broadcasting for 
a study of these factual reports from 12 
countries and for a general study on 
school broadcasting prepared by M. Roger 
Clausse, Assistant Director-General of 
the Belgian National Broadcasting 
Institute. 
Of the five members of this committee, 
three were heads of school broadcasting 
services : Mr. R. Postgate (B.B.C.); Mr. 
A. Oakkenhaug (Norway) and Miss J. 
Waller (N.B.C.,, Chicago), the others 
being M. N. Lakshemanan, Director- 
General of All India Radio and M. R. 
Dovaz, Director of Radio Geneva. 
Three observers, M. Nieto Caballero 
(International Bureau of Education), 
Miss J. Coombs (New Zealand) and Mrs 
Victoria Corey (U.S.A) followed the 
meetings at Unesco House. 
After going through the reports. 
these experts formulated a number of 
recommendations which, together with 
the reports of the survey. will be pub- 
lished for the benefit of all governments 
and broadcasting organizations. Before 
this is done, however, more information 
on specific problems will be obtained from 
other countries than those already covered 
by the survey. In the 12 nations surveyed, 
the accent was on long-term experience, 
but there are other countries which in a 
relatively short time have organized 
educational services of a high order. 
Children 
Lvs k 
HILE, for example, began school broad- 
casting only in 1943 and although 
the State does not own a single radio 
station, it is putting out one of the 
most varied educational prcgrammes in 
the world. The commercial companies in 
Chile, which operate the radio stations 
grant part of their programme time to 
broadcasts prepared by a special service 
of the Ministry of Education for trans- 
mission to schools, teachers, students in 
technical, professional and commercial 
and colieges and to parents. 
There are other small countries like 
Chile which would like to introduce school 
broadcasting. To assist them. the experts’ 
committee suggested that Unesco set up 
a Worid Documentation and Information 
Centre at its headquarters in Paris, 
The centre will include a general and 
specialized bibliography, backed up by a 
library, an international register of 
periodicals, programme booklets issued by 
broadcasting organizations, a selection of 
scripts and recordings of school pro- 
grammes and general information on 
educational broadcasting collected by 
Unesco. 
————— 
. 
  
NESCO groups in the 
- Member States are being 
~~ asked to help the Secretariat   
in two ways: 
First they can aid in the 
distribution of Unesco features 
by pointing out to editors 
how its use will further the aim 
of governments who wish to foster the 
educational and cultural developments of 
their citizens. 
Secondly, they can ferward to Unesco 
Features, at Unesco House in Paris, news 
of education, science and culture in their 
country which of significance for other 
parts of the world. This will permit 
Unesco to give wide diffusicn to research 
findings, scientific discoveries and cul- 
tural experiences that affect every day 
life, Such items could come from edu- 
cators in their schools, scientists in their 
laboratories or even farmers in the fields. 
Unesco Features will provide Unesco it- 
seit with a ready made service for pro- 
moting other programme proiects of the 
Organization. For example, one of 
Unesco’s activities is the “popularization 
of science and its social implications”. 
The feature service will be one way in 
which the media of mass communications 
can be used to “diffuse. scientific and 
technical knowledge among all classes of 
the community, so as to increase the un- 
derstanding of advances in these fields’. 
For Unesco Features has been planned to 
reach not only publications destined for 
the general reading public. but those 
devoted to such specialized subjects as 
basic education, public health, agricul- 
tural extension services, and public admi- 
nistration. i 
It is hoped that the new press service 
will provide a form of assistance to under- 
developed countries, since many special- 
ized publications, operating on meagre 
budgets, and almost the whole daily and 
weekly press in these countries will be 
kept informed of developments in other 
parts of the world. Her: will be practical 
articles telling of successful achievements 
in other areas leading towards the el!imi- 
nation of illiteracy, the eradication of 
diseases and the adaptation of modern 
technology to agriculture and industry. 
Here will be education and science “at the 
service of economic progress’. Here, in 
sum. js a service by which thie people 
can be helped to help themselves, and by 
which the press can fulfil its high obliga- 
tions towards its readers and the com- 
munity. 
 
Italian children listen to a school bruadcast. On the blackboard (cut. above. left), 
the teacher has written “Repeat the fable you have heard on the radio”

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 74021: Adult education

  
  
| SUPPLEMENT 
COURIER 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
—— 
  
  
 
UNESCO 
  
 
Volume II.—No 6. JULY 1949, 
  
By Jean BLOCH-MICHEL 
Special ‘Courier’ correspondent at Elsinore 
‘ONE OF THE MOST IMPORT- 
ANT QUESTIONS OF OUR DAY 
AND ONE LIKELY TO HAVE 
THE MOST FAR - REACHING 
CONSEQUENCES’ | 
N a tongue of land east of the sea- 
port of Els'nore, stands the castle 
of Kronborg. It was here, “un- 
der the kindly shade of the genius of 
Shakespeare”, that the first international 
conference on adult education opened on 
June 16, to discuss what M. Torres Bodet 
has called “one of the most important 
questions of our day and one likely to 
have the most far-reaching conse- 
quences’. 
For, as the Director-General of Unesco 
declared in one of his major addresses 
of the year, inaugurating the conference, 
“the aim of our Congress is... the awaken- 
ing in the consciousness of every adult of 
an awareness both of his personal res- 
ponsibility and of his intellectual and 
moral fellowship with the whole of 
mankjnd”. 
On the day following the opening 
speeches by M. Torres Bodet and M. 
Hartvig Frisch, the Danish Minister of 
Education, the work of the conference 
proper began in Elsinore at the Inter- 
national People’s College—one of the 
many Danish institutions devoted to adult 
education. 
For a period of almost two weeks, from 
June 16 to 25, almost one hundred and 
fifty delegates from 29 nations, speaking 
nearly as many different languages, liv- 
ed and worked together at the College 
to see how their individual experiences 
and working methods could be pooled so 
that adult education, through interna- 
tional co-operation, could be employed 
for the betterment of all mankind. 
N the morning of June 17, in a great 
hall, decked with the flags of all 
of the countries represented, the 
first plenary meeting of the adult educa- 
tion confereiice was opened by Dr. Cla- 
rence E. Beeby, Assistant Director- 
General of Unesco and head of its Educa- 
tion Department. Dr. Beeby pointed out 
that although the conference had been 
convened by Unesco, its success depend- 
ed on the delegates themselves and the 
30 international organizations. devoted to 
adult education questions, which they re- 
presented. He drew their attention to the 
fact that. on the basis of the work they 
accomplished, Unesco was going to pre- 
pare a handbook on adult: education 
which would serve aduit educators 
throughout the world, Unesco's actual 
work would begin, Dr. Beeby said. where 
the Elsinore Conference ended. 
After hearing the Assistant Director- 
General, the delegates elected the officers 
of the Conference: M. Novrup, had of 
the Danish delegation, was elected Presi- 
dent, and Mr. Pei-Ching Tang, China's 
representative and M. Muschin Adil Bi- 
nal, of Turkey. Vice-Chairmen M. Bus- 
siére and M. Lengrand, of the Unesco 
(Torres Bodet) 
Secretariat were named respectively Secre- 
tary-General and Rapporteur. Four com- 
missions were set up to discuss the ‘“con- 
tent of adult education”, “agencies and 
problems of organization”. “methods and 
technique”, and “the means of establish- 
ing permanent international co-operation” 
in adult education. . 
URING the second week of the con- 
ference, two distinguished visitors 
arrived at Elsinore, at the invitation 
of Unesco, to present to the delegates 
their personal views—as world thinkers— 
on adult education. 
The first, Sir John Maud, Permanent 
Under-Secretary of Education in the 
United Kingdom, spake on the signifi- 
cance of adult education, which he des- 
cribed as the means man has of getting 
away from the oppressive feeling of soli- 
tude in an inhuman world. 
“We can help individual men and wo- 
men to find more significance in their 
lives”, he said, “in their work, in their 
citizenship, both as members of their na- 
tion and of the world community— to 
bz more significant and io feel more 
significant... in other words, to be able 
to help free men from a sense of insig- 
nificance”. 
A few days later, the noted French 
writer and professor. M. Jean Guéhenno, 
addressed the conference. He stressed 
the importance of distinguishing between 
culture and “all the noise being made 
about culture”, and of giving men a 
desire for THE truth even when it was 
not THEIR truth, 
In the course of its meetings, the Elsi- 
nore Conference defined the content of 
adult education as “the dua! function of 
not only providing certain useful ideas 
which will help the individual to play 
his part in economic. social and political 
life, but also of enabling him to develop 
for himself within his community, a better 
integrated and more human life.. It is 
more than anything a spiritual! condition, 
a thirst for knowledge, a desire for men- 
tal and social freedom, an urge to parti- 
cipate in cultural development”. 
Results Achieved 
HAT are the practical measures, 
WwW however, which dave emerged 
from the ten-day meeting in 
Elsinore last month? 
A number of specific, concrete steps, 
designed to be carried out either as im- 
mediate or long-term programmes, was 
adopted by the Conference at the end of 
its deliberations, so as to promote perma- 
nent world co-operation in adult educa- 
tion, 
{(Continuzd on Page 8) 
 
  
  
Personal contacts between delegates did much to ensure the sucoess 
of the Elsinorc Conference in Denmark. Above, two adult education 
specialists exchange ideas betwesn Conference meetings in the People’s 
College at Elsinore. 
  

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

- 
-> * 
I > 
TE tu 
  
The opening ceremony of the Adult Education Conference, in the Great Knights’ Hall, of Kronborg 
Castle, at Elsinore, 


### 74022: 100 years of the Danish folk high school movement

100 YEARS OF THE DANISH 
FOLK HIGHSCHOOL MOVEMENT 
by Hartvig FRISCH 
Minister of Education, Denmark 
have been asked by the Danish National Commission te say 
some words about the subject we are going to discuss, in the 
light of Denmark's experience. 
First, I want to thank M. Torres Bodet for his brilliant, 
eloquent and penetrating interpretation of the whole problem in 
which he pointed to the march of events from the ancient Greeks down 
to the atrocities of the second World War. 
1t seems to me that the Director-General of Unesco is quite right 
both in pointi::g to the danger of propaganda for the mass education 
of adults ard in urging the necessity of filling the empty gap which 
threatens to separate the different groups in modern society. 
Espzcially from a democratic point of view, it is of fundamental 
importance for the State, that adult citizens who are responsible by 
their votes for the executive power of the community should be able 
not only to read and write, but to form independent .opinions on the 
political issues of today. 
Pericles and Unesco 
HE old Athen’an, Socrates, 
whom M. Torres Bodet has 
quoted, was undoubtedly 
deeply interested in education, 
but we can gather from the works 
of his disciples, that he was 
rather sceptical about the benefits 
of democracy and especially 
about the rule of the majority. 
And yet, Socrates lived as a coa- 
temporary fellow citizen of Peri- 
cles who, more than anv other 
statesman of antiquity, favoured 
democracy and adult education in 
the most liberal sense of the 
word, as we know from the famous 
“Funeral Oration.” Here we find, 
as quoted by Thucydides, the well- 
known phrase declaring Atheas 
the School of Hellas, This. for 
his time, was realiy some sort of 
Unesco programme. 
In the same Oration we find 
the idea that a man who does not 
care for politics is not only ingif- 
ferent, but frankly worthless. 
This bold statement corresponds 
very well with the exigencies of 
a true democracy; and, of course, 
it is not purely by accident that 
the old Greek tern for a private 
individual — "idiotes”—eventually 
acquired in modern languages the 
popular meaning of idiet. This 
play of words, caused by se- 
mantic evolution. contains, as in 
a nui-shell, the whole problem of 
adult education, of paideia, as it 
was looked unon by the dem- 
ocraric statesman Pericles and 
bv his contemporary, the phiio- 
scpher Socrates. 
Grundtvig and Kierkegaard 
E find exactly the same 
WwW sharp differences in Dan- 
ish thinking and lite.a- 
ture, even as far back as the 
first days of our democracy— 
that is to say just 100 years 
sgo—when Denmark was given a 
free Constitution. We have just 
been celebrating the centenary. 
About the year 1848 we had in 
Denmark two men of outstanding 
capacity who later gained world- 
wide fame, Gruntvig and Kierk- 
egaard. Both were theologians 
and both possessed extraordinary 
literary talents, but otherwise 
they were as different as day ana 
night. Grundivig with his all- 
embracing mind was fond of 
country life and loved the peas- 
ant. To teach the peasants lw 
become free and self-confident 
citizens, he used Christian hymus 
and old Nordic legends. 
Kierkegaard, a pupil of So- 
crates and Hegel, was an aesthele, 
who dialectically examined his 
own character. A prototype of all 
later existentialism and a great 
critic of the liberal ideals of his 
age, he addressed his books, not 
to the public. but as he wrote 
on the front page, “lo (he 
individual reader.” 
In the difference between these 
two masters of Danish literatute 
we find expressed a profound 
divergence in the ideals of educa- 
tion. which we ought not to 
ignore in our studies of the proo- 
lems of adult education. 
The Folk High School 
T is easy enough to find the 
\ broad influence of Grundtvig 
in all popular Danish educa- 
tion. About 1830 Gundtvig had 
already conceived the idea of 
founding a folk high school to 
educate the Danisih people and 
prepare them for cultural, social 
and political activities. And his 
words did not fall upon stony 
ground, for in 1844, as a result 
of the Danish national movement 
in the Duchy of Slesvig, the first 
folk high school was founded in 
Rodding by Christian Floor. 
Grundtvig himself attached 
great importance to the idea of 
founding a foik high school at 
ro where youths from all classes 
would meet and be imbued with 
national and historical ideas, free 
from any scholastic prejudices. 
He had obtained a definite pro- 
mise from King Christian VIII, 
for the establishment of the 
school, but because of the King's 
death and the introduction of 
the new Constitution this promise 
was left unfulfilled. 
"mark. 
However, Grundtvig's idea of 
folk high schools did not die 
because of the failure of the Soro 
project. All over the country his 
followers set to work. Soon folk 
high schoo:s founded by private 
followers sprang up by the 
hundreds in all parts of Den- 
Their creative activity 
reached its height 
in about 1870. The 
majority of the stu- 
dents attending the 
folk high schools 
were the children of 
the fdrming popula- 
tion. I can here 
quote a passage fron 
a booklet recently 
published about Dan- 
ish statesmen, which 
reads: : 
"received 
only elementary 
school education, 
they came to .the 
folk high schools in 
search of a wider 
range of interesis. 
Material progress 
was not their sole 
aim, they wanted 
their share of £now- 
ledge of the na'ion 
and of the principles of political 
democracy.” 
“Having 
Co-operative Movement 
HE ideas of the old folk 
1} high schools were based on 
Christian culture, 
a national, nordic and 
and it is an 
interesting fact that although 
the schools did not offer any 
professional courses, it was this 
inspiration of Grundtvig’s, never- 
theless, which laid the founda- 
tion for the agricultural co- 
operative movement. 
This, more than anything else, 
resulted in the remodelling of 
Danish agricuiture during the 
crisis in the eighties and was 
responsible for the extraordinary 
development of Danish farming. 
* During the same decades Den- 
mark gradually developed into an 
industrial nation. But, among the 
labouring masses, thus brought 
into being in the cities and towns, 
these ideas of a national, nordic 
and Christian inspiration did not 
exist. The trade unions, together 
with the Social Democratic Party, 
fought their way, by means of 
strikes, following the interna- 
tional lines of the developing 
labour movement on the Con- 
tinent. The idea of providing 
adult education for the workers 
came first from the university 
and from the free-thinkers and 
foliowers of Georg Brandes, Bran- 
des, although an atheist, was a 
great reader of Kierkegaard from 
his youth. 
(Continued on page 8) 
  
ADULT 
  
EDU 
 
E publish below the full text of one nf the 
most important addresses delivered by M. 
Jaime Torres Bodet, since he took up his post as 
Director-General of Unesco late last year. 
Mr. Torres Bodet spOke on June 16. at the 
opening ceremony of the Conference on Adult Edu- 
cation in Elsinore. Denmark. 
city, renowned alike for 
D its beauty, and its 
hospitality, to consider one 
of the most absorbing topics 
of our day: adult education. 
The basic concept of your 
work is characteristic of our 
era. In a certain sense, however, it corresponds 
to an eternal preoccupation of civiliza- 
tion. We need go no further back than 
to the time when Athens, under the influence 
of Socrates, considered philosophy as a way 
of life and living, as teaching, as paideia. The 
memory of Plato counsels humility whenever 
we catch ourselves believing that our problems 
are something new. For did not Plato say that, 
in order to educate the citizen, it is necessary 
to educate the city? And was not the city, in 
the ancient world, the state? 
I see no inconsistency in reminding you, on 
one hand, that the ideal towards which we are 
striving is an ancient one, and in stating, on the 
other hand, that adult education is one of the most 
important questions cf our day and one likely to 
have the most far-reaching consequences. On the 
contrary, the fact that this problem is both topical 
and perennial is confirmation of its importance 
and gravity Even before the 1939 war, its impor- 
tance was vecogn'zed by educationists, by many 
agricultural, industrial and academic associations, 
and even by ceriain governments. Extensive 
programmes of pepular education were indeed 
worked oul; in some countries on account of the 
political requirements of the totalitarian regimes; 
in others as a result of that desire for emanci- 
pation which does honour te democracy. 
| | outcome of those efforts. I should like, 
however, to draw vour attention to a fact 
which this Conference should certainly not over- 
lock, for it is at the roo; of dangers which we 
must take into. consideration in all our work. I am 
OU are meeting in this 
  
the 
T is not for me to consider in detail the   referring to the perfidious way in which the 
 
Seated under the fiags of their countries, adult education 
conference delegates hold their first session in the Inter- 
national People’s College, at Elsinore, 
Fascist régimes, both German and Italian, exploited 
the most personal and therefore the most inviolable 
of the assets usually possessed by adults: the short 
time, after their day’s work in the fields or the 
workshop is done, when they are free to think. 
By seizing upon this modest possession, those ré- 
glmes managed to change rest into meetings, amuse- 
ment into hypnotism. education into propaganda 
and propaganda into drill. 
There was in this totalitarian activity a sort of 
obscure return to the cynical phrase of rhe Roman 
Emperors, “panem et circenses”: a principle of 
government the mere ment'on of which would 
warrant a protest. Those leisure hours of the 
worker's life that we would like to see filled with 
understanding and beauty, with truth and poetry, 
are so hard-won that to use them for the vurpose 
of inoculating him with the drug of mass adulation, 
to which all demagoges resort when they set out 
to anaesthetize their followers, must be considered 
as a breach of trust. 
To rescue the adult from the third-rate pleasures In 
which his wages sometimes enable him to indulge is of 
the course an excellent motive, But the more excellent 
mative, the more heinous would be the deception if that 
motive were invoked with the object of regimenting the 
worker's spare time after having ordered his day's work. 
There can be no question of substituting for drinking and 
gitmbling the political dance before the tribal gods. - 
We have seen with our own eyes what H.tler 
and Mussolini made of the “"Dopelavoro”: frenz.ed 
masses caught up in noisy, cstentatious celebrations, 
in aggressive parades which were bound to end 
in the bloody nightmare of war. 
HE aim of our Congress is entirely different, 
1 for we are convinced that to educate is to 
liberate. We hope for no better result from 
our work than the awakening in the conscicusness 
i} of every adult of an awareness both of his personal   


### 74023: Adult education and the future of our civilization

OF 
   
responsibility and of his 
fellowship w.th the whole 
This Congress is the fir 
held since the end of th 
question with which we a 
vears, countries found the 
their men and women the; 
tha adult can learn of life 
the midst of deadly dange 
til:ties ended than Uneésa 
proclaimed from the begin 
of peace must be constructt 
Uresco was founded in 1 
Conference in Paris in 19 
in 1947. In Mexico City th 
following resolution: 
“In _coilaboration with adul 
leaders and persons premine 
produce materials on intern; 
adaptation and extensive use 
“A Conference for leaders and 
for international understandi 
sufficieny information is ava 
War—A Brutal 
LY O moment could 
more solemn. I 
cance in the fac 
meeting today at Elsinore, 
the Prince of eternal doubt. 
of today is forever wonder 
From one point of view, 
inevitably brings with it 
the use of science to destr 
of the priority of might o 
hand, the need to build th 
and ineluctable. The poss 
need for peace, continual 
present in our minds, ti 
dramatic state of anxiety. 
the onlooker the impressio 
moral obligation were, unf« 
sloth would insidiously leac 
that it is easier to let anot 
to build a just peace. Fx 
barbar.sm, produces a br 
does not suicide also produ 
that final? 
International co-operatio 
during the war by militan 
appeared, with the return 
which cannot be attained 
adjustment of conflicting 
rat.ons. Now that the dar 
pearing together has sub: 
wcndering how they can r 
HIS phenomenon, so 
national level, is alsc 
level, within each c¢ 
The fear of death is a more 
We 
But we do not all hope in the 
for joining wills together, 
one thing: peace demands m 
and also more heroism than d 
In time of war, imagin 
course indispensable to the 
winning of victory. Strate 
of preparaticn and all sorts 
ized stud:es. But the sold 
unfortunately learn with 
technique of killing and th 
In peace-time, on the ot 
to feel that we have equal r 
duties. War is thought o 
carried out by their subc 
peace all men must unite. 
country war aiways seems tv 
whereas to consolidate peac 
voluntary participation. If 1 
we shall understand how 
peace is bound up with t 
and the problem of ireedo 
educat.on. 
Our Persona 
AY I quote once I 
MM knewn words, w 
\ “To be or not to 
in itself, because at any g- 
only wnat he aspires to b¢ 
From the day of our birth, 
living project; life lies before 
child is an anticipation of t 
anticipation of the adult. And 
is he? Of what future develop 
mere anticipation? This questio 
personal equation that is most 
That is why we canno 
terms. That is why the pai 
yeu are dedicated is so de 
it justice, you cannot mere 
to the usual educational n 
compensation and partly 
development of an apprent 
deny it?) re-education 
Suppose we have a grou)

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 74023: Adult education and the future of our civilization

CATION AND THE FUTURE 
OUR CIVILIZATION 
  
    
    
By Jaime TORRES BODET 
atellectual and moral 
" mankind. 
international meeting 
war to consider the - 
» concerned. For long 
selves forced to teach 
ost painful lesson that 
the lesson of fear in 
Hardly had the hos- 
was established, and 
ing that the defences 
in tke minds of men. 
{5 and heid its first 
» and in Mexico City 
delegates adopted the 
education erganizations, 
. in adult education, to 
onal affairs suitable for 
y adult study groups. 
orkers in aduit education 
shall be convened when 
ble, if possible in 1948.” 
implification 
more ausolc.ous or 
id a symbolic zignifi- 
that this assembly is 
the castle of Hamlet, 
Like Hamlet, the world 
+ “to be or not to be”. 
he possibility of war 
ge extolling of hatred, 
r life, the justification 
r r.ght. On the other 
peace is equally plain 
ility of war and the 
and simultaneously 
s produce the most 
laterial progress gives 
that, if the sense of 
;unately, to disappear, 
nen to the conclusion 
ir war break out than 
war, l'ke any other 
al simplification. But 
a simplification—and 
which was ensured 
alliances, has now re- 
f peace, as an ideal 
ithout a very delicate 
ad controversial aspi- 
or of their all disap- 
ed, the nations are 
nage lo live together. 
bvious on the inter- 
isible, on the national 
ntry. 
‘fective cement than hope  
| fear in the same way. 
me way, We must realize 
» skill, mere imagination 
battles, 
ion and skill are of 
yeneral Staffs for the 
requires many years 
f detailed and special- 
°s, unknown mariyrs, 
1e greatest ease the 
art of dying. 
r hand, we ought all 
ponsibilities and equal 
by the leaders and 
inates. But to make 
‘0 the citizen of any 
be something coercive, 
there must be wholely 
accept these premises, 
osely the problem of 
problem of freedom, 
with the problem of 
Equation 
re Shakespeare's well- 
ch are as apt hcre: 
"7 But to be is nothing 
A moment everyone is 
‘ec are a mere project, a 
I like a programme. The 
 
youth; the youth is an 
ie adult—what, in reality, 
nt are we, all of us. the 
involves everything in our 
timate and inexpressible, 
 
answer it in general 
of education to wh.ch 
ate; if you are to do 
be satisfied to resort 
‘hods, for it is partiy 
pplement—partly the 
ship and partly (why 
» of adults to educate— 
 
workers or peasants, craftsmen, bureaucrats or 
soldiers. With any ideal grcup with which we have 
tc deal, what should be the problem of prime 
concern to us? Differences of temperament, as wit 
children? D:.fferences of vocation, as with young 
people? Ceriainly; temperament and vocation are 
factors that no teacher, lecturer or artist approach- 
ing an adult public should ignore. But what he 
should have in mind before all else is the spiritual 
loneliness in which each.member of his audience 
i always living. 
ARELY has this loneliness been so formidable, 
so complete and so unrecognized as in the 
world of today. The child lives within its 
childishness as in a protective atmosphere. The 
vouth comes to know himself more with every 
adventure in which his feelings or his intellect are 
involved, and rejoices, sometimes even in spite of 
scrrow, in his discovery of himself. But the adult 
has no place of refuge. Cui off from others of his 
generation by the relentless uniqueness of his 
destiny, and from his own conscience by his fear 
of seeing himself in it as he really is, stripped of 
all gloss or illusion, the adult has only two courses 
open to him—either to remain himself, isolating 
A vicw of the moat and massive walls of historic 
Kronberg Castle at Elsinore, where Unesco’s Adult 
Education Conference was officially opened. 
himself from the muititude, or to give up his 
individuality ard to submit to the impersonal will 
of the masses. Even for the genius, absolute lone- 
liness is a termiless punishment. What then shall 
we say of the absolute loneliness of the ordinary 
man? Yet his merging in the mass would mean 
no less than a cruel renunciation of his very nature 
a3 a man. 
In face of this loneliness or this renunciation, 
adult education should be based on the idea that 
necessarily underlies every international institution 
—the brotherhood of human destiny. At bottom, 
it is a question not so much of teaching the aduit 
such and such an art or such and such a science, 
as of instructing him in a much vaster subject, 
which we foolishly imagine he has already master- 
ed—life itself. 
Bent over the soil for hours evary day, pounded 
from morning to night by the mechanical rhythm 
of industrial mass-prcduction, the averafe adult of 
our time rarely seems to be in any position to ap- 
-preciate the life going on around him and to grasp 
the truth about his fellows. 
OTHING, however, is more untrue than 
xd to believe that man is by nature man's 
NL enemy. On the contrary, sociability is. of 
all human instincts, the most widespread and 
ineradicable. But it has to be admitted that the 
eccnomic organization of society creates too often 
conditions of life which weaken the fraternal in- 
stinet. 
Tn 2 world where material interests have become the 
main spring of action, and where economic success is the 
measuring rod of values, individuals, classes, nations act 
as encmies or rivals rather than as partners: so that it 
is seldom that man has been lonelier, poorer and more 
unhappy. 
“At the same time, a conception no! less destruc- 
tive of human community has taken place in minds 
the conception of a culture whose goals were no 
longer grandeur and strength, simplicity of impulse 
and breadih of v.sion, but were. alas, the difficuit, 
the precious, the exceptional, the arbitrary and the 
refined. This created a gulf between the ordinary 
people and the intellectuals, whose affectation and 
over-nicety became more and more foreign to the 
crowd. 
In both cases the lack of true culture is obvious 
for, in both, conta-~t hetwcen 1 fe and the intellect 
has been severed. On the one hand, ignorance on 
the part of the masses: on the other, anaemia 
among the élite. All the same, such a situation has 
iis precedents. In sturdy periods of historv, when 
the community is undeniably healthy, culture seems 
to men to be an essential part of their system: it 
is a manifestation of their being and derives its 
lustre from that very fact. To be beautiful, it has 
only to meet its problems boldly and solve them 
or.ginally, frankly and satisfactorily, But in periods 
of moral upheaval culture becomes an ornament 
and gradually ceases to be a vital function. In 
architecture, as in literature, it aspires to be no 
more than a luxury. It becomes a mere decoration, 
a flower without roofs in society. But a culture 
must be judged. rot by the distance separating it 
from the peopie that produced it, but by the 
strength and depth of its roots. In the last resort, 
our civilization will be judged according to the 
services it has rendered to man, the extent to 
which it has made him conscious of his rights, and 
_the way in which it has taught him to co-operate 
with all his fellow-men in an atmosphere of peace, 
which can only be ensured through intelligence 
guided by the sense of justice and faith sustained 
by beauty, truth and virtue, 
‘Education for Responsibility 
peculiar importance which I attach to 
your deliberations. When you are discus- 
sing adult education, you are in fact discussing no 
less a matter than the future of our civilization. 
Do we want to educate people for obedience? Do 
we want to educate them for responsibility? Are 
we going to eaucate the masses as if they were 
a uniform cenglomeration in which individuals are 
swallowed up? Or are we going to educate them as 
A HAT I have just said indicates the 
a group of living beings in which the freedom of 
the individual conscience to dzvelop is not restricted 
by the group mind? Do we claim to relieve man’s 
isolation by accustoming him to blind subir.ission 
to the will of the herd? Or do we wish to bring 
him to take a conscious part in a culture which, 
while having regard for his personality, will inspire 
- in him a sincere desire to be one with &ll his 
fellows? 
If we decide in favour of education for respon- 
sibility. we shall have chosen the more difficult but, 
as I believe, the only true road. There is no better 
remedy for the terror of solitude than the principle 
of the universal responsibility of man on earth. 
“Each of us is responsible for everything to everygne 
eise”, is one of Dostoyevsky's most profoundly 
penetrating remarks. Let us make no mistake. If 
we choose education for responsibility, we automa- 
tically demand a culture based upon the sense of 
responsibiiily. Such a choice involves more than 
what we have to discuss at this Conference; it calls 
for efforts from others than teachers alone. 
All forms of human activity are concerned —politics and 
economics as well as science and art. When the people 
agitate for better organization of work, a fairer distribu- 
tion of property, and equality of opportunity, they are, 
of course, struggling for the improvement of their material 
 
Many eminent personalities attended the Adult Educaticn 
people whe wonder whether primary 
living conditions, But we are conscious that they are alse 
putting forward albeit in othér terms, a concept of 
humanism which will give fresh life to culture, 
When I say humanism, I am not using the word 
in the narrow sense which has been given to it by 
the most uncompromising individualists, but in the 
far wider. philosophical and philological, sense 
which comes from its derivation; I am using it 
with reference to the reconciliation of man and 
humanity. 
A Gleam of Hope 
AN is primarly a social being; he cannot 
& & therefore be considered apart from the 
NN A community to which he owes his upbring- 
ing. Now, in the present day, whether he 
likes it or not, the community is world-wide. It 
therefore impases, and wiil continue t{o impese, 
ever widening duties. The contrast between the 
number and ex:ient of such duties, on the one hang, 
and the misunderstanding and hatred we see, ea 
the other, is so cruel that pessimism would be 
justified, if there were not to be seen amid the 
chaos one gleam of hope—the hope that at last 
a living culture will be established, in which the 
m=33es can have a share although the rights of 
the individual are not abated, and in which, 
similarly, the individual will not appear as the 
selfish beneficiary of an inheritance which he 
receives as a free gift and uses irresponsibly, but 
as the essential instrument of the moral solidarity 
of mankind. 
World-wide aims and freedom in the means of 
obtaining them seem t2> me to constitute the two 
guiding rules in any action to foster, by universal 
education, a type of culture in which the motive 
principle is personal responsibility. 
The development of the first stage of industrial 
expansion was facilitated by primary education for 
the masses. We must not forget that fact. 
It is particularly significant, as adult education—which 
only the most favoured couniries are as yet entitled to 
distinguish from primary education—is still today, over most 
of the world, at the stage of heroic literacy campaigns 
Another reason for remembering it is that there are still 
education for the 
proletariat is dangerous, And above all we must remember 
it because the real danger would be to limit our training 
of the peoples of the future to the imparting eof the 
rudimentary knowledge implied in the teaching of reading 
and writing, 
In the present day world, technical skills are | 
becoming highly complex and the desire for 
universality grows ever more urgent. Civilization 
can only progress if the masses are trained 
systematically and coherently for the task before 
them. That is the ultimate aim of adult education. 
It is no exaggeration to'say that it is awe-inspiring. 
ADIES and Gentlemen, in the last few months 
| many voices have been raised to reiterate 
that peace is essential. Some people have 
been concerned because Unesco has not added its 
voice to those others. Such a concern is unfounded, 
for if ever any international institution was inspir- 
ed with a sincere determination to secure peace, 
it 1s the Organization which we established in 
London in 1945 to promote understanding between 
all the nations through education, science and 
culture. It is not Unesco's business to make 
speeches about peace; it is the Organization's duty 
to work silently and modestly to ensure that the 
spiritual conditions in the world are such that men 
may build the peace, and build it advisedly, for 
the advancement of justice, good and progress. 
Unesco is giad that so many of you have come 
to this meeting at Elsinore. Personally, when I 
express, on behalf of the Organization to the 
authorities and the people of Denmark the deep 
gratitude they reserve for the warm welcome they 
have given this Conference, I also thank you for 
your heip and hope most sincerely that your discus- 
sions will be crowned with success. 
A 
bar = 38 
Conferenca at Elsinore, las month 
Above, (left to r.ght). Professor Niels Bohr, world-famous Danish physicist and Nobel prize-winner, 
is shown discussing the work of the Conference with M. Hartvig Frise, Danish Mi ister of Lducae 
J — 
tion. M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of Unesco and Dr. C.E. Beeby, 
  
Assistant Directon

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=8) 2

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER July 1949 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
agreed”, 
ing: 
cussion of controversial questions, 
freedom of thought and discussion. 
political conflict. 
people outside the European family.   
Basic Princi ples 
The Elsinore Conference approved a num- 
ber of “basic principles on which adult edu- 
cation movements in all countries should be 
Among these we quote the follow- 
1. “We must encourage the study and dis- § 
recog- 
nizing that it is not so important to secure 
agreement as to establish firmly the right 
of minorities to disagree. The life and breath | 
y of adult education must depend upon full 
2. Platitudes cannot solve the deep-seated 
suspicion belween countries in the East and 
West of Europe, and the adult educalion 
movement must remain above the partly § 
It must not give up hope 
of a reconciliation and ought to be the bridge 
by means of which this can be achieved. An 
adult education movement based upon a 
reasoned and objective approach to world 
problems should be able to make a unique 
contribution to international understanding. 
3 The nations cannot, in their own inter- 
ests, any longer afford to leave the German 
The 
(Conference) believes that Unesco has a spe- 
cial duty in this respect. Post-war Germany 
has, indeed, a valuab.e contribution to make 
to adult education and with encouragement 
and understanding this may be guided into 
channels which would be of benefit to all. 
(Continued from Centre Page) 
University teachers also took up 
the idea, about the beginning of 
the present century, of forming 
what is called a “folk-university.” 
To all parts of the country, es- 
pecially the towns, they sent out 
lecturers to teach history, litera- 
ture, art, economics and the na- 
tural sciences. This teaching was 
} of an intellectual, scientific and 
international character, and cor- 
responded well with the atmos- 
phere of the early labour move- 
ment. 
SONGS AND CLASSES 
O we had in Denmark two 
trends of popular adult 
education working among 
different groups of society. In 
Esbjerg a labour high school had 
been founded, but this was an 
exception. In 1924, following the 
first World War, the labour 
movement in Denmark was the 
first to take up the task of   


### 74021: Adult education

ADULT EDUCATION 
  
sequences.’ 
(Continued from Page 5) 
One of the basic resolutions passed by 
the Conference calls on Unesco to set up, 
at the earliest possible moment, a Consul- 
tative Committee on adult education to 
act in an advisory capacity to the Adult 
Education Division of Unesco, and to 
   
   
  
    
  
Elsinore Conference, 
«.If the aims of this Conference and 
of Unesco are to be achieved”, the resolu- 
tion states, “there must be developed an 
effective world-wide adult education move- 
ment... How.ver, at this time it would be 
premature fcr the Conference to recom- 
mend the establishment of a permanent 
world organization for adult education. 
“In order to realize the aims of Unesco 
and to carry out the recommendations of 
the Conference (it is suggested) that 
machinery be established ‘or securing co- 
operation among the organizations and 
leaders of adult education throughout the 
world. It is recognized that any suchx ma- 
chinery should at this time function 
through and use the facilities of Unesco.” 
Seminars Urged 
second important resolution voted 
AN by the Conference stressed the im- 
portance, for adult education move- 
ments throughout the world, ot setting up 
international seminars which would study 
particular topics in the field of adult 
education, “This we regard as a func- 
tion of Unesco”, the resolution states, 
“and we strongly recommend that 
Unesco be urged to organize a seminar 
forthwith, to be held if possible in 1950. 
The topics requiring most urgent consider- 
ation are in our view. the study of inter- 
- .afzonal relations or of some specific 
international problem, and methods and 
techniques in adult education.” 
To facilitate the circulation of mate- 
rial between one country and another, 
the Elsinore Conference on Adult Educa- 
tion asked Unesco to act as a central 
focal point in receiving publications and 
providing a regular abstracting service, 
condensing, translating, and disseminat- 
ing information on adult education activ- 
ities. 
In addition, the delegates approved a 
resolution recommending the publication 
by Unesco of a Bulletin on the latest 
developments in adult education, “The 
dissemrination of news about fresh 
developments in adult education”, the 
resolution reads, “could best be under- 
taken by the periodical issue of a Bulle- 
tin. If such a Bulletin could be issued 
not less than quarterly, the information 
: herein could be used by the 
carry out the recommendations of the 
‘One ofthe most Important 
Questions of cur day and ane likely 
ta have the mast far-reaching con- 
national journals published b+ adult edu- 
cational bodies and disseminated over a 
wide international field. 
Missions 
THER programmes recommended by 
the Conference call for the sending 
of missions from countries with a 
rich experience in adult education to 
countries where it is less developed. For 
particular types of adult education, such 
missions might be organized by the adult 
education bodies working in that special 
field. For adult education nn general, the 
Conference agreed, the responsibility 
should be with Unesco. 
As a project requiring long-term plan- 
ning, the delegates agreed that Unesco 
should seek to serve adult education by 
the translation and production of existing 
significant material in various languages. 
The Elsincge Conference also recom- 
mended the extended use Jf radio in each 
country to provide instruction in foreign 
languages, emphasized the part played by 
museums and libraries in adult education 
work, and agreed that science, in the 
widest sense, had an important part to 
play in adult education programmes, par- 
ticularly as regards the neel for explain- 
ing the social implications of science on 
modern society. 
Living Culture 
EFORE the close of the Congress. in 
| B a special broadcast from Denmark 
to the peoples of all Spanish speak- 
ing America, M. Torres Bodet eloquently 
summed up the fundamental meaning of 
the Elsinore meetings. 
“What the distinguished educators here 
assambled are really doing in planning in- 
ternational co-operation in adult educa- 
tion”, he said, “is to Jay the foundation for 
a new way of life in better social condi- 
tions. in which Man, bringing a sound and 
conscious technique to the services of his 
social instincts, may profitably cultivate 
the single smiling field of brotherhood 
and peace. 
“Today all true culture must spring 
from life itself. A living culture has its 
roots primarily in the life of the in- 
dividual and thereafter in the life of 
society and of the world. The assumption 
that even the humblest of men may be 
enabizd to attain to fuller and deeper liv- 
ing through science, philosophy or art, ac- 
cording to his circumstances, is a new 
approach. Culture is the road to an art 
of self-expression and an art of execution... 
Adult education—living culture — helps 
each worker to live his life by giving him 
the means of becoming more fully a 
man...” 
  
building the Workers’ Educa- 
tional Association. Soon after, it 
founded a labour high school. not 
in competition with the Grundt- 
vig folk high schools, but as a 
departure of its own, 
But here we meet ga curious 
fact, indicative, perhaps, of an 
essential factor in the Danish 
mind. Although the old folk high 
schools and the labour high 
schools were founded and run 
from quite different sources of 
inspiration: one of them national 
and Christian, the other, inter- 
national and rational, one thing 
soon proved to be common to 
both—the singing of songs both 
at the beginning and end of a 
lecture and even between lessons. 
Perhaps this habit is some- 


### 74022: 100 years of the Danish folk high school movement

100 Years of the Danish 
Folk High School Movement 
thing peculiar to Danes, expressed 
by the Danish word “stemning” 
(the same as the German. Stim- 
mung”). I don't know if there 
is an exact equivalent in English 
or French, but the English word 
“tune” is perhaps the nearest. 
You can tune an instrument, 
and so you may “tune” an 
audience, and the result 3 
what we call “stemning”. 
This implies both the method 
and the result; not only the har- 
mony. but also something which 
creates a feeling of communal 
spiritual unity; a sentimental 
thing, but still relevant in educa- 
tional matters. The songhook has, 
therefore, shown itself to be an 
essential instrument in all adult 
education, 
THE HYMNS OF GRUNDTVIG: 
THE DANISH 
HIS was undoubtedly a 
heritage from the old 
prophet Grundtvig. From 
the folk high schools, the song- 
books have spread to the evening 
"schools, the professional schools 
of agriculture and arts and crafts, 
nay even to political meetings 
and youth organizations. 
So, in the humilating days of 
the Nazi occupation, after the 
9th of April 1940, the first strong 
uniting force of national self- 
confidence came from songs. In 
the summer of 1940, people 
gathered around platforms, in 
thousands and in hundreds of 
thousands, singing the national 
hymns and, not least, the hymns 
of Grundtvig. For farmers, com- 
ing from centres teaching Gundt- 
vig's ideas, it was of course na- 
tural, and soon the workers too, 
adopted the same procedure. It 
is no exaggeration to say that the 
“All-song.” as we called it. united 
all classes and laid the founda- 
tion for active resistance later on. 
Therefore, I am aot using empty 
phrase when 1 say that during 
the first phase of occupation it 
was the traditions of Danish 
adult education which more than 
anything else helped to unite the 
Danish nation in our distress and 
wretchedness 
THE PRISONER 
“ALL SONG” 
Ang in the 1941-1942 session of 
Parliament, under the Minister of - 
Education, Jorgen Jorgensen, we 
passed a series of bills concerning 
folk high schools, evening schools, 
agricultural schools and schools 
for young unskilled workers with 
the determinate purpose of laying 
a new broad foundation for free 
adult education. On one point 
there was much hesitation, and 
perhaps this conference may give 
us good advice in this respect— 
namely, on the question of schools 
for young unskilled workers. 
Should they be compulsory or 
not? The Danish parties were 
divided on this point, and the 
non-compulsory system was final- 
ly adopted But as the results 
achieved during the last six years 
have not been convincing, I have 
felt obliged to appoint a commis- 
sion, including parliamentarians, 
to re-examine the questions in 
this field of adult education. 
Now I have come to the snd 
of this brief survey of the Danish 
problems of adult education, but 
I haven't, of course, dealt with 
the questions of school and pro- 
fessional education in our coun- 
try. 
AND HOLGER: 
THE IRON-CLAD MEN 
SHALL conclude by telling 
you a legend of one of the 
ancient inhabitants of this 
castle. Here, says the saga, deep 
in one of the underground cellars, 
sits the old hero Holger Danske, 
who 1s said to have fought by 
the sid> of Charlemagne as Ogier 
le Danois. When he grew old he 
did not d:e but went underground 
into the vaults of Kronborg with 
his iron-clad men, and there he 
sits, leaning his arms against a 
stone table, which his long white 
beard covers completely. 
Only one human being has ever 
seen Holger. This was a prisoner, 
condemned to death, who, in 
order to sawe his life consented 
to climb down the narrow steps 
to find him. This he did. awaken- 
ing Holger. who stretched out his 
hand to greet him. The prisoner 
did not dare to seize his hand, 
but held out an iron stick. And 
luckily too. For Holger Danske 
pressed the stick so hard that his 
fingers left their mark on it. And 
thus the wretched prisoner escap- 
ed. The legend ends as follows: 
One day when Denmark is on the 
brink of destruction, Holger 
Danske will spring to his feet and 
with his iron-clad followers will 
reappear to the rescue of Den- 
mark. 
NO WHITE BEARD 
HIS old legend has been told 
| to all Dan:sh children and 
ever since Grundivig, it has 
been repeated thousands of times 
in Danish folk high schools. But, 
ladies and gentlemen. in the time 
of emergency during the Nazi 
occupation, w.th its humilation of 
our country, when we older people 
had to endure this, like Hamlet, 
the only thing we could do was 
mutter strange things after the 
murder of freedom, then Holger 
Danske reappeared. He came 
back in a way we had not 
expected and in which all of us 
did not always agree, but reap- 
pear he did, as the resistance 
movement was sweeping the coun- 
try from Skagen to Gedser. And 
it turned out that Holger had no 
white beard at all, but that he 
and his guard were all of them 
quite young men. 
As in the “All-song”, I spoke of 
before, we saw the outburst of 
Danish pecpular education from 
the folk high schools and the 
evening schools, so in the resis- 
tance movement, we met the 
anonymous forces of youth, young 
men and women, rallying around 
the ideals of freedom and demo- 
cracy, with which they were im- 
bued. 
In promoting peace, which is 
the goal and ideal of Unesco, we 
must take care of these anony- 
mous idealistic forces of vouth; it 
is our duty to support them. to 
make use of them and fo win 
their confidence. This need can 
only be filled by the means of 
adult education,

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

July 1949 UNESCO COURIER 9 
OW can we ensure that the one 
a to two million articles. published 
each year in about 50.000 scientific 
journals and reviews, are really 
brought to the notice of all scientists 
throughout the world? 
Perhaps the best way is through the 
publication of scientific abstracts. But 
though more than 500 internationally- 
known journals are already performing 
this task, the result is still far from satis- 
factory. For it is well known that certain 
branches of science and certain countcies 
are badly neglected by the abstracting 
services. 
“No scientist should have to read more 
than two general abstracting journals 
  
or more than three specialized ones”, 
professor J.-D. Bernal, of the Research 
Laboratory of Birkbeck College, London 
Un'versity, recently declared. At present, 
however, any specialist, interested in a 
new branch of science, such as crystalio- 
graphy, frequently has to hunt through 
a whole series of publicaticns intended 
mainly for physicists, chemists, mathe- 
maticians, biologists or docrors in order 
to find the information he needs. 
Moreover, that omissions occur in 
abstracting journals was fcund last year 
by Unesco’s Field Science Co-operation 
Oifice in Cairo, when 1t was compiling 
its “List of Scientific Works Published 
in the Middle East”. This list revealed 
to scientists who actually specialized in 
Middle East studies, the existence of a 
considerable number of works which had 
been unknown to them before. Those 
who were not specialists in this field 
learned of periodicals which they had 
never heard of before 
ee AN the scientific world afford 
y C to run the risk. remote as it 
. may appear. of remaining 
jgnorant for years of scientific works 
which may be of considerable importance, 
as we know happened in the case of 
Mendel's discoveries on heredity?” 
This question was the central theme 
of the speech made by the eminent 
French scientist, Professor Pierre Auger, 
head of Unesco's Natural Sciences 
Department, at the opening of the Inter- 
national Conference on Science Abstract- 
rd 


### 74024: A Problem of vital concern to all scientists...

SWAMPED BY TWO 
  
A Problem 
Of Vital Concern 
To All Scientists 
MILLION ARTICLES A 
YEAR, RESEARCH WORKERS SEEK RELIEF IN 
ABSTRACTING SERVICES. 
MAPS WORLD PLANS TO IMPROVE EFFECTIVE- 
~ . NESS OF SYSTEM . . 
UNESCO PARLEY   
  
ing held at Unesco House from June 20 
to 24. 
The extensive preparations made by 
Unesco for this conference and the par- 
ticipation of 147 specialis’s from 29 coun- 
tries, who represented 24 world scientific 
organizations, clearly demonstrated the 
international importance of the problem. 
This point was stressed by M. Torres 
Bodet, Director-General of Unesco when, 
at the close of the conference. he praised 
the delegates for the steps thev had 
taken to ensure “better international co- 
ordination of abstracting services”. 
“It is in the very interests of peace”, 
he said, “to prevent the sciences from 
isolating themselves in special watertight 
compartments.” 
which was under 
the chairmanship of the noiad 
British scientist, Dr. Alexander 
King, recommended as one of its steps, 
the creation of a number of committees 
to be responsible for co-ordination of 
science abstracting services in different 
countries or regions and in the various 
specialized fields. 
The main task of the regional com- 
mittees would be to ensure the proper 
~ 
HE conference, 
abstracting and indexing of scientific 
works published in these regions and see 
that scientists working there can obtain 
abstracts of articles published abroad. 
Already, a regional committee has been 
set up in Britain. Recently, a British 
scientist, Professor Sampson Wright, 
made the interesting suggestion that, in 
addition, national committees be cet up 
to undertake the abstracting of scientific 
articles published in their own country 


### 74025: The Role of scientific abstracting journals

 
THE ROLE OF SCIENTIFIC 
ABSTRACTING JOURNALS 
HE Scientist is a person with 
TT unique vequirements as regards 
the dissemination of information. 
Whether he be a bacteriologist or phy- 
sioiogist or chemist working in a labora- 
"tory. or a field worker, such as a geologist 
or an expert in ‘tropical medicine, his 
efforts, if successful, result in the dis- 
covery of new facts of value to mankind. 
Yet his discovery, great or small—his ad- 
dition to the stockpile of man’s knowledge 
—would be ineffective and useless unless 
communicated to his fellow-scientists, 
If, for example, his work results in the 
discovery of a new antibiotic substance 
useful to medicine in the treatment of a 
tropical disease, if becomes immensely 
important that all physicians and health 
officers in the tropics, wherever the 
disease may exist, be promptly informed. 
No one knows how many scientists are 
at work in the world's labcratories and 
field stations. No one knows how many 
scientific reports are published. The esti- 
mates of experienced documentalists and 
librarians vary greatly. 
ONSERVATIVELY it has been 
estimated that at least 750,000 re- 
ports (scientific papers) are pub- 
lished annually—and some authorities 
place the number as high as 2.000.000 
annually. Some of these reszarcl reports 
appear as technical books, dissertations, 
and bulletins, but mostly they appeac as 
articles in scientific periodicals. and such 
perioaicals number possibly 50.000. No 
Library possesses all of them, hence. inter- 
library borrowing and the distribution of 
photographic copies of documents are im- 
portant features in the dissemination of 
information among scientists. 
The process of discovery itself is enoe- 
mously facilitated by information passed 
on from one research worker to another. 
An item of information possessed by a 
bacteriologist in Prague may prove to be 
precisely the item required by a researcher 
in New York to bring his experimentation 
to a successful conclusion. 
The attack of science upon the evils of 
disease and malnutrition and poverty 
could be immensely facilitated if more 
effective devices were available to promote 
By 
Dr. JOHN E. FLYNN, 
Editor-in-Chief, Biological Abstracts, 
Philadelphia. 
 
    
the dissemination of information and the 
sharing of experience. 
The sheer magnitude of the published 
record of the sciences is perhaps the 
greatest impediment to its effective use. 
A man undertaking reszarch on the con- 
trol of typhus, if he attempted to read all 
that his fellow-scientists engaged on the 
same and similar problems were pub- 
lishing, might spend all his waking hours 
locating and reading the published record 
—and still miss important information. 
O conserve the researcher's time for 
I} more productive labour, vet give him 
full information as to the progress 
others ate making, scientists of many 
nations have developed organizations for 
the perusal and abridgement or “abstract- 
ing” of scientific reports in the various 
departments of science. These organiza- 
tions, known as abstracting or indexing 
services, are usually non-profit organiza- 
tions set up by scientific bodies. sometim<s 
assisted by governmental subs:dy. Typi- 
cally they consist of research workers or 
members of university faculties. working 
on a part-time basis, gratis or for merely 
nominal compensation. reading and 
abridging the scientific papers in their 
own fields of competence for the benefit 
of their fellow-scientists. 
Many of the abstracting services employ 
highly trained specialists to evaluate as 
well as to abridge the reports assigned to 
them for study. Since scientific papers in 
large number appear in languages not 
commonly understood, as Finnish. Hun- 
garian, Turkish, Arabic and Japanese. 
many of the abstracting services employ 
scientists who are also skilled linguists 
to abstract such papers in the languages 
more commonly in use. 
HERE are several hundred such 
1 | abstracting services in existence at 
the present time. Some are local. or 
restricted to the service of & limited 
branch of knowledge; others are far 
flung organizations with thousands of 
readers and scores or even hundreds of 
part-time editors. According 1c a suwvey 
recently carried out by the International 
Federation for Documentation, there are 
forty-two such services publishing 4.000 or 
more abstracts per annum. Many fi¢lds of 
research lack such services, others ace 
poorly served. Scientists and documental- 
ists generally agree that scarcely any 
domain of man's knowledge is ad2quately 
served, and that improvement and ex- 
tension of the abstracting and indexing 
services is imperative if important ad- 
vances are not to be wasted and remain . 
unused. 
Scientists of all nations, Unesco and 
mankind generally, have an important 
stake in this process of the publication of 
whatever is discovered in the laboratories 
throughout the world. Speed in the publi- 
cation dissemination and application of 
whatever is new is of the utmost im- 
portance, in medicine, in public health, in 
agriculture, in chemistry, and in fact in 
all the disciplines in which scentists. are 
working. The stockpile of man's recorded 
scientific knowledge. increasing daily. 
must be freely available to all who need 
the information it contains.   
which would be of interest to other 
countries. 
“This system”, wrote De. Thérése Grivet 
in a detailed report specially prepared 
at Unesco's request for the confecence, 
“already appears to be working in 
Switzerland, Italy, Hungary, Finiand, 
Norway and South America and sheuld 
be extended and generalized.” 
The purpose of the specialized com- 
miitees would be the international co-or- 
dination of abstracting services dealing 
with the pure and applied sciences, 
physics and the engineering sciences, 
chemistry and agriculture. Other special- 
ized committees, to cover abstracting ser- 
vices in such fields as mathematics and 
crvstallography, might also be set up later 
on if 1t were found desirable. The con- 
ference suggested that Unesco and the 
International Scientific Unions help in 
setting up these committees. 
In suggesting this procedure, the dele- 
gates probably recalled the excellent re- 
sults already obtained by the co-ordinat- 
ing committee on medical and biological 
abstracts. 
Indeed, before the conference came to 
an end, a 16-man committee of physical 
scientists was officially set up along the 
lines of the medical and biological 
abstracting committee. 
  
Publication of General Journal 
HE conference also called for the 
1 publication of a general abstracting 
journal for both pure and applied 
physics, under the auspices of a single 
internationally controlled organization. 
The delegates recommended “that a com- 
mission composed of representatives of 
organizations now responsible for publish- 
ng abstracts (including the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers and the American 
Phys:cal Society) and reprasentatives of 
interested international scientific unions, 
be convened for carrying out this pro- 
ject”. 
Perhaps one of the most important 
resolutions passed by the Conference on 
Scientific Abstracting, calls on all scien- 
tific periodicals to publish synopses in 
English or French of original articles in 
all languages appearing in their publica- 
tions. This scheme, which has already 
been applied by a number of scientific 
periodicals, would, if adopted universally, 
have far-reaching consequences in spe2d- 
ing up the time required for publishing 
abstracts. This factor would be particu- 
larly appreciated by scientists in the 
midst of specific research tasks. 
‘Who’s Who’ in Abstracting 
HE delegates suggested, finally, that 
1] standard terminology and presenta- 
tion be adopted by all abstracting 
journals, and pointed to the need for 
publishing a complete directory of in- 
dexing and abstracting services, contain- 
ing lists of all per.odicals abstracted by 
the various services. This would be the 
first “Who's Who". as it were, in abstract- 
ing ever produced. 
Though scientific abstracting remains 
a complex and difficult problem, appre- 
ciable improvement in the services can 
be achieved through inteenat:onal action, 
a: the Unesco-sponsored conference una- 
nimously agreed at its final meeting. For 
it is this common effort that will ulti- 
mately put an end to the shortcomings 
of present-day abstracting services, and 
eliminate the barriers which seriously 
hamper scieutific research in many coun- 
tries of the world. 
During the period of the conference, an 
exhibition to both delegates and the gen- 
eral public, portrayed the major problems 
of scientific abstracting. Diagrams, photo- 
graphs and charts dealt with the fune- 
tioning of abstracting and documentation 
services, as well as the difficulties involv- 
ed in their publication and distribution 
in different languages. Aids to abstracting 
on display included microfilm cameras 
and readers, and devices for the mechan- 
ical selection of documents. 
  
  
MEE FING: S CONY ENED BY UNESCO 
Date Place 
40 July Mzeting of Exprris on Copyright, Unesco House, 
4 Joint Committee Unesco IBE (6th meeting). Geneva 
+12 Unesco IBE--X1Ith International Conference of 
Mublic Education, " 
7 International Voluntary Werk Camps Co-ordinating 
| Cummittee, Unesco House, 
7-8 Preparatory Committee — International Political | 
Scitnces Association London. 
11 th Session of the Preparatory Commission of the 
Iuternational Music Council, Unesco House. 
11-13 Committee of Experts on Engineering Sciences. on 
14-15 Joint Committee on Education for Librarianship in 
| eeoprration with IFIA-FID. Basel, 
15-16 Meeting of Leaders of Science Club, Unesco House. 
2571 Aug Technical Needs Commission, - 
International Conference for the Establishment of 
. an International Centre of Agricultural Science 
(Jointly with FAO and Halian Government), Rome, 
27-3Sep. | Latin America Seminar on Hit sracy. Rie de Jancire 
  
  
    

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10 UNESCO COURIER July 1949 
  


### 74026: UNESCO maps aid plan for 'backward' areas

Unesco Maps Aid Plan 
AST month, the Unesco Courier 
published an account of the 
bread UN plan to use more 
than $ 85,000,000 in two years 
for technical assistance which 
had been outlined in a report 
issued by the United Nations 
at Lake Success. 
Unesco’s partic pation in the 
joint plan was approved in ils 
entirety by the Executive Board ur ils meeting in Paris 
on June 10. The Executive Board appointed a five- 
member working party to aid the Director-General in 
drafting a special programme and budget which will be 
submitted to the General Conference in September. 
In view of the importance of this subject, the Unesco 
Courier is devoting this page to a summary of lhe 
proposals adopted by the Execut ve Board for Unesco’s 
participation in the technical aid programme. Unesco's 
plan provides for an estimated budget of. § 6,150,000 jor 
the first year and $ 10,705,500 for the second year. 
Under the extended programme of technical assistance 
it will be for the recipient countries to determ ne in what 
particular fields they want help. Unesco, therefore, has 
presented the general fields in which it is competent to 
give technical aid and the methods which it is ready lo 
use in giving such assistance. 
  
  
I. — TECHNICAL EDUCATION 
A NY economic development scheme that sets out really 
AN to help an under-developed country to do something 
for itself, will, sooner or later, lose its impetus if it does 
not incorporate a scheme for educational development. 
Most economically under-developed countries have in- 
adequate systems of education, and few of them will be 
able, without technical help from outside, to keep pace 
with the demands for skilled personnel that a successful 
economic plan will create. 
The first educational demands from economic develop- 
ment schemes are liksly to be for technical education. 
Help and advice will be asked for at all levels, from 
training 1n eiementary handicrafts to the education of 
engineers and other specialists in technological institutes. 
Many ucrder-developed countries have no knowledge, 
personnel, or traditions with which to build up a technical 
school system adequate to their growing needs, and want 
help in such matters as organization, equipment, textbooks 
and technical periodicals, the training of teachers, curri- 
cula, teaching methods, the use of audio-visual aids, and 
the integration of technical schools with industry. Unesco 
is qualified to advise on the establishment within the 
education system of laboratories and “shops” for the 
practical training of engineers and other higher technical 
staff, and on their relationships to Universities. 
UNESCO METHODS: 
exploratory missions, teams of 
advisers, field science offices, 
Use of others, but it includes the orzan- 
ization of missions covering 
technical education, and the 
  
 
@@ 
  Council. 
areas.’’ 
prosperous areas. 
  
EW subjects excite the imagination more than economic development,’”’ said Willard L. 
n Thorp, of the United States, at a meeting early this year of the Economic and Social 
Technical assistance to under-developed countries, as a contribution to peace and stability, 
became a subject of special interest when President Truman, in his Inaugural Address, listed it 
among the four major points of a ‘Bold new programme for making the benefits of our scientific 
advances and industrial progress available for the improvment and growth of under-developed 
“*More than half of the people of the world,’’ the United States President stated, ‘‘are living in 
conditions approaching misery. Their food is inadequate. They are victims of disease. Their economic 
life is primitive and stagnant. Their poverty is a handicap and a threat both to them and to more 
‘For the first time in history, humanity possesses the knowledge and the skill to relieve the 
suffering of these people,’’ he said, adding, ‘‘This should be a co-operative enterprise in which all 
nations work together through the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies... It must be a 
world-wide effort for the achievement of peace, plenty and freedom.’’ 
  
sackward’ Areas 
  
campaigns; the educational possibilities of libraries, co- 
operative enterprises, and community centres; and the 
methods of conduct ng social surveys preparatory to over- 
all community projects. 
Unesco will, in many of its adult education activities, 
be dependent upon the close co-operation of sister agencies 
with special competence in health, agriculture and in- 
dustry. In return, Unesco hopes to be able to assist other 
agencies with the educational and materials needed for 
their work. 
UNESCO METHODS: Explora- 
tory missions, advisers, fellows- 
ships, demonstration areas, pu- 
blicalions, research exhibitions 
and clearing-house services. 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco’s 
experience in this field is wide. 
It has sent exploratory mis- 
sions and advisers, organized 
pilot projects, conducted semi- 
nars and conferences, produced 
exhibits and publications, and 
carried on extensive clearing- 
house services, 
fellowships, and general clear- 
ing-house services, (See B. 
below). 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco's 
giving of advice through field 
* science offices. It is also con- 
ducting an extensive sarvey in 
the teaching of science, and has 
past experience In this field is given assistance to technical 
not as extensive as in many schools in war-devastated areas. 
II. — ELEMENTARY EDUCATION 
ECHNICAL educaticn worthy of the name is impos- 
s.ble unless based on efficient and widespread cle- 
mentary education. Few under-developad countries are 
capable of profiting, without expert help, from the hard- 
won experience that other countries have gatherad in 
this field over the past hundred years. They commonly 
need advice, not only on such relatively concrete matters 
as scheols buildings and equipment and school administra- 
tion and finance, but also on the more subtle problems 
that arise when a community begins to change its way of 
life and when a school system tries to break away from 
sterile formalism and to adapt itself to those chang.ng 
needs. Many under-developed areas are in desperate nezd 
of assistance on teaching methods, textbooks, curricula and 
the training of teachers. It is rare for a narrow and 
formal school system to produce educators who are 
capable, unless helped irom the outside, of adapting their 
schools readily to the changing demands of the ecoromic 
and social system. 
UNESCO METHODS: Explora- 
tory missions, advisers, fellow- 
ships, training and production 
centres, seminars, publication of 
teachers’ manuals and revicws, 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco 
is the only agency operating in 
this field, and has had expe- 
rience in it with practically all 
IV. — MASS COMMUNICATIONS AND EDUCATION 
MATERIALS 
1 HERE is serious need for research into the use of 
books, fiims, film-strips, the press and the radio, in 
the service of economic development schemes. These are 
powerful media, which have, up to the present, been 
very largely neglected for this purpose. Even the printed 
word has only in relatively rare instances, been adapted 
to the needs of under-developed peoples; the number of 
really good books and pamphlets specially written for 
them is surprisingly small, 
The film, film-strip, and radio seem to be ideally adapted 
  
to the purpose of winning popular support in under- 
developed communities, But the techniques involved are 
extremely difficult: even the adaptation of the press to 
the needs of the barely literate is by no means simple. 
Most under-developed countries will need outside assis- 
tance if they are to make much progress in the use of 
thes2 media. 
to use these media effectively in the service of economic 
deveiopment. 
An under-developed country can scarcely hope, without 
assistance from the outside, to make much progress 
towards meeting its needs for educators, scientisis, and 
technicians. It is for this reason that schemes of training 
loom large in Unesco's plans for technical assistance, 
Nearly every agency will need to make plans for train- 
ing schemes within its own ficld of competence. Unesco 
will have the additional duty of being a centre of ine 
formation on training techniques in general. 
UNESCO METHODS: Training 
centres, fellowships and scholar- 
ships, seminars and symposia, 
demonstration projects, scientific 
and industrial institutes. 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco’s 
experience covers: seminars, 
symposia, fellowships, demons 
tration arcas, production cen-~ 
tres, and the establishment of 
one regional institute. 
VII. — RESEARCH AND TRAINING LABORATORIES 
CONOMIC development .s beund up with technical 
development and cannot be considered as durable if 
it is not backed by a certain amount of scientific and 
technical research. This research serves a double purposz: 
first, it provides for the necessary adjustment and amend 
ments to established techniques so that they can be 
applied successfully under new conditions; secondly, the 
research laboratories provide the best kind of training for 
the highest technical staff and for future professors and 
teachers in higher technical education. 
The organization, equipment and programmes of the 
laboratories must be very carefully planned by a team of 
skilled scientists, whose services must be made available 
over a considerable period. 
UNESCO METHODS: Advisory 
missions, Field Science Offices, 
Fellowships, Scientific and Tech- 
nical Research Institutes. 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco’s 
field science offices have already, 
within the limits of their powers, 
given advice on the organiza- 
The Scientific Instruments Sere 
vice has provided extensive ine 
formation en research appara- 
tus to meet local needs and on 
its availability (catalogues, des- 
criptions, prices), The Recons- 
truction Department has bought 
and shipped apparatus in large 
UNESCO METHODS: Advisers, 
research and production cen- 
tres, demonstration areas, semi- 
nars and other training meth- 
eds. | . 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco is 
making collection of books and 
pamphlets produced throughout 
the world for use in under-deve- 
loped areas, and is already 
supporting twe relatively small- 
scale regional experiments in 
the production of books, films 
and film-sirips for fundamental 
educative campaigns, 
V. — TECHNICAL NEEDS FOR PRESS, FILM AND 
RADIO 
distribution of books and ma- 
the methods mentioned imme- 
terials. diately above. 
III. — FUNDAMENTAL ADULT EDUCATION 
CONOMIC development schemes, however, can 
rarely afford to wait fcr a new and educated genera- 
tion to grow up. An attempt must be made to educate 
adults. It is a fact that some two-thirds of the human race 
are unable to read and write. Whilst bare literacy is not 
the end and may not even be the beginning, of education, 
yet the printed word is one of the most potent means of 
conveying ideas and of stirring the sleeping minds of a 
people. The mind of the illiterate is often closed to ideas 
that may be essential to economic and political develop- 
ment. Great advances have bcen made during this century 
in methods of literacy teaching, but so slow and uncertain 
is the spread of educational methods that many illiteracy 
campaigns are cven now making use of methods that were 
out-of-date thirty years ago. Technical assistance would, 
in most cases, save time, money, and dreary, wasted effort. 
Mere literacy teaching is not enough: education must 
also develop. in both children and adults, the knowledge, 
the skills, and the attitudes of mind that are essential 
in any under-developed community that has to preserve 
its values and learn to control its own affairs during 
a period f rapid economic expansion. With Unesco must 
lie some of the responsibility for ensuring in any com- 
munity a reasonably balanced development. 
Unesco is prepared to offer advice and assistance on 
fundamental education services generally. Since its 
estaolishmens, its has tried to make itself competent on 
such matters as the conducting of illiteracy campaigns for 
the improvement of health, of agricultural methods and 
soil conservation, and of local crafts and smal!-scale indus- 
tries: the production and use of books, films, film-strips, 
exhibits, and radio programmes adapted to use in such 
WM ANY under-developed countries, however, have more 
material difficulties to overcome before they can 
make full use of mass media. Th2y lack the equipment, 
materials, and personnel to develop the use of the press, 
film and radio in the service of eccnomic development 
and education. Many of them have most inadequate 
resources in such materials as paper and film stock, and 
such equipment as flat-bed presses, linotype machines, 
typewriters and linotypes with letters in the alphabet 
of the country, radio recording equipment, radio receiving 
sets, cine-cameras, and film projection apparatus. Most 
of them lack information about sources of supplv of the 
kinds of materials and equipment suited t+ their needs, 
and about methods of training personnel, 
UNESCO METHODS: Missions, 
advisers, and fellowships. 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco 
has made special studies in 4% 
ccuntries to obtain information 
on the opncration and needs of 
the press, illm and radio. It has 
also gathered information on 
sources cf supply of material 
and cquipment and on methods 
ef train‘ng available in the more 
highly developed countries, and 
has given information on these 
matters in response to requests. 
TRAINING OF TEACHERS AND OTHER 
PERSONNEL 
YL — 
NESCO’S most extensive contribution to economic 
development will almost certainly be !n the training 
of workers from under-developed countries in the fields 
of eaucation, science, and the educational uses of mass 
media. In fundamental education, for example, the 
number of reaily skilled persons in the world is pathe- 
tically inadequate; and, in technical education, even the 
most advanced countries are dangerously short of 
teachers. The supply of scientific workers for under- 
developed countries is equally insufficient for the task 
ahead. The same applies to trained librarians and docu- 
mentalists. When we turn to the radio and the film 
we find even fewer people with the knowledge and skill 
tion of research laboratories. quantities, 
Scientific Information 
ROGRAMME of economic development avill create a 
growing demand, in under-develoned countries of: 
the world, for scientific information and liaison serv.ces.' 
These can be most easily provided by international agen-. 
cies. Information will be requested on scientific material’ 
of all kinds, including material needed for scientific and, 
technical teaching at every level and material for research’ 
laboratories. There will also be a demand for information 
on scientific literature, and in most cases for the supply 
of scientific books and journals and for advice on library 
methods. These services will keep scientists and research 
workers within the regions in contact with recent develope 
ments in their respective fields througheut the world, 
A scientific information service has a second function, 
that of helping the general public in an area to a detper 
understanding of the scientific principles and practices 
that will play an increasing role in their lives as the 
aconomic development scheme progresses. Without some 
such education in the meaning and place of science in 
everyday life, the inhabitants of an undevelcped area are 
unlikely to he willing and intelligent participants in 
development schemes based on technical advances. Exh: 
bitions, pamphlets, science clubs and the like, will be 
amongst the methods used. 
UNESCO METHODS: Field has had useful expericuce in 
Science Offices, distribution these matters, through its field 
centres for books and periodi- science offices and its division 
cals, advisory missions, publica- for scientific literature, The 
tions and exhibitions, book-coupon scheme has served 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco the same purpose, 
VIII. — REGIONAL PROBLEMS RAISED 
BY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
OR many countries economic development means 
some measure of industirialization making for a more 
complete use of all possible natural resources. The 
earliest secondary industries to be developed will, in 
general be those based on mining and agriculture. To be 
really effective such industrialization necessitates an 
inventory of all the available natural resources, backed up 
by a systematic study of the special problems encountered 
in each type of area. Very often, local authorities could 
proceed with plans to dcvelop these regions. 
Economic development naturally produces quite diuf- 
ferent problems in different areas. These areas can be 
classified in 2 small number of basic categories. The ‘m- 
portant problems peculiar to each type of region need an 
all-over scientific study in order that its economic develop- 
ment can be founded on a really solid basis of technical 
knowledge. We can classify the regions as : the arid zone, 
the humid tropical zone, the high altitude plateau, and 
the coastal region. In each case it will be necessary t@ 
(Cont‘nued on Page 11)

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

July 1949 UNESCO COURIER 11 
SE 
 
Group 
Leaders 
Selected For 
Rio Semi 10 Se nar 
There are to be five working 
groups in the Rie seminar on Hlit- 
eracy opening July 27 These with 
their group leaders are listed 
below: 
GROUP 1. STATISTICS AND DOCU- 
MENTATION. 
Dr. Germane G. Jardim, Brazilian 
statistician with the Inter-American 
Institute of Statistics, Washington, 
D.C. 
GROUP 1I. PRIMARY EDUCATION 
AND ILLITERACY. 
Dr. Carmela Tejada, of Peru, 
specialist in primary education for 
the Organization eof American 
States. 
GROUP III. ORGANIZATION OF 
LITERACY CAMPAIGNS, 
Dr. Lourenco Filho, Director of 
the seminar, Director-General of 
National Department of Education, 
Brazil. 
GROUP 1V. OBJECTIVES, METH- 
ODS AND MATERIALS OF LIT- 
ERACY TEACHING. 
" Dr. Frederick J. Rex, eminent 
American educator, of the Unesco 
Secretariat. 
GROUP V. ADULT EDUCATION. 
Dr. Gvuillerme Nannetti, former 
Minister of National Education of 
Colombia, Director of Caracas 
named Raimundo Souza Dantas, is now being printed by the 
A N unusual little book, wr'‘ten by a Rio de Janeiro journalist, 
Brazilian Ministry of Education for distribution to studeats 
in adult illiteracy classes throughout Brazil. Souza Dantas, who is only 
28 years old, is the editor of one of Rios most important daily 
newspapers. And yet, less than 11 vears ago, he was totally illiterate! 
In the book. which the Brazilian 
Souza Dantas tells how his entire 
new horizons opened to him after 
write, 
This month, when a seminar 
on illiteracy, organized jointly by 
the Brazilian Government, the 
Organization of American States 
(OAS) and Unesco, opens at 
Niteroi, near Rio, it will have 
before it Souza Dantas’ little book 
as one example of what Brazil 
has been doing in the Latin 
American struggle against illiter- 
acy. 
José Julian Marti once called 
America “the Continent of Hope". 
Simén Bolivar also groclaimed 
the liberty of America to be the 
“Hope of the Un:verse”. But this 
America of the hberators today 
sees seventy million of its inhab- 
jtants unable either to read or 
write. Nineteen million children 
are without elementary schools. 
How reconcile Marti's and 
Bolivar’'s dreams of a better life 
with these neglected masses cut 
off from the cultural stream of 
the continent? 
] HE opehing guns in what is 
expected to be the first 
seminar on Fundamental Education 
in 1948.     example in world history of a 
methodical, sweeping attack by 
co-ordinated forces on an entire 
  
Are You A Courier’ 
- SUBSCRIBER ? 
Government is publishing, Senhor 
life was suddenly transformed and 
he had learned how to read and 
continent, to lift the veil of iliiter- 
acy and ignorance, will be provid- 
ed by the Rio de Janeiro seminar, 
The job, however, calls for some- 
thing much greater than just 
teaching the people how tc read 
ang write. It means an effort 
to raise the whole material, moral 
and spiritual standards of these 
people. 
During the past several months, 
in both North and South America, 
groups and organizations have 
been at work, in collaboration 
with Unesco, preparing for the 
big task ahead. 
The Inter-American Institute of 
Statistics has been preparing and 
co-ordinating statistics on :lliter- 
acy in 22 countries in order to 
reveal the true face of the 
situation in the Americas. WHO 
and the Pan-American Sanitary 
Bureau have been working on 
health education for adults and 
preparing an exhibition of fun- 
damental education for health. 
The Inter-American Institute of 
Agriculture has been studying the 
development of better farming 
practices, while the ILO and the 
Department of Economic and 
Social Welfare of the OAS have 
‘been at work on problems of 
labour, co-operatives and housing. 
The library division of the Pan- 
American Union, which for the 
past 60 years has accumulated 
documentation on America, has 
been studying the question of 
spreading popular libraries. 
Educators and scientists in both 
2 
Illiteracy 
Latin America. At 
seminar, the nations of America 
present their experiences, 


### 74027: The Latin American struggle against illiteracy

The Latin American Struggle 
  
Below. the hotel 
Quitandinha, site of 
the Latin-American 
Seminar on HIit- 
eracy, which opens 
at Niteroi, a moun- 
tain village over- 
looking Rio de 
Janeire. 
ainst 
    
- 5 
  
: 5 . VTE Coe 
FERPA L] . 
pot 
— —— . 
the Rio The Seminar on Illiteracy 
which opens on July 27 and cons 
tinues for six weeks untii Sep- 
their knowledge and their ma- 
terials so that they can be made 
available to all the countries for 
the continent-wide drive. 
Unesco. in co-operation with the 
OAS. the Bureau of Currant 
Affaire in London. the Interna- 
tional Bureau of Education, has 
prepared extensive documentary 
material for the seminar, includ- 
ing a fundamental education 
exhibit, and information on 
audio-visual techniques and adult 
education methods. 
tember 2, will be held at the Hotel 
Termas Quitandinha, in the pic- 
turesque mountain town of Niteroi 
above Rio de Janeiro. 
Dr. Lourengo Filho will direct 
the seminar, which will be givided 
into five working groups dealing 
with stat.stics and documentation, 
the objectives, methods and ma- 
terials of literacy teaching, pri- 
mary education and illiteracy, the 
organization of literacy came 
paigns, and adult education. 
        
      
            
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
     
and culture. 
subscribers. 
“outside of France). 
Courier and get them to subscribe too. 
Unesco House, 19. avenue Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France. 
The Unesco Courier is an international periodical 
devoted to the work of Unesco and to activities and 
developments throughout the world in education, science 
Until now some of our readers have been receiving free 
copies of cur periodical. In order to permit us to supply 
the many thousands of new readers in almost every coun- 
try in the world, we are undertaking a special drive for 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 
US. or 5/- or 250 French Francs (300 French Francs 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! Tell your friends about the Unesco 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to 
N. B. — The photo-offset American edition is available only 
Americas, universities in Mexico, 
Brazil, Peru and the United States 
have been tackling some of the 
technical aspects of education. 
And in all the countries of North 
and South America, plans are 
being pushed for the joint effort 
which will be launched with the 
Rio de Janeiro seminar. 
REAL: for example, is going 
ahead with the organiza- 
which stand out like beacon 
lights for other nations of Amer- 
ica to follow. 
In 1920, out of every 100 
Brazilians, 60 could neither read 
nor write. The major campaign 
launched in 1947, opened over 
12,000 schools within a few 
tion of its illiteracy campaigns EPRESENTATIVES of non- 
governmental organizations 
which co-operate with the 
United Nations and its Specialized 
Agencies assembled in Geneva, 
Switzerland, between June 27 and status with Unesco were addressed 
July 2, for two conferences held 
in the Palais des Nations. 
At the first of these inter-relat- 
Information Groups Study 
Mass Media Methods 
To Publicize UN Work 
ways in which they can cone 
tribute to the success of the 
United Nations’ work. . 
Representatives of 29 organiza- 
tions admitted to consultative 
by Mr, V. Hercik, of Unesco's 
Bureau of External Relations, 
who suggested how they might 
through our agent, Columbia University Press. 
Australia: H, A. Goddard Ltd. 255a, George St. Sydney. 
Bruxelles IV. 
Caaada : I'he Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West. Toronto. 
Cuba: La Casa Belga. R de Smedt O'Reilly, Habana 
Denmark : Einar Mupksgaard, 6 Norregade. Covenhagen. 
     
way tRetail Counter Service) 
    
   
France: Sditions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soufflot. Paris. Se. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale Athens.      
Low Countries: NV 
+ Lange Voorhout. The Hague       
   Sweden: Ab OC. E PFritzes. Fredsgatan i, Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Pavot. Lausanne 
Montevideo 
   Press. 2960 Broadway, New York 27, N.Y. 
 
Argentina:  Editoriai Sudamericana S.A. Alsina 500. Buenos-Aires 
Belgium. — Librairie encyclopedique, 7, rue du Luxembourg. 
Great Britain: HM Stationery Office: London: York House, Kings- 
. P.O Box 369, Lond, SE1. 
orders). — Manchester 2: 39-41 King Street — Edinburgh 2: 
Castle Street — Cardiff: 1 St Andrew's Crescent. — Bristol 1: 
Tower Lane — Belfast: 80 Chichester Street 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House. New Delhi, 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle, Av, des Francais, Beirut, 
Martinus Nijhoff. Afd.. Fondsaministratie 
Portugal : Unido Portuguesa de Imprensa, Caixa Postal 615, Lisboa 
Uruguay. ~— Libreria Internacional S R.L., Calle Uruguay 
U.S.A. — International Documents Service, Columbia University   
 
months, with an enrollment of 
one million students. The coun- 
try saw the literacy campaign as 
a tool for better health, better 
farming and better living. Gov- 
ernment ministries, the nation’s 
press, private industry and the 
intellectual leaders joined in the 
movement. Thanks to the efforts 
of men like Dr. Lourenco Filho, 
Brazilian Minister of Education, 
and one of the most outstanding 
figures in the educational world 
of Latin America; Dr. Francisco 
Jarussi: Dr. Anisio Teixeira; Dr. 
Fernando Tude de Souza and 
others the illiteracy campaigns 
have taken on the aspect of a 
national crusade. 
Similar efforis have beén gain- 
ing momentum in other parts of   
ed conferences, called for June 27 
and 28 by the U.N. Department 
of Public Information, 160 dele- 
gates from 95 European non-gov- 
ernmental organizations met for 
a general examination of U.N. 
information problems. 
The delegates heard reports 
from representatives of U.N. 
Information Centres in Europe 
and discussed how the best use 
can be made of press, films and 
radio to improve public awareness 
and understanding of the U.N. 
and its work. 
At the 2nd General Conference 
of Non-Governmental Organiza- 
tions having consultative status 
with the U.N. or its Agencies. 
held on July 1 and 2, over 100 
delegates were told of practical 
help the Organization's work. 
The resuits of these conferences 
are among the items for con- 
sideration by the Consultative 
Committee on Public Information 
for the U.N. and its Specialized 
Agencies, which holds its tenth 
Session at Geneva on July 5. 
Two Unesco items proposed for 
discussion concern plans for 
celebrating “Human Rights” Day 
on December 10, and the possibil- 
ity of publishing and distributing 
pamphlets and books, particularly 
in German and Italian, in those 
states which are not members of 
the United Nations. 
Unesco was represented at the 
conferences by Dr Carlo a Prato, 
Head of the Bureau of Public 
Information. 


### 74026: UNESCO maps aid plan for 'backward' areas

Unesco Maps Technical Aid 
(Continued from page 10) 
make a study of the conditions of human and animal life, 
of the production of energy, of nydrography, of the use of 
vegetable and mineral resources, and of the relation of 
each of these fields to all the others. Such studies could 
best be made in institutes peculiar to each type of region. 
Unesco could be responsible for the initial organization 
and operation of such institutes. They could be used for 
- the training of specialists who could eventually take over 
the direction of the institutes. 
UNESCO METHODS: Explora- Institute, the research program- 
tory missions, advisers, field me of which will be directed 
science co-operation offices, towards the development of a 
institutes of technical and scien- region which has all the char- 
tific research, symposia fellow- acteristics of a tropical humid 
ships. zone. Through its Field Science 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Unesco Offices, Unesco has been able 
took the initiative in the estab- to help solve special local in- 
lishment of the Hylean Amazon dustrial problems. 
IX. — PROTECTION OF LOCAL CULTURES 
NLESS education accompanies {echnological de- 
velopment programmes, the cultural values of a 
country are almost necessarily undermined, and the 
cultural values of the nation or nations giving the assis- 
tance are subtly substituted for them. But not any or 
every form Of education will avert this ev:l. Even educa- 
tion can be a disruptive force unless it is geared to the 
cultural and social needs of a particular people. Other- 
wise, it can lead merely to the creation of a class of 
uprooted intellectuals. 
History furnishes dramatic examples of societies thrown 
into upheaval—sometimes with grave consequence for 
the world—by unbalanced programmes of industrializa- 
tion. The gravest examples come from lands where what 
was mistakenly assumed to be “progress” was brought 
from without. 
Such examples make it obviously necessary to associate 
with projects of economic development specialists with 
experience in anthropology and sociology. Their advice 
will help to ensure that the economic development scheme 
conform to the way of life valued by the people them- 
selves The assistance of social scientists is obviously not 
enough in itself to enable a scheme to avoid all the 
risks inherent in major social change. 
When a mission is sent to survey the technical needs 
and problems of a given country, an expert should be 
included in the team to conduct on the spot a survey of 
the cultural and sociological factors involved and to call 
attention to the sociological implications on the projected 
assistance programme, The primary function of this 
expert should be to advise on protecting the native 
culture, as the protection of national cultures is one 
of Unesco's duties. ) 
In addition to protecting the native cultures, the 
services of experts can often be useful in stimulating 
Jocal industries based on native arts crafts. Technical 
assistance need not and should not be a one-way process. 
The under-developed areas have much to contribute to 
the 1est of the world, not only through increased pro- 
duction in the economic field, but in the cultural field 
as well. Already there is a considerable market in the 
industrialized countries for the products of artists and 
ciaftsmen in certain of the under-developed areas. This 
market could be greatly expanded if native artists and 
craftsmen were taught to adapt their traditional tech- 
niques and designs to fit trade needs in the industrialized 
countries, without at the same time lower:mg the artistic 
quality of their works. Preserving them not only helpe 
protect the culture as a whole, bu" also conserves 
potential economic resource and ultimately makes 
available to members of other cultures valuable items 
in tre general cultural heritage of mankind. 
UNESCO METHUDS: Use of logisis, and other social sciem< 
sociologists and anthropologists tists, It has alse been concern~ 
and authorities on native arts ed with studies on the relation- 
and crafts as members of expio- ship of technology te social 
ratory missions and as advisers tensions, which invelve many of 
te governments engaging in the problems that will be en- 
economic development schemes. countered in economie develop- 
PAST EXPERIENCE: Through ment schemes, Unesce has 
its activities in the field of already carried out three intem= 
the social sciences Unesco is in sive anthropolegical surveys of 
permanent contact with nation- the type referred io abeve, and 
al and international organiza- proposes te publish a momegraph 
tions eof anthropologists, socio- em survey metheds,

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/074013engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

12 UNESCO COURIER July 1949 


### 74028: The Story of Antonio Arango: a UNESCO 'Food and people' pamphlet

THE STORY 
oF ANTONIO ARANGO 
A Unesco ‘Food and People’ Pamphlet 
TR AV ELLER 
approaching the 
Colombian port 
of Barranquilla 
on the Carib- 
bean Sea sees 
Colombian soil 
long before he 
sights the coast. 
The ‘ropical 
blue of the sea changes to yellow 
as far as the eye can reach. 
What gives it its yellow colour? 
The port of Barranquilla lies on 
the estuary of the River Mag- 
dalena. A great river which rises 
in the interior of Colombia and 
flows for a thousand miles to 
empty into the Caribbean Sea. 
It is soil swept 
by the Magdalena River which 
gives the sea water that yellow 
colour within a radius of some 
miles round the Port of Bar- 
ranquilla. Where does the soil 
come from? 
It comes from the Magdalena 
‘Valley and from the slopes of the 
Andes enclosing the valley to the 
east and the west. It has been 
washed away by the rain and 
borne down brooks, tributaries 
and secondary rivers. 
Part of it has been strippad by 
the River Magdalena from its 
own banks. The traveller notes 
the yellow colour of the sea with- 
out interest. 
re does not . - 
realize that 
every day 
every hou 
even ever 
minute, to 
wealth of - 
nation is cast 
into the sea 
That vege- 
table top-soil. 
borne off by 
the river. guve 
their fertility 
to plantations } 
of coffee and Cem 
bananas and to fields of 
  
NTONIO ARANGO, whom I 
knew in the Andean Cor- 
dillera, was himself an 
actor in the tragedy of the 
vanishing soil, without under- 
standing it. 
Antonio Arango invested his 
1.fe-savings in the purchase of a 
20-hectare parcel of land in the 
Cordillera. The land was covered 
with “tall timber”, which showed 
the fertility of the soil. “Where 
such big trees grow. the soil is 
. good”, said Antonio to himself, 
. and he gazed with satisfaction at 
_ the thick stratum of vegetable 
. top-soil which could be seen 
- in the cutting made by the brook. 
. The water of the brook was 
crystal-clear as it flowed through 
the under-growth of mosses and 
parasitic plants; so crystalline 
“that Anton.o and his sons chrs- 
tered it “Diamond Brook”. The 
"site was ideal for a house, with a 
view over the whole landscape. 
Antonio Arango sharpened his 
axe and machete. Iron was to 
conquer the woodland. His wife 
and three sons aiding him he 
toiled like a Colossus. The tall 
trees crashed in thunder at the 
stroke of the unweary:ng axe. The 
timber could not be used because 
there were no roads by which to 
remove it nor neighbouring towns 
.to buy it. So Antonio Arango let a 
‘few days’ sunshine dry the tallen 
trees and then set fire to them. 
THER settlers were doing 
( the same in cther parts of 
the mountains. 
The blaze was encrmous. 
How the fallen giants crackled 
in the fire and how the small 
beasts and birds of the forest fled 
‘before the flames! 
At long last the ground was 
cleared and Antonio Arango 
sowed it with maize. On two hec- 
tares he sowed forage for the cow. 
He built a house on the high 
ground. As his good wife had 
worked so hard, Antonio gave his 
canch a pretty name, La Isabela. 
away for ever 
maize. 
The first harvest was encourag- 
ing. How tall, how thick, how 
luxuriant were the maize stems! 
Antonio was well pleased with his 
efforts. So he went on sowing 
maize. But things were changing. 
IAMOND BROOK, which 
had once been brimming 
and crystal-clear through- 
out the year, hag shrunk to a 
thread of water in summer-time. 
In the rainy season if was a 
yellow flood tearing loose rocks 
and mud and lumps of soil The 
harvests were growing smaller. 
Antonio Arango sold the cow be- 
cause the pasture was no longer 
enough for it to live on. Things 
were not going right at all. 
One day, when he was sowing 
maize, his mattock struck solid 
rock. The vegetable top-soil had 
become so thin that already rocky 
outcrops were appearing every- 
where. There was no money nn the 
house. The children had nothing 
to eat. Lastly, Diamond Brook 
vanished and only its stony chan- 
nel was left. Like so many other 
settlers, Antonio Arango sought 
another stretch of woodland {to 
begin again. 
HIS little tragedy of Antonio 
1 Arango is attaining natio- 
nal, continental and world 
proportions. It has been said that 
every year Co- 
lombia 103es 
the equivalent 
of 10,000 20- 
hectares ran- 
ches by soil 
erosion. That 
means that 
every year 
there are 10.- 
000 families in 
the same posi- 
tion as the 
Arangos. 
Doctor H.H. 
Se Bennett, the 
BA North Amer- 
ican apostle of soil conserva- 
tion, claims that his country 
has lost for ever 300,000,000 acres 
by erosion, which is imperilling 
755,000,000 acres more. Authorita- 
tive writers have set out the 
problem as it affects other na- 
tions in different continents. 
Nor js it simply a case of men 
utterly losing their land. There 
is ‘also the case of the man who 
lives wretchedly, toiling vainly on 
impoverished land, faced with his 
own ruin and the degeneration of 
his race. 
‘x 1 
Re, 
. “2 
a
 
oe
 
P
a
 
ii
i 
B
o
 
te
 
 
0D N this page, we publish the first two chapters of - 
the manuscript entitled “The Story of Antonio Aran- 
go”, written originally in Spanish by Dr. Guillermo 
Nannetti for the Unesco “Food and Peopls” pamphlet 
and discussion series, 
Dr. Nannetti tells the story of a farmer and his 
family, who bought a rich plot of land in the high 
Andean Cordillera of Colombia, only to see it rapidly 
lose its wealth because he failed to guard against soil 
erosion, The tale is written for the peasants them- 
selves who must be taught the save their land and 
their food by applying the methods of modern agri- 
cultural science. It is deliberately written at a very 
different level from the usual academic article and 
is in sharp contrast to most other pamphlets mn the 
series because of its simple, and yet highly poctic, 
style, § 
Dr. Nannetti, who was formerly Minister of Na- 
tional Education in Colombia, is a noted international 
expert on fundamental and adult sducaton. Last year, 
he was Director of the Unesco Fundamental Edueca- 
tion Seminar held in Caracas. This month, he will 
lead the working group on adult education at the 
Rio d= Janeiro Seminar on Illiteracy. He is also a 
member of Unesco’s Executive Board. 
Arrangements have been made for the Spanish 
version of the pamphlet to be published by Sud Amer- 
icana Press in Buenos Aires. In the English edition, 
published by the Bureau of Current Affairs, 
known as “Alphabet of the Soil”. Sr TN 
The “Food and People” campaign is exciting in- 
terest throughout the world. It is to be discussed, for 
example, at the French Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science, meeting at Clermont-Ferrand this 
month, at the British Association for the Advancement 
of Science, meeting in England in September, and at 
the World Federation of United Nations’ Associations 
meeting in Réme in September. 
ISTORY has shown us cases 
| of whole civilizations 
which fell with the im- 
poverishment of the soil that 
nurtured them. Classical Greece 
was a country of woods and 
brooks. Carthage a zone of 
forests and farm-lands. In desert 
areas of North Africa men have 
found the ruing of cities where 
the archaeologist discovers traces 
of wine and olive-oil industries. 
Science notes similar facts regard- 
ing the great civilizations of Asia 
Minor. There is no apparent reason 
why the same fate should not 
await the nations affected by 
erosion today. 
In some instances the process 
of erosion is rapid and violent, 
taking a few years cnly, as in the 
case of Antonio Arango, with his 
soil newly exposed to the action 
of tropical rains. 
Elsewhere the process is slow 
and insidious and revealed only 
by the gradual impoverishment 
of the soil, and calcium deficiency 
and degeneration in its inhabi- 
tants. By the diminishing stature 
of the new generations, dental 
troubles. and the onset of diseases. 
consequent on a condition of 
malnutrition and pauperism. 
“Like so many other settlers, Antonio Arango sought another 
stretch of woodland te begin again” 
{Original drawings em this page we re 
of Colombia.) 
made by Senorita Emma Reyes, 
it is 
Fs 
HOW THE SOIL VANISHES 
The Story of a Grain 
“of Earth 
ET us go back to Antonio 
|B Arango. What happened to 
Antonio’s land? Why did 
that good land bear several crops 
of maize? Why does the soil 
which is left bear no crons? And 
why and how did the good earth 
disappear? Who stole the gocd 
earth and with it the wealth, 
well-being and future of Antonio 
Arango and his sons? What 
happened to the brook? 
If only Antonio Arango had 
been able to examine a small 
grain of good soil through a miec- 
roscope, he would have seen that 
that soil did not consist merely of 
symmetrical crystals, like earth 
from the subsoil. No, indeed, the 
good soil was something almost 
alive. In it there were living, mov- 
ing bacteria and animalculae. 
N the subscil stratum, as in 
0 the stony ground of :he 
Gospel parable, the sown 
seed dies. If it were not for its 
covering of organic soil, our plant 
would be as dead as the moon. As 
dead as the areas of rocky desert 
soil, whence the organic covering 
has vanished, borne off by rain 
and wind. As dead as “La Tsa- 
bela”, Antonio Arango’s land. Yet, 
that organic so.l, sole buckler 
against the death of our plant, is 
daily swept away through our cul- 
pable thoughtlessness. But how 
did the soil disappear? 
When Antonio Arango’s land 
was covered with trees, the rain- 
water, as it fell, struck the foliage, 
trickled gently down branches 
and trunks and soaked down 
along the roots to the subsoil. The 
goed soil did not suffer a heavy 
impact of water and the water it- 
self accumulated in the subsoil. 
And that was how Diamond 
Brook, with its waters ever lim- 
pid, was born. 
But when Antonio Arango 
stripped off the forest, the good 
earth was left expesed, naked and 
defenceless, to the impact of the 
rain. Thus every heavy drop 
struck a grain of good soil, as 
it had been a little hammer. The 
impact of the raindrop dissolved 
the grain of good soil and ‘the 
accumulated water flowed over 
the slope, bearing off the soil 
with it. In some instances small 
threads of water developed, which 
 
“H= toiled like a 
 
Colossus, felling the tall 
trees” 
were positive brooklets and cut 
themselves channels, wic> clels 
in the soil. “Diamond Brook is in 
flocd and cannot handle all the 
“water,” Antonio Arango used to 
say as he watched the turbid 
torrent, muddy and swollen. He 
did not know that Diamond Brook 
was bearing off the good soil, 
which was the source of his har- 
vests, his wealth, his hopes and 
the future of his sons, 
ATER which sinks in‘o the 
WwW subsoil is the sap of the 
whole world. Rainwater 
flowing over the surface steals 
away the top soil. Hence the im- 
portance of trees. Vegetation is 
like an umbrella protecting the 
soil. It breaks the fall of the wa- 
ter and causes it to sink into the 
subsoil. The forest is the mother 
of the spring. The roots of the 
trees are like friendly hands sus- 
taining the topsoil with their 
myriad fingers. Fallen leaves and 
fruits fertilize the soil and build 
up the vegetable humus. The 
trees afford protection from ‘ha 
wind, regulate humidity and give 
shelter from heat and cold. They 
prevent floods. They purify the 
air. They can be an inexhaustib'a 
source of profit to one who kncws 
how to cultivate and utilize them 
wisely. 
CIENCE has conquered ero- 
J sion. There is a body of sim- 
ple techniques which prev- 
ents the disappearance of the 
good soil. If only someone had 
taught Antonio Arango to drive 
his furrows according to the con- 
tour of the slope. To terrace the 
steepest part of the slope. To cica- 
trize the scars of erosion with 
simple dams of logs and stones. 
If only someone had taught Anto- 
nio Arango that maize is not the 
right crop for sloping greund and 
that other better paying .crops 
can be rotated instead. If only 
someone had taught him to sow 
the ground between his furrows 
with suitable bushes to check the 
movement of the soil. 
And if only that could be made 
to apply to all the Antonio Araa- 
gos in his own country and 
throughout the werld! To the 
Smiths, the Chungs, the Abdullas, 
the men of the soil in all lati- 
tudes! This is the theme which 
Fundamental Education preaches 
under the heading of Conserva- 
tion of Natural Resources. 
Editor : 
Editorial Offices : Unesco, 19. Avenue Kléber, Paris (16e) 
S.M. KOFFLER. 
Director : C. a PRATO. 
Asst. Editor : R. S. FENTON. 
All Reproductions Authorized | 
IMPRIMERIE DU “NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE”, 21, Rue de Berri, Paris (80), 
Unesco Publication 380,