# [138446](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

= the n°w 
IH 
United Nations : 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
  
 
The slave trade: 
a peculiar 
cultural odyssey 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004   
Cover photo: 
© Betty Press/Panos Pictures, London 
the new Courier is published 
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
Tel: 33 1 45 68 46 85 
Fax: 33 1 45 68 56 52 
Email: unesco.courier@unesco.org 
Internet: http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Editors in Chief: Vincent Defourny, Sue Williams 
Editorial Assistant: Agnés Bardon 
Editorial staff: Roni Amelan, Pierre Gaillard, 
Lucia Iglesias-Kuntz, Cathy Nolan, Bassam Mansour, 
Vladimir Sergueev, Jasmina Sopova 
Research and documentation: José Banaag 
Photo editor: Ariane Bailey 
Photographers: Niamh Burke, Michel Ravassard 
Editions produced away from headquarters: 
Michiko Tanaka 
Artistic direction: Jean-Francis Cheriez 
Production: Gérard Prosper, Eric Frogé 
Photoengraving: Annick Coueffé 
Distribution: Pilar Morel Vasquez 
Printed by: Imprimerie Corlet, 
Condé-sur-Noireau, France 
Electronic version: Richard Cadiou, 
Fiona Ryan-Jacqueron 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted 
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads 
“Reprinted from the new Courier”, including the 
date and issue. Non-copyright photos will be 
supplied upon request. Unsolicited manuscripts and 
articles will not be returned unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. 
Signed articles express the opinions of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the opinions 
of UNESCO or those of the new Courier. 
Photo captions and headlines are written by the 
magazine’s editorial staff. 
The boundaries on maps do not imply official 
endorsement or acceptance by UNESCO or 
the United Nations of the countries and territories 
concerned. 
ISSN 0041-5278 
-verybody was on their feet swaying to the music, happy to 
be sharing an exceptional moment. To bring the International 
Year for the Commemoration of the Struggle against Slavery 
and its Abolition to a close, Gilberto Gil, musician and 
Brazilian Minister of Culture, performed an exceptional concert at 
UNESCO’s Paris Headquarters. “The most fantastic contribution of 
the Black diaspora to the world is the cultural, racial and spiritual 
blending it has spawned,” Gil commented in between an evocative 
ballad about the island of Gorée, a song of revolt and hope by 
Bob Marley and John Lennon’s “Imagine”. 
The concert hall was packed on that evening of December 3. 
As with events over the whole of 2004, it served as a poignant 
reminder of the abominations of slavery, the celebration of 
its abolition, and the need to continue the struggle against all 
contemporary forms of slavery. At the same time, it also highlighted 
the extraordinary exchanges that the slave trade engendered, and 
how they have influenced the world in which we live today. 
The concert was the final event on the evening’s emotionally 
charged programme. Earlier, poet Aimé Césaire took part, live 
via videolink from his home in Fort de France in Martinique. He 
was awarded the Toussaint Louverture Prize, specially created by 
UNESCO for the International Year. With finesse and precision, he 
spoke of the universal dimension of the combat against injustice 
and for human dignity. Quoting from his writings on the freed slave 
who went on to lead Haiti, he emphasized how seriously Toussaint 
Louverture had taken the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of 
the Citizen, which was adopted by the National Assembly of France 
in 1789. 
The founder of the Teatro Experimental do Negro, Abdias 
Nasacimento of Brazil, was there in person. He also received the 
Toussaint Louverture Prize for his efforts over almost 70 years to 
rehabilitate Afro-Brazilian heritage, and his commitment to the 
struggle against domination, racism and intolerance. He called for 
vigilance and launched a vibrant plea in favour of Haiti and Africa, 
denouncing all mechanisms that today maintain injustice and 
oppression. 
Earlier in the day, in la salle des pas perdus, a travelling 
exhibition was inaugurated. « Lest we forget : the triumph over 
slavery”, was conceived by the Schomberg Centre in New York 
in collaboration with UNESCO's Slave Route project. The facts 
and figures, the methods used and the terrible logic of the slave 
trade presented in this exhibition serve as a sober reminder of the 
suffering endured by so many men and women. 
The dossier published in this issue of the new UNESCO Courier 
focuses on the « blending » that resulted from the population 
movements that resulted from the slave trade. It takes us on a 
strange cultural odyssey, shedding a completely different light on 
some of the most dreadful pages of human history 
Vincent Defourny

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

oS 4 
MICHELE JEAN 
Human dignity, key value 
of bioethics 
  
HIM OAY. ' APL 
UNE LD Hf aetion 
     
        
/ 
OCEANS HIT BOTTOM 
Already the victims of global warming, marine ecosystems 
are threatened by a rising level of acidity 
16 
SPACE FOR ETHICS 
As space exploration advances, law pu 
and ethics have to keep up. 3 
MALI: MOBILE RADIO 
IN THE BATTLE 
AGAINST HORDES 
OF LOCUSTS 
  
18 
i QUALITY OF EDUCATION: 
Sication COULD DO BETTER 
HE GLIA Conclusions of the latest Education 
for All Global Monitoring Report 
5 
DRC: SPECIES 
EXTINCTION ALERT 
Bonobo and Northern White 
Rhinoceros are endangered 
21 
The organization’s latest news 
Focks 24 
THE SLAVE TRADE: 
A PECULIAR 
CULTURAL ODYSSEY 
Beyand the atrogities involved in the traffic 
of human beings, the slave trade also brought about 
unprecedented cultural exchange 
 
5¢ 
Projects organized, sponsored or supported 
by UNESCO with civil society: personalities, universities, 
NGOs, corporations.... 
52 
ICT TIME IN AFRICA 
Close-up on community multimedia 
centres in Mozambique  
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 138436: Talking to Michèle Jean: human dignity, key value of bioethics

talking to 
MICHELE JEAN 
  
ee 
Te 
Science is becoming more and oi \"\ KE 
more universal. In order to ame BE 
respond to the questions raised i i } \ 
by modern science, ethics Ie | _ RENE 
must go global, with common A i. = hy g ; 
points of reference established. a | & 
The International Bioethics SIE) | p / 
Committee (IBC) has been \ i TB 
working at this task for several SR 
months, creating the basis of 
a declaration on the universal a 
norms of bioethics. The IBC 
will soon hand the baton to 
government experts, who are 
expected to meet and generate 
the final document that will 
be submitted to UN. ESCO S Taking into account our consultations with UNESCO member 
General Conference in 2008S. states, we’ve chosen to focus the declaration on human beings 
: as as moral actors with responsibilities vis-a-vis animals, the 
IBC Pres ident Michele Jean of environment and the biosphere. These areas could be the focus 
Canada answers our questions. of other work done either by the World Commission on the 
Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology (COMEST), the 
IBC or other bodies. 
i» 
UN
ES
CO
/M
ic
he
l 
Ra
va
ss
ar
d 
What will this future declaration include? 
Who will the declaration be targeting? 
The declaration aspires to create a framework that could inspire 
states in the implementation of their policies, legislation, 
rules of good conduct and codes of ethics. It’s an instrument 
that should help countries draft their own policies and their 
own guidelines, while taking into account their cultures and 
traditions. One of the challenges is not to fall into the trap of 
cultural relativism. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 138436: Talking to Michèle Jean: human dignity, key value of bioethics

The IBC’s text is based on a series of fundamental principles, 
with human dignity at the forefront. Can this principle really 
be defined? 
This notion is very complex and I don’t think that we’ll end up 
with a precise definition. Human dignity can take diverse forms 
in different cultures. Others before us have tried to do it and we 
always end up with solutions that don’t allow for the principle 
to maintain its universality. 
So, what's the point then? 
Human dignity is a notion that crops up in several international 
texts, notably in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
and in the works of philosophers like Kant. This principle has 
the advantage of putting forward a vision of the human being. 
If we don’t take human dignity into consideration, what is 
the use of talking about principles like autonomy or informed 
consent? I think that this notion constitutes a vision or an 
objective to which we should strive, an objective which allows 
us to establish a certain number of other principles that we can 
define more clearly. 
Does such a pluralistic approach risk weakening the 
instrument? 
We must not fall into any kind of cultural relativism, where 
everything is mixed up and we can do anything in the name 
of cultural diversity. This is why we specify in the declaration 
that one cannot undermine the values of justice, human dignity 
and human rights in the name of cultural diversity. Nothing 
that has been implemented should run contrary to the general 
and fundamental principles that we define. But one can - in 
one’s way of working, in one’s relationship with spirituality and 
religion - come up with different ways of implementing these 
same principles. 
One of the goals of the future declaration is to prevent 
the stigmatization of and discrimination against individuals 
or a group of individuals. Could you give some recent 
examples of cases in which scientific progress came up 
against such a risk? 
New risks have appeared, notably with the development of 
genetic science. For example, if you study the “susceptibility” 
of a given population to certain illnesses, there is a risk that 
certain sectors of the population could be stigmatized. Those 
who are more susceptible than others to developing a certain 
illness due to their genetic make-up are maybe going to see 
themselves denied jobs or health insurance. How can we make 
sure that, on one hand, epidemiological research - which can 
benefit from the study of genetic data from certain populations 
~ moves forward, but on the other hand, that this does not lead 
to the stigmatization of individuals? 
There is also a question about the collective dimensions of 
consent. If you decide to submit to a DNA test, it can reveal 
certain susceptibilities within your family and thus have 
repercussions within the family. On the other hand, everything 
should not be “geneticized” as the individual is made up of 
genetic data, but also of phenotypes, the education he or she 
has received and his/her environment. 
The draft highlights that scientific progress should always 
attempt to promote the well-being of individuals and 
of the human species as a whole. Are there situations in 
which the interests of the individual and the interests 
of the community clash? 
The great challenge in bioethics is, as a matter of fact, to try to 
reach equilibrium between those interests. For example: if you 
have a medication that costs 20,000 dollars a year per person in 
a public health system funded by the state, you might be forced 
to decide not to subsidize that medication because it is too 
costly and those costs could adversely affect the entire system. 
There are collective interests that must be counterbalanced with 
  
the interests of an individual. Bioethics allows us to inform 
stich a choice. 
On such an issue like the one you just mentioned, how 
could the declaration have helped inform the decision? 
When we're talking about acting for the good of the individual 
or individuals, the declaration is not necessarily going to > 
The lntevuational 
“Bioethics Committee 
UNESCO created the 
International Bioethics 
Committee {IBC} in 1993, 
at a time when human 
genome research and 
genetic testing were 
beginning to take shape. 
With culture, education and 
the sciences as its mandate, 
UNESCO wanted to use this 
Committee — which did not 
yet have a formal structure 
— to contribute by drawing 
up a declaration on the 
human genome and human 
rights. The Universal 
Declaration on the Human 
Genome and Human Rights 
was drafted by the IBC 
and adopted by UNESCO's 
General Conference in 1997, 
and later approved by the 
United Nations General 
Assembly in 1998. 
in 1998, the IBC was given 
a formal structure with 
statutes, rules and formal 
working procedures. The 
Committee was quickly 
given a mandate to prepare 
another declaration, 
this time devoted to 
human genetic data. This 
declaration was adopted 
in 2003 and, at the same 
time, the Committee was 
given the mandate to work 
on a draft declaration 
on universal norms in 
bioethics. That text will 
soon be reviewed by the 
Intergovernmental Bioethics 
Committee (IGBC) and 
government experts. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### 138436: Talking to Michèle Jean: human dignity, key value of bioethics

talking to 
Ti
S 
© 
Sa
ee
d 
K
h
a
n
/
A
F
P
,
 
Pa
 
1S : : “NN 
RE 
oh 
nN GO i ry 
0 
g 
NT aba") x 4g 
> KY £ 
p> help because the level of social acceptability is not the same 
everywhere. But we hope to provide a framework that will 
allow us, when we’re looking at these types of questions, to 
make the best possible decisions in the given circumstances 
by applying the fundamental and secondary principles of the 
declaration. 
The text introduces certain new or emerging principles 
like the principle of responsibility, of accountability. What's 
the point of this principle? 
This principle is particularly important in the current context. It 
touches on the whole question of the integrity of scientists and 
their responsibility, but also on the responsibility of individuals. 
We don’t talk about it that often, but as individuals in a society 
we also have a certain degree of responsibility with respect to 
2004 - Re-elected president of the IBC 
2002 - Elected president of the IBC 
“, 2002 - Named vice-president of the board 
~ of Quebec's health research fund 
2001 - Nominated to Quebec's 
Commission on the Ethics of Science 
and Technology 
1998 —- Nominated to the International 
Bioethics Committee (IBC) 
1995 - Received honorary doctorate in law 
from Concordia University, Montreal 
1993-1998 — Served as Canada’s deputy 
health minister 
1982 - Published “The History of Women 
in Quebec, from New France to today” 
(re-released in 1992) 
1975 — Earned Masters in History from 
the University of Montreal 
1974 - Earned Masters in Education from 
the University of Montreal 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
 
Collective interests 
can sometimes 
conflict with those of 
the individual 
our health, the way we behave, feed ourselves and live, with a 
view to not undermining the health system for our countrymen. 
We often say, “My freedom stops where yours begins” - that is 
a question of balance. 
All of these principles remain rather general. Are you worried 
that the declaration could become merely a statement of 
good intentions? What is its true usefulness? 
The declaration also recommends rather concrete measures, 
like the establishment of ethics committees, public debate, etc. 
On all of these issues, we have to engage in public debates and 
foster dialogue with scientists and civil society, to see how far 
we want to go and how it would work. All this is very concrete 
- we need ethics committees, we need ethics education 
programs for scientists and health professionals, we need to 
develop genetic counseling programs... As for UNESCO, it must 
develop procedures to implement the declaration, as well as 
evaluation and monitoring procedures. All these things will 
breathe life into the declaration. 
This declaration is aimed at establishing ethical principles 
that will provide a framework for recent scientific progress. 
Is it truly possible to create norms that will keep up with the 
speed of scientific evolution? 
Certainly, science is developing at breakneck speed, but that 
is precisely why we need this declaration. In addition, the 
declaration is due to be reviewed later on to take scientific 
progress into account so that certain areas that might not be 
initially covered can be included in subsequent work. I don’t 
think we should give up on moving forward just because 
science is moving too quickly. On the contrary, we must 
continue to develop useful frameworks. Once we have a 
good framework, we can gradually - notably through reports 
and opinions - follow the evolution and make the necessary 
adjustments. We cannot forget that bioethics must be based 
on an adequate scientific background and must not make 
pronouncements based on unfounded principles. 
Interview conducted by Jeanette Blom, SHS

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO in action science 
| . 
sc 1] ! h 
'Y AaAriLN 8 | IT » % T v & AA 


### 138437: Oceans hit the bottom

Much of our carbon gas emission is absorbed by the oceans. This is a boon for the 
atmosphere, already saturated with gases contributing to the greenhouse effect. 
But it is a growing danger for marine ecosystems, in which acidity is increasing. 
UNESCO and the scientific community are sounding the alarm. 
=
=
=
 
a ! 0 
aw Sy = | anv Wv | N u 
  © 
Au
st
ra
li
an
 
Re
se
ar
ch
 
C
o
u
n
c
i
l
/
H
Q
O
/
A
F
P
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Australia. : ¢ Now, we considered it a blessing in what is happening in the oceans was limited 
Underwater robot Int ({ for the environment. The oceans to discovering their influence on climate 
near the Great covering two-thirds of the planet’s surface absorb models and their response to a warming of the 
Barrier Reef much of our carbon gas emissions, particularly planet’s atmosphere (raised water levels and 
carbon dioxide, which would otherwise contribute ~~ temperatures). But the absorption of around a 
to the greenhouse effect. The problem is that third of the carbon gas output of human activity 
oceans are being harmed in the process. The over two centuries —- some 118 billion tonnes 
ocean environment has significantly increased between 1800 and 1994 - has threatened the 
in acidity since the start of the industrial era. In chemical balance of the sea’s upper levels. 
May 2004, UNESCO and the scientific community Concern over climate change has now been 
sounded the alarm at a symposium organised by overtaken by worries of a potentially disastrous 
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission degradation of marine ecosystems. 
(IOC) and the Scientific Committee for Oceanic 
Research (SCOR). PLANKTON IN DANGER 
In recent years, heat waves, unusual droughts, In soluble form, carbon gas is acidic. The 
a succession of cyclones and storms have increased acidity of seawater, that is to say its 
focused attention on the climate and supposed lowered pH* level, translates to a deficiency in 
signs of global warming. Up until now, interest carbonates (1). But carbonates are used by coral ~~ » 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### 138437: Oceans hit the bottom

UNESCO in action science 
  
© 
H
O
/
N
A
S
A
/
A
F
P
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
P and some plankton species to form protective 
outer shells made of calcium carbonate. “A 
decreased availability of carbonates will lead to 
a lessened calcification of the exoskeletons of 
these species” of between 10 and 40 per cent, says 
James Orr, a biogeochemist at France’s Laboratory 
for Climate and Environmental Science (LSCE) 
and member of the planning committee for the 
SCOR-IOC symposium. Based on measurements 
taken at nearly 10,000 sites between 1990 and 
1998, Richard A. Feely, Christopher L. Sabine 
and their colleagues have clearly highlighted the 
importance of the level of carbonates in seawater 
(1). Their research shows that, at the current rate 
of carbon gas emissions, the decline in this level 
is going to worsen. 
Coral reefs are among the first victims of this 
change. They are no longer threatened only by 
the increase in the ocean’s temperature but also 
by the shift in its chemical balance. Various 
uncontrollable chain reactions are being triggered. 
One of the most important is the reduction in the 
size of some plankton species which serve as food 
for fish and other marine organisms. The entire 
food chain is being perturbed in unpredictable 
ways that could imperil the ocean’s biodiversity 
and production. 
Proliferation of 
phytoplankton off the 
Norwegian coast 
 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
CARBON GAS IN THE OCEAN'S 
DEPTHS? 
The reasons to view the oceans as CO, “sinks” 
have become well-established. The discovery was 
all the more eye-opening because very few experts 
had anticipated it. The ocean in effect acts as an 
enormous reservoir of carbon (holding around 
37,000 gigatonnes, or 37,000 billion tonnes), 
much more than in the atmosphere (around 
800 gigatonnes). The addition of human-produced 
carbon gas (nearly two gigatonnes a year of 
the total six gigatonnes generated by industrial 
activity (2)) would seem relatively harmless. 
Some have even theorized, and still theorize, 
that carbon gas could be captured at its source, 
compressed into a liquid form, and injected into 
the ocean’s depths. Based on oceanic circulation 
models, carbon gas stored in this way would not 
cycle to the surface and into the atmosphere for 
several hundred years. 
Cesare Marchetti was the first to suggest this 
solution in 1977, while he was working for the 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
(IASA) in Austria. His idea for disposing of the CO, 
produced in Europe was to send it to the bottom 
of the Atlantic Ocean, off the Strait of Gibraltar. 
Marchetti’s proposal was picked up two years 
later by American scientists, and in the 1980s the 
US Department of Energy started researching the 
possibility. The underlying question was: Given 
that the carbon gas dissolved on the surface is only 
very slowly circulated into deep water, is there a 
way to speed up the process? Especially as deep 
water, being colder, absorbs carbon gas at a much 
faster rate than surface water. 
CAUTION IS THE WATCHWORD 
The European Commission currently favours 
carbon gas storage underground or in saline land 
aquifers and gives little support to researching 
ocean storage. This path is mostly being explored 
by Norway, Japan and the United States, though 
as it stands US authorities seem unconvinced by 
the technique. Scientists in those three countries 
are working together on the Ocean Abyssal 
Carbon Experiment (OACE) project (2002- 
2005). Ceertain results were presented at the 7th 
International Conference on Greenhouse Gas 
Control in Vancouver in September 2004(3). In the 
industrial sector, caution reigns, as expressed in 
a report prepared by scientists from the oil group 
Total and the Institut Francais du Pétrole (IFP) 
for the 19th World Energy Congress in Sydney 
  © 
Lu
ke
 
Sm
it
h/
AI
MS
/A
FP
, 
Pa
ri
s 
* The pH of a 
liquid or a solution 
measures its acidity 
or alkalinity. A level 
of 7 is neutral, lower 
numbers indicate 
increasing acidity, 
and higher numbers 
indicate increasing 
alkalinity. The pH 
of seawater is on 
average between 8 
and 8.3. This level 
has declined by 
around 0.1 since 
the beginning of the 
industrial era.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### 138437: Oceans hit the bottom

Les écoies de la 
région de Semei sont 
isolées et difficiles 
d'accés. 
! S
E
E
 
4
 
i
g
 
wv  
in September 2004, which read: “Even with a 
certain scientific guarantee as to the system’s 
equilibrium, it would not be easy for the public to 
allow our oceans - part of our universal heritage 
and a source of life - to be used as storage sites. 
The oceans have long been unwisely considered 
bottomless trash cans [...]” (4). 
This sort of storage also has to be evaluated 
in the light of international measures protecting 
the ocean environment, such as the London 
Convention on waste disposal at sea, even 
though, strictly speaking, CO, cannot be 
considered waste. But whether we like it or not, 
part of the carbon gas output resulting from 
human activity has already gone into the ocean. 
Therefore, if we short-circuit CO,’s present route 
(through the atmosphere and surface ocean) 
by putting it directly at the bottom of the sea, 
the question is whether this creates additional 
risks to the deep ocean environment, as Takashi 
Oshumi, Japanese scientist and member of the 
SCOR-IOC planning committee, wrote in 2002. (5) 
One achievement of the conference was bringing 
together the various points of view and scientific 
knowledge from different disciplines (chemistry, 
physics, biology, ecology, paleoceanography...), 
as another member of the committee, French 
biogeochemist Liliane Merlivat, pointed out. 
LOOKING BEFORE LEAPING 
A multidisciplinary confrontation is crucial 
for evaluating each alternative on scientific, 
environmental and economic grounds, as the 
Intergovernmental Panel] on Climate Change 
  
(IPCC) has recommended. That also holds for 
proposals to fertilize the ocean environment 
with injections of iron, an element essential for 
activating photosynthesis. The idea now is to 
encourage the growth of ocean vegetation in order 
to sequester some of the carbon dioxide generated 
by humans. Despite inconclusive results so far, 
some companies have already started to develop 
techniques implementing this process, notes 
Patricio Bernal, the I0C’s Executive Secretary. For 
symposium participants, the scientific evaluation 
has to continue before any decision is made on the 
method’s large-scale application. 
Given the volume of emissions predicted 
for the decades ahead, nothing should be left 
to chance. Scientists predict that by 2100 the 
decline in surface seawater pH will accelerate 
further, multiplying by as much as a factor 
of three compared to the level recorded since 
the beginning of the industrial era. This is a 
phenomenon unprecedented in the last 20 million 
years, says Maria Hood, a specialist researcher for 
the IOC. UNESCO's initiative aims to address the 
situation. “Our main message,” Patricio Bernal 
stresses, “is to leave no path unexplored, but to 
evaluate each one according to strict scientific 
principles. This is the key to making fully 
informed political decisions about a problem that 
goes far beyond mere national interests.” 
Dominique Chouchan 
(1) R. A. Feely et al., Impact of anthropogenic CO, on 
the CaCO3 system in the oceans, Science, vol. 305, 
pp- 362-366, 2004 
(2) IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, Carbon 
Dioxide Chemistry and Properties, March 2002 (http:// 
www.ieagreen.org.uk/index.htm) 
(3) Peter M. Haugan et al., Ocean abyssal carbon 
experiments at 0,7 and 4 km depth, in E.S.Rubin, 
D.W. Keith and C.F Gilboy (Eds.)}, Proceedings of 7th 
International Conference on Greenhotise Gas Control 
Technologies (IEA Greenhouse Gas Programme), in press 
(4) G. Plouchard (IFP), P. Le Thiez (IFP), L. de Marliave 
(Total), S. Crépin (Total), Capture et stockage du CO,, 
contraintes et progrés, World Energy Council, Sydney 2004. 
(5) Takashi Oshumi, Ocean storage, including costs and 
risks, IPCC Workshop for Carbon Capture and Storage, 
2002 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004  

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### 138438: Space for ethics

UNESCO in action social sciences 
SPACE FOR ETHICS 
oo 
  
© Mikhail Grachyev/Gamma, Paris 
The World Commission on the Ethics 
of Scientific Knowledge and Technology * 
(COMEST) brought scientists, legal 
experts and space programme directors ( ( To whom do I complain to if the sky falls on 
. my head? What law applies and which court 
together f or a symposium Or the legal is competent?» Those are the questions 
and ethical framework for astronauts” Gabriel Lafferranderie** half-seriously asked 
, . himself in 1997. Since then, the development of 
at UNESCO's Paris headquarters on the 16-nation International Space Station (ISS) 
October 29. has not made matters any clearer. Let’s say debris 
does drop out of the sky. Will it be necessary 
to ask which part of the station it comes from? 
Which of the 16 countries built that section of the 
«erector set» spacecraft? 
Like space itself, space law might seem quite 
murky to mere Earthlings like us. There are texts, 
such as the 1967 Space Treaty, the Agreement 
on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of 
Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched 
into Outer Space and even the 1998 Agreement on 
the International Space Station, which attempts 
to untangle in advance the legal intricacies that 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### 138438: Space for ethics

might arise if a crime took place aboard the 
ISS. All these texts might seem largely sufficient 
because they pertain to situations that, for the 
most part, have not occurred yet. What's more, 
the burden of determining what constitutes a 
crime will fall primarily on a small group of 
individuals living and working in close proximity 
to each other, and will probably require ethical 
judgement before legal judgement. 
But chances are that these texts and the 
ethical reflection swirling around them will fall 
short in the near future. New directions in space 
exploration are opening up horizons very different 
from those of the period of the moon launches 
and the Cold War. Commercial and national 
interests are increasingly looming up behind 
astronauts, described as “envoys of mankind” by 
the Outer Space Treaty. The two flights the private 
rocket-powered plane SpaceShipOne made in 
September and October 2004 show that the age 
of space tourism opened up by billionaire Dennis 
Tito’s May 2001 trip is here to stay. The ticket 
is still quite pricey - 160,000 euros - but Virgin 
Galactic says over 7,000 potential passengers 
are already queuing up for its flights, which are 
scheduled to begin in 2007 or 2008, and other 
“carriers” will probably follow suit. That means 
there will be many more astronauts in a few years 
than during the entire first half-century of space 
exploration. 
MORAL RESPONSIBILITY AND 
FINANCIAL LIABILITY 
But it also means new problems, from something 
as banal as lost luggage to determining what 
constitutes an acceptable risk to space tourists. 
(Astronaut Jean-Pierre Haigneré says that in 1969 
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin had just one 
chance in two of coming back from the moon safe 
and sound, and today the risk is 3%, which is 
quite high for mere tourists!) The growth of space 
tourism will also raise the likelihood of seeing 
crimes and misdemeanours committed in space, 
but the existing text applies only to the ISS. “The 
first recognized space criminal,” North Carolina 
University anthropologist Peter Redfield said at 
the October meeting, “could in fact prove to be 
an unethical corporation that violates commercial 
law in search of greater profit, or a particularly 
rude and belligerent space tourist who goes one 
step too far.” 
A single example is enough to show the limits 
of present law in dealing with today’s situation. 
Dennis Tito and his fellow trailblazers were 
still “envoys of mankind” and they incurred the 
moral responsibility and financial liability of the 
State responsible for launching the vessel aboard 
which they travelled. Imagine a passenger on the 
Virgin Galactic or another future carrier causing a 
disaster during a space flight. Neither the party at 
fault nor the company that sent the craft into orbit 
could afford to cope with such a possibility. 
Tourist-astronauts will be joined by future 
astronaut-colonists. At the October 29 meeting, 
Jacques Arnould, of the CNES (Centre National 
d’Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency), 
pointed out that for the moment astronauts are 
still campers “working and living in space”, but 11 
the day is coming when they will be “settled 
in space”. Longer and longer space sojourns, 
increasingly far from Earth, will raise new 
technical problems as well as ethical and legal WP 
  
Billionaire Dennis 
Tito launched the 
era of space tourism 
(left). 
Virgin Galactic 
hopes to develop 
space flights by 2007. 
  © 
Vi
rg
in
 
Ga
la
ct
ic
 
vi
a 
Ge
tt
y/
AF
P,
 
Pa
ri
s 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### 138438: Space for ethics

  
UNESCO in action social sciences 
  
P issues. How will existing principles be applied to 
the situation? Should new regulations or ethical 
considerations govern astronauts’ activities? In 
the long run, one may wonder whether a special 
status will have to be created for space settlers’ 
descendants whose ties with Earth are so loose 
that they could only be described as a different 
species. 
PONDERING ASTRONAUTS" 
STATUS AND OTHER ETHICAL 
QUESTIONS 
Without peering quite so far ahead into the 
future, it might be worth pondering whether the 
foundations of the astronaut’s status should be 
revised. Until now, astronauts have been considered 
pioneers pushing back new frontiers, focusing 
mainly on scientific research and geostrategic 
competition. Is the driving force behind space 
exploration shifting, with economic motives 
taking precedence over research? It might also 
be worth asking other kinds of ethical questions 
involving space exploration: wouldn't the resources 
swallowed up by flights to Mars be put to better 
use on Earth, to combat illiteracy for example? 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
The October 29, 2004 meeting, organised 
by UNESCO, the European Centre for Space 
Law (ECSL), the European Space Agency 
and the Institut du droit de I’espace et des 
télécommunications at Université Paris XI-Sceaux, 
tried to map out these uncharted territories. 
“We're here to move the debate forward, or rather 
to get it started,” says Julien Tort of UNESCO's 
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology, 
adding that to his knowledge, UNESCO is the 
only international organisation which “provides a 
framework for thinking about space ethics issues.” 
Adigun Ade Abiodun, chairman of the Committee 
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUQS) 
and the meeting’s rapporteur, concluded by calling 
on States to develop space policies and laws. 
Pierre Gaillard 
* UNESCO has been exploring the ethics 
of outer space for five years. 
**Today president of the ECSL 
Earth viewed from a 
space station 
© 
Mi
kh
ai
l 
G
r
a
y
c
h
e
v
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

© 
F
A
Q
/
A
F
P
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
UNESCO in action 
Fah I 
8 MALI: MOBILE RADIO IN THE BATTLE 


### 138439: Mali: mobile radio in the battle against hordes of locust

AGAINST HORDES OF LOCUST 
The people of Timbuktu in Mali used a suitcase radio donated by 
UNESCO to battle the hordes of locusts that destroyed a significant 
percentage of Mali’s crops in 2004. The equipment helped 
Community Multimedia Centres to reach and involve communities 
in the vital struggle against this blight. 
 
The suitcase radio has enabled us to save 
crops in the plain around Timbuktu,” 
says Birama Diallo, of UNESCO’s Community 
Multimedia Centre pronject in Bamako, the 
capital of Mali. He explains that “it enabled us 
to disseminate information about traditional 
methods of fighting the locusts that had been 
forgotten because there had been no locust 
attacks in so long. Thanks to the suitcase radio 
we have been able to reach everybody, including 
nomads.” The last major invasion of locusts 
occurred some 20 years ago, according to Diallo. 
“The equipment was used to broadcast daily 
crisis programmes, retransmitted on all four radio 
stations in Timbuktu, to tell people where to go 
and to organize the fight against the invading 
swarms,” explained radio technician Mahi Touré.   
Crops are left 
devastated when 
lecusts invade 
With few government resources available 
for actions such as airborne surveillance and 
spraying, Timbuktu had to rely on traditional 
methods like smoking the locusts out, beating 
the swarms with sticks and with traditional 
boubou cloth. This requires the participation of 
many people. Thus the mobile radio, which was 
taken to the anti-locust operational headquarters 
run by the authorities and even into the fields 
to broadcast live from the local communities, 
was essential in mobilizing the necessary large 
numbers. 
The languages spoken in this cultural 
crossroads include Tamacheq, Songhay, Peulh, 
Arabic, French and Bambara, and radio provides 
the only effective means of ensuring urgent 
information reaches all communities in all 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### 138439: Mali: mobile radio in the battle against hordes of locust

UNESCO in action “cmv catio w
d
 
The suitcase radio 
makes it possibie to 
reach even the most 
remote communities 
For more information on 
  
g \ the suitcase radio: 
3 www.wantokent.com 
7 For UNESCO’s Community 
g Multimedia Centres: 
5 http://www.unesco.org/ 
E webworld/cmc 
: 
14 P languages and is therefore understood by all. It internet. The suitcase radio was originally donated 
also allows local people to participate, have their by UNESCO under its Community Multimedia 
say and share traditional knowledge - which has Centre programme, to help radio stations make 
proved vital in times of crisis. optimal use of telecentre resources. Staff from 
“Old people explain the traditional methods of each station have been trained in web searching 
fighting the locust hordes. We also broadcast calls and in producing “radio browsing” programmes 
to mobilize the villagers. Today, the army and in which the presenter browses pre-selected 
the youth of Timbuktu will be going out together web sites on air, explaining and discussing the 
to fight the swarms,” explained Mr Touré. The contents with a local expert in the national 
special broadcasts linked up all four radio stations languages. 
each day from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. and from 10 p.m. In less critical times, the stations also use the 
until midnight. “There has never been such an suitcase unit to cover local sporting events such 
effective way to reach all the people of our area as football matches and official celebrations. The 
before,” noted Mr Touré. unit has even been much in demand to give a 
The radio presenters also used the local special touch to Touareg weddings at nomadic 
telecentre to obtain further information from the camps in the desert surrounding Timbuktu. 
But with the locust crisis, it had become clear 
that the suitcase radio has a vital role to play in 
“Foyt Able A nA UEYS Ati le reaching the people scattered across tharares, 
UNESCO has decided to provide the radio stations 
with a 100 watt suitcase, which increases the 
broadcast radius from the 15 to 20 kilometres 
possible with the 30 watt transmitter to upto 
60 km, covering the entire populated area of 
Timbuktu and the 40 villages situated in the Niger 
Delta. 
Although the radio stations of Timbuktu are 
small and under-funded, they have successfully 
managed to share the cost of maintaining the 
unit and have carried out live outside broadcasts 
The suitcase radio, a complete 
broadcast station in a single case and 
complete with a high gain antenna, 
is a product of Wantok Enterprises in 
Canada. It is designed to be extremely 
simple to use and to withstand harsh 
conditions such as those of the Sahara 
desert. The unit is fully portable but 
can also be used as a permanent FM 
community radio station. Because of 
its low-cost, easy-to-use advantage, 
suitcase radio has been piloted in 
several CMCs including in Mali, 
Mozambique, Uganda, Niger, Burkina 
Faso and Tanzania. The suitcase radio 
comes in 30 watt and 100 watt versions. Stella Hugues 
© 
Wa
nt
ok
 
En
te
rp
ri
se
s 
Lt
d.
, 
Ca
na
da
 
weekly for three years. 
  UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### 138440: DRC: species extinction alert

UNESCO in action culture 
DRC : SPECIES EXTINCTION ALERT 
   
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
I
a
n
 
R
e
d
m
o
n
d
 
Gorilla and elephant 
Endangered by civil war, deforestation and poaching, certain skulis found In 
animal species living in the Democratic Republic of Congo pau Bleue Park 
are now down to a few individuals. If nothing is done, 
the bonobo, the mountain gorilla and the Northern White 
Rhinoceros will vanish. UNESCO sounds the alarm. 
~ onsidered the “world’s second green lung” 
after the Amazon, the Democratic Republic 
"of Congo (DRC) is home to a number of 
animal species that are now under threat. For 
that reason, UNESCO rallied all of its Member 
States and partners in September to join a major 
international campaign to support the DRC’s rich 
natural heritage. This western African country 
has five sites inscribed on the World Heritage List 
and the World Heritage in Danger List that are 
the habitat of emblematic species and sub-species 
such as the bonobo, the okapi, the mountain 
gorilla and the Northern White Rhinoceros. 
No other African country can boast such a 
variety of animal and plant species. One reason 
is the diversity of climates and ecosystems: 
tropical forest, deciduous forest, savannah, 
mangrove, swamps, and a whole range of rivers, 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### 138440: DRC: species extinction alert

  
UNESCO in action culture 
Novthevn Dhite Rhinocevos: 
state of alert in Gavamba 
In the northeast of the 
Demacratic Republic of the 
Congo, Garamba National Park 
is home to the world's last 
remaining colony of Northern 
White Rhino in the wild. 
Unfortunately, this may not 
be the case for much longer. 
Bigger than their southern 
cousins, these rhinoceros are 
hunted by Sudanese poachers 
who supply the illegal trade 
in rhinoceros horns that are 
used for medicinal purposes or 
carved into decorative sword 
handles. A report in July 2004 
by the World Conservation 
Union (IUCN), revealed that of 
the 2,250 rhinos recorded in a 
survey of five African countries 
in the 1960s, only between 
17 and 22 remained. “The 
situation today is even more 
critical,” said Guy Debaonnet, a 
specialist at UNESCO's World 
Heritage Centre. “We think that 
in Garamba there are now only 
15 left.” To those can be added 
another nine animals, six of 
which are living in captivity in 
zoos in the Czech Republic 
and three in a nature reserve in 
San Diego, in the United States. 
Which means that today just 
24 of these animals that 
symbolize the African savannah 
survive. 
Another problem: the white 
rhinoceros seems unable to 
reproduce successfully in 
captivity. In 2000, a female 
rhinoceros was born in a zoo 
in Dvur Kralove, in the Czech 
Republic, but that was the first 
birth for ten years. What can be 
done? In July, a meeting was 
held in Nairobi to develop an 
emergency strategy to save the 
species. The managers of the 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
site, UNESCO's World Heritage 
Centre, International Rhino 
Foundation, Fauna and Flora 
International, African Parks 
Foundation, Frankfurt Zoological 
Society and the Zoological 
Society of London all took 
part. “In the immediate future, 
we have designated, with the 
support of the European Union, 
three international instructors 
who will provide on-the-spot 
technical assistance to the 
park wardens who have been 
struggling for years against 
poaching,” Guy Debonnet 
explained. The next step is to 
evaluate and discuss with the 
DRC authorities the possibility 
of taking some of the 15 
surviving white rhinos to a safer 
place, such as Kenya or the 
United States. This move, for 
which UNESCO has obtained a 
contribution of 250,000 dollars 
from the Italian government, 
could take place early in 2005. 
The Garamba National Park 
was inscribed on the World 
Heritage in Danger List in 
1996. Its immense savannahs, 
prairies and forests are also 
home to large mammals such 
as giraffes, elephants and 
hippopotami. However, as the 
specialist Olivier Feneteau noted 
in a recent report, the clock is 
ticking for the white rhinoceros: 
“If nothing is done in the very 
near future, the Democratic 
Republic of Congo could have 
the sad privilege of being the 
first country in the 21st century 
to experience the extinction of a 
large mammal species.” 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
  
  
  
  
UNESCO hosted the 
“Nature and culture 
in DRC” exhibition, 
created by the Royal 
In response to the 
risk of extinction 
of a number of 
species, UNESCO 
and the United 
Nations Foundation 
Museum for Central 
Africa in Tervuren, 
Belgium launched a project to 
safeguard the DRC's 
five World Heritage 
sites 
Pp mountains, volcanoes and lakes. The civil war 
and instability in the Great Lakes region are 
endangering the conservation of these species, 
which are threatened by de-forestation, poaching, 
the movement of refugees or the illegal extraction 
of ore. 
In an attempt to reduce this damage, UNESCO 
and the United Nations Foundation launched a 
project in 2000 called “Biodiversity Conservation 
in Regions of Armed Conflict: Conserving World 
Heritage Sites in the DRC”, aiming to preserve 
the sites in their entirety in a country embroiled 
in war. This programme used 62 percent of 
its budget of three million dollars to pay the 
salaries of the park wardens, who sometimes risk 
their lives to protect the parks. This intensive 
surveillance of the sites has, for example, allowed 
the mountain gorilla population to rise from 
325 individuals at the start of the programme 
to 355 now. The staff of the parks have also 
benefited from training programmes to help them 
deal with the crisis. Another important part of this 
alliance, which the DRC government and several 
conservation organisations active in the DRC have 
joined, has been the launch of a “diplomacy of 
conservation”. Its main achievement has been 
to develop links and contact with all belligerent 
parties. 
The event in Paris, which took place from 
September 14 to 26, included an international 
 

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=17) 0

### 138440: DRC: species extinction alert

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
I
a
n
 
R
e
d
m
o
n
d
 
donors conference. The countries and institutions 
taking part made commitments to donate 50 
million dollars, which will prolong several 
programmes. More specifically, 3.5 million dollars 
pledged by the governments of Belgium and Italy 
as well as the United Nations Foundation and the 
Wildlife Conservation Society will fund the second 
phase of the programme launched in 2000. Arthur 
Z’Ahidi N’Goma, one of the four Vice-Presidents 
of the DRC’s government of national unity, 
pledged to do everything possible to stop the 
devastation of the forest and to keep troops and 
displaced people away from the protected areas. 
Other events were aimed at the wider public: 
UNESCO hosted an exhibition organised by the 
Royal Museum for Central Africa in Tervuren, 
Belgium, and a charity concert featuring rumba 
music and other traditional Congolese rhythms. 
The programme established in DRC by 
UNESCO and the UNF can serve in future as a 
model for the protection of heritage in times of 
conflict. Meanwhile, the survival of a number 
of threatened species depends on the initiative’s 
success. 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
Novid tevitage sites in YORE 
Sudanese refugees, 
military presence, 
poaching 
Virunga National 
Park 
Founded: 1925 
Surface area: 8,100 km2 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage List: 1979 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage in Danger List: 
1994 
Principal protected 
species: mountain 
gorillas 
Main threats: military 
intrusion, poaching 
Garamba National 
Park 
Founded: 1938 
Surface area: 4,900 km2 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage List: 1980 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage in Danger List: 
1996 
Principal protected 
species: white 
rhinoceros and 
Congolese giraffe 
Main threats: influx of 
Kahuzi-Biega 
National Park 
Founded: 1970 
Surface area: 6,000 km2 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage List: 1980 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage in Danger List: 
1997 
Principal protected 
species: ‘high-altitude’ 
forests, Eastern 
lowland gorillas 
Main threats: influx of 
Rwandan refugees, 
military presence, 
poaching 
Salonga National 
Park 
Founded: 1970 
Surface area: 
36,000 km2 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage List: 1984 
Inscribed on the 
World Heritage in 
Danger List: 1999 
Principal protected 
species: dwarf 
chimpanzee or 
bonobo 
Main threats: illegal 
hunting and trade 
in bush meat, illegal 
exploitation of forests 
Okapi Wildlife 
Reserve 
Founded: 1992 
Surface area: 
13,700 km2 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage List: 1996 
Inscribed on the World 
Heritage in Danger List: 
1997 
Principal protected 
species: okapi 
Main threats: poaching 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=18) 0

### 138441: Quality of education: could do better

UNESCO in action education 
QUALITY OF EDUCATION: 
COULD DO BETTER 
TET I More children are going to EFA Global 50 EY 0 
To. y 
  
o school, the gender ratio is Meitaring reper 18 Le: 
improving and resources & ih VA. 
for education are tending | RAE 
to increase. Quality of i 
education, however, is 
| 
. 
  
E
d
u
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
fo
r 
RI
I 
¢ hin 
  
: 8 still significantly lacking : TT Ser ck a 5 #. 
in many regions of the : G67" FUT Ree by 
3 § 
world. These are some of i 1 4 p 
the conclusions of the 2005 | BEN Sd Bh SE. 
edition of the Education RAN ES SNE 1 7 
for All Global Monitoring Ko p : : ge ikl 
ithe RPE TL, x Report. F. : 
Education for All 
a HE QUALITY 
IMPERATIVE 
al news: More children are going 
4 00 A to school than ever before. But 
unfortunately, many drop out before grade 5 of 
primary school or graduate without mastering 
even a minimum set of cognitive skills, concludes 
the 2005 Education for All Global Monitoring 
Report, launched November 8 in Brasilia (Brazil). 
The Report, which monitors progress towards 
the six Education for All goals* set by over 160 
countries at the World Education Forum in Dakar 
(2000), finds that significant efforts are being 
made to increase resources, broaden access to 
  © 
UN
ES
CO
/A
SP
ne
t/
Si
gr
id
 
Al
ve
st
ad
 
school and improve gender parity. However, 
exhaustive analysis of research data shows that 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=19) 0

### 138441: Quality of education: could do better

the quality of education systems is failing children 
in many parts of the world, and could prevent 
many countries from achieving Education for All 
by the target date of 2015. 
In one third of countries with data, for example, 
less than 75 percent of students reach grade 
5. National and international assessments also 
show that performance levels and very weak in 
low and middle-income countries and among 
disadvantaged groups in some industrialized 
nations. 
“Overcrowded classes, poorly qualified teachers 
and ill-equipped schools with scant learning 
materials remain all too familiar pictures in 
many countries,” said UNESCO Director-General 
Koichiro Matsuura. “Yet, achieving education 
for all fundamentally relies on assuring decent 
quality: what children learn and how they learn 
can make or break their school experience and 
their subsequent opportunities for life.” 
DEVELOPMENT INDEX 
The importance of quality is reflected in the 
report’s EFA Development Index, which measures 
the overall progress of 127 countries towards 
EFA. The Index is based on indicators for the four 
most measurable Dakar goals: universal primary 
education, adult literacy, education quality as 
proxied by survival rate of pupils to grade 5 and 
gender parity. 
Norway, Denmark and the Netherlands head a 
list of 41 countries at the top of the Index, which 
have achieved or nearly achieved the four goals. 
Almost all are in North America and Western, 
Central and Eastern Europe, except for a few 
in Latin America and the Caribbean, such as 
Argentina, Cuba and Chile, and five small island 
states. 
They are followed by another 51 countries, 
headed by Romania, Bulgaria and Costa Rica 
and including many of the Arab States and the 
countries of Latin America, which are well on the 
way to achieving some of the goals, but are being 
held back by slow progress on others, notably 
quality. 
Finally, a third group of 35 countries, 22 of 
them in sub-Saharan Africa, but also including 
the high population countries of Bangladesh, 
India and Pakistan, are “very far from achieving 
the goals”, with “multiple challenges to tackle 
simultaneously if EFA is to be assured.” 
The report provides a detailed analysis of the 
key factors influencing the quality of education, 
including financial and material resources for 
schools, teacher numbers and their training, core 
subjects, pedagogy, language, the amount of 
actual learning time, facilities and leadership. 
There is a clear upward trend on many of 
these fronts. Education spending, for example, 
has increased over the past decade in many 
developing countries, and access to education 
continues to improve. But there are still 103.5 
million out-of-school children, a figure that is 
declining too slowly to achieve universal primary 
education by 2015. The report also emphasizes 
that improved access has not been matched by an 
expansion of educational facilities and resources. 
INSUFFICIENT TRAINING 
FOR TEACHERS 
This is most notable, for example, with teachers, 
who, the report emphasizes, “are the strongest 
influence on learning.” In many low-income 
countries, teachers do not meet even the 
minimum standards for the profession. In Togo, 
for example, only two percent of teachers met the 
minimum national standard of lower secondary 
education. In Botswana, where the standard was 
an upper secondary education for teaching in 
primary, only 10 percent of teachers made the 
grade. Similarly, a recent study of seven Southern 
African countries, cited by the Report, “found 
that some primary school mathematics teachers 
 
  
Like Norway, 41 
countries are on the 
verge of reaching 
four EFA goals (left) 
India is among 
states stiil far from 
reaching EFA goals 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
B
r
e
n
d
a
n
 
O'
Ma
ll
ey
 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=20) 0

### 138441: Quality of education: could do better

UNESCO in action education 
  
The Report presents 
case studies for 11 
countries, including 
Brazil 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
  
The Education for All 
Global Monitoring Report is 
prepared by an independent 
international team based at 
UNESCO Headquarters in 
Paris (France). It is part of 
the follow-up to the World 
Education Forum held in 
Dakar (Senegal, 2000), and 
benefits from the advice of an 
international editorial board. 
It is funded by UNESCO 
and a number of bilateral 
agencies. 
Its findings will be serve 
as the basis for discussions 
at the Fourth High-Level 
Group Meeting on Education 
A lever fox political action 
for All (Brasilia, November 
4-10). This small, flexibie 
group comprising high-level 
leaders from governments 
and civil society in 
developing and developed 
countries, serves as a lever 
for political commitment 
and technical and financial 
resource mobilisation 
for EFA. Informed by 
the Global Monitoring 
Report, it also provides 
an opportunity to hold the 
global community to account 
for commitments made at 
the Dakar Forum. 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
Q
O
/
A
S
P
n
e
t
/
A
n
a
 
Cl
au
di
a 
N
a
h
a
s
 
possessed only basic numeracy and actually 
scored lower than students on the same tests.” 
Too often, these poorly trained, teachers must 
also face over-crowded classrooms. The report 
finds that in countries with the highest pupil/ 
teacher ratios, “barely one third of students who 
start primary reach grade 5.” In many countries 
of sub-Saharan Africa and South and West Asia, 
where education has expanded rapidly over the 
past decade, pupil/teacher ratios have actually 
risen. In most countries of these regions, the 
number of pupils per teacher exceeds 40 in 
primary education and climbs above 60 in several 
cases, including Malawi, Mozambique, Central 
African Republic and Chad. Furthermore, in many 
low-income countries, teachers’ real wages have 
declined relative ti average incomes and their 
earnings are too low to provide an acceptable 
standard of living. 
HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC: 
UNDERMINING EDUCATION 
The HIV/AIDS pandemic is another factor 
“severely undermining” the quality of education, 
states the report. In Zambia, for example, an 
estimated 815 primary school teachers died of 
AIDS in 2001, “corresponding to 45 percent of 
teachers trained that year.” Across sub-Saharan 
Africa, “more than 11 million children under 
the age of 15 have lost at least one parent to 
HIV/AIDS”. “Their opportunities to learn” points 
out the report, “are often curtailed by the need 
to care for sick family members or contribute to 
household income.” 
The Report presents case studies from 11 
countries (Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Chile, 
Cuba, Egypt, Finland, Republic of Korea, Senegal, 
South Africa and Sri Lanka) showing how both 
rich and developing nations are tackling the 
quality issue. It also proposes a series of policy 
measures to improve the quality of education, 
emphasizing that although “there are no universal 
recipes, a robust long-term vision for education, 
strong government leadership and a motivated, 
well-supported teaching corps are conditions for 
successful qualitative reforms.” 
The international community has a crucial role 
to play in supporting this process. Recent pledges 
may double the amount of aid to basic education 
to about US$3-3.5 billion by 2006, but even this 
figure falls short of the estimated US$7 billion 
per year required for achieving universal primary 
education by 2015. 
Sue Williams

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

First Israeli-Palestinian 
esprotluction 
For the first time ever, 
Israeli and Palestinian 
public broadcasters - 
Channel 2 (Keshet TV) 
and the Palestinian 
Broadcasting 
Corporation - aired 
the same television 
programme 
simultaneously. 
The documentary, 
“On the Road to 
Dialogue”, broadcast 
on November 24, is 
also the first co- 
production by Israeli 
and Palestinian public 
television broadcasters. 
It was supported 
by German public 
broadcaster ARD and 
by UNESCO. 
In the film, Israeli 
director Yoram Binour 
interviews Palestinians 
in the West Bank, and 
Palestinian director, 
Salwa Abu Libdeh 
speaks to Israelis 
in Israel. Made as a 
road movie, showing 
how the Israeli and 
Palestinian crews 
worked together on 
their parallel stories, 
the film travels from 
one village to another. 
It highlights people’s 
ideas and problems, 
the prevalent 
stereotypes that mark 
their views of one 
another, and the socio- 
economic and political 
realities of both sides. 
Water management 
for Iragi eivi 
SeTVaNnTS 
4 = Z 
n = -~ & : 
fF — 4 ti 
  
The UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water 
Education at Delft in the Netherlands 
is providing postgraduate training in 
hydrological engineering, water resources 
management and river management, 
to 16 Iraqi professionals. The initiative is 
a response to the urgent need for water 
supply, water treatment and sewage 
services on the ground in Iraq today. 
     
  © 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
I
H
E
 
 
First Meeting of Governmental 
Experts on Cultural Diversity 
Convention 
Representatives of UNESCO’s 
Member States met at 
headquarters to examine the first 
outline of a preliminary draft of 
an international Convention on 
the Protection of the Diversity 
of Cultural Contents and Artistic 
Expressions (September 20 to 25). 
The draft, prepared by 14 
independent experts from 
various regions and professional 
NA 
/ 
    
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard 
UNESCO in brief 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
  
backgrounds, recognizes both the 
cultural and economic natures of 
cultural goods and services, and 
identifies measures to be adopted 
by States Parties to ensure the 
promotion and protection of the 
diversity of cultural contents and 
artistic expressions. 
Further experts meetings are 
scheduled for 2005. 
UNESCO 
Recional Chair 
in Education 
and HIV/AIDS 
UNESCOQ’s Director-General 
Koichiro Matsuura and Professor 
Rex Nettleford, Vice Chancellor 
Emeritus of the University of the 
West Indies, signed an agreement 
in October for the establishment 
of a UNESCO Commonwealth 
Region Chair in Education and 
HIV/AIDS, the first UNESCO 
Chair in this field. It will give a 
role of regional leadership to the 
University of the West Indies in 
the educational aspects of the 
fight against the pandemic. The 
inauguration was held in Cave 
Hill (Barbados). 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

  
UNESCO in brief 
Citizenship 
education handbook 
UNESCO and the French 
National Commission for 
UNESCO, in partnership 
with several French bodies 
such as the ministries of 
education and defence, 
have published a manual, 
“Defence in the Service of 
Peace”. The book, which 
consists of 40 fold-out 
fact sheets, is to provide 
secondary school teachers 
with a complete package 
of information about 
French defence 
policy, how it 
works, what 
it stands for 
and its specific 
components, ¥ 
as well as the | 
corollaries 
related to 
citizenship, human rights, 
democracy, and the 
universal values of law 
and civic education. The 
book is divided into three 
chapters: Foundations of 
Peace and International 
Security; Risks and Threats 
to Peace and International 
Security; The Defense of 
Peace: A Global Action. 
    
2064 UNESCO-Matlanjeet 
Singh Prize 
Director-General Koichiro 
Matsuura awarded the 
2004 UNESCO-Madanjeet 
Singh Prize for the 
Promotion of Tolerance 
and Non-Violence to 
Bangladeshi writer and 
journalist Taslima Nasrin 
on November 16. 
A qualified physician, 
Ms Nasrin has won public 
recognition for her writings 
against the oppression 
of women. Facing death 
threats from Moslem 
fundamentalists, she 
continues fighting for a 
new civil code, based on 
gender equality, and for 
secular education. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
The $100,000 UNESCO- 
Madanjeet Singh Prize was 
created in 1995 thanks 
to the generosity of the 
Indian writer and diplomat 
Madanjeet Singh, who is 
also a UNESCO Goodwill 
Ambassador. 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
M
i
c
h
e
l
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
 
S
S
 
& 
9% 
= 
9 
9» 
0» 
® 
# 
® 
6 
0 
2 
& 
8 
» 
a 
2 
. 
& 
a 
s 
¥ 
8 
» 
® 
» 
3
%
 
" 
4 
0» 
 
— 1 
—C 
© UNESCO/Han Qunli 
La 
Biosphere Reserve in Cat 
Ba (Vietnam) 
UNESCO's Man and the 
Biosphere (MAB) Network 
Nineteen new sites in 13 
countries were added to 
UNESCO’s World Network 
of Biosphere Reserves during 
the 18th session of the 
International Co-ordinating 
Council of UNESCO’s Man 
and the Biosphere (MAB) 
Programme in late October. 
The new reserves are: Taza 
Biosphere Reserve (Algeria); 
Gouraya Biosphere Reserve 
(Algeria); Pribuzhskoye- 
Polesie Biosphere Reserve 
(Belarus); Georgian Bay 
Littoral Biosphere Reserve 
(Canada); Foping Biosphere 
Reserve (China); Qomolangma 
Biosphere Reserve (China); 
Wadden Sea of Schleswig 
Holstein Biosphere Reserve 
-- extension (Germany); 
Nanda Devi Biosphere 
Reserve (India); Selva Pisana 
Biosphere Reserve (Italy); 
Mount Kuwol Biosphere 
Reserve (People’s Democratic 
Republic of Korea); Ria 
Celestin Biosphere Reserve 
and Ria Lagartos Biosphere 
Reserve (Mexico); Kedrovaya 
Pad Biosphere Reserve 
(Russian Federation); 
Kenozerskiy Biosphere 
Reserve (Russian Federation); 
Valdaisky Biosphere Reserve 
(Russian Federation); The 
Karst Biosphere Reserve, 
(Slovenia); Babia Biosphere 
Reserve Unit, Gran Reserva de 
Biosfera Cantabrica, (Spain); 
Kanneliya-Dediyagala- 
Nakiyadeniya Biosphere 
Reserve (Sri Lanka); Cat Ba 
Biosphere Reserve (Vietnam); 
Red River Delta Biosphere 
Reserve (Vietnam); The 
Council also decided to 
expand the area included in 
Menorca Biosphere Reserve 
(Spain). The network, 
which has been pioneering a 
scientific basis for sustainable 
development for over 30 
years, now includes 459 
reserves in 97 countries.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO and Radio 
Thailand Chiang Mai 
Three thousand five 
hundred tickets were 
sold in just a few days 
for a five-hour concert by 
20 of the most popular 
singers from the Akha, 
Hmong; Karen, Lahu, 
Lisu, Mien and Shan 
communities in Chiang 
Mai (Northern Thailand) 
organized by UNESCO’s 
Bangkok office and Radio 
Thailand Chiang Mai on 
November 20. The concert 
- which was broadcast live 
across the Mekong region 
reaching a 15-million 
hill tribe population in 
southern China, parts of 
India, northern Vietnam, 
Myanmar, Laos and 
Thailand - featured 
messages on HIV/AIDS, 
human trafficking and 
drugs. The event was part 
of UNESCO’s work with 
Radio Thailand Chiang 
Mai to fight HIV/AIDS, 
trafficking and drug abuse 
by providing people with 
prevention information in 
their own language based 
on their own specific 
cultural context. 
1 ROURSHsUm 1S MothufeAymy rs 
MILL TRIDE POP CONCERT ACABST HIV/AIDS, TRAFFICKING AND DRUGS 
UNESCO Prize 
  
© UNESCO/Owen Wrigley 
for human rights 
etlucation 
Professor Vitit 
Muntarbhorn of Thailand 
is the winner of the 2004 
UNESCO Prize for Human 
Rights Education. Mr 
Muntarbhorn, born in 
1952, and a Professor of 
Law at Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, 
has devoted his life to 
human rights education 
activities, notably through 
his teaching and his 
participation in training 
sessions, seminars and 
conferences. An expert 
and consultant for 
several United Nations 
organizations, he is also 
the author of numerous 
publications and learning 
tools (including board 
games with a human 
rights theme). In July 
2004, he was appointed 
UN Special Rapporteur on 
the Situation of Human 
Rights in the Democratic 
People’s Republic of 
Korea. 
A bat year for freedom 
of expression 
At the time of writing, 
in December 2004, the 
Committee to Protect 
Journalists reported that 54 
journalists and 17 media 
workers had been killed in the 
course of 2004, compared to 
37 journalists last year. Thirty- 
one of the dead were killed in 
Iraq. 2004 proved the deadliest 
year since 1994 when 66 
journalists were killed in the 
exercise of their profession. 
The Director-General of 
UNESCO issued numerous 
statements over the year 
calling for strong measures 
to punish and deter acts of 
violence against professionals 
whose work is indispensable 
for democracy and rule of law. 
He also drew attention to the 
fact that inadequate security 
of journalists undermines 
freedom of expression. 
UNESCO contributes to 
efforts to improve the safety 
of journalists, especially 
through training provided 
by the International News 
Safety Institute. In late 2004, 
Reporters Without Borders 
reported 187 cases of men 
and women - 115 journalists 
and 69 cyberdissidents 
- held in prison around the 
world for exercising their 
right to disseminate or seek 
information. 
  
Revitalising Iraq's Higher 
Education 
Four containers of laboratory 
equipment, along with 
supplies of reference books 
and students’ textbooks, 
were delivered to universities 
in Iraq at the end of 
December as part of a major 
international project to 
revitalize the country’s higher 
education. 
The consignment was 
organized by UNESCO and 
the International Fund for 
Higher Education in Iraq, in 
close cooperation with Iraqi 
education authorities. 
The first phase of the 
project also includes 
500 fellowships for Iraqi 
researchers and university 
teachers that will allow 
them to spend three months 
in universities abroad to 
reintroduce them to the 
academic community and 
update their knowledge and 
teaching methods. 
  
© UNESCO 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=24) 0

### IGNORE

THE SLAVE TRADE: A PECULIAR 
  
  
I~,  
® Musical memories p.26 W Creole miracle p.42 
MW Jongo's rebirth p.30 B® Africa-America: return trip p.44 
MW Okra gumbo and rice p.32 ® 2004 : International Year for the 
Commemoration of the Struggle against 
Slavery and its Abolition p.47 
BW Studying slavery in schools p.49 
M Illustrious unknowns p.35 
® Mary Ann Shadd Cary: pushing 
the boundaries p.37 
® The African ‘maisons de trente’ 
in Louisiana p.39 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=25) 0

### IGNORE

CULTURAL 
   
  
= 3 o i. —F Oo 
ps — 
% ; =) 
In = 
. or 
o 
Hi 8 - ad 
- -. Fi} 
. 
= — - 3 
es» a Lg 
- ) - A 
FRE we © 
In the 16th century, 
Salvador de Bahia 
(Brazil) became 
the ‘New World's’ 
first slave market 
The Cape Coast 
(Ghana) Fort 
was a centre of 
the slave trade 
© Paolo Koch/Rapho, Paris 
Report planned and prepared by Jasmina Sopova 
ODYSSEY 
( against humanity*, the 
slave trade constitutes one 
C Y( Mm e. of the most tragic pages of 
our history. Four centuries of terror and humiliation. y 
Human beings captured, chained, deported, sold like f 6CUS 
merchandise, exploited, tortured. Ten million? Twenty 
million? The exact number is unknown, and could 
hardly convey the extent of the catastrophe of these 2 5 
dehumanized people: families separated, populations 
decimated, a continent dispossessed of its greatest 
wealth. 
The year 2004, which marks the bicentennial of 
the creation of Haiti, the first independent black 
state, has been proclaimed International Year for the 
Commemoration of the Struggle against Slavery and 
its Abolition by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations (p. 47). It is a time to accomplish our duty of 
remembrance, but also to “to bring renewed attention 
to this abiding and widespread influence of African 
cultures and civilizations,” to quote the Director-General 
of UNESCO, Koichiro Matsuura. 
Despite the horror that pervaded it, this commerce 
in human beings carried with it cultural values and 
ideas. It laid the ethical and cultural foundations of 
Caribbean and Indian Ocean societies and profoundly 
affected societies on the American continent. It was the 
origin of a blending of cultures that constitutes one of 
the modern’s world’s greatest riches. A peculiar cultural 
odyssey. 
African influence is most obvious in music and 
religion (p. 26 and 30). But we have more than just jazz, 
jongo and voodoo. We also have agriculture. Africa is 
present in the daily life of Americans, down to the food 
on their plates, whether they realize it or not (p. 32). 
The legacy of slaves is often little known, if not literally 
obscured, particularly in the sciences. Few are aware, 
for instance, that the “father of the smallpox vaccine” 
Edward Jenner was not even born when Onesimus, a 
slave, revealed to his master the method used by African 
healers to combat the disease (p. 35). And not many 
people suspect that the “typically Palladian” houses in 
Louisiana are just as typically African (p. 39). A 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

  
> Creole culture, formed around an African core, 
is undoubtedly one of the most positive outcomes 
of the slave trade - a barbaric act that led to the 
creation of new societies. By putting down the 
foundations of new societies that incorporated 
their cultural, linguistic, spiritual and esthetic 
characteristics - in short, their identity - slaves 
brought about a genuine miracle (p. 42). 
If this dossier in UNESCO’s New Courier focuses 
primarily on little-known aspects of African 
influence in the world, born of the slave trade, it 
also opens an even lesser-known chapter: how 
cultural values, customs and social practices that 
were exported with the slaves then returned to 
Africa (p. 44). 
Ten years ago, UNESCO launched the programme 
“Slave Routes” with the purpose of retracing 
the slave trade’s path, analyzing particularly 
the interpenetration of different cultures of the 
continents concerned. A number of publications 
have emerged on the subject, and new projects 
are multiplying, especially targeting young people. 
Commemorative sites such as Stone Town of 
Zanzibar (United Republic of Tanzania} or James 
Island (Gambia) have been inscribed on the World 
Heritage List, while the Carnival of Barranquilla 
(Colombia) and La Tumba Francesa (Cuba), as 
well as a number of other cultural expressions and 
practices, have been proclaimed masterpieces of oral 
and intangible heritage of humanity (p. 48). 
In presenting a dossier devoted to the diverse 
legacies that African slaves and their descendants 
left behind, UNESCO’s New Courier is attempting 
to discover the positive effects of the slave trade. 
Examining the past is a way of calling the present 
into question. 
Jasmina Sopova 
UNESCO 
* The slave trade and slavery were recognized 
as a crime against humanity at the World 
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, 
Xenophobia and Related 
Intolerance (Durban, South Africa, 2001). 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 


### 138448: Musical memories

MUSICAL 
One sphere in which Africa has unquestionably 
influenced universal culture is music. Black slaves 
were also the originators of voodoo and the different 
syncretic religions in the Caribbean and South 
America. Certain cults and musical styles are now 
returning to their roots in Africa, bearing witness fo 
the exceptional wealth of this cultural blending, which 
finds probably its most colourful expression in the 
Notting Hill carnival in London. 
and other styles of Afro- 
A American music such as 
XK Blues appeared in the 
1at&"1800s, about a quarter of a century after the 
abolition of slavery in the United States. Their 
syncopated rhythms fused traits of West African 
folk music with European popular music, and 
reflected the mores and social situations of the first 
generation of African Americans born outside of 
slavery. 
The African heritage is also a primary basis of 
Brazilian samba, Cuban rumba and Trinidadian 
calypso, which all became internationally popular. 
Combining the skills of African story telling, singing 
and instrument making, calypso usually involves 
some social commentary, typically in the form of 
satire, with an infectious beat. It has since been 
influenced by European, North American and other 
Caribbean cultures to produce reggae and the most 
controversial of all forms of black music today, rap. 
Cuban music too has its roots in the ritual music 
of African slaves mixed with Catholic liturgies and 
the brass bands and guitars of Spanish colonialists. 
It developed in a rural setting in which African 
slaves and small farmers from Andalusia worked 
and played music together. With the end of the Cold 
War and the popularity of “The Buena Vista Social 
Club”, film by German director Wim Wenders, 
Cuban music is enjoying a resurgence around the 
world. 
Another slavery-related art form enjoying global 
popularity is Capoeira, leaping and wheeling in 
stylized combat to the rhythm of drums. Rooted in 
Bantu tradition of Angola, Capoeira was used by 
Africans enslaved in Brazil to practice their fighting

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=27) 0

### 138448: Musical memories

MEMORIES 
  
skills, unbeknown to their masters. When colonial 
authorities, who at first thought it a harmless dance, 
eventually learned its real purpose they banned it on 
penalty of death. But it continued to be practiced by 
fugitive slaves who set up independent settlements, 
known as Quilombos (see page 31). Capoeira 
remained illegal in Brazil until the 1930s, when it 
received national recognition as a martial art. In 
recent years it exploded out of Brazil and continues 
to grow in popularity. According to the International 
Capoeira Angola Foundation, it is now practiced 
in 74 countries, and there are over 1,000 Capoeira 
schools listed on the internet. 
Besides culture, enslaved Africans also carried 
spiritual traditions with them to the New World, 
where they were modified to meet the conditions 
of slavery and are now being re-exported back 
to Africa. One of these was Voodoo, which gave 
Africans enslaved in Haiti the strength to survive, 
resist and eventually overturn slavery. Many think 
Voodoo hails from Haiti. But it originated in Africa, 
where the Fon tribes of Benin first called it ‘voodoo’ 
meaning ‘spirit. Although taking new forms in Haiti, 
© 
Jo
na
th
an
 
El
de
rf
ie
ld
/G
am
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s 
African-American 
musician B. B. King 
in concert in New 
York on June 20, 2000 
including elements of Roman Catholicism, Voodoo 
remains largely unchanged among some West 
Africans who still worship their traditional gods and 
Spirits in stirring ceremonies. 
Benin's annual Voodoo Festival at Porto Novo 
includes a parade of different cults carrying statues 
of the pantheon of tribal gods they worship, 
and dances by priests and priestesses backed by 
chanting and drums aimed at invoking the spirits. 
In contrast, a Voodoo temple in nearby Cotonou, 
run by an Haitian-born priest, featured candles, 
bells and a eross, and the gods were identified with 
Roman Catholic saints. Similarities between the 
two forms of Voodoo include ancestor worship, and 
rituals involving trance states and possession by 
spirits. 
Africans enslaved in America blended African 
musical forms with European Christian hymns 
to create spirituals, which developed into gospel 
music. At first a predominantly white style, it 
became prominent in charismatic evangelistic 
movements. Black gospel music became distinctive 
by 1930, and is especially associated with > 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=28) 0

### 138448: Musical memories

  
  
Haiti: 
  
British bobby 
sprayed with 
chocolate during 
the Notting Hill 
Carnival in Lendon 
libexty AA cveativity 
This year, the Smithsonian 
Institute's Folklife Festival, the 
biggest annual cultural event 
in Washington D.C. (USA), 
commemorated the bicentennial 
of Haitian independence. It 
highlighted the role of Haitian 
culture in its people's fight 
for freedom. Founded by the 
descendants of slaves, Haiti was 
the first country to free itself 
from colonialism and slavery 
simultaneously. 
The Festival hosted more 
than 100 traditional Haitian 
artists, crafts people, musicians, 
dancers, storytellers and cooks 
during 10 days (late June and 
early July) of demonstrations, 
workshops and concerts 
outdoors on Washington's 
National Mall. 
Over one million visitors were 
able to experience a variety 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
of celebratory events that 
represented Haitian rites of 
resistance. These included 
Rara, a processional tradition of 
village bands paying handmade 
instruments, and Voudou, an 
African-based religious tradition 
that persists as a spiritual 
influence in Haitian life. 
The idea for the Festival 
program, “Haiti: Freedom and 
Creativity,” originated two 
years ago with members of 
the tJ.S. Haitian community. 
A broad coalition of Haitians, 
U.S. government agencies and 
international organizations, 
such as UNESCO, joined forces 
to make Haitian participation in 
the Festival possible. 
J.E. 
© 
Sc
ot
t 
Ba
rb
ou
r/
AF
P,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Pp Pentecostal churches. Today black church choirs 
around Africa sing both gospel and spirituals, no 
matter what their denomination, often accompanied 
by drums. 
Gospel and blues merged in America to produce 
yet another popular genre known as soul, which 
also gives its name to a cuisine commonly 
associated with African Americans in the southern 
United States. Soul food reflects gastronomic 
responses to racial and economic oppression, and 
makes creative use of inexpensive products such as 
yams, peanuts, okra, black-eyed peas and rice (see 
p. 10). Simply prepared Kentucky fried chicken now 
spearheads a fast food chain that reaches around the 
world. 
The most colorful manifestation of the fusion of 
diverse cultures in the New World is undoubtedly 
carnival. A spring fertility festival of the Ancient 
Egyptians adopted by the Greeks, Romans and then 
Christianity, the carnival tradition was carried across 
the Atlantic by European settlers, and transformed 
by descendants of African slaves who have now 
taken it back to Europe in the form of London's 
huge Notting Hill Carnival. 
It started when slaves began to burlesque the 
extravagant pre-Lenten festivities that their masters 
had brought from European courts. Later they added 
elements of West Africa’s Egungun festival honoring 
family ancestors, such as throwing talcum powder 
on fellow masqueraders, all wearing the same

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=29) 0

### 138448: Musical memories

Out of Afvica: 
black music bovie nt the A mevicas 
Axé - popular music which sprang 
in Salvador de Bahia, Brazil in the 
mid-1980s. Quick tempo and beat 
with percussion and guitar, it mixes 
samba, reggae, pop and other 
influences. Originally instrumental, 
vocals were a later addition. 
Cumbia - born on the Atlantic coast 
of Colombia, traditionally consisting 
only of vocals and percussion, 
from African, Indian and European 
influences. Left the countryside in the 
1940s to become a favourite of the 
urban classes. 
E  EE TE 
‘proclaimed Masterpiece of the Oral 
and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by 
UNESCO 
Sources: The Oxford Companion to 
Music; New Grove Dictionary of Music 
and Musicians; Dictionnaire thématique 
des musigues du monde. 
color of dress. Finally they turned this annual 
explosion of dazzling color and fantasy into 
frenzy by infusing it with African-influenced 
music and dance. 
Like its counterparts in ancient Egypt and in 
the New World, London’s Notting Hill carnival 
is a celebration of life. Started 40 years ago 
by a group of homesick Trinidadians, it is 
now an annual favorite loved by people from 
all cultures. Although the historical legacy of 
slavery, including racism, discrimination and 
poverty, is far from played out, hope springs 
from the fact that people from around the world 
can enjoy together the slave trade’s cultural 
legacy. 
John Lawton, 
Film Director 
Voodoo ritual in 
Benin 
Mambo — began in Cuba in the 1940s, 
from Central African ritual music. 
Gave rise to the cha cha cha in the 
early in the early 1950s, also in Cuba. 
Rumba — from the Havana & 
Matanzas provinces in Cuba, 
developed at the end of the 19th 
century from rhythms of the Bantu in 
West Africa. 
Samba — originated in Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil in the early 1900s, from the 
rhythms of Angola and the Congo. 
  
Son — developed in the early 1900s in 
the Oriente province of Cuba, a fusion 
of West African and Iberian elements. 
Gave rise to the salsa in Cuba and 
Puerto Rico in the mid-1960s. 
Temba francesa’ - from the Oriente 
province in Cuba, appeared in the 
18th century, inspired by music from 
Dahomey, West Africa. 
J.B. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
 Lz) 
i=] 
vl 
~~ 
r. 
= 
a 
T 
[2 
~ 
= 
j © 
— 
[3] 
> 
© 
= 
&] 
[£3 
©

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=30) 0

### 138450: Jongo's rebirth

JONGO'S REBIRTH 
Jongo, a blend of song, dance and magic, had fallen into oblivion. 
Thanks to certain communities such as Sao José da Serra, this piece of intangible 
heritage brought by slaves who came from Angola and the Congo is again 
in the spotlight in Brazil. 
Chapel, Sdo José 
da Serra community 
(Brazil) 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
    
 
Militana and their son 
4% A Y O Manoel were bought 
in Bahia, in mid-19t 
century, to work on the Sao José da Serra property. 
The former coffee fazenda, converted now to 
subsistence farming and small-scale stock breeding, 
is near Valenga, in the state of Rio de Janeiro. 
According to his descendants, Pedro belonged 
to the Cabinda nation. Back then, the slaves in 
the region were mostly of Bantu origin, sent to 
Brazil from the slave trade ports on the coasts of 
Angola and the Congo, or via Mozambique. The 
grandchildren, great-grandchildren and great-great- 
grandchildren of Pedro and Militana now form 
the Sao José da Serra community, a group that 
perpetuates the intangible heritage of its ancestors. 
Nearly 80 people live in some 15 clay and straw 
houses, with roofs made from plant materials and 
mud floors. There is also a small chapel in the 
fazenda, and since 1970 a public school. Because 
  
researchers, journalists and jongo fans from the 
big cities have “discovered” Sao José da Serra, it 
recently got electricity. 
“The captive black man/ Worked so hard/ He 
won his freedom/ Today May 13.” The inhabitants 
of S30 José da Serra dance to these words during 
the commemoration, which lasts several days, of 
the 1888 abolition of slavery in Brazil, on May 13. 
The high point is the caxambu, dance around a big 
fire that has been blessed by the mae-de-santo(see 
box) at the beginning of the festivities. A large circle 
is formed and one couple dances in the middle 
while the rest sing jongos, songs which are often 
improvised, to the rhythm of timbus, drums made 
from hollow tree-trunks sealed with animal hide. 
According to the elders, magic is an ingredient 
of traditional jongo. The singers “sent” each other 
words that contained spells and the “dialogues” 
between singers could end up in actual battles. 
Children were excluded from the circle for this

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=31) 0

### 138450: Jongo's rebirth

Quilombo 
The word is said to be 
of kimbundu (Angola) 
origin. In colonial Brazil, 
it referred to camps of 
runaway slaves (also 
called mocambos). The 
most important Brazilian 
quilombo was Palmares. 
in the 17th century, 
up to 20,000 people 
lived there, divided 
into several vilages, 
governed according to 
mostly African rules and 
customs, in the Serra da 
Barriga, in the Brazilian 
Nordeste interior. ts 
best-known leader 
Zumbi dos Palmares 
became a hero of slaves’ 
resistance and the black 
movements in Brazil. 
November 20, the day 
he died, is now Black 
Consciousness Day in 
Brazil and a holiday in 
several cities including 
Rio de Janeiro. 
M. M. H. 
Mae-Ade- 
The “mothers” and 
“fathers” of the spirits, 
or saints, have priestly 
roles in Afro-Brazilian 
religious communities. 
The inhabitants of 
Sao José da Serra 
are devotees of 
umbanda. Candomblé 
and umbanda are the 
principal Afro-American 
religious movements, 
listed in the national 
census. They have 
the same structure, 
involving small 
groups of worshippers 
organized around a 
“mother of the saint” 
or “father of the saint”. 
The oldest Afro-Brazilian 
religions, which have a 
diversity of names but 
are generally referred 
to as Candomblé, 
were created in the 
© 
Is
ab
el
 
Ca
st
ro
 
Timbus, made from 
hollow logs, provide 
jongo’s heat 
SANLO 
19th century and are 
a syncretic blend 
of African religion 
and Catholicism, the 
country’s official religion 
at the time. Umbanda, 
which originated in Rio 
de Janeiro in the 20th 
century, is a synthesis 
of African religious 
traditions, the old Bahia 
Candombilé rituais and 
the spiritism of Allan 
Kardec, imported from 
France in the 19th 
century. According 
to the 2000 census, 
571,329 people declared 
themselves devotees 
of Afro-Brazilian 
religions (0.34% of the 
population), but the 
numbers are considered 
vastly underestimated 
M. M. H. 
  @ 
Is
ab
el
 
Ca
st
ro
 
reason. Things have changed, and today children featured in the press and on television. « Nasci 
participate fully in the celebrations. Jongo has 
become a show and possibly even a means 
of earning a living for the community’s new 16... »* are the words they sing at every public 
generations. Thanks to jongo, Sao José da Serra is appearance. 
reinforcing its black identity, even reverting to its There is a resurgence of interest in Brazil for 
original name of quilombo (see box). 
The 1988 Brazilian constitution recognized 
the land rights of groups considered the heirs of 
quilombos, in other words communities of black 
peasants descended from slaves and entitled by 
tradition to the land on which they lived. The 
Sao José da Serra community was thus officially Brazil 
recognized in 1988. 
Meanwhile, the Sao José da Serra community’s 
jongo group has become the definition of this 
musical genre for amateurs. The group has already 
contributed to two compilation CDs and is preparing 
its first solo album. It is getting an increasing 
number of concert dates and has frequently been 
na Angola / Congo que me criou / Eu sou la de 
Mogcambique / Meu Deus do Céu / Lg, 1é, Ié, 1, 
black, ar “roots,” music. Jongo, which had been 
forgotten in the big cities, is now drawing Rio’s 
youth to special jongo clubs. 
Maria Mattos Hebe, 
Federal University of Fluminense, 
* “I was born in Angola/ 
I was raised in Congo/ 
I am from Mozambique/ 
3 
My God in heaven....” 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=32) 0

### 138452: Okra gumbo and rice

OKRA GUMBO AND RICE 
. - | 
Most Americans are unaware : 
of African cultural heritage aa § “i ’ ” 
as a component of the American a. - : 
way of life. We are far from fully F : > g ' oH 
recognizing the role that Africa Pe yf y - Ta be. id 
played in the creation of the United J BN 5 ‘4 
States and continues to playin its a NLA ry 
    
people's daily lives. 
  
may have Cuff, Cuffy, Coffey, 
Ih 0 or Coffee as a family name, 
or Ouida(h) or Weda as a 
female first name. Their children love Bambi. They 
say “Wow!” when impressed or surprised. Many 
eat okra gumbo with rice. They listen to jazz. They 
11
 
C
o
r
d
i
e
r
/
J
a
c
a
n
a
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
are American, and would deny African influence 
on their culture. Africa is just not seen as a possible 
component of the American Way of Life. 
The name Koffi that the world knows thanks to 
United Nations Secretary General Koffi Annan comes 
from the Akan-speaking people of West Africa. 
Ouidah is a coastal town in Benin from which many 
Africans were deported to the Americas during the 
transatlantic trade in enslaved Africans. Wow means 
“yes” in the Wolof language of Senegal and the 
Gambia. And Bambi is a Central African Bantu word 
for antelope. 
The word okra comes from Akan and gombo is 
© 
a
g
e
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Bantu for the vegetable that is the key ingredient in 
the Louisiana stew called redundantly okra gumbo. 
And the rice that so enriched planters that it was 
called “Carolina Gold” came to the United States 
from the banks of the Niger River and the Atlantic 
shores of Senegambia. 
Some scholars have claimed, and most people still 
believe, that although culture of African origin may 
have persisted in farther south regions they consider 
“exotic,” like the Caribbean and Latin America, little 
or no African culture came to the United States, and 
© 
a
g
e
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
certainly none has remained. In 1919 sociologist : 25 
Robert Park stated that, “It is very difficult to find in ® breadiruit (Artocarpus altilis) 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
& 
Mi
ch
el
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
/
U
N
E
S
C
O

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=33) 0

### 138617: Itinerant plants

### 138452: Okra gumbo and rice

[tinevant plants 
breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis) 
A tree native to the Malay archipelago, its fruit can be cooked 
like a potato. The Polynesians carried it to the South Pacific 
islands. From Tahiti, Captain William Bligh took it to the West 
Indies in 1793 on the Bounty, intended as food for slaves who 
refused to eat it as it was totally unknown to them in West 
Africa. It was only after the end of slavery that breadfruit 
appeared on Caribbean tables. 
cassava (manioc) (Manihot esculenta) 
This Brazilian vegetable with tubers boiled and baked iike 
potatoes travelled on Portuguese ships to Africa. Migrating 
Indians algo transported them in their cances to the Caribbean. 
collards (Brassica oleraces var. ocephala) 
One of the earliest varieties of the cabbage family, said to have 
originated in the Mediterranean region, spread to Asia and 
Africa, finally reaching the Americas via the slave trade. Today, 
it is an ingredient of “soul food,” its dark green leaves usually 
boiled with pork. 
cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) 
A bean going back as far as the prehistoric era either in India 
or China, with Africa suggested as a possible source. Reached 
the Americas via the slave trade and cultivated today in most 
tropical and subtropical regions. lts best-known variety is the 
black-eyed bean, a common feature of southern cuisine in the 
United States. 
West Indian gherkin (Cucumis anguria) 
A native of tropical Africa, crossed into the Americas in the early 
16th century through the slave trade. From there, it crossed the 
Atlantic once again towards Europe. Mostly used for pickles. 
maize (corn) (Zea mays) 
Native to the Americas, Columbus carried it to Spain. In the 16th 
century, Portuguese traders carried it to East Africa and Asia, 
Arab traders to North Africa. It reached West Africa from the 
Caribbean, used on both sides of the Atlantic as an inexpensive 
means of provisioning slave ships across the Atlantic. 
okra {Abelmoschus esculentus) 
Also called “gumbo,” although the latter is also the name of 
a soup using okra as a main ingredient. Native to Africa, wae 
grown by the Egyptians, then brought by Spanish Moors to 
Europe in the 12th century and introduced by slaves to the 
Americas in the 17th. 
roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa) 
Probably of West African origin, its young shoots and leaves are 
eaten raw or cooked as vegetables, its flowers used for sauces 
and jellies. Introduced in Brazil in the 17th century through the 
slave trade. 
sesame (Sesamum indicum) 
The plant may have originated in East Africa or India, grown 
for its oil some 5,000 years ago in the valleys of the Tigris and 
Euphrates. Slave ships carried the seeds to the New World. 
sorghum (Sorghum vulgare) 
Cultivated in East Africa some 6,000 years ago, crossed the   
indian Ocean to India and China. Used as grain and as a source 
of syrup, several varieties of sorghums reached the Americas 
through the slave trade. 
taro (Colocasia esculenta) 
Originated in South Asia, travelled to Egypt some 2,000 years 
ago, later introduced into Europe, from where the Spaniards 
took it to the New World. It made its way to West Africa from 
there. Its starchy tuber is cooked like potatoes. 
watermelon (Citrullus lanatus) 
A vine cultivated for its fruit, this native of Africa reached the 
Middle East, Egypt. India and Persia some 6,000 years ago. Later 
grown by the ancient Greeks and Romans, also by the Chinese 
in the 10th century AD. Arrived in Europe via the Spanish 
Moors, then the Americas via the slave trade. 
winged bean (Psophocarpus tetragonolobus) 
A relative of the cowpea, this vegetables leaves, pods, seeds, 
shoots and tubers are all edible. Its origins are thought to be in 
India or China, even Africa where it grows wild. Reached the 
Caribbean and South America via the slave trade. 
yellow malanga (Xanthosoma atrovirens) 
Grown for its corm which is cooked like a yam. Most probably 
originated in South America, taken to the Caribbean by the 
Taino, later reached West Africa from where it was used to feed 
America-bound slaves. Also grown today in Asia and the Pacific. 
Source: The Cambridge World History of Food 
José Banaag 
sorghum (Sorghum vulgare) 
© 
Pa
tr
ic
k 
le
 
F
l
o
c
’
h
/
E
x
p
l
o
r
e
r
/
H
o
a
 
Qu
i,
 
Pa
ri
s 
focus 
33 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=34) 0

### 138452: Okra gumbo and rice

focus 
3 4 © Keystone/Gamma, Paris 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
Few Americans 
know that Walt 
Disney's Bambi 
owes its name to 
the Bantu word 
for antilope 
Pp the South today anything that can be traced directly 
back to Africa.” 
Such perspectives were challenged in Melville 
Herskovits’ 1941 The Myth of the Negro Past, 
which demonstrated “that African survivals can be 
discovered in almost all phases of Negro life in the 
United States.” Yet in 1963 sociologist E. Franklin 
Frazier maintained that, “. .. because of the manner 
in which the Negroes were captured in Africa and 
enslaved, they were practically stripped of their 
social heritage.” 
Twenty years later, in an article about engineer 
Lewis Latimer, in the book Blacks in Science Ancient 
and Modern, the African American scholar John 
Henrik Clarke maintained that “The collective 
contributions of African Americans to science and 
inventions is so extensive that it is not possible to 
live a full day in any part of 
the United States, or the world in general, without 
sharing the benefits of 
their contributions.” 
Why is there such ignorance and denial of this 
African presence in U.S. culture? Because in spite 
of all of the accurate information that has been 
available for decades, schools and the media 
portray Africa as a continent characterized by 
severe problems rather than tremendous wealth 
and resources, that has folklore rather than culture, 
and that certainly could not have contributed to the 
civilization of the United States. 
This denial of Africa as part of the foundation of 
U.S. society is especially true concerning intellectual 
and technological matters., The “Carolina” rice 
served with the okra gumbo, which might be more 
appropriately termed Senegambian rice, is an 
excellent example. 
The rice grown in South Carolina and other parts 
of the Americas is Oryza glaberrima, different from 
the Asian Oryza sativa. This West African rice 
and the complex system of knowledge involved 
in growing it and making it edible were brought 
by Africans, but they have not been given credit. 
As shown in Judith Carnev’s recent book, Black 
Rice: The African Origins of Rice Cultivation in the 
Americas Portuguese mariners were credited with 
introducing rice culture to Africa—not explaining 
how sailors taught planters to plant, and ignoring 
Portuguese writings about their amazement at 
discovering complex vice production technology in 
the Senegambia. 
Thus, Europeans assumed undue credit for 
African intellectual and technological achievements, 
despite evidence to the contrary. Europeans 
from temperate zones did not have the skills and 
knowledge required for such endeavors as rice 
cultivation, particularly in the sub-tropical climate 
of the southern United States. African origins can 
also be found for other elements of foundational 
technologies, such as the animal husbandry 
popularized in U.S. cowboy films. 
The transatlantic trade in enslaved Africans 
needs to be reconceptualized as not just a source 
of unskilled labor, but more importantly, also as 
a massive brain drain and transfer of knowledge, 
technology, and culture from Africa to the Americas. 
Sheila S. Walker, 
Director of the African Diaspora 
and the World Program, Spelman College, 
Atlanta, Georgia

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=35) 0

### 138453: Illustrious unknowns

ILLUSTRIOUS UNKNOWNS 
Men and women of genius, they had dr 
 an impact on their era. Their scientific AC — RN ) 
discoveries were brilliant, but we y Benfemin Bamnaker's 
dent know their names. Only rarely have A PoxNSYLVANIA, Ds: AWaREMMaRY- Pi 
slaves or children of slaves received 1 A I M "A N A C k 
b 
   
recognition. Some of them served modern 
science with traditional know-how. For THE 
. YEAR of our LORD 17935; - 
Being the Third after Lesp-Year,   a 
~ the skin, put in one 
(l 
A t drop...nobody else will get 
sick,” said Onesimus, in 
1721, when a smallpox epidemic was raging in 
the thirteen British colonies that would become 
the United States. He showed his own scar as 
A
A
T
 
S
E
R
 
w
h
a
 
£
7
 
focus 
evidence. 
Cotton Mather, the Puritan pastor in Boston, 
found it hard to believe, but he finally published 
  
  
 
  
the “discovery” in a text - Some Account of What | 
Is Said of Inoculating or Transplanting the Small | 
Pox - and found himself the laughing stock of Esa ep ron EB 
the era’s medical profession, with the exception “And Sold by JOHN FISHER, Stioner i 
of Zabdiel Boylston. He tested the vaccine on SE Cah PaLTINOSS ,- iL SN ¥ The almanac 
his own son and two of his slaves. It was a gh ; published by 
success. He continued the experiment on 241 EE. SO we Wr] u J Benjamin Banneker 
people. Only six were infected. Late, Thomas © UNESCO/Route de I'esclave/Collection Alibert impressed US 
Jefferson had complete success with 200 slaves, President Thomas 
Jefferson 80 of them his own. After that, the vaccine was 
accepted by the white population and saved a 
good number of American soldiers from illness 
during the war of independence. “The Real McCoy” 
Edward Jenner, internationally recognized as 
the father of the smallpox vaccine, wasn’t born 
when Onesimus taught his master the method 
used by African healers to fight the illness. The 
young African had been deported to America in 
1706. His name remains inscribed in the history 
of medicine, but in a footnote. 
Other slaves knew similar fates. A certain 
Cesar, for instance, devised an antidote for 
rattlesnake bites, mixing several ingredients 
including wood ash and tobacco. It is very 
probable that the remedy was based on 
traditional African know-how. A description was 
published in 1792, in Massachussets Magazine. 
The remedy did not earn its inventor world 
fame, but it did inspire the South Carolina 
General Assembly to restore his freedom. 
People in the United 
States who want the real 
thing, not an imitation, 
often say they want “the 
real McCoy.” But most 
probably have no idea 
that they are referring 
to a gadget invented by 
an African American, 
Elijah McCoy. In 1872, he 
received a patent for the 
drip cup, a lubricating 
device for steam engines 
that fed oil to moving 
machinery, avoiding the 
waste and cost of having 
to stop engines in order 
to lubricate them. People 
were so confident in the 
reliability of McCoy's 
invention, which had a 
seminal impact on the 
evolving railroad industry, 
that to he sure they were 
getting his device rather 
than someone else's 
imitation of it, they asked 
for “the real McCoy.” 
McCoy, who arrived in 
the United States after 
the Civil War, was the 
son of African-Americans 
who had escaped from 
enslavement and fled to 
Canada. 
SW. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=36) 0

### 138453: Illustrious unknowns

© 
Al
el
ia
 
B
i
t
s
 
e
d
i
t
 
Fa
mi
ly
 
Co
ll
ec
ti
on
 
it
 I 
E— wii ™— — . | 
  
Mi iv — 
ry 
  
Benjamin Banneker, son of a slave father 
and free mother born in Maryland in 1731, was 
granted more recognition. A brilliant astronomer 
and mathematician, he published an Almanac 
in 1791 containing such an impressive wealth of 
information that Thomas Jefferson was prompted 
to write him a letter. In his letter, Thomas Jefferson 
speaks of the almanac as proof “that nature has 
given to our black brethren, talents equal to those 
of the other colors of men” and informs the author 
that he is sending it to Monsieur de Condorecet, 
Secretary of the Academy of Sciences in Paris. It 
was a revolutionary gesture for the time. 
The Federal Gazette and the Baltimore Daily 
Advertiser also paid tribute to Banneker’s genius, 
publishing articles about the “direct descendant of 
an African” a few days after his death on October 
25, 1806. 
Other scientists such as the engineer Lewis 
Howard Latimer (1848-1928), who became one 
of the “Edison Pioneers”, or Norbert Rillieux 
(1806-1894) from New Orleans, whose process 
for refining sugar cane juice into sugar is used 
to this day, also received recognition. But for the 
most part the scientific contributions of slaves and 
their immediate descendants remained cloaked 
in silence. Too often, as in the case of Onesimus, 
it was the masters who published or patented 
the slaves’ inventions, with the latter considering 
themselves lucky to have their names even 
mentioned. 
Only recently has research exhumed these 
personalities, who should be familiar to us, 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
   
 
  
  
    
  Sarah Breediowe was not 
predestined to become a 
millionaire. Born in 1867 on 
a Louisiana Delta plantation, 
a child of former slaves, 
she went to school only 
intermittently. Married at age 
14, widowed when she was 
30, she was working as a 
laundress in Saint Louis when 
she began to lose her hair. 
Did she remember her 
grandmother's potions or 
concoct her own miracle 
formula? We don't know. 
Based on her own needs and 
without ever revealing her 
recipes ar ingredients, she 
invented hair-care products 
“Toov 
Rich Gir 
) ttle 
for black women and then 
marketed them. 
She moved to Denver in 1905 
and married C.J. Walker, 
who helped promote her hair 
products and a whole range 
of cosmetics for black women, 
which became famous 
under the label “Madam C.J. 
Walker”. White manufacturers 
had ignored this niche market. 
Thanks to her inventions, she 
became a millionaire. 
Madam C.J. Walker employed 
a large number of people 
in her factory, whose total 
salaries amounted to US$ 
200,000 a year, a considerable 
sum at the time. In addition to 
the training centre she started 
for her workers, she founded 
a girls’ academy in West 
Africa with a donation of US$ 
100,000. 
Sarah Breedlowe, aka Madam 
C.J. Walker, died in 1919. 
0.D. 
from silence and oblivion. This represents part 
of our duty to remember, but also a contribution 
to intercultural dialogue founded on inclusive 
knowledge of the scientific finds and techniques 
of different segments of humanity. The goal is for 
everyone to identify with the words of the Latin 
comic playwright Terence, a freed slave himself: 
Homo sum; nihil homini a me puto alienum. 
(“I am human; nothing human is alien to me.”) 
Oumar Dioume, 
Director of Research and Development, 
AirTel Com (Montreal, Canada)

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=37) 0

### 138454: Mary Ann Shadd Cary: pushing the boundaries

MARY ANN SHADD CARY: 
PUSHING THE BOUNDARIES 
    
70 ANTISLAVERY, TEMPERANCE, 
 
        
 
© 
Li
br
ar
y 
an
d 
Ar
ch
iv
es
 
of
 
Ca
na
da
, 
Ot
ta
wa
 
 
 
DEVOTED AND GENERAL LITERATURE, 
R et nen ieee Bee he 0 Spine” 
VOLONE 1} TORONTO, CANADA WEST, SATURDAY DECEMBER 8, i854. | NUMBER 35. 
i P trp. bi ua 0h 7 By . Sanbes 3 a2 or i 
PROVINCIAL FREEMAN, — - 3 orp wh d's SEER Ee tha 
i, beri Ji oF ud bey is von aes vite witphs wads, ‘whan. ts tren, of oor 
  
   
  
     
   
 
    
Fae of Z ma | a ght ari Fe 3} Harm 
a bad 5. agwan, boy 1 wm 
    
J r S Se ba Fon. Vitae bow. 
= Erna lo tls ; 2 - {wth yn mE vik 
Ap 2 | ese by Sas J sf hon kod | TE Ao ci fet $i by oChs 
he Hg 2 oo folk the Jolie wad fuer or Ye st Latter: Mts 3 hy 0 2 ns od of eur ak Bn Bo 
h Es raiities me a 
a oe iG ict Adar 
na    
  
35 wshiuisg HE 
u sao of Hori) Ahr oeghided poo bed 
us LE a ey Pistons om 3b “ a, “* - J Women wn a pid 
rum i ad ASA fryers cxewatle 2 - ’ pw gtr § 3pi0rs veal hick 2 all ix 2 . { 
5, > oh og ws Ran, ost : roll. 5 > real thicken » 4 4 on “HEmy's FUaK Bers 
woe piven oF patie y oust | hall gt Ad Ee 
SRA, Fubivhiag Ager 
us [BE i ha Svat Thay npg 
™ La igirsiam. 
= Solu, . wit Ll ie 
1 J Cun is 
poh EE seit hye 2% 
panied, 0 sles catos 
      
Launched in 1853 
ap 
4% - 
; 
orgs or Arm in Toronto (Canada), 
VRXT A SABAH, Eh 
Rie fo s ge ois | 2 Final fhe thou ¥65, 
al i Bs wk Sra a ; ois bape: FT 
Perk nie doch the provincial 
pm 
on 
MY freeman is the first 
DNEH, ©. # 
13 ¥ i I   newspaper founded LER SEARO nr EX Muha, XT ic £3
 
I FEEL ; Tiare shewes © Srv ber . 3 AAs dwinkog hy ws to | wo od ig [3 * § % Allth ar their beflex tt of bo steel abs 
" FARNAR, Ly eo sie here thataha arty who fad § Bosdis abd wid € x teas pus gogo 
gob Flere duh Shay ino ibe i
 5) ii
 
i
 
¥ ¥ by a Black woman 
in North America 
SEDOR, 6. i sia Fam Bui Heri Nondiy torered ELT 
g [oe set. ‘Tazy of ar od 
bin 5p rok on wth k seer oy Ar through | te “iiges ot our [Sa alii x well 2x4 diroet Ses of     
Ay js BT Hate 
1850, the American Congress passed 
Pioneer newspaperwoman, antislavery 
activist, lawyer, leader of the emigration 
movement to Canada, recruiter of Black 
soldiers during the Civil War, Mary Ann 
Shadd Cary contributed significantly to the 
success of abolitionist causes. A descendant 
of the Shadd family tells the story of her 
great-aunt. 
a bill known as the Fugitive Slave Act. 
It stipulated that any white person 
could arrest and detain anyone of African descent 
suspected of being a runaway slave. Even those 
who had been born free, unless they had irrefutable 
proof, were at risk of being captured and dragged 
into bondage. As a result, thousands of African 
Americans picked up and fled the northern states. 
For many, this destination was Canada. It was a 
phenomenal movement of refugees on what was 
known as the Underground Railroad: 20,000 people 
are estimated to have settled in Canada between 
1820 and 1860. 
At the time of the fugitive slave law, Mary Ann > 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=38) 0

### 138454: Mary Ann Shadd Cary: pushing the boundaries

  
P Shadd, a young freeborn woman, was a teacher in 
the northeastern United States. Mary Ann was born 
in Delaware in 1823 into a prominent abolitionist 
family. When her services were requested by 
Henry and Mary Bibb, founders of the first Black 
newspaper in Canada, Voice of the Fugitive, she 
moved to Windsor (Ontario) and started a school 
in 1851 for the children of fugitive slaves. She also 
quickly became a leading emigrationist, hiding 
numerous fugitives in her home. 
In 1852, she published A Plea for Emigration; 
or Notes of Canada West which touted the country 
as a major refuge not only for escaping slaves but 
also free African Americans experiencing increasing 
restrictions on their lives in northern states. Her 
skills as an orator convinced many, but her public 
outspokenness got her into trouble. A dispute with 
the Bibbs over the question of separate schools for 
Blacks spilled onto the pages of their newspaper, the 
Voice of the Fugitive, and led to her firing from her 
teaching position. 
Shadd than decided to start her own weekly, 
where she could control how her ideas were 
disseminated. One of Canada’s first women 
journalists thus became the first Black woman in 
North America to found a newspaper. The Provincial 
Freeman began publishing out of Toronto on March 
24, 1853. Because she was aware that her name 
on the masthead could alienate a readership that 
preferred the strict gender codes of the 19th century, 
she had asked Samuel Ringgold Ward, Black 
abolitionist and agent of the Anti-Slavery Society of 
Canada, to become editor. Shadd then spent a year 
on the lecture circuit drumming up subscriptions 
and interest in her paper, which became a daily the 
following year. 
First and foremost, the Provincial Freeman was 
an anti-slavery paper. It focused on the importance 
of Black self-reliance and integration into Canadian 
society and denounced the practice of “begging,” 
or fundraising on behalf of the “downtrodden 
fugitives” by presenting them in an unfavorable 
light. It also championed women’s rights, providing 
a forum for activists Lucy Stone Blackwell and 
Lucretia Mott. 
Yet in spite of its success, the paper could not 
stay afloat, dependent for its readership upon 
a small educated elite. In 1860, it succumbed. 
Seven years of publishing a newspaper under 
such circumstances was nonetheless quite an 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
  
$150 REWARD   
RANAWAY from the subscriber, on 
{he might eof the Bad Instant, 1 segroe man, 
whe calls himself Zlensy Jay, about 22 
years old, & feet 6 or 8 faches high, or= 
dinary color, rather chunky built, bushy 
bead, und hes i divided mostly on one 
side, and keeps it very wulecly combed; 
bas been ralsed in the house, and is 2 rst 
rae dlologerovm servant, and was in a ; Javea in Rsviite for 18 months. i 
p “expect he is usw isvific § ake his stot in a is nig {io all ny Louise ry ng Fo dy 4 ay Y te got emplopiuent on un aeambont. Ke isu wom cook. aRlnet eon PAPACY 0s house servant, Mad en whoa Be loi, 0 deck 0 ” eassinet! pant pe pd vo $50 reward if’ (show in eee J fo other i Pi, : Loviarilie in this Qtate, and 150 doline ifiahon out SHEL fo rae, or secured fn any jail so that § 
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
R
o
u
t
e
 
de
 
Ve
sc
la
ve
/C
ol
le
ct
io
n 
Al
ib
er
t 
ugain, rue oo idm 
Bardstown. Ky. Kepiember Bd, 188% WRLEIAWM Bipnn yl 
114, Certain gl 
their attempts to nce were suscesstul in 
in this notice by 
Burke offers 3 1, 
   
A bounty wes offered for 
any runaway slave caught 
achievement and places it among a very small group 
of Black publications, including Frederick Douglass’s 
newspapers. It is today a valuable resource for 
researchers. 
After the death of her husband Thomas F. Cary, 
a Toronto businessman she married in 1856, Shadd 
Cary left Canada with her two children. Hired by 
Martin Delany as perhaps the only woman to recruit 
Black soldiers during the Civil War, she later went 
on to study and practice law in Washington D.C., 
being one of the first women of her race to do so. 
She also became increasingly vocal and active on 
the issue of women’s rights and suffrage during her 
later years. 
Shadd Cary died on June 5, 1893. A woman who 
pushed the boundaries and limitations normally 
ascribed to her race and sex, she was designated a 
person of national historic significance in Canada, 
one of a number of posthumous honors she 
received. 
Shadd’s descendants, and those of her brothers 
and sisters, live all over Canada and the United 
States today. I am one of those descendants 
who have become active in the resurrection and 
preservation of the memory not only of Mary Ann 
Shadd but of the thousands of others who made 
Canada home during that period. 
Adrienne Shadd, 
writer, researcher and curator 
living in Toronto 
 

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=39) 0

### 138455: The African Maison de Trente in Louisiana

THE AFRICAN “MAISON DE TRENTE" 
IN LOUISIANA 
© Joseph Dunn/Laura Plantation, Louisiana 
Staves from West Africa influenced the architectural style and construction techniques 
in Louisiana. They brought traditional know-how that proved appropriate for the climatic 
conditions in the south of the United States. 
Laura Plantation’s 
main house was built 
by the descendants 
of the first slaves 
who arrived from 
Senegal in the 18th 
Century 
years ago, I visited 
0, eX A | some of the plantation 
U homes along the 
Mississippi River, outside New Orleans. It was not 
my first visit to the area, but I had never before 
wanted to visit them. This time, however, I ventured 
out to see these beautiful places that once witnessed 
so much human suffering. I was silenced when I 
saw one-room slave cabins built on raised wooden 
posts, weathered by time, but still standing. 
The first site I visited was Laura Plantation. La 
maison principale or manor house was built in 1805, 
on land granted to the French owner by President 
Thomas Jefferson. 
The main house was built by the descendants of 
the first slaves brought to Louisiana from Senegal 
in the early 1720s. Builders from the Bambara 
and Wollof tribes were highly valued for their 
construction skills. Every spring, the Mississippi 
River would flood, just as rivers in Africa flooded, 
and the slaves used the same architectural solution 
as they did for houses in Africa. As Joseph Dunn, 
spokesman for Laura Plantation, explains, “The 
main house of Laura Plantation rests on 72 pyramids 
that are identical to those found in West Africa, in 
the Senegal and Gambia region, according to the 
architects that we consulted.” 
Because the house was built on alluvial land, 
the builders dug a 750 m2 hole, 2.5 m deep. At the 
bottom of the hole, they put down a sort of raft of 
cypress and willow logs, on top of which they built 
72 brick pyramids to support the foundation and 
make the ground level stable. Once the hole was 
filled with earth, brick columns were erected on 
some of the pyramids. The columns support the 
horizontal beams that hold up the building, forming 
an above-ground basement. 
Today, when visitors stand on the floor of 
the above-ground basement and look up at the 
horizontal beams supporting the first floor, they 
can see the Roman numerals numbering one to 30 
on the beams. The slave builders cut the beams 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
>

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=40) 0

### 138455: The African Maison de Trente in Louisiana

focus 
© 
Jo
se
ph
 
D
u
n
n
/
L
a
u
r
a
 
Pl
an
ta
ti
on
, 
Lo
ui
si
an
a 
   
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
» from 1000-year-old cypress trees harvested from the 
nearby swamp. It took them approximately one year 
to select and cut down the trees. 
Because these houses were constructed on 30 
horizontal beams and 30 vertical posts. they were 
called “maisons de trente”. Predating the Civil 
War, they share a striking number of architectural 
features with West African houses: galleries, 
porches, pillars one to four feet high, the use of 
plastered clay for walls, the decoration of facades 
with patterns in bas relief or in paint, relatively 
small interior rooms, and detached kitchens built 
away from the main house. These characteristics are 
found in plantations along the Mississippi, in the 
Garden District residential quarter of New Orleans, 
and in Charleston, South Carolina. 
“The method used by the Senegalese builders was 
similar to what we now call prefabricated. They 
prepared everything in advance and the house had 
to be finished in 11 days,” says Dunn, adding, “The 
Creole architectural style that is typical of our region 
is a blend of Palladian and African ingredients. 
  
That's why it’s very close to the style found in West 
Africa, and even in the Indian Ocean.” 
African understanding of domestic space, which 
was ideally suited for the subtropical climate in the 
south of the United States, as well as construction 
techniques arrived in Louisiana by way of the 
slave trade route, stopping off in Brazil and in the 
Caribbean and making modifications to suit each 
locale along the way. 
In 1733, a factory building constructed in the 
Gambia by local Mandingo designer-builders for the 
English Royal African Company was described by its 
British factor: 
“Their next work was to make a porch, called 
an Alpainter by the natives, who pretend a right 
to have one at every factory, that they may have 
access and shelter....Here a house is built with a 
hall [piazza| of 40 foot by 13, two-lodging rooms 20 
foot by 13, and three strong storehouses, without 
any iron work, trowels, squares or carpenter's rules, 
and with the smallest expense to the Company, for it 
was done by their servants only...” 
 
  Numbered | to XXX, 
the beams were cut 
from thousand-year- 
old trees 
V vesevuing puilding Avts 
In 2002, the New Orleans 
Museum of Art presented 
an exhibition, “Raised to 
the Trade” showcasing 
the artistry of the building 
trades and the talent of the 
builders who helped make 
New Orleans an architectural 
gem. The museum also 
recorded, over four years, 
the oral histories of builders 
who are living today, but 
growing older. Because 
young people today have not 
been interested in learning 
the building trades, the skills 
of these master craftsmen 
could be lost. The exhibition 
curators hope that “Raised to 
the Trade” will inspire young 
people to learn these unique 
building skills, ensuring 
that the architecture of New 
Orleans will be preserved by 
qualified restorers. 
D.D.

## [Page 41](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=41) 0

### 138455: The African Maison de Trente in Louisiana

foeus 
41 
© 
Jo
se
ph
 
D
u
n
n
/
L
a
u
r
a
 
Pl
an
ta
ti
on
, 
Lo
ui
si
an
a 
  
This passage also attests to the experience of the The names of slave architects and builders are Near the main house, 
Mandingo designer-builders and of the economy and lost to us, but the architectural treasures they built the rudimentary 
skill with which they worked. It forever repudiates continue to enchant all who visit them. In spite of cabins that served as 
the idea that Africans came to the Americas as the unspeakable injustice and hardship of slavery, slave quarters 
unskilled, uncivilized people. Dunn adds, “It has West African slaves and their descendants created 
been our experience that many of our visitors beauty in architecture, iron work, the decorative arts 
think only of African slaves within the context of and furniture. That beauty is with us today. 
fieldwork. Hardly ever are they afforded credit 
for designing, constructing and maintaining such Denise Dennis, 
buildings as Laura Plantation, and yes, most of the American novelist 
French Quarter in New Orleans.” 
Descendants of slaves handed down from 
generation to generation the building techniques 
inherited from their ancestors. Besides the brick Pr 
pyramids, the main house at Laura plantation also + AY + hey 
incorporates what is known as “Senegalese plaster”, ( 
made of ground oyster shells, sand and water, and VEAAL : 
evaporation planks” at the point where horizontal Tay DE Bs, Vernacular 
Vision: The Gallery and Our 
Africanized Architectural 
Landscape, ed. Jonn Ethan 
beams meet vertical pillars, intended to protect the 
wood from humidity. 
Freed slaves, or “gens libres de couleur”, were 
even sent to France where they learned French ! 
yie Hankins; and Steven 
Maklansky, Raised to the 
Trade: Creole Building Arts 
of Louisiana, (New Orleans 
Museum of Art, New 
methods of construction. The mixing of African 
and European technique has been perpetuated until 
now. 
Orleans, Louisiana, 2002) 
  
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 42](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=42) 0

### 138457: Creole miracle

CREOLE MIRACLE 
sur Futilisation du kreol dans jes &tablissements primaires. EARL Wh ra 
The slave was treated like a beast rere EE 4 La | en 
. Ee he Mata] i Wher tebe po y < Foe sued bo i 
of burden, a tool, an object that oie gr isis | Aa "ee 
os lbia Free mie WE TR 
belonged to his master. He was FRETS Fon ovens i Tn a 2550 ~~ Ln 
reputed to be lazy, thieving, lacking “=== 
moral judgment and constantly 
jeopardizing his owner's property. SEE a men 
Tiectis Gu etind 20 Shenst 2008 — frme 3   
EDUCATION 
  
Pacacsion de Prud Bervmge su 
Le 
doney de sen dpa, at deat wie Prd ean 
i snlsenge  vigDe B00 It eunaiey §f 
* nso seibary sefionde  I'Bdiveicn gor wre £ horas 
ntti Jor 8 Ne de | to de eung damh Ios 
Sods dae 2s sige 
Fiemise dessins, Se bint 
  
  
  
KOICHIRQ MATSUURA : 
"Le Conseil des ministres si 
examine un rapport sur le kreol . 
Sopdhe Fetben 
Steven Gheegadoo compte présenter un document de politique générale For insmr gn & 
       
   
  
 
yon de funy”. 4 bein dna quan sales oi 
Hparan, a fo Semaiis fe es ieinations.” 
die be pas NY 
 
fd Pom aldkm 
wie, Kiki 
 
 
 
Er bes Je or Xl 4 rede is 
Sau & 
 
    
  
 
  
  
 
us .  d 
focus Today, however, in the islands SR | I = - et 4 . ee 
- PTA ft Domai | 9) = a, od f th i d 0 | one nme aquks. “enisce M2 Pont Perenger y £0 i Rtn nS, me ose. 
Of (ne inalan ycean, siaves are Er: ee LT hm. steetarteDns a ems eb oe 
§ H H fu snemcoghiec | Fl aan hs . amady toe lor Eds DONE re 
2 Increasingly recognized as the Pop cs ees parm pen pean Ba Rn 2 Chl 3, Tit, ids pour pd Joes rns ped » Find i 
Segre duebmopea sell | © Seivey son Gi board dibs he csr Or gam Rorsracomewrsron Pe " uted ame Be Con 6k my 
architects of a new culture and EEE, Sn Ek re Eas SRESEELE 
H epoca diesen std scan sce “ 
society. 2a ir sian Nox dain Al i ie Sai 
Article in Express, 
Mauritian 
newspaper, February 
20, 2004 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
ecked by captivity and the long 
Y voyage, slaves deported to the 
islands in the Indian Ocean between 
the 17" and 19 centuries were victims of racism, 
de-socialized, de-cultured, almost dehumanized. 
They were a sprinkling of individuals in exile, 
torn from their families and peer groups, cut off 
from their myths, symbols and everything else 
that anchored their reason for being. No lineage, 
no name, no genealogy. Slaves were barred from 
forming groups, and often could not understand 
each other: Makuas, Yaos, “Inhambanes,” Makondé, 
Betsimisaraka, Sakalava, Merina, Betsileo and 
other ethnic groups from Africa and Madagascar, 
Indians, Malaysians and Indonesians, spoke different 
languages and belonged to different traditions. 
Hunters, stock breeders, farmers, from matrilineal, 
patrilineal, polygamous, monogamous, gerontocratic 
or monocratic societies, they had little in common. 
Nonetheless, for the sake of survival, they managed 
to adapt to inhuman living conditions in a hostile 
universe and to leave traces of their existence for 
posterity. 
Out of 63,447 slaves counted in 1826 on Bourbon 
Island (now Reunion Island), 79.2% were farmers 
(between 1680 and 1810, agriculture in the islands 
of the Indian Ocean was 90% dependent on slave 
labour); 16% servants; 2.9 manual workers, 0.9% 
sailors, 0.6% day labourers and 0.4% fishermen. 
In the French colony, as in the British colony of 
 
£ UNESCO 
Mauritius, the slave was the equivalent of a tool, 
nicknamed “pickaxe” even in official documents, 
and was often the beast of burden of choice. In 
Madagascar, a base for the slave trade towards 
the sugar colonies, thousands were assigned tu 
“portage”. 
Nothing permitted the immense majority of 
these oppressed people to develop creativity or 
specific professional skills. Yet “slaves with talent” 
- what they called carpenters, cabinetmakers, 
and stone masons at the time - produced genuine 
masterpieces, including roads, sugar factories, 
churches, and East India Company buildings. Gol 
Castle in Saint-Louis and the Desbassays house 
(Reunion), what is now the history museum in 
Mahébourg and the port of Saint-Louis (Mauritius) 
are only a few examples of heritage they left 
behind. And they made discoveries, such as the 
one by Edmond Albius (see box p. 21), which 
revolutionized agriculture and made the island the 
top producer of vanilla in the world. 
It has often been said that slaves did nothing 
more than obey the orders of the boss or overseer. 
Is that any reason to deny their contribution to the 
development of the colonies and the construction 
of the island societies in the Indian Ocean? Their 
traces can be seen in areas as diverse as territorial 
planning, social structures, economy and culture. 
In a life story collected by Eve Prosper, historian 
from Reunion, an elder more than 70 years old says:

## [Page 43](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=43) 0

### 138457: Creole miracle

“The most wonderful lesson our slave ancestors 
left us is the knowledge of how to work with 
perseverance, even in a hostile climate, and to get 
good results.” Research done on the heritage left by 
former slaves, notably oral tradition, show that these 
men’s share was crucial to the evolution of Indian 
Ocean societies. It must be pointed out that they 
numbered 140,000 in 1830, which amounted to 70% 
of the total population of Mauritius, Bourbon Island 
and the Seychelles. 
While it is true that slaves were more likely to 
carry out than to conceive the creation of material 
heritage, it is just as true that they left us an 
authentic intangible heritage. They succeeded in 
something that no one, neither masters nor colonial 
authorities, had foreseen. In laying the foundation 
of a new society which today has its own cultural 
specificities, its language, spirituality and esthetics, 
they accomplished a true miracle: the “Creole 
miracle”. 
The miracle is visible everywhere and primarily 
in the Creole language. It was made up by slaves 
and masters spoke it too. Today it is part of the 
cultural heritage of all Indian Ocean islands. Despite 
attempts in the 1960s to eradicate it from Reunion, it 
resisted and finally was given the status of regional 
language, which the political authorities long denied 
it. In Mauritius, Creole is spoken by everyone, and 
is currently being introduced experimentally as the 
language for primary education. In the Seychelles, 
Creole became the official language after the 
country’s independence. 
Fort Saint-Louis in 
Port-Louis 
    
ARS =e 
a x 
© 
Se
rr
ai
ll
ie
r/
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Edmond Klbius: 
the slave child and the 
vanilla pon 
For a long time, botanist 
Ferreo! Beaumont Bellier 
had been searching in vain 
for a way to poliinate vanilla 
artificiaily. Then a 12-year 
old kid showed him what 
he had discovered how to 
do: turn a vanilla flower into 
a pod. 
The kid was his slave. His 
name was Edmond. His 
mother had died when he 
was born. He had grown up 
in his master's fruit garden 
and learned from him to 
icve plants. 
This was in 1841, on 
Bourbon island {Reunion 
island). Befcre the botanists 
in the museum of natural 
history in Paris and the local 
scientisis, the child prodigy 
had identitied the male 
and femaie organs in the 
same flower, and devised 
a method of artificial 
pollination that soon made 
the island the leading 
producer of vanifia in the 
world. 
Except in Mexico, where it 
is fertilized bv a local bee 
{the melipone), vanilla has 
10 be pollinated by human 
hand. 
Mort 
  
ves tle rs oie smerb a te 
Albius: Lithograph 
partrait, 1863. 
Edrnond’s method spread 
quickly throughout the 
colony. The langcwner from 
the small town of Sainte- 
Suzanne was happy to lend 
nis young slave ta other 
planters in the colony so he 
could teach them how to 
cultivate vanilla. 
Desnite his ingenuity, 
cdmond, who was given the 
name Albius in 1848 when 
siavery was abolished, 
received no reward from 
his master or the colony's 
authorities. He diad in 
poverty oi August 8, 1880, 
at the Sainie-Suzanne 
cornmunity hospital. 
S.F 
Cveole A 
Moring, a martiai art 
still practiced today in 
Madagascar (Moraingy), 
the Comores {Mrengué), 
Mayotte, Reunion Island 
and Africa, was brought 
to the islands by slaves 
or recruits from Africa 
and Madgascar. Close 
to Brazilian Capoeira 
{see p. 4}, Moring 
helped slaves redefine 
their lives and resist 
the cultural oppression 
of colonization. The 
surviving forms of this 
ancestral rite remind us of 
the extraordinary culturai 
resources developed 
by slaves in the Creole 
islands of the Indian 
Ocean. 
S.F.   
© 
Bi
bl
io
th
eq
ue
 
dé
pa
rt
em
en
ta
le
 
de
 
la 
Ré
un
io
n,
 
Sa
in
t-
De
ni
s 
focus 
4% 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 44](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=44) 0

### 138458: Africa-Americas: return trip

### 138457: Creole miracle

AFRICA- 
P» Food, handicrafts, medicine, tales and legends 
are all components of the rich legacy of the slaves, 
and all part of the Creole miracle. Particularly 
music: sega and maloya, very popular with young 
people, typical of the islands in the Indian Ocean, 
perpetuate the memory of the ancestors on public 
and private radio (see box p. 7) 
Of course, not all Indian Ocean island inhabitants 
lay claim to the history of slavery as their own. 
As a consequence of racism, undoubtedly, certain 
descendants of slaves from Africa or Madagascar 
do not recognize themselves as such, or try to 
conceal the fact, forgetting that “A people that 
has no memory has no future,” in the words of 
Aimé Césaire, poet from Martinique. Yet in recent 
decades, a genuine cultural revolution is taking 
place in the region, and more and more the 
  
people are embracing their history. February 2 and 
December 20 are holidays in Mauritius and Reunion, 
commemorating their abolition of slavery in 1835 
and 1848 respectively. 
Finally, let us say that the miracle has taken place 
mainly at the level of Creole identity, making the 
concept of “residential identity” the keystone of 
Creole societies in the Indian Ocean. While Africa 
and Madagascar remain the cultural references for 
much of the population, the country we live in is 
our real homeland. 
Sudel Fuma, 
University of Reunion   © 
Ca
ro
li
ne
 
P
e
n
n
/
P
a
n
o
s
 
Pi
ct
ur
es
, 
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
1. The different ethnic groups from 
the Inhambanne (Mozambique) region were phenomena of physical or spiritual 
all given that geographic label on Bourbon return to the ancestral homeland 
Island (Reunion). Th 0 began even before the end of 
slavery. Often the same ship that transported 
human cargo to the New World returned to the 
African coast with other people aboard, who 
carried with them new knowledge, ideas and 
practices. The latter nonetheless seemed familiar to 
local populations. 
For nearly four hundred years, the Atlantic 
shipping route in both directions allowed for 
exchanges that gave birth on both sides of the 
ocean to hybrid cross-breed cultures, which remain 
fundamentally African. There is no better illustration 
of the movement of Africans and their descendants 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 45](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=45) 0

### 138458: Africa-Americas: return trip

AMERICAS: RETURN TRIP 
A subject often discussed, albeit only recently, is what American culture owes to African slaves. Much 
less talked about is what Africa awes to its diaspora. Certain cultural values, customs and social 
practices the slaves took with them to the American continent returned to Africa, generally in modified 
but recognizable form. 
in the Atlantic world (the European, American and 
African coasts) than the experience of black sailors. 
They acquired valuable knowledge of navigation 
and a number of them went into trade, accumulating 
enough capital to buy their freedom. 
Such exchanges were undoubtedly the most 
fruitful between Bahia, in Brazil, and the Benin Gulf. 
According to certain estimates, nearly two million 
people crossed the ocean aboard slave ships in 250 
years. During this period, Brazilians of all origins 
and conditions - white slavers, mulattos, free men 
and slaves - settled in places ranging from the cape 
of Sao Paulo to the mouth of the Niger River. Port 
cities such as Agoue, Aneho, Ouidah, Cotonou, 
Porto-Novo, Badagri and Laos were marked by the 
Meeting of 
African-American 
descendants of 
staves in Benin 
return of freed slaves of Brazilian origin, called 
Aguda or Amaro. 
The experience acquired during their years of 
captivity and the knowledge of European languages 
and customs were extremely useful to those who 3 
decided to try their luck on the African coast as f 6OUS 
traders, craftsmen, farmers or hired help. Many 
started shops; others made their fortune in the slave 
trade. Masons, foremen, carpenters, cabinetmakers, 
goldsmiths and barber-surgeons brought new know- 
how to the region. A novel architectural style was 
created, using previously unknown methods and 
unusual materials. Converted to Catholicism, these 
retornados brought with them religious practices 
that continue today, such as the extravagant feast- 
days in honor of the Lord of Bonfim, identical to 
those in Bahia. 
Following the abolitions of slavery, freed 
slaves from Brazil, Cuba, the West Indies and 
the United States settle on the Slave Coast and 
inland, reinforcing and diversifying the American 
influences. Ghana, Liberia and Sierra Leone thus 
became important reception centres for retornados 
and people freed by British forces fighting the illicit 
slave trade. Many of them contributed to developing 
the cultivation of oil-yielding plants, which became 
the region’s principal economic activity to replace 
the slave trade. 
Starting in the 19th century, Afro-American 
churches in the United States began to send aid and 
missionaries to the African coast and sometimes 
even inside the African continent. Black missionaries 
converted and brought Western-style schooling to 
some of the population, at the same time promoting 
American university education for Africans and the 
founding of vocational schools in several African 
regions. Mostly they intensified the exchange of 
ideas between Africans and Americans. 
Pan-African conferences in the first half of the 
20th century, numbering an overwhelming majority 
of representatives from the US and the Caribbean, 
played a major role, in spite of limited African 
participation, in the birth of a supranational and 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 46](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=46) 0

### 138458: Africa-Americas: return trip

© 
K
i
m
 
L
u
d
b
r
o
o
k
/
E
P
A
/
S
i
p
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Celebrations on 
May 25, 2003, in 
Johannesburg 
{South Africa) of the 
48th anniversary 
Organization of 
African Unity and the 
birth of the African 
Union   
intercontinental identity, as well as an alliance “axe”, jazz, soul, reggae and hip-hop, all musical 
against racial and colonialist dominance. Following genres of African origin, came/returned to Africa 
World War II, many national liberation movements and are now enjoying undeniable success all over 
the continent. Dance and theatre have also absorbed 
North-American, Cuban and Brazilian elements. A 
derivative of the “bumba-meu-boi”, for example, a 
picked up the ideas that came out of the conferences 
to justify their struggle. In the long term, pan- 
Africanism provided a solid ideological base for the 
leaders pushing for modern policies in Africa, some sort of popular Brazilian opera, of European, Indian 
and African origin, has been “adopted” by Nigeria 
under the name of “boi” (ox in Portuguese) and as 
“burrinha” (female donkey) in Benin. 
of whom became the principal actors in the new 
international relations that emerged as countries 
became independent. Pan-Africanism also served as 
the basis for founding the Organization of African 
Unity (OAU), now the African Union (AU). 
During the 20th century, economic exchanges 
between the two continents deteriorated, but 
cultural exchanges, particularly in music and the 
performing arts, did not diminish. North-American 
music noticeably affected the birth of urban identity 
in South Africa. On the western coast, the musical 
dialogue is even older. Retornados from Cuba 
and the West Indies, as well as British soldiers 
recruited in the Caribbean, introduced syncretic 
musical styles in the region’s urban areas. Those 
returning from Brazil put an indelible mark on 
urban music in Nigeria and Benin. The introduction 
of record-players and records facilitated extensive 
dissemination of music from the other side of the 
Atlantic. Recordings by the famous groups Septeto 
Habanero and Trio Matamoros beat all the audience 
records in the first half of the 20th century. 
Instruments of mixed origin like the maracas, 
congas and bongos, which arrived in Africa in the 
1950s, led to the development of an impressive 
style of rumba, characteristic of today’s Democratic 
Republic of Congo. The rumba, calypso, Bahia’s 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
Carlos Liberato de Sousa, 
of the Federal University of Sergipe, 
Brazil 
Musical instyuments 
bonges —- a pair of small single- 
headed drums made from 
hollowed tree-trunks, created 
in Cuba around 1900. Always 
played with bare hands using 
pressure to produce varying 
sounds and pitches, the two 
drums are of varying sizes, 
with the heads made of nailed 
membrane or plastic material. 
congas - used either singly or 
as a pair, these long, narrow, 
barrei-shaped drums are made 
out of wood or fibreglass, the 
head being of thick vellum. 
An integral element of Latin 
American dance bands in the 
1930s, they are played with 
the fingers, the hand pressure 
providing a variety of sounds 
and pitches. 
maracas - Of pre-Columbian 
Indian origin, the word mbaracé 
denotes a gourd containing dry 
seeds. Widely used in dance 
bands in Colombia, Venezuela 
and Brazil, this pair of rattles 
with wooden handles provides 
rhythm and has been adopted 
everywhere else by pop bands 
and percussion ensembles. 
Sources: The Oxford Companion 
to Music; New Grove Dictionary of 
Music and Musicians.

## [Page 47](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=47) 0

### IGNORE

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
a
s
m
i
n
a
 
Su
po
va
 


### 138463: 2004: International Year for the Commemoration of the Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition

  
2004. 
NN 
won 
INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 
STRUGGLE AGAINST SLAVERY AND ITS ABOLITION 
Launching of the 
International Year in 
Cape Coast (Ghana) 
1. The message of 
UNESCO's Director- 
General is available 
in its entirety at: 
WWW.unesco.org/dg 
  
roclaimed International Year for the 
Commemoration of the Struggle against 
Slavery and its Abolition by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, 2004 marks the 
bicentenary of the first independent black state, 
Haiti, symbol of uprising and resistance by slaves.. 
“By institutionalizing memory, 
resisting the onset of oblivion, 
recalling the memory of a tragedy that for long 
years remained hidden or unrecognized, and 
by assigning it its proper place in the human 
conscience, we respond to our duty to remember,” 
said the Director-General of UNESCO, Koichiro 
Matsuura, in his message for the occasion. 
The year, devoted to a tragedy recognized 
as a “crime against humanity” in 2001 at the 
Durban World Conference against Racism, Racial 
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, 
has helped humanity accomplish its duty of 
remembrance as well as promote the fight against all 
forms of slavery and racism in the world today. 
In the framework of the Year, UNESCO prepared 
a series of activities in cooperation with Member 
States, National Commissions, governmental and 
non-governmental organizations, UNESCO Clubs, 
the international scientific community, Nobel Prize 
winners, and UNESCO's Artists for Peace and 
Goodwill Ambassadors. 
Several events will mark the closing of the 
ul 5 A Ltn? d 
International Year and the celebration of 
the International Day for the Abolition of 
Slavery on December 2. 
b A traveling exhibition entitled “Lest 
We Forget: the Triumph over Slavery,” 
created by the Schomburg Center 
in New York in collaboration with 
UNESCO’s project “The Slave Route,” 
will be inaugurated at UNESCO. The 
show, which has already traveled to 
several countries, traces the economic impact of 
the slave trade and the labour of African slaves 
on American and European development, and the 
trade’s disastrous effects on economic, political and 
social life in Africa. It highlights its contributions 
to language, religion, music and institutions on all 
three continents. 
) The presentation of the Toussaint Louverture prize, 
named after the freed slave who fought for the 
independence of Haiti; it is awarded in recognition 
of contributions to the struggle against domination, 
racism and intolerance. Laureates are the well- 
known poet from Martinique Aimé Césaire, bard of 
“Négritude,” and Abdias do Nascimento, founder of 
the Teatro Experimental do Negro, the first Afro- 
Brazilian association to combine the fight against 
discrimination with the issue of rehabilitation of 
African culture as a fundamental asset of Brazilian 
focus 
47 
society._ _ 
» A special concert by Gilberto Gil, UNESCO 
Goodwill Ambassador and Brazilian Minister of 
Culture. 
» An international colloquium on “Issues of 
Memory: Coming to Terms with the Slave Trade 
and Slavery” explores interactions between 
different approaches to memory, such as revisionist 
historiography, the ethics of responsibility, and 
identity-based mobilisation for the reconfiguration of 
collective memory. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 48](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=48) 0

### 138461: Studying slavery in schools

Jer and Intangible tlexitage 
The first proclamation of 
masterpieces of oral and 
intangible heritage of humanity 
was made in 2001. Every 
two years, UNESCO selects 
outstanding examples of 
practices, representations, 
expressions, knowledge and skills 
that communities recognize as 
The Carnival of Barranquilla 
{Colombia) - “a veritable melting- 
pot of indigenous, African and 
European cultural heritages.... 
aspects that, in many cases, died 
cut in the very areas where they 
originated or evolved.” 
The Maroon Heritage of 
Moore Town (Jamaica) — «Moore 
Town is home to the descendants 
of independent communities of 
former runaway slaves known 
as Maroons...hailing from West 
and Central African regions with 
diverse languages and cultura 
La Tumba Francesa, Music practices.” 
focus 
part of their cultural heritage. 
A certain number of these 
masterpieces are linked to the 
slave trade. 
The Garifuna Language, 
Dance and Music (Belize) 
- “The Garifuna, a population 
of mixed origin, incorporating 
elements of the culture of 
indigenous Caribbean groups 
and populations of African 
origin...The melodies bring 
together African and Amerindian 
elements.” 
Jv oxy AMA 
movida evitage 
A dozen sites associated with the 
slave trade and slaves’ struggle 
for freedom have been inscribed 
on the World Heritage List. 
In Africa, the Island of Gorée 
(Senegal), the Ruins of Kilwa 
Kisiwani and Songo Mnara as 
well as Stone Town of Zanzibar 
{United Republic of Tanzania), the 
Forts and Castles of Volta (Ghana) 
and James Island (Gambia) are 
sites that commemorate the 
embarkation of slaves towards 
the New World. 
Others, like the Royal Palaces 
of Abomey in Benin, testify to 
the role African feudal systems 
played in supplying the siave 
trade. 
A variety of significant places 
in the history of slavery in the 
Americas and the French West 
indies are also listed as World 
Heritage: the Historic Centres 
of Salvador de Bahia {the New 
World's first slave market), 
lyri Preto, Olinda, Sao Luis, 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
of the Oriente Brotherhood 
(Cuba) —- “an eighteenth-century 
fusion of music from Dahomey in 
West Africa and traditional French 
dances....brought to Cuba by 
Haitian slaves.” 
The Cultural Space of the 
Brotherhood of the Holy Spirit 
of the Congos of Villa Melia 
(Dominican Republic) - “The 
Brotherhood was founded in the 
16th century by African slaves 
and people of mixed origin.” 
Diamantina and the Sanctuary 
of Bom Jesus do Congonhas 
(Brazil); Brimstone Hill Fortress 
National Park on the little island 
of Saint Kitts and Nevis in the 
Caribbean; the Fortifications on 
the Caribbean Side of Panama: 
Portobello-San Lorenzo and 
the Historic District of Panama; 
Old Havana, San Pedro de la 
Roca Castle and the first coffee 
plantations in south-east Cuba; 
and the Historic Inner City of 
Paramaribo (Suriname). 
In Haiti, the Palace of Sans Souci, 
the buildings of Ramiers, and the 
Citadel! are the first monuments 
built by slaves after they had 
fought for and won their freedom. 
\ For more information on 
sites: htip://whc.unesco. 
org/nwhc.fr/pages/doc/ 
mainfs.htm 
  
The Carnival of Barranquilla 
(Colombia) is one of the 
masterpieces of oral and 
intangible heritage of humanity 
Also, just published 
mn Fv ench: 
LES ROUTES DE L'ESCLAVAGE : 
HISTOIRE D'UN TRES GRAND 
« DERANGEMENT », 
by Claude Fauque and 
Marie-Josée Thiel, 
Hermé editions {Paris}, 2004, 192 pp. 
(€35). 
From the start of the slave trade to 
abolition, the book retraces the history 
and consequences of the “peculiar 
institution” of slavery. Considering 
slavery as a precursor of globalization, 
the authors examine the economic 
reasons for the slave trade, but also 
the social life and living conditions of 
slaves. The abundant illustrations, many 
previously unpublished, are drawn from 
UNESCO archives. 
©
 
Mi
ch
el
 
Ra
va
ss
ar
d/
UN
ES
CO

## [Page 49](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=49) 0

### IGNORE

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
J
e
a
n
 
O'
Su
ll
iv
an
 
STUDYING SLAEY . — 
  
NESCO’s entire ASPnet, or 
Associated Schools Project 
Network (7,600 institutions 
in 175 countries), was mobilized in 2004 
in order to introduce the issue of slavery 
in school curricula. Network members 
produced innovative educational 
resource material and held workshops, 
all in the cause of improving education 
about the causes and consequences of 
slavery. These activities are part of the 
“Breaking the Silence” Project, launched 
by UNESCO in 1998. 
3 For more 
information on 
Breaking the 
Silence: www. 
unesco.org/ 
education/asp 
Among publications, a resource 
booklet Levons le Voile pour un futur 
meilleur (Banishing Shadows for a 
Better Future) was produced and 
illustrated by Haitian ASPnet students. 
In the trilogy “Slave Voices,” “Slave 
Voyages,” and “Slave Visions,” the final 
volume is in preparation, focusing on 
the aspirations of the enslaved for a 
new society following the abolition of 
slavery. An initiative to produce multi- 
media educational material on places 
of memory related to the slave trade 
is also underway. Finally, the schools 
network in the United States has begun 
production of a “Memory Trunk” of slave 
trade artifacts. 
Following a series of international 
meetings on teaching about the causes 
and consequences of the slave trade, 
an International Youth Forum was 
held November 12-16 in Trinidad and 
Tobago. Attended by students, teachers 
and experts from over 20 countries in 
Pupils from the Abomey- 
Calvi school in Bénin, 
which is a member of 
the Associated Schools 
Project Network ASPnet 
three regions, it finalized “The Race 
against Racism,” an international schools 
campaign against racism and modern 
forms of slavery to be launched in early 
2005. 
On 21 March 2005, International 
Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination, ASPnet schools will be 
invited to join this campaign by carrying 
out a series of concrete anti-racism 
activities within the school and the 
community. 
Jean O’Sullivan 
UNESCO 
focus 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 50](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=50) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
> 1 Gates, 
2 | head of the 
transnational computer 
software firm Microsoft, 
and UNESCO Director- 
General Koichiro 
Matsuura signed an 
COMBA 
© Niamh Burke/UNESCO 
“We are very honoured 
to work with UNESCO in 
this important initiative,” 
Gates said. “Our shared 
aim is to help remove 
Microsoft 
TING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE 
 
obstacles to joining the 
digital world and enable 
people everywhere to 
grasp the full potential 
of technology through 
educational programmes 
and new skills, 
increasing access to it 
for communities and 
preserving cultural and 
linguistic diversity.” 
Matsuura welcomed the 
link-up with Microsoft. 
“Efficient use of ICT can 
play a big role in giving 
people the means to build 
sustainable development, 
which involves support 
for education and 
learning,” he said. 
The agreement includes 
plans to set up knowledge 
and Internet-based skills 
communities leading 
to pooling of intellectual 
resources across 
geographical borders and 
stresses the need to train 
teachers to incorporate 
ICT into the classroom. 
open-ended cooperation 
agreement on November 
  
weir TECHNOLOGY FOR TEACHERS 
technology (ICT) as 
part of the UN policy of 
international cooperation 
to narrow the world’s 
“digital divide.” 
Microsoft and UNESCO 
will devise projects and 
exchange experiences in 
the firm’s enormous 
experience in training 
teachers in the use of 
technology, in addition 
to its renowned support 
for teachers striving 
to include technology 
in their courses. 
Through its programme 
“Intel@Teach to the 
Future,” the company 
has already trained two 
million teachers from 
across the world. “The 
challenge is to find the 
best use of technology 
for improving the 
quality of teaching 
and learning, while 
introducing a high 
degree of flexibility to 
Corporation, 
nt el the world’s 
leading manufacturer 
respond to regional 
needs,” declared Wendy 
Hawkins, Intel director 
of education. 
On the basis of the 
agreement, UNESO and 
Intel will work together 
jointly on a multi-partite 
initiative aimed at 
establishing norms for 
improving the quality 
of teacher training 
programmes through 
ITC. These norms 
will be drawn from 
theoretical knowledge 
and practical skills in 
the field. 
of electronic 
microprocessors and 
a major producer of 
computer, network and 
communication devices, 
signed with UNESCO 
on November 9, 2004, a 
cooperation agreement 
aimed at developing a 
model curriculum or 
syllabus to improve 
the use of information 
and communications 
technology (ICT) in 
classrooms worldwide. 
UNESCO chose to 
work with Intel on 
this project because of 
areas such as education 
and learning, expanding 
linguistic diversity, the 
exchange of information 
and software applications 
and community access to 
technology. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 51](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=51) 0

### IGNORE

Ambassadors and artists 
 
  
“UNESCO'S FAMILY OF SUPPORTERS GROWS 
A more prominent figures have 
J N 0 agreed to help UNESCO 
campaign for its ideals and aims - Brazilian 
activist Maria Lourdes Egydio Villela (Mild 
Villela) and Croatian actor Relja Basic. 
Villela was appointed in Brasilia on 
10 November as a UNESCO goodwill 
ambassador for inclusive education “in 
recognition of her outstanding commitment 
to education and her attachment to the 
ideals and aims of UNESCO.” 
She is well known in Brazil for her work 
with voluntary and youth movements. In 
1994 she founded Despertar (Wake Up), a 
Croatian actor Relja Basic was 
named a UNESCO artist for peace 
on 6 November in recognition 
of his “outstanding career 
achievements in the performing 
arts and his lifelong contribution 
to film and theatre.” 
He has appeared in more than 
3,000 plays and about 120 films 
and TV series in Croatia and 
elsewhere. He was a member 
of the Croatian National Theatre 
from 1956 to 1968, and in 1974 
founded Zagreb’s “Visiting Theatre” (Teatar 
 © 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
Br
az
il
 
   
u gostima), which he ran until he retired 
last February at the age of 74. The theatre 
has performed throughout the former 
community association providing technical 
and vocational courses for teenagers as 
  
well as medical and psychological help. It 
also teaches adults skills so they can earn 
a living, directly benefiting about 7,000 
people every year. 
She currently heads Faca Parte (Be Part 
of It), an NGO that encourages voluntary 
work, especially among young people, 
to help schools throughout the country. 
As a goodwill ambassador, she will defend 
the right to education for people with 
disabilities. 
Yugoslavia and about 50 times in other 
countries. 
As an artist for peace, BaSic said he 
would promote intercultural dialogue, 
especially among young people in south- 
eastern Europe. 
© 
Mi
ch
el
 
R
a
v
a
s
s
a
r
d
/
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
Rotary International 
PROMOTING PEACE 
in their joint letter. “Working 
with UNESCO, Rotary clubs 
can increase their impact 
by launching projects that 
promote peace in communities 
 
gS NESCO 
| / \ Director- 
General Koichiro 
Matsuura and the 
president of Rotary 
international organisation of 
business and professional leaders 
that does humanitarian work and 
strives for peace in the world. 
It is active in 166 countries and 
  
International, comprises 31,000 clubs and everywhere.” 
Jonathan nearly 1.5 million members. It Rotary has spearheaded a 
Majiyagbe, signed 
a memorandum on October 
11 to encourage the governors 
of various Rotary districts 
to work with UNESCO 
national commissions to 
promote worldwide peace and 
understanding. 
Rotary, which was founded 
in Chicago in 1905, is an 
will celebrate its centenary next 
year in Chicago. 
“UNESCO and Rotary 
International share the goal 
of setting up projects and 
programmes with other 
government, non-government 
and civic organisations to 
help build peace worldwide,” 
said Matsuura and Majiyagbe 
major campaign against infantile 
paralysis (polio) and is currently 
involved in a big way in the fight 
against AIDS. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 52](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=52) 0

### 138462: ICT time in Africa

  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
 

## [Page 53](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=53) 0

### 138462: ICT time in Africa

 
 
 
 
 
 
MUEJLRJA LIED 
 

## [Page 54](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=54) 0

### 138462: ICT time in Africa

## [Page 55](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=55) 0

### 138462: ICT time in Africa

 

## [Page 56](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=56) 0

### IGNORE

books 
SILK, SCENTS AND SPICE 
Retracing the World's Great Trade Routes 
    
name, Silk, Scents and Spice tells the 
fascinating story of the silk, scent and 
spice trade routes. At once a fascinating 
history and travelogue, this book is filled 
with astonishing colour photographs, 
illustrating the author’s journeys along 
routes once traced by great trade caravans 
and vessels. Besides exotic merchandise 
these routes also carried new ideas, 
technologies and religions across vast 
distances, shaping the history of humanity. 
The oldest route was the Incense Trail, 
which linked the frankincense-producing 
regions of Arabia with the empires of 
antiquity. The Silk Road was the longest 
of the routes, stretching across mountains, 
desert and the steppes of Central Asia, 
joining the markets of China with those 
of Europe and the Middle East. The Spice 
Route connected the great civilizations 
of Europe, India and the Orient for over 
2,000 years. Arab dhows, Chinese junks 
and Spanish galleons would sail this route 
laden with precious spices from South-East 
Asia and the treasures of the Orient. Their 
trade of these routes bred international 
rivalries and conquests, and the search for 
these riches impelled Columbus to cross the 
Atlantic and Magellan to circumnavigate 
the globe. 
nspired by the DVD of the same 
  
Written by John Lawton 
Photographed by Nik Wheeler, 
Tor Eigeland and Bill Lyons 
128 pp., 29x 24,7 cm 
2004, 92-3-103927-X 
€19.80 
UNESCO Publishing/ECONOMICA 
Memory of Peoples series 
   
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 57](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=57) 0

### IGNORE

  
MEDITERRANEAN BASIN 
WATER ATLAS 
The synthetic maps presented in this 
book offer a series of panoramic views 
accompanied by short commentaries 
on the geography of the Mediterranean 
Basin. They show the extreme 
diversity of natural water resources, 
the specific needs of Mediterranean 
countries, and the impacts of water 
usage on the environment. This 
publication will satisfy the demands 
of the general public and teachers for 
well-documented and synthetic maps, 
presented in a user-friendly format 
suitable for educational purposes. 
By Jean Margat 
46 pp., 27 x 21 cm 
2004, ISBN 92-3-103963-6 
€15.00 
UNESCO Publishing/Blue Plan/Commission 
for the Geological Map of the World (Paris) 
Earth Sciences series 
  
MULTIGRADE SCHOOLS: 
IMPROVING ACCESS IN RURAL 
AFRICA? 
This volume presents an overview of 
the role of multigrade and one-teacher 
classes in the history of primary 
schooling, noting the factors that 
determine their success or failure. It 
offers educational planners a coherent, 
flexible and realistic set of measures 
for increasing provision in rural areas, 
particularly in the French-speaking 
countries of sub-Saharan Africa. 
By Etienne Brunswic and Jean Valérien 
124 pp., 21 x 135 cm 
2004, ISBN 92-803-1242-1 
€12.20 
UNESCO-IIEP 
Fundamentals of Educational Planning series 
  
THE CHALLENGE OF 
INDIGENOUS EDUCATION: 
PRACTICE AND 
PERSPECTIVES 
Published in the framework of 
the United Nations International 
Decade of the World’s 
Indigenous People (1994- 
2004), this book offers insights 
for education policy makers, 
researchers and all those 
concerned with educational 
provision for indigenous 
peoples. 
Part I reflects upon the 
challenges and obstacles facing 
indigenous education, the 
situation of indigenous peoples 
with regard to education, 
aspects of the political and 
legal context, and prospects 
for indigenous education. It 
also summarizes the general 
objectives of indigenous 
education. Part II develops a set 
of criteria for the identification 
of successful examples of 
quality education for indigenous 
peoples, illustrated by some 
relevant experiences. 
Part III presents some successful 
case studies in education for 
indigenous peoples. 
By Linda King and Sabine Schielmann 
284 pp., 24x 155cm 
2004, ISBN 92-3-103934-2 
€19.80 
UNESCO Publishing 
Education on the Move series 
  
  
www.unesco.org/publishing 
  
  
CULTURAL DIVERSITY 
AND INDIGENQUS PEOPLES 
Oral, written expressions and 
new technologies 
This unique CD-ROM, aimed at promoting 
the Convention on Cultural Diversity, 
contains the full text of the Convention and 
documentation related to the subject. It 
offers a rare opportunity to appreciate the 
languages of indigenous peoples, many of 
which are under threat. Included are more 
than 130 texts, photographs, paintings, film 
extracts, video sequences and files presented 
in languages spoken by different indigenous 
peoples. These are combined with links to 
websites and portals developed by different 
institutions and indigenous organizations 
throughout the world. 
Users will discover over 20 hours of 
navigation (the equivalent of a fascinating 
1,000-page, multi-language publication) 
including a rich variety of essays, literature, 
poetry, photography, cinema, paintings and 
songs. All texts are translated into English, 
with additional texts in French and Spanish, 
as well as oral examples of 30 indigenous 
languages. Also included are feature film 
extracts portraying aspects of contemporary 
life in indigenous communities. In 
addition, the CD-ROM presents different 
joint-activities and partnerships carried 
out by indigenous peoples, museums and 
researchers, making use of all available 
media to transmit the knowledge of 
indigenous communities. 
Editorial Team: 
Division of Cultural Policies and Intercultural Dialogue 
{UNESCO), Barbara Glowczewski {Laboratoire 
d'Anthropologie Sociale, CNRS, France), Laurence 
Pourchez (MNHN, CNRS, France), Joélle Rostkowski 
(EHESS and UNESCO Consultant, France) and John 
Stanton (Berndt Museum of Anthropology, University 
of Western Australia). 
Conception, design, graphics and development: 
Hervé Pourchez (for Vidéosolutions) 
PC: Windows 98 SE or later 
2004, ISBN 92-3-103939-3 
€49.00 
UNESCO Publishing 
  UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 58](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=58) 0

### IGNORE

  
contacts 
— 
IH 
United Nations 
 
 
® 
6 
» 
¢ 
e
0
0
9
 
s
s
s
 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy - 
75352 Paris 07 SP, 
France 
Tel. +33 14568 1000 - 
Internet: 
WWW.UNEesco.org   
Documentation Centres 
Archives (BSS/AM) 
T (33-1) 45 68 19 50/55 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 17 
E-mail: archives@unesco.org 
Coastal Areas and Small Islands 
(33-1) 45 68 39 34 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 08 
E-mail: ¢.nollet@unesco.org 
Communication 
(33-1) 45 68 42 67 
Fax: {33-1} 45 68 55 82 
E-mail: nnguyen-van@unesco.org 
Culture 
T (33-1) 45 68 43 43 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 74 
E-mail: culture.doc@unesco.org 
Education 
a (33-1) 45 68 10 29 
Fax: {33-1} 45 68 56 24 
E-mail: sdi@unesco.org 
Information et Informatics 
a (33-1) 45 68 43 99 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 82 
E-mail: g.mensah@unesco.org 
Information about UNESCO 
‘T (33-1) 01 45 68 16 81 
Fax: {33-1} 45 68 56 57 
E-mail: p.morel-vasquez@unesco.org 
Library 
a (33-1) 45 68 03 56 
Fax: {33-1} 45 68 56 98 
E-mail: library@unesco,org 
MAB - Man and the Biosphere 
T (33-1) 45 68 40.59 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 04 
E-mail: mab@unesco.org 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004 
Natural Sciences 
a (33-1) 45 68 40 17 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 23 
E-mail: p.murugaiyan@unesco.org 
Oceanography 
B (33-1) 45 68 39 82 
Fax: {33-1) 45 68 58 12 
E-mail: p.boned@unesco.org 
Photo Library 
D (33-1) 4568 16 9 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 55 
E-mail: photobank@unesco.org 
Studio Radio-TV, Archives, Audiovisual 
T (33-1) 45 68 00 68 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 56 
E-mail: studio@unesco.org 
Social and Human Sciences 
T (33-1) 45 68 38 07 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 56 77 
E-mail: dare@unesco.org 
Statistics 
a (1-514) 343- 68 80 
Fax: {1-514} 343-68 82 
E-mail: uis.resource-centre@unesco.org 
Hydrology 
T (33-1) 456840 04 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 58 11 
E-mail: thp@unesco rg 
World Heritage 
(33-1) 4568 1876 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 55 70 
E-mail: wh-info@unesco rg 
Youth Coordination 
a (33-1) 45 08 16 54 
Fax: (33-1) 45 68 57 90 
E-mail: ucj@unesco.org 
UNESCO Offices 
Afghanistan 
UNESCO Kabul 
P.O. Box 5, Kabul 
TT +93-70-283.008 
Fax: +873-763 468 836, 
E-mail: martin.hadlow@undp.org 
Bangladesh 
Idb Bhaban (16th floor) 
E/8-A Rokeya Sharan 
Sher-e-Banglanagar, Dhaka 1207 
a (880-2) 912 34 69/6522 
Fax: (880-2) 912 34 68 
E-mail: dhaka@unesco rg 
Brazil 
SAS Quadra 5 Bloco H Lote 6 
Edificio CNPQ/IBICT/UNESCO 
9° andar, 70070-914 Brasilia D.F. 
Ta (55-61)21 06 35 00 
Fax: (55-61) 322 42 él 
E-mail: brasilia@unesco.org 
Burundi 
Avenue du Luxembourg, 
Bujumbura 
a (257) 21 53 82/84 
Fax: (257) 21 53 83 
E-mail: bujumbura@unesco.org 
Cambodia 
P.O. BOX 29 
House 38, Samdech Sothearos 
blvd, Phnom Penh 
TT (855-23) 217 244, 426 726 
Fax: (855-23) 426 163, 217 022 
E-mail: phnompenh@unesco.org 
Cameroon 
Immeuble Starnatiades, 
(2nd floor), Avenue de 
I'Indépendance, BP 12909, 
Yaoundé 
a (237) 22 57 63 
Fax: (237) 22 63 89 
E-mail: yaounde@unesco.org 
Chile 
Calle Enrique Delpiano, 2058 
Providencia, 3187 Santiago 
T (56-2) 472 46007655 10 50 
Fax: (56 2) 655 10 46, 655 10 47 
E-mail: santiago@unesco.org 
China 
Waijiaogongyu 5-15-3, 
Jianguomenwai Compound, 
Beijing 100600 
T (86-10) 65 32 28 28 
Fax: (86-10) 65 32 48 54 
E-mail: beifing@unesco.org 
Congo 
134 bd du Maréchal Lyautey, 
Brazzaville 
TT (242) 81 18 29 
Fax: (242) 81 17 80 
E-mail: brazzaville@unesco.org 
Costa Rica 
Paseo Colon, ave 1 bis, calle 28, 
casa esquinera, 2810 San José 
TT (506) 258 76 25 
Fax: (506) 258 74 58, 258 76 41 
E-mail: san-jose@unesco.org 
Cuba 
UNESCO Regional bureau 
for Culture 
Calzada 551 - Esq. a D 
Vedado, Havana 
@ (53-7) 832 76 38, 
{57-3) 33 34 38 
Fax: {53-7) 33 31 44 
E-mail: habana@unesco.org 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
fmmeuble Losoma, 
Boulevard du 30 Juin, Kinshasa 
T (243) 88 48 253 
Fax: (243) 88 48 252 
E-mail: kinshasa@unesco.org 
Ecuador 
Juan Leon Mera 130 v 
Ave. Patria, Edificio CFN 6to Piso, 
Quito 
T 2 5932 2529 08572 5932 2562 327 
Fax: 2 5932 2504 435 
E-mail: quito@unesco.org 
Egypt 
UNESCO Regional Office 
for Science 
8 Abdel-Rahman 
Fahmy Street, Garden City, 
Cairo 11541 
 {202) 79 504 24 
Fax: (202) 79 45 296 
E-mail: cairo@unesco.org 
P.O. Box 1177, ECA Building, 
Menelik Avenue, 
Addis Ababa 
oT (251-1) 51 39 53 
Fax: (251-1) 51 14 14 
E-mail. miconde@hotmail com 
Gabon 
A la Cité de la Démocratie, 
Batiment N° 6, B.P 2, Libreville 
(241) 76 28 79 
Fax: (241) 76 28 14 
E-mail: unescibv@inet.ga 
Ghana 
32 Nortei Ababio Street, Airport, 
Residential Area, Accra 
(233-21) 765 497, 765 499 
Fax: (233-21) 765 498 
E-mail: accra@unesco org 
Guatemala 
Edificio Elisa, Ofic. 7 “A” 
Plaza Espafia, Zona 9, 
Guatemala City 
a (502) 360 87 17, 
360 87 27 
Fax: (502) 360 87 19 
E-mail: guatemala@unesco.org 
Haiti 
19, Delmas 60, Musseau par 
Bourdon, Petion Ville 
ow {509} 511 04 60/61/62 
Fax. {509) 257 8158 
E-mail: unescohaiti@hainet. net 
India 
B 5/29 Safdarjung Enclave, New 
Delhi 110 029 
w (91-11) 671 3000 
Fax: (91-11) 671 3001/2 
E-mail: newdelhi@unesco.org

## [Page 59](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=59) 0

### IGNORE

Indonesia 
UNESCO House, Jalan Galuh 
(In 
N° 5, Kebayo Baru, 
Jakarta Selatan, Jakarta 12110 
= (62-21) 739 9818 
Fax: (62-21) 7279 6489 
E-mail: jakarta@tunesco org 
fran {Istamic Republic of) 
Bahman Building, Sa’ad 
Abad Palace Complex 
Tehran 
(98-21) 27 40 
141/142/143 
Fax: (98-21) 27 40 144 
E-mail: tehran@unesco.org 
italy 
Palazzo Zorzi, Castello 4930 
Venice 
= (39-041) 260 15 11 
switchboard 
Fax: (39-041) 528 99 95 
E-mail: roste@unesco.oig 
— 
  
Sted. UL] 
Kazakhstan 
4th Floor, UN Building 
67, Tole Bi Street, Almaty 
T (7-3272) 58 26 37/38 
Fax: {(7-3272) 79 48 53 
E-mail: almatv@unesco org 
Kenya 
United Nations Offices, 
Gigiri, Block €, United 
Nations Avenue, Gigirl 
Nairobi 
wT (234-2) 62 12 34 
Fax: {254-2} 62 27 50 
E-mail: nairehi@unesco org 
Lebanon 
Cité Spertive Av., Beirut 
| (961-1; 8500 13 
Fax. (961-1; 82 48 54 
E-mail: beirui@unesco.org 
Mali 
Badalabougou Est 
B.P. E 1763, Bamako 
T (223) 223 3392, 223 34 93 
Fax: (223) 223 34 94 
E-mail. bamako@unesco org 
hy rw fs: isi 
. 
i 0. 
NERC OL 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
B
u
r
k
e
 
Jamaica 
The Towers, 25 Dominica 
Drive, 3rd Floor, Kingston 5 
= (1-876) 929 70 87, 
929 70 89 
Fax: (1-876) 929 84 68 
E-mail’ kingston@unesco.org 
Jordan 
Wadi Saqgra Street 
Amman 11181 
{962-6} 551 42 34/65 59 
Fax: (962-6) 553 21 83 
E-mail registry@unesco.org 
  
Mexico 
Pte Masaryk n.© 526, 3er piso 
Colonia Polanco, 11560 
Mexico, D.F 
° (52-55) 5230 76 00 
Fax: (52-55) 5230 76 02 
E-mail. mexico@unesco otg 
Morocco 
35 av du 16 novembre, 
Agdal, Rabat 1777 
= (212-37) 67 03 72, 
67 03 74, 77 81 82 
Fax: (212-37) 67 03 75 
E-mail: rabat@unesco.org 
Mozambique 
515, av. Frederick Engels, 
Maputo 
T (258-1) 49 44 50, 49 34 34 
Fax. (258-1) 49 34 31, 49 45 03 
E-mail: maputo@unesco org 
Namibia 
Oppenheimer House. 
5 Brahms St.. Windhoek 
T {264-61} 291 7000, 
Fax: {264-6i) 291 7220 
E-mail 
windhoek@unesco org 
Nepal 
Ring Road-Bansbari 
Kathinandu 
(977-1) 437 40 09. 
Fax: (977-17 437 30 04 
E-mail’ 
kathmandu@unesco org 
Nigeria 
Street Plot 777, 
Bouake Street, off Herbert 
Maccaulay Way 
Wuse Zone 6, Abuja 
a (234-9) 52 37 088 
Fax: (234-9) 52 38 094 
E-mail. abuja@unesco.org 
Pakistan 
Saudi-Pak Tower, First Floor, 
Blue Area, Jinnah Avenue, 
Islamabad 44000 
© (92-51) 28 000 83 
Fax: (92-51) 28 000 56 
E-mail: 
islamabad@unesco.org 
Palestinian Authority 
17, Ahliyyah College St. West 
Bank via Israel Ramallah 
T (972-2) 295 9740 
Fax: (972-2) 295 97 41 
E-mail unesco@palnet.com 
Peru 
Aveda Javier Prado Este 
2465 - 8 pise. Museo de la 
Naclon. San Borja, Lima 
™ (51-1) 476 98 71. 
224 25 26 
Fax: {51-1} 47698 72 
E-mail: unescope@amauia. 
rch net.pe 
Qatar 
57. Al-Jazira Al-Arabia 
St Doha 
BT (974) 486 77 071 77 08; 
Fax. (974) 486 76 44 
E-mait: dohag@unesciorg 
Romania 
» UNESCO European Centre 
for Higher Education, 39, 
Stirbei Voda Str, Bucharest 
T (40-21) 313 08 39 / 06 98 
Fax. (40-21) 312 35 67 
E-mail. bucarest@unesco.oig 
Russian Federation 
Bolshoi Levshinsky per 15/28, 
blg. 2, 119034 Moscou 
= (7-095) 202 80 97/ 
202 87 59/202 81 66 
Fax: (7-095) 202 05 G8, 
956 36 66 
E-mail: moscow@unesco.org 
Rwanda 
Mineduc Compound 
@ (250) 51 58 45/ 44/ 46 
Fax: {250} 51 38 44 
E-mail: kigali@unesco.org 
Samoa 
P.O Box 615 
Matautu-uta Post Office, Apia 
a (685) 242 76 
Fax: (685) 222 53 
E-mail: apla@unesco.org 
Senegal 
UNESCO Regional Office 
Dakar and Regional Bureau 
for Education 
12 av.L.S Senghor, 
Dakar 
T (221) 849 2323 
Fax: (221) 823 83 93 
E-mail: dakar@unesco.org 
Switzerland 
Villa «Les Feuillantines» 
CH-1211 Geneve 10 
= (41-22) 917 33 81 
Fax: {41-22} 917 00 64 
E-mail: geneva@unesco org 
Tanzania {United Republic of) 
Oyster Bay, Uganda Av, 
Plot N°® 197A, Dar-es-Salaam 
T (255-22) 2666 623/26 
671 656 
Fax: (255-22) 26 66 927 
E-mail: 
dar-es-salaam@unesco.org 
Thailand 
920 Suhumvit Rd., 
Bangkok 10110 
T (662) 391 05 77/391 0879 
Fax: (0662) 391 08 G6 
E-mail: bangkek@unesco.org 
United States ef America 
2, United Nations Plaza, 
Suite 900 
New York, N.Y 10017 
a (1-212] 963 59 95, 
Fax: {1-212} 963 80 14 
E-mail: 
e.minchenberg@unesco.org 
Uruguay 
UNESCO Office Montevideo 
Regional Bureau for Science 
it Latin and the Caribbean 
Eduticio del Mercosur {ex 
Parque Hotel), Calie Dr. Luis 
Piera. 1992 
Montevideo 
a (598-2) 413 2075/413 
2094 
Fax: (598-2) 413 2094, 
E-mail: orcyt@unesco.org.ury 
  
Uzbekistan 
95, Amir Temur Str, 
Tashkent, 70 000 
™ (998-71) 12 07 116 
Fax: (998-71) 13 21 382 
E-mail: tashkent@unesco.org 
Viet Nam 
23 Cao Ba Quat, Hanot 
™ (84-4) 747 0275/6 
Fax: (84-4) 747 0274 
E-mail: registry @unesco.org 
Zimbabwe 
8 Kenilworth Rd. Newlands, 
Harare 
™ (263-4) 77 61 16 
Fax: (263-4) 77 60 55 
£-mail harare@unesco.org 
UNESCO | the new Courier | December 2004

## [Page 60](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/138446eng.pdf#page=60) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
  
| 
I 
ul 
Er \ 3 
4 : i 
rn i 
Jr - rn ~ : " & K 3 
; po : 4 ol || 
a » in rs WS + fy & “ |i 
- Ne 2 as a : . Ru 
= +) - 2 _ : w ih re - * a 3 ht 
@ ” Ws, CTE ER “1 
f in - v g Ys ™ “4 pe » o 
é ’ RR ev AN ' 
» 5 ™ = he © a od %. { ] 3 - 
’ A - - - 2 my BR! : ¥ | 
“ B Ng) 
- , HY ire. 55 = by 1 
- $a LE = W | 
J : > » 
# . : 
’ » : ) 3 ’ 
M 5 BJ ~ & 
N 
” A ’ ~ A ¢ 
4 § £ v A p 
1 " i ; 1 
MN n : bs La I “4 H Wy » 
& tT i - 
¥ : kK: ve i 
. : 1 ¥ . 
: = 
_- ) 
PS 
- ” 
Fw 
N A > 
X # 
1 | 
! | 
. 
Ll 
A 
4 
4 i 
. 
| ji i 
r A ou 
 
The Nagasaki Angel » 
The sculpture, which faces the Peace Garden i 
at UNESCO headquarters, was miraculously i 
spared. lt is a vestige of the Urakami church, 
destroyed by the atomic bomb explosion on 
August 9, 1945. it was given to UNESCO by the } 
city of Nagasaki on the organization's 30th 
anniversary in 1976. 