# [066614](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

5 
He 
a 
on 
CL
: 
  

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

    wR. — Lami OEE 
SR i fo = | —- 
’ 
  
A time to live... 
39 Bolivia 
 
Round numbers 
This pupil at school in the Bolivian town of 
Corocoro is learning arithmetic with the aid 
of an abacus designed by her teacher who 
has used old bottle tops as counters. In the 
rural areas of Bolivia, where the United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) is 
helping the government to spread formal 
  
education as widely as possible, teaching 
aids are in short supply and are mostly made 
by the teachers themselves. The abacus is 
one of the oldest counting devices known to 
man. Its name is thought to derive from the 
ancient Phoenician word abak describing 
sand strewn on a surface for writing. 
Ph
ot
o 
Ce
ri
, 
U
N
I
C
E
F

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

' The Courier 
A window open on the world 
 
Editorial 
mankind. Indeed, history was for long summarily reduced 
to little more than a catalogue of a series of conflicts. There 
was not only one “Hundred Years War”, but centuries of waste of 
human lives. 
The desire for peace, however, is just as ancient as the instinct to 
destroy, and the vision of a united planet had haunted mankind 
long before it assumed definite shape at a Conference in London in 
1945, when men and governments decided to give it a new meaning. 
Scarcely had men emerged from the bloodiest of human conflicts 
than they suddenly seemed to become aware of the unity of their 
species, proposing to create what the French poet Paul Eluard 
called “Man with the face of man”. They wished to turn values 
upside down. 
This was no longer the isolated cry of a poet, a prophet or a 
visionary preaching to an indifferent world, but the commitment of 
men and women speaking different tongues but a common lan- 
guage: “Since wars begin in the minds of men, it is the minds of men 
that the defences of peace must be constructed”. * More than an act 
of faith, the words of Archibald MacLeish spell out the lesson 
learned from a grim and horrifying reality. Crimes against human- 
ity"had been committed by men who knew how to read. Medical 
doctors, in the name of science, had used women and children as 
guinea pigs, as fuel. Men of taste had provided a theory for this 
carnage and encouraged it, just as they had ordered Heine's poetry 
to be burned. And so, in 1945, on the banks of the Thames, 
governments affirmed that education, science and culture should 
no longer be a law unto themselves, nor a servant for Caesar. 
How do things stand now? Such an objective is not achieved 
from one year to the next, nor from one plan to the next. Even 
today, on the fortieth anniversary of the signing of Unesco’s 
Constitution, we still have to fight against “that ignorance of each 
other’s ways and lives [which] has been a common cause, through- 
out the history of mankind, of that suspicion and mistrust between 
the peoples of the world through which their differences have all 
too often broken into war.” * 
This is why, at a time when the United Nations system as a whole 
is undergoing a searching re-appraisal, it was decided that this issue 
of the Unesco Courier, should commemorate not the customary 
anniversary (4 November 1946, the date on which Unesco’s Con- 
stitution came into force) but the birth, with the signing of the 
Constitution on 16 November 1945, of the Unesco ideal and the 
efforts of the men and women whose passionate commitment made 
possible this expression of belief in mankind and hope for the 
future. If anniversaries are occasions for reflection, may this 
anniversary be an occasion for us to meditate on this message, too 
often ignored or lost sight of, from the founding fathers. 
Lv] 
T HE origins of war are intermingled with the origins of 
* The Preamble to Unesco’s Constitution 
gyre 
COVER: Gouache by the American artist Alexander Calder (1898-1976), 
from the book Calder a Saché, published by Les Editions du Cercle d'Art, 
Paris, 1975. © Cercle d’Art, Paris- ADAGP 
Editor-in-Chief: Edouard Glissant   
October 1985 
38th year 
This issue of the Unesco Courier is special on two counts. Firstly, it 
celebrates the fortieth anniversary of the signing in London, on 16th 
November 1945, of the Constitution of Unesco. Secondly, within the 
framework of the programme of innovation and modernization now being 
implemented throughout the Organization, it is the first fully computerized 
issue of the English, French and Spanish editions of the Unesco Courier to 
be prepared entirely within Unesco up to the final photogravure and 
printing stage. To mark this occasion we are happy to have obtained the 
collaboration of the Assistant Director-General, of the General Activities 
and Programme Support Sector, Mr. Henri Lopes, as guest editorialist. 
5 Birth of an ideal 
by Howard Brabyn 
 
6 The precursors 
8 ‘The life of the mind’ 
Clement Attlee, Ellen Wilkinson, Jaime Torres Bodet, René Cassin 
10 The San Francisco Conference 
Harry S. Truman, Andrei Gromyko, Ezequiel Padilla 
14 The mood of Britain, 1945 
by Asa Briggs 
21 Putting the ‘S’ in Unesco 
24 Early days 
by Julian Huxley 
 
27 Can we educate for world peace? 
by Archibald MacLeish 
28 The application of science and art 
29 Finding a home for Unesco 
32 Foundations 
Photo story 
 
N
 
A time to live... 
BOLIVIA: Round numbers 
Published monthly in 32 languages English Italian Turkish Macedonian Finnish Selection in Braille is published 
by Unesco French Hindi Urdu Serbo-Croat Swedish quarterly in English, French, 
The United Nations Educational, Spanish ~~ Tamil Catalan Slovene Basque Spanish and Korean 
Scientific and Cultural Organization Russian Hebrew Malaysian Chinese Thal 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. German Persian Korean Bulgarian aon 0041-5278 
Arabic Dutch Swahili Greek 10-1985 - CPD - 85 - 1 - 427A 
Japanese Portuguese Croato-Serb SANE oN 
\deonss/ 3

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

  
H Photo Mirko Lion © ADAGP 1985 
La Place (1950), sculpture in bronze (17 x BR N D
64 cm) by the Swiss-born artist Alberto Venise (R. Guggenheim Foundation) 
Giacometti (1901-1966). 
  
The Governments of the States Parties to this Constitution on behalf 
of their peoples declare: 
That since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men 
that the defences of peace must be constructed; 
That ignorance of each other’s ways and lives has been a common 
cause, throughout the history of mankind, of that suspicion and 
mistrust between the peoples of the world through which their 
differences have all too often broken into war; 
That the great and terrible war which has now ended was a war made 
possible by the denial of the democratic principles of the dignity, 
equality and mutual respect of men, and by the propagation, in their 
place, through ignorance.and prejudice, of the doctrine of the 
inequality of men and races; 
That the wide diffusion of culture, and the education of humanity for 
justice and liberty and peace are indispensable to the dignity of man 
and constitute a sacred duty which all the nations must fulfil in a spirit 
of mutual assistance and concern; 
That a peace based exclusively upon the political and economic 
arrangements of governments would not be a peace which could 
secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of 
the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to 
fail, upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
For these reasons, the States Parties to this Constitution, believing in 
full and equal opportunities for education for all, in the unrestricted 
pursuit of objective truth, and in the free exchange of ideas and 
knowledge, are agreed and determined to develop and to increase the 
means of communication between their peoples and to employ these 
means for the purposes of mutual understanding and a truer and 
more perfect knowledge of each other’s lives; 
In consequence whereof they do hereby create the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the purpose of 
advancing, through the educational and scientific and cultural rela- 
tions of the peoples of the world, the objectives of international peace 
and of the common welfare of mankind for which the United Nations 
Organization was established and which its Charter proclaims. 
Preamble to the Constitution of Unesco, 
London, 16 November 1945  

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 66068: Birth of an ideal

Birth of anideal 
NESCO, the United Nations 
\ | Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, would 
almost certainly never have come into 
being, at least in its present form, had it 
not been for the very special conditions 
that existed in London during the Second 
World War. 
With great tracts of Europe occupied 
by Axis forces, Britain's bomb-scarred 
capital was the temporary home of seven 
Allied Governments-in-exile and of 
General de Gaulle’s Free French Com- 
mittee, of statesmen, diplomats and 
generals, of intellectuals and refugees, 
and of ordinary men and women come 
from all corners of the earth to fight for 
freedom. It was a microcosm of a world in 
ferment. 
Although the overriding common pur- 
pose was the winning of the war, the 
presence in London of so many able men 
and women from so many countries also 
engendered an intellectual ferment which 
was to leave a permanent mark on the 
post-war world. Among these men and 
women were the education ministers of 
the Allied Governments in exile who at a 
critical point in the struggle against the 
Axis Powers had the vision and the cour- 
age to plan ahead for the task of recon- 
structing their educational systems after 
the war was over. 
As Gian Franco Pompei (President of 
the Executive Board of Unesco from 
1968 to 1970) was to write later: 
“We recall with admiration that on 16 
November 1942, in a London then half in 
ruins, Richard A. Butler, President of the 
Board of Education of England and 
Wales, invited his colleagues from the 
Allied Powers in exile, Belgium, Czecho- 
slovakia, France, Greece, Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia, to meet, 
not just to discuss the problems of the 
moment, but also to plan the establish- 
ment after the war of a permanent orga- 
nization for co-operation in the field of 
education.” 
The invitation was enthusiastically re- 
ceived and the first meeting of the Con- 
ference of Allied Ministers of Education 
(CAME) took place at Alexandra 
House, London, three years to the day 
before Unesco was born. All the coun- 
tries invited were represented by their 
ministers of education or their deputies. 
Although it spoke of educational needs 
in the post-war world, the letter of invita- 
tion made no specific mention of the pos- 
sibility of creating a permanent interna- 
tional educational organization. Yet, as 
Denis Mylonas points out in his remark- 
able study La Genése de "Unesco (The 
Genesis of Unesco), only two months 
later, during the second plenary session 
of CAME, this possibility was mooted by 
the Belgian delegate Jules Hoste in a 
document he had prepared concerning 
the intellectual relations between the Un- 
ited Kingdom and Europe in which he 
expressed the hope “that these relations 
which had been developed and institu- 
tionalized within the framework of the 
International Institute of Intellectual Co- 
operation (see page 6) would be vigorous- 
ly renewed in more practical form after 
the war”. 
Meanwhile, a number of independent 
British and international organizations, 
including the London International 
Assembly (founded in 1941), the Council 
for Education in World Citizenship, the 
British Association for the Advancement 
of Science and the Association of Uni- 
versity Teachers, spurred on perhaps by 
their contacts with the many European 
intellectuals in exile in London, were ex- 
amining various aspects of the future of 
education in Europe in the post-war 
world. 
The personal prestige of their mem- 
bers, among whom were numbered such 
men as Lord Robert Cecil, Henri Rolin, 
René Cassin, Jan Masaryk, Gilbert Mur- 
ray and Julian Huxley, added great 
weight to their deliberations which, 
almost without exception, stressed the 
need for an international educational 
organization or organizations of one form 
or another and which were to have great 
influence on such governmental orga- 
nizations as CAME. 
Denis Mylonas describes how: 
“In May 1943, during the fourth plenary 
session of CAME, an ad hoc committee 
was formed to study a joint report (Educa- 
tion and the United Nations) drawn up by 
a joint committee of the London Interna- 
tional Assembly and of the Council for 
Education in World Citizenship. This re- 
port proposed, among other things, the 
‘creation as soon as possible’ of an inter- 
national organization for education (...) 
The ad hoc committee considered that the 
creation of such an organization would be 
premature.” 
Nevertheless, only a month later, in 
July 1943, delegates attending the fifth 
plenary session of CAME were talking of 
their own Conference as “containing the 
seed of an international educational orga- 
nization”. 
Indeed, in the nine months of its ex- 
istence, CAME had vastly extended the 
scope of its activities. It had created com- 
by Howard Brabyn 
missions on cultural conventions, on 
books and periodicals, on scientific mat- 
ters, and on films and audio-visual media, 
as well as committees or sub-committees 
on history, the restitution of scientific 
equipment and on the restitution of 
works of art. To these would be added 
later further commissions on the protec- 
tion and restitution of cultural objects 
and on school equipment, and another to 
enquire into the special educational prob- 
lems of liberated countries, finance and 
drafting committees, committees on 
emergency assistance for teachers and on 
the re-education of children who had 
been subjected to nazi-inspired educa- 
tion, a technical sub-committee to the 
scientific commission, and sub-commit- 
tees on educational broadcasts and on an 
international film centre. Just by looking 
at the titles of these commissions, com- 
mittees and sub-committees, we can see 
emerging the hazy outlines of many of the 
important programmes with which Un- 
esco is still very much concerned today. 
Meanwhile, world interest in the activi- 
ties of CAME was growing and towards 
the end of 1943 the delegates decided that 
the time had come to enlarge the Confer- 
ence by giving full delegate status to those 
countries until then represented only by 
observers. By now the concept of the 
creation of an international organization 
was fully accepted, and in its letter of 
invitation to the US Government the 
Conference declared that among “the ob- 
jects of the reconstituted Conference 
would be to consider plans for the forma- 
tion of a permanent organization, at first 
confined to the United Nations'®, but 
eventually to be placed on an internation- 
al basis with the object of promoting co- 
operation in educational matters in the 
post-war period”. 
The United States Government 
accepted this invitation with alacrity and 
enthusiasm. In its reply it acknowledged 
“the important preliminary work done by 
the Conference of Allied Ministers of 
Education” and recognized it as “a useful 
agency for the further emergency de- 
velopment of international co-operation 
CONTINUED PAGE 12 
(1) In the Minds of Men, Unesco, 1972 
(2) La Genése de I' Unesco: La Conférence des Ministres 
Alliés de Education (1942-1945). by Denis Mylonas. 
Bruylant, Brussels, 1976. 
(3) Here the term United Nations refers to those nations 
that had signed the Declaration by United Nations on 1 
January 1942; the United Nations Organization did not 
then exist.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ed
im
ed
ia
, 
Pa
ri
s 
The French philosopher Henri Bergson 
(1859-1941) 
The Polish-born French physicist Marie: 
Curie (1867-1934), famous for her work on 
radioactivity and twice winner of the Nobel 
Prize (1903 and 1911). 
  
Ph
ot
o 
(
 
E
d
i
m
e
d
i
a
.
 
Pa
ri
s 


### 66089: The Precursors

The precursors 
of Education (CAME) was to play 
the unusual role of mother and 
midwife at the birth of Unesco. the new 
baby that was born on 16 November 1945 
could trace its antecedents back some 
twenty vears to an emanation of the 
League of Nations, the International In- 
stitute of Intellectual Co-operation. and 
an institution which started out as an 
autonomous. non-governmental organi- 
zation, the International Bureau of 
Education. 
I F the Conference of Allied Ministers 
International Institute of Intellectual Co- 
operation (II11C) 
In 1922. following a proposal made by the 
French statesman and Nobel Peace Prize 
winner Léon Bourgeois, the League of 
Nations established an International 
Commission for Intellectual Co-operation 
(ICIC) which was composed of twelve 
members and which was to be responsible 
for international questions relating to in- 
ternational co-operation. 
The Commission was made up of an 
impressive array of great thinkers inclu- 
ding, for example, Henri Bergson, its 
first president, Marie Curie, Albert Ein- 
stein and Gilbert Murray. With the 
woefully inadequate financial resources 
made available to them, however. they 
could do little more than exchange letters 
and come together for an annual session 
of discussion to which there was virtually 
no follow-up. 
In reply to president Henri Bergson’s

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 66089: The Precursors

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
As
so
ci
at
ed
 
Pr
es
s,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Albert Einstein (1879-1955). The great 
physicist played a leading role in the work 
of the International Institute of Intellectual 
Co-operation. 
  
plea for help, the French Government 
offered to create in Paris and to finance 
an International Institute of Intellectual 
Co-operation, and, in 1926, with the bles- 
sing of the Assembly of the League of 
Nations, the IIIC came into being. 
Properly financed and staffed by a 
permanent Secretariat, the I11C breathed 
new life into international intellectual co- 
operation. The Institute established 
seven sections which dealt with: general 
affairs, relations between universities, 
libraries and scientific unions, juridical 
questions concerning intellectual proper- 
ty and the conditions of intellectual 
labour, translations and the exchange of 
literary works between nations, museums 
and artistic relations, and information 
and relations with the press and other 
media. 
We begin to see the embryonic outlines 
of things to come. 
International Bureau of Education 
(IBE) 
After the First World War, although indi- 
vidual educationists and intellectuals 
called insistently for an international 
1968. 
organization to promote co-operation 
between countries in education, govern- 
ments tended to guard jealously their 
right to unqualified control over the 
education process within their bound- 
aries. Indeed, the League of Nations ex- 
pressly limited the educational activities 
of the IIIC to theoretical pedagogical 
matters and declared that it should “ab- 
stain from activities concerning educa- 
tional questions which belong to the 
realm of the sovereign Member States.” 
This, however, merely had the effect of 
encouraging independent action and, in 
1925, the International Bureau of Educa- 
tion was founded in Geneva as a non- 
governmental organization. This was 
made possible through the sponsorship of 
the Jean-Jacques Rousseau Institute of 
the University of Geneva. Despite the 
support of this prestigious body, the IBE 
soon found itself hampered by lack of 
funds and, in 1929, it became a mainly 
intergovernmental organization when a 
number of States met in Geneva to draw 
up and sign a new constitution. However, 
the reformed IBE still remained indepen- 
dent of the League of Nations. 
The Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget 
(1896-1980) was Director of the Interna- 
tional Bureau of Education from 1929 to 
  
The main objectives of the IBE were to 
act as an information clearing house for 
all matters connected with education, to 
gather information concerning both pri- 
vate and public education, and to under- 
take scientific and statistical research in 
the educational field. 
During the Second World War the acti- 
vities of the IBE were severely curtailed. 
Its efforts were concentrated on the 
humanitarian work of supplying “intel- 
lectual aid” to prisoners of war of all 
nationalities. Altogether it sent some 
600,000 volumes of scientific and literary 
works to prisoner of war camps. 
With the emergence of Unesco it be- 
came clear that the new organization was 
better placed to carry out many of the 
functions of the IBE, and in 1947 a pro- 
visional agreement was drawn up be- 
tween the two bodies for their future 
unification. In 1968, under the terms of a 
new agreement, the old IBE ceased to 
exist, its functions being fully assumed by 
Unesco. A new IBE was established in 
Geneva, under the aegis of Unesco, as an 
international centre for comparative edu- 
cational studies. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s  
Clement Attlee (later Earl Attlee, 1883- 
1967) 
“In the new world order towards which 
we are moving it is essential that we 
should have appropriate machinery to 
deal with each of the major fields of 
human activity (...) However we classify 
the principal elements in the public life of 
the world it would be impossible to ex- 
clude from our classification that large 
and significant field of activity which can 
be described broadly as the life of the 
mind. This covers not only the special 
field of education in all its branches and at 
all its stages, it includes the whole intel- 
lectual realm with its ‘many goodly states 
and kingdoms’, the sciences, the humani- 
ties, the fine arts, research for the 
advancement of knowledge and the 
whole vast territory in which ideas are 
disseminated. The field of educational 
and cultural relationships is surely one of 
the richest and most significant in the 
international life of the world. We cannot 
be content until our new world organiza- 
tion provides for the fullest and most 
beneficent development of these re- 
lationships. Do not wars, after all, begin 
in the minds of men?” 
Clement R. Attlee 
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 
London, 1 November 1945 


### 66091: The Life of the mind'

The life of the mind g 
Below and on the opposite page we present extracts from four 
speeches made during the “Conference for the Establishment 
of an Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of the 
United Nations”, held in London from 1 to 16 November 
1945. 
 D
h
a
f
a
 
 
W
a
v
u
c
f
a
n
a
 
a
r
c
 
 
  
Ellen Wilkinson (1891-1947) addressing a 
peace rally in Trafalgar Square, London 
“We are met at the end of the greatest 
war in history, against the background of 
two continents with their attendant 
islands, across which the fires of war have 
raged. Even now the embers still glow, 
and here and there the flames still flicker. 
All of us here—all the nations that we 
represent—have taken some part in this 
great struggle. All have ranged them- 
selves under the flag of freedom and 
against aggression and oppression. Many 
of us have drunk together from a com- 
mon cup of sorrow and sacrifice. Now we 
are met together; workers in education, 
in scientific research and in the varied 
fields of culture. We represent those who 
teach, those who discover, those who 
write, those who express their inspiration 
in music and art. We have a high respon- 
sibility, for entrusted to us is the task of 
creating some part—and not the least 
important part—of that structure of the 
United Nations on which rest our hopes 
for the future of mankind. It is for us to 
clear the channels through which may 
flow from nation to nation the streams of 
knowledge and thought, of truth and 
beauty which are the foundations of true 
civilization.” 
Ellen Wilkinson 
President of the Conference 
Minister of Education, United Kingdom 
London, 1 November 1945 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 66091: The Life of the mind'

Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
  
“Our duty will be more completely de- 
fined when our charter has been adopted 
by all the United Nations, and when, on 
what I hope may not be a far distant day, 
we have the great Soviet Republic in our 
midst (...). We shall never lose sight of 
the fact, so adequately expressed at the 
opening of our deliberations, that it is not 
the sum of knowledge that is to be the 
distinguishing mark of the activities of 
our future Organization, but the develop- 
ment of culture. One of our great authors 
has said: ‘Science without conscience is 
but the ruin of the soul.” We can say: 
‘Knowledge without morality can only 
result in barbarism.” We who know that 
there can be no democracy without cul- 
ture, will direct our efforts towards 
adding something else to knowledge: a 
great ideal, a clear vision of the great 
problems to be solved in the cause of 
international peace and, lastly, and 
perhaps most important of all, the mas- 
tery of self.” 
René Cassin 
Delegate of France 
London, 16 November 1945 
René Cassin (1887-1976) photographed in 
London during the Second World War 
Jaime Torres Bodet (1902-1974), is here 
seen (third from left) during his term as 
Unesco’s second Director-General (1948- 
1952) with a group of exchange students. 
“We believe that the intellectualism of 
the eighteenth century and the material- 
ism of the nineteenth should give place in 
the twentieth to the conception of a true 
and balanced integration of man. That is 
why—while the education of the intellec- 
tual faculties was the chief concern of 
those systems which are now obsolete, 
and while the education of the will has 
resulted in extremes of imperialism that 
we condemn—the horizons now open to 
our view will demand of us a form of 
education aiming at international co- 
operation through the medium of truth, 
virtue in all its significance, and 
democracy.” 
Jaime Torres Bodet 
Delegate of Mexico 
London, 2 November 1945 
 Ph
ot
o 
©)
 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
(©)
 
Ke
ys
to
ne
, 
Pa
ri
s 
  
OBbBEAMHEHHDBIE HALUWN 
Bl SAN FRANCISCO 194 5 
Z Cc apn > 5 « 
Z : 2 
z hic Z g: 3 i J 
= z 
Z = | = 
ll BIRTH PLACE OF THE CHARTER IM 
_NACIONES UNIDAS ®& & RB 
Stamp commemorating the signature of 
the Charter of the United Nations at San 
Francisco on 26 June 1945 shows the 
Memorial Opera House, where the signing 
ceremony took place, and the UN emblem. 
On 25 April 1945, crowds line the outside 
of the San Francisco Memorial Opera 
House as delegates enter the building for 
the opening session of the United Nations 
Conference on International Organization 
(UNCIO) at which the Charter of the United 
Nations was drafted. 


### 66094: The San Francisco Conference

  
The San Francisco 
Conference 
The Second World War was nearly over when the United 
Nations Conference on International Organization (UNCIO) 
convened in San Francisco on 25 April 1945 to complete the 
work, started long before, of drawing up the Charter of the 
United Nations. This Charter was signed by heads of delega- 
tions on 26 June with the understanding that it woult come into 
effect (and that the organization would officiallly come into 
existence) when it had been ratified by China, France, the 
United Kingdom, the United States of America, the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics and by a majority of the other 
signatory States. This condition was met on 24 October which 
is therefore the birthday of the United Nations, celebrated as 
United Nations Day. Opposite page, brief extracts from three 
addresses given at the final plenary session of the Conference. 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 66094: The San Francisco Conference

  
P
h
o
t
o
 
Un
it
ed
 
Na
ti
on
s 
  P
h
o
t
o
 
Un
it
ed
 
N
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
Andrei Gromyko, then Soviet ambassador 
to the United States, signs the Charter. 
President Harry S. Truman (1884-1972) 
speaking at the 16th plenary session of the 
San Francisco Conference, on 26 June 
1945. 
“(...) That we now have this Charter at all 
is a great wonder. It is also a cause for 
profound thanksgiving to Almighty God, 
who has brought us so far in our search 
for peace through world organization. 
There were many who doubted that 
agreement could ever be reached by 
these fifty countries differing so much in 
race and religion, in language and cul- 
ture. But these differences were all for- 
gotten in one unshakable unity of deter- 
mination—to find a way to end war. Out 
of all the arguments and disputes, and 
different points of view, a way was found 
to agree. Here in the spotlight of full 
publicity, in the tradition of liberty-loving 
people, opinions were expressed openly 
and freely. The faith and hope of fifty 
peaceful nations were laid before this 
world forum. Differences were over- 
come. This Charter was not the work of 
any single nation or group of nations, 
large or small. It was the result of a spirit 
of give and take, of tolerance for the 
views and interests of others. It was proof 
that nations, like men, can state their 
differences, can face them, and then can 
find common ground on which to stand. 
That is the essence of democracy; and 
that is the essence of keeping the peace in 
the future. By your agreement, the way 
was shown toward future agreement in 
the years to come (...)” 
Harry S. Truman 
President of the United States of America 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
it
ed
 
Na
ti
on
s 
“(...) The small nations, who have dis- 
played in this Conference a great sense of 
responsibility, noble co-operation and 
dignity, are destined to fulfil a great mis- 
sion: to tend with devotion and courage 
the sacred fire of Law. They will not be 
alone in this luminous task, for the com- 
mon men of all nations, great and small, 
hold the same aspirations and have the 
same faith in a common destiny. 
Whenever the cause of justice will raise 
its banner, the peoples, great and small, 
shall cry with the same conviction, shall 
act with the same strength (...) Our faith 
must rest, not on the great or the small 
nations, but upon the common men of all 
nations. All peoples, large and small, 
fully know that the world cannot bear the 
terrible stress of another total war with- 
out turning back to the dark ages. There 
is, therefore, a peremptory necessity to 
live in peace. Let us have reciprocal con- 
fidence, let us have the full measure of 
our goodwill (...)” 
The Honourable Ezequiel Padilla 
Chairman of the Delegation of Mexico 
  
“(...) In the course of the work of the 
Conference there were some difficulties 
and differences of view between separate 
delegations on these or other questions. 
However, one should be surprised not at 
the existence of these difficulties and not 
at the existence of different viewpoints 
between separate delegations on these or 
other questions, but at the fact that, as a 
result of the work of the Conference, all 
the main difficulties were overcome, and 
we succeeded in fulfilling successfully the 
tasks before the Conference. We pre- 
pared a document which should become 
the basis for the actions of the Interna- 
tional Organization—its constitution. 
Naturally, the very best and most perfect 
Charter in itself is not yet a guarantee that 
its provisions will be carried out and en- 
sure the preservation of peace. In order 
to achieve this important and noble task it 
is also necessary, in addition to the ex- 
isting Charter, to have the unity and co- 
ordination of actions of members of the 
International Organization, and first of 
all the unity and co-ordination of actions 
between the most powerful military 
powers in the world. It is also necessary 
that all members of the International 
Organization should try to settle all dis- 
putes by peaceful means in the spirit of 
co-operation and goodwill (...)” 
The Honourable Andrei Gromyko 
Acting Chairman of the Delegation of the 
USSR 
  
The Mexican jurist Ezequiel Padilla (1892- 
1971), Minister of Foreign Relations (1940- 
1945). 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 66068: Birth of an ideal

Birth of an ideal 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 5 
in educational and cultural reconstruc- 
tion”. It also declared that “the govern- 
ments collaborating in the Conference 
should take steps, with other interested 
governments, to seek the best means for 
establishing a United Nations agency for 
educational and cultural reconstruction, 
organized and administered along demo- 
cratic lines”. 
Thus, by April 1944, the United States 
was represented at the Conference in 
London by a strong delegation which in- 
cluded J. William Fulbright and a man 
who was to play an important role in the 
preparation and drafting of the constitu- 
tion of Unesco—the poet and Librarian 
of the American Congress Archibald 
MacLeish. 
The American delegation had arrived 
‘with already well-formed proposals for a 
“United Nations Organization for Edu- 
cational and Cultural Reconstruction” 
and these were discussed at two special 
“enlarged” meetings of the Conference 
and a tentative draft constitution was ela- 
borated. After discussion of this draft at 
the tenth plenary session of CAME, at 
which the Conference accepted a minor 
but significant amendment proposed by 
the chairman of the Scientific Commis- 
sion, it was sent by the Chairman of 
CAME, Richard Butler, to the govern- 
ments of all members and associate mem- 
bers of the United Nations, as well as to 
institutions with links with the United 
Nations, for consideration and comment. 
The amendment mentioned above 
proposed the addition to a paragraph 
concerning the exchange of information 
on problems of education and culture of 
the words “including scientific.research”. 
Innocuous enough on the face of it, the 
addition of this phrase was an indication 
of the pressure that was building up to 
extend the importance of science in the 
activities of the proposed new 
organization. 
Reactions to the United States propos- 
als were generally favourable, but were 
to be influenced by the outcome of the 
Dumbarton Qaks Conference, held in 
Washington from 21 August to 7 October 
1944, which was to pave the way for the 
creation of the United Nations Organiza- 
tion during the following year at the San 
Francisco Conference. The Dumbarton 
Oaks Conference had given cautious 
approval to the concept of an educational 
and cultural organization, but everything 
would depend on the Conference at San 
Francisco at which the Charter of the 
United Nations was finally to be adopted. 
Work at the London Conference came 
virtually to a standstill, the general feel- 
ing being clearly expressed in a declara- 
tion in March 1945 by Richard Butler, 
chairman of CAME, that “the creation of 
a United Nations Educational Organiza- 
tion should have the closest possible con- 
nexion with any organization created by 
the San Francisco Conference”. 
12 
The eagerly awaited United Nations 
Conference on International Organiza- 
tion opened in San Francisco on 25 April 
1945, and when it closed, two months 
later, it had not only agreed the Charter 
of the United Nations Organization 
(which came officially into force on 24 
October 1945), but had also approved a. 
French recommendation “that govern- 
ments should convene within the next few 
months a general conference to draw up 
the statute of an international organiza- 
tion on cuitural co-operation”. It also 
recorded an addendum by the United 
States delegation, speaking in support of 
the French proposal, mentioning “the 
plans of the Conference of Allied Minis- 
ters of Education to callin the near future 
a United Nations conference for the 
establishment of an international orga- 
nization on education and cultural co- 
operation. The Government of the 
United Kingdom had been requested to 
convene such a conference.” 
The way ahead was now clear for the 
creation of the new specialized agency of 
the United Nations, and on 12 July 1945, 
following the nineteenth plenary session 
of CAME, British minister of education 
Richard Law issued a press release 
announcing that “A conference is to be 
held in London on November 1 next, to 
consider the establishment of a United 
Nations Educational and Cultural 
Organization”. 
On 3 and 4 August 1945 invitations 
were despatched to the governments con- 
cerned, the French Government being 
specially associated with the British Gov- 
ernment as inviting power. A working 
committee to prepare the Conference 
was established, and on 1 November 1945 
the Conference for the Establishment of 
the United Nations Educational and 
Cultural Organization began its work at 
the Institute of Civil Engineers, one of 
the few buildings in London large enough 
to house such an important meeting that 
had not been damaged by bombs. 
The Conference started out to estab- 
lish Uneco; it ended up establishing Un- 
esco. For some time past a number of 
eminent scientists, including, in particu- 
lar, Joseph Needham and Julian Huxley, 
had been pressing for the inclusion of 
science in the title of the new organiza- 
tion (see page 21). In her opening speech 
on the first day of the Conference, the 
chairman of the Conference, Ellen Wil- 
kinson, had announced the intention of 
the British delegation to propose the in- 
clusion of science in the organization’s 
title. During the third plenary session, 
the Chinese delegate, Hu Shih, declared 
his support for the British proposition, 
and by the end of the Conference Unesco 
was firmly established as the name of the 
new organization. There can be little 
doubt that the events of August 6 and 9 at 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, still fresh in all 
their horror in delegates’ minds, had con- 
siderable bearing on this decision. 
The Conference took place in an 
atmosphere quite remarkable for its 
sense of urgent purpose, of determina- 
tion to succeed in what was seen as a task 
of crucial world importance, and of refus- 
al to allow minor differences to stand in 
the way of the main objective. 
The tone was set from the outset by the 
US delegate Archibald MacLeish. In a 
speech in which he seconded Léon 
Blum’s motion that Ellen Wilkinson, the 
new British Minister of Education, be 
elected President of the Conference, he 
declared: 
“(...) The achievement of greater and 
more effective international co-operation 
in the field of education, as in the fields of 
culture generally—of science and the 
arts—is the immediate purpose of this 
meeting. But that purpose has behind it a 
greater and even more moving objective— 
the common understanding of the masses 
of the people in this world (...) 
The universal languages of communica- 
tion have always existed in the sciences 
and in the arts and in the language of the 
human spirit. Human science has pro- 
vided those universal languages with in- 
struments, in the last few years, by which 
men can speak to men across the frontiers 
of the world, by which the peoples of the 
world may speak and answer (...) What 
remains to do is what we have been called 
here to accomplish: to create a social in- 
strument through which these instruments 
of communication, these universal lan- 
guages, may be put to the service of the 
common hope for peace (...)” 
The Conference achieved this goal 
with remarkable unanimity and des- 
patch. At three o'clock in the afternoon 
of Friday 16 November 1945, the Presi- 
dent of the Conference, Ellen Wilkinson, 
opened the tenth plenary session at which 
delegates formally signed the Final Act, 
the Constitution of the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, and the Instrument Estab- 
lishing a Preparatory Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Commission. 
Once again Archibald MacLeish found 
the right words to sum up the feelings of 
all the delegates at the close of the Con- 
ference: 
“(...) I think, speaking in all frankness, 
that some of us who came to this Confer- 
ence came with narrower ideas of what this 
Organization was going to be than the 
ideas with which we leave it. Some of us 
thought it was to be an international orga- 
nization for this or for that or the other 
piece of the whole objective; but I think 
not one of us knew we should be construct- 
ing here a great and powerful instrument 
for the broadest possible purpose, which is 
the purpose of the common understanding 
of men for peace (...)"” L 
 
HOWARD BRABYN is editor of the English edi- 
tion of the Unesco Courier,

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

  
bl 
» 
B
E
S
R
E
N
 
a
w
 
- 
where the Conference to establish Unesco 
The Institute of Civil Engineers, in London, 
was held in November 1945. 
» 
N
T
 
e
r
 
E
t
 
2 
a
r
e
 
S
o
 
R
E
 
+
 d
a
n
k
   
-
_
   
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
N
E
,
 
 
 
  
    
  
u
o
p
u
o
 
‘s100ubUT 
JIAID) 
JO 
IMINSU| 
{)) 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

| by Asa Briggs 
  
LE 
el
 
HE word “revolution” was some- 
T times used in Britain to describe 
the transformation of ways of 
life and, equally important, of attitudes 
since the beginning of the Second World 
War. The scientist Julian Huxley, who 
was to become Director-General of Un- 
esco in 1946, had published a volume of 
essays in 1944 with the title On Living ina 
Revolution which caught the mood. Of 
course, not everyone shared the sense. 
There had always been people who were 
unwilling to chart plans for “reconstruc- 
tion” until long after the War had been 
won, and there were some who in the 
year of victory stressed continuity rather 
than change, fearing change rather than 
welcoming it. 
Huxley, well known to the war-time 
public through his broadcasts in the 
BBC’s immensely popular programme 
the Brains Trust, in which everything was 
discussed except the War, had no doubts. 
The first of his essays, written as early as 
1942, described how there had already by 
then been “a re-thinking of old prob- 
lems” and a “transvaluation of values” in 
Britain since the War began. Social ser- 
vices were being extended, old class di- 
viding lines crossed, and planning was 
being taken for granted. Economic man 
had given way to “social man”. After the 
War was over people would not want to 
return to the ways of 1939. “As a result”, 
he concluded, “we now live in quite a 
different world.” 
Huxley had made his reputation as a 
writer on biological evolution. He con- 
cluded quite deliberately, however, in his 
essays that only the word “revolution” 
was adequate to cover what had been 
happening not only in people’s minds but 


### 66070: The Mood of Britain, 1945

14 
The mood of Britain, 1945 
“The air of England has a curious quality. We all com- 
plain about it one way or another when we come to it—the 
physical air of England—but, oddly enough, we can all 
live in it, no matter where we come from. It is a mild air, it 
is a medial air, it has no extremes about it, and we can all 
live here. And what is true of men physically is true of 
men’s ideas. This air has always been hospitable to ideas; 
it has always been hospitable to freedom; and we are men 
who love freedom.” 
Archibald MacLeish, 16 November 1945 
on the world stage. It was a world revolu- 
tion which he contemplated, not just a 
“revolution” in Britain. Certain trends 
within the revolution were “inevitable” 
and “universal”. One was towards “a 
more conscious social purpose”. Another 
was towards “a fuller utilization of the 
resources of backward countries”. The 
question was one not of trends but of 
methods. “The chief alternatives depend 
on whether the revolution is effected in a 
democratic or a totalitarian way.” 
Nothing could have been more demo- 
cratic than Britain’s general election of 
July 1945 which displanted Britain’s great 
war leader, Winston Churchill, and 
which brought the Labour Party into 
power with a massive over-all majority of 
146 seats in the new Parliament. In one of 
the most readable of Britain’s contem- 
porary diaries Harold Nicolson, who lost 
his own seat, wrote simply “Churchill is 
out and Attlee has a clear majority! No- 
body foresaw this at all.” Yet there were 
people who foresaw it and had foreseen it 
for some years as the logical outcome of a 
“people’s war” and the development of a 
“citizens” army” which had been encour- 
aged to think. “This is the dawn of a new 
day”, declared the new Minister of 
Labour with unsurprising enthusiasm, 
“and in the light of it we are going to 
march forward to those things of which 
we have dreamed for years past.” 
It is easy in retrospect to analyse the 
remarkable social and political conjunc- 
tions of 1945 in a more sophisticated 
fashion than was possible in 1945, 
although even in the immediate after- 
math of the election its first academic 
analyst, R.B. McCallum, was at pains to 
insist that even if it might be called a 
revolution it was as well to avoid the 
word. “Revolution is a cant word of the 
day and is applied to almost any move- 
ment of human affairs.” 
Certainly there was no element of force 
or coercion in the domestic politics of 
1945; the verdict was free. Nor was the 
Conservative Party overwhelmed in 
terms of the total number of votes cast 
nationally. In fact, Labour was in a 
minority of 47.8 per cent and the Con- 
servative Party was to return to power, 
once more under Churchill, in 1951. 
Above all, the Labour Party itself was 
less radical in 1945 than Conservatives 
claimed during the heat of the general 
election campaign; it was wooing a broad 
spectrum of the electorate, and many of 
the policies it propounded had been 
forged as part of a war-time national con- 
sensus in which different parties shared 
and to which they all contributed. 
Moreover, it inherited rather than de- 
signed the planning controls deemed 
necessary to implement them. The eco- 
nomy was to be “mixed”. “Labour will 
plan from the ground up”, its election 
manifesto Labour Face the Future stated, 
“giving an appropriate place to construc- 
tive enterprise and private endeavour in 
the national plan.” 
There was a reasonably broad consen- 
sus on foreign policy in 1945 with the only p 
On 8 May 1945, the day the Third Reich 
capitulated and peace returned to Europe 
after 5 years and 8 months of bloody war, 
prime minister Winston Churchill and 
members of his cabinet received a raptur- 
ous welcome as they appeared on the bal- 
cony of the Ministry of Health in London. Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Im
ap
re
ss
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 66070: The Mood of Britain, 1945

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 66070: The Mood of Britain, 1945

   
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Im
ap
re
ss
, 
Pa
ri
s 
In May 1940, Winston Churchill (1874- 
1965), statesman, author and orator, be- 
came prime minister of the wartime coali- 
tion government that was to lead Britain to 
victory in 1945. In the darkest days of the 
Second World War he rallied the people of 
Britain behind him and, concentrating his 
boundless energy on the conduct of the 
war, became one of the principal 
architects of the Allied victory. Swept out 
critics on the far left and far right. Much 
was made of the need to continue the 
alliance of “the Big Three”—the United 
States, the Soviet Union and Britain. All 
the main parties supported the idea of a 
new international organization “with 
teeth”; the teeth, in particular, mattered. 
It seemed more important also to create 
machinery that would work than to im- 
pose a quick peace; peacemaking was 
approached as a process, not an event. 
Finally, in the making of peace, it was 
maintained, attention had to be paid to 
economic and social issues as well as to 
political and diplomatic concerns. As the 
authors of Patterns of Peacemaking, a 
much praised book of 1945, put it, “The 
last war slogans of ‘homes fit for heroes’ 
16 
of office in the Labour election landslide of 
July 1945, he became prime minister again 
for another four-year term from 1951-1955. 
The author of a number of books, includ- 
ing a biography of his famous ancestor, 
Marlborough: his Life and Times, and a 
six-volume history of The Second World 
War, he was awarded the Nobel Prize for 
Literature in 1953. Above, a smiling Chur- 
chill gives his “V for Victory” salute. 
and ‘a world safe for democracy’ were 
modest hopes compared with the aspira- 
tions for social security, freedom from 
fear and want, full employment and 
world peace which have been generated 
by this war.” 
Education was considered to be a 
necessary agent not only in purging Ger- 
many and Italy from the grip of Nazism 
and Fascism but in bringing people of the 
world together, and Huxley participated 
in a London conference held in 1944 to 
consider new international machinery de- 
signed to extend the work of the Interna- 
tional Institute of Intellectual Co-oper- 
ation, a body associated with the League 
of Nations, and at the founding Confer- 
ence of Unesco in London in 1945. One 
of the most important reforms in Britain 
carried out during the War itself had been 
an Education Act of 1944, and there were 
several meetings of Allied Ministers of 
Education from European governments 
in exile in London which considered the 
international implications of educational 
advance. 
It was usually recognized too, that 
education and science went together. The 
winning of the Second World War had 
depended on trained scientists—it was 
sometimes called “the physicists war”— 
with some of the ablest scientists working 
in laboratories and “little back rooms” on 
electronics, radar and nuclear power. Sci- 
entists were the first to appreciate, 
however, that scientific discovery was in- 
ternational rather than national in char- 
acter and that the effective use of science, 
which was to pose difficult moral prob- 
lems in the 1950s and 1960s, depended on 
advances in the social as well as the natu- 
ral sciences. 
Education and science did not figure, 
however, in the list of major public preoc- 
cupations in Britain which were identi- 
fied in a pre-election public opinion poll 
in June 1945. Housing came first, full 
employment second, and social security 
third. And by then as many as 84 per cent 
of the persons questioned, large numbers 
of them new voters, had made up their 
minds as to how to vote. 
There were echoes of the First World 
War slogan “homes for heroes” in the 
placing of housing first, and full employ- 
ment had been identified as a major goal 
of national policy in 1944, one of the 
Government's “primary aims and re- 
sponsibilities”. Social security had been 
the theme of the most popular of all 
war-time reports, that of the Liberal Wil- 
liam Beveridge, who went on in 1944 to 
write Full Employment in a Free Society. 
The name of Beveridge became one of 
the best-known in the country, but, hav- 
ing won a war-time by-election he lost his 
seat at the general election in 1945. The 
plan was more important than the man. 
Beveridge was to criticize the use of the 
term “welfare State”. Yet it was such a 
State which the Labour Government of 
1945 set out to create—with a compre- 
hensive national health service figuring 
prominently as an extra plank in its prog- 
ramme. The day it was brought into 
effect, 5 July 1948, was treated as another 
D-Day and compared with the Allied 
landings in Normandy in 1944, and 
Labour was at pains to insist that it was a 
model for others to emulate. 
It was to prove difficult in practice to 
reconcile the demand for such an active 
and greatly extended social policy with 
the economic facts of life which Britain 
faced in 1945. If there was sunshine in the 
sky, there were lots of clouds. Huxley had 
written little in his essays about economic 
problems, although he had been associ- 
ated with Political and Economic Plan- 
ning, an important cross-party opinion 
group, since its foundation in 1931. He

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 66070: The Mood of Britain, 1945

believed in the possibilities of planning 
without devoting sustained attention to 
the most appropriate methods of carrying 
it out. Nor had most of the Labour lead- 
ers very clear ideas either. 
In fact, Britain in 1945 faced very se- 
rious economic problems, short-term as 
well as long-term, which severely limited 
its choices and made it difficult to pursue 
long-term goals. On the day of the 
Japanese surrender in August 1945, J.M. 
Keynes—by then a main influence on 
economic policy-making—warned that 
Britain faced an “economic Dunkirk” as 
serious as the military Dunkirk five years 
before. 
Existing foreign investment had been 
dissipated to pay for the War, there was a 
heavy new foreign debt, and there had 
been a serious destruction of shipping on 
which a crucial export drive depended. 
Many materials and foodstuffs were in 
shorter supply than they had been during 
the War, and rations were to fall lower 
after 1945 than they had been in the 
darkest years of the War. The abrupt 
ending of American Lend/Lease was a 
severe blow to an increasingly vulnerable 
economy, and an indispensable Amer- 
ican loan was secured only on difficult 
and controversial terms. In consequence, 
the country remained in the grip of 
austerity. Indeed, bread, which had nev- 
er been rationed during the War, was to 
be rationed in 1946. “That we should 
have to do such an unpopular thing”, 
wrote the Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
“illustrates vividly the urgent shortages of 
the post-war years.” 
The words “shortage” and “crisis” 
were to be two of the most used words of 
the late 1940s, when the queue became a 
major national peacetime institution. 
“Economic man” had not been sup- 
planted by “social man” as Huxley had 
suggested. The new Government had to 
deal not only with “economic man” in the 
shape of traditional entrepreneurs, des- 
perately struggling to restore their 
businesses, or managers of newly 
nationalized industries, like coal and the 
railways, but with “spivs” (a new word) 
who dealt shadily in unprecedentedly 
substantial black markets. There were 
soon to be more cartoons about spivs 
than about any other subject, and they 
were to figure- prominently in British 
films, many of them comedy films, which » 
In November 1940 the city of Coventry 
bore the brunt of a massive attack by Ger- 
man bombers aiming to destroy the air- 
craft and armaments factory complex on 
the city’s outskirts. Bombs destroyed 
some 70,000 houses and the 14th-century 
Gothic cathedral of St. Michael, above. 
17 
Ph
ot
o 
«)
 
Im
ap
re
ss
, 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 66070: The Mood of Britain, 1945

» had been given a new lease of life during 
the War and which evoke the mood of the 
War and the immediate post-war years 
more quickly than plays, novels or 
poems. 
In evoking the mood of Britain in 1945 
it would be misleading to concentrate 
entirely on the economics either of indus- 
try or of consumer austerity. One effect 
of the War had been to stimulate a lively 
interest in the arts, including music, and 
the interest was enhanced after the end of 
the War. A Council for the Encourage- 
ment of Music and the Arts had been set 
up during the War, and in 1946 this body 
gave way to the Arts Council with an 
annual Government grant at its disposal, 
modest though this was by the standards 
of some other European countries. “I do 
not believe it is yet realized what an im- 
portant thing has happened”, wrote 
Keynes, who was even more interested in 
the arts than in the diplomacy of the 
Anglo-American Loan. “State patronage 
of the arts has crept in.” 
Keynes made the remark in a BBC 
broadcast, and it was often through the 
BBC, which had provided both an inspir- 
I 
ing and a consoling influence for the peo- 
ple of occupied Europe during the War, 
that the culture of the nation was most 
universally expressed. It was a sign of the 
times that Sir William Haley, the BBC's 
Director-General, planned the start of a 
new Third Prorgamme which would pre- 
sent the best not only in British but in 
European culture. For him—and for his 
colleagues—the community was “a 
broadly-based cultural pyramid aspiring 
slowly upwards”. The pyramid would be 
served by three main Programmes, 
“differentiated but broadly overlapping 
in levels and interest, each Programme 
leading on to the other, the listener being 
induced through the years increasingly to 
discriminate in favour of the things that 
are more worthwhile”. 
This was a very British conception. So 
too was the philosophy that “each Pro- 
gramme at any given moment must be 
ahead of its public, but not so much as to 
lose their confidence”. “The listener”, 
Haley maintained, “must be led from 
good to better by curiosity, liking and a 
growth of understanding. As the stan- 
dards of the education and culture of the 
During the Battle of Britain London was 
the target of violent and highly destructive 
bombing attacks by the Luftwaffe. The 
bombing of London continued intermit- 
tently throughout the war culminating in 
1944 with the launching of V1 and V2 pilot- 
less planes and rockets against the capi- 
tal. Above, to escape the bombs many 
thousands of Londoners slept each night 
in London Underground stations. Right, 
Shelter Scene (7941), one of a series of 
drawings by the famous sculptor Henry 
Moore who was an official war artist from 
1940 to 1942. 
Ph
ot
o 
&:
 
li
ma
pr
es
s.
 
P
a
r
i
s

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 66070: The Mood of Britain, 1945

Rei 
L 
O 
° 
Cc 
« 
E 
<Q { 
oO 
c 
2 an 
EY 
24 
[ab 
3 
© 
2 
8 
-d 
c 
Ke 
8 
8 
4] 
= 
a  
community rise, so should the pro- 
gramme pyramid rise as a whole.” 
It was an essential feature of the mood 
of 1945 that there was optimism about the 
cultural pyramid. Social security reform 
was based on a sense of solidarity. Much 
other reform presupposed that “the 
education and culture of the community” 
would “rise as a whole” in conditions of 
peace. Economists might be pointing to 
the inherent difficulties in the British eco- 
nomy; sociologists, a smaller band, were 
pointing instead to increased social 
mobility and to higher levels of social 
aspiration. 
Britain’s Labour Foreign Secretary, 
Ernest Bevin, a trade unionist by com- 
mitment and career, had warned of the 
dangers of “poverty of desire”. That 
poverty, it was hoped, would now dis- 
appear as completely as poverty affecting 
the body. The hope was to reach its 
pinnacle at the time of the Festival of 
Britain, in 1951, which seemed to follow 
naturally from the Allied victory six years 
earlier, and, characteristically, it was ex- 
pressed as a public as well as a private 
hope. “1951”, the Director-General of 
the Festival promised, “shall be a year of 
fun, fantasy and colour, a year in which 
we can, while soberly surveying our great 
past and our promising future, for once 
let ourselves go.” 
Science had its place in the new picture 
also. Two of the features of the Festival 
were displays of jet engines and penicil- 
lin, the one transforming travel, the other 
medicine. There was a Dome of Dis- 
covery, and most of the visitors to Lon- 
don during the Festival went there first. 
Many of them came from outside Britain, 
although in retrospect this was a period of 
severely restricted travel and people had 
to depend on rationed newsprint and 
broadcasting to find out what was hap- 
pening in other parts of the world. 
The BBC was broadcasting to the 
world in 1945 and, as the War ended, 
there was considerable interest in Britain 
in the world outside Europe. It was still 
considered likely in May 1945 that the 
war against Japan in the Far East would 
continue into the unforeseeable future, 
and once that war ended the political 
problems of Asia were forced into the 
newspaper headlines. 
Inevitably issues of empire confronted 
a British Government which included a 
strong anti-imperial element and which 
wanted to settle them as quickly as pos- 
sible. Already in 1945 the word most 
generally used to describe the inherited 
empire was “Commonwealth”, and the 
Labour Government always spoke of it in 
this way; it had no sympathy with 
attempts by other imperial powers, as it 
saw them, to put back the clock of empire 
to 1939. In particular, the Government 
was anxious to speed up the process of 
implementing India’s independence and 
to try to introduce welfare State policies 
in Africa. 
There was a further strand in the think- 
ing which related to Huxley's sense that a 
worldwide revolution was in the making. 
Great emphasis was placed on “develop- 
ment” even though the economics of de- 
velopment were expounded in such a 
fashion that the advantages of tropical 
development in Britain were stressed 
more than its advantages to the people 
who still had not won their political inde- 
pendence. There was a sense that the 
whole world was a great underdeveloped 
estate. 
The biggest changes in the world scene 
were to become fully apparent only after 
1947 when the Indian sub-continent secu- 
red its independence, and there was to be 
more than one crisis before the world 
map was redrawn. There were few people 
in 1945 who could have foreseen the fu- 
ture speed of change, and it was other 
actors in the drama, not the British, who 
were to determine that. Britain had with 
its Allies won the War, but it had lost 
power in the process. It took time and 
more than time to appreciate that, and 
again it was people outside Britain, not 
inside it, who were best able to judge the 
consequences. 
ASA BRIGGS (LORD BRIGGS) is a disting- 
uished British social and economic historian who 
has been Provost of Worcester College, Oxford, 
since 1976 and Chancellor of the Open Universi- 
ty since 1978. He is the author of many published 
works, including A Social History of England 
(1983), and a History of Broadcasting in the 
United Kingdom, the fourth volume of which, 
Sound and Vision, appeared in 1979. He was 
made a life peer in 1976. His latest book is The BBC: 
The first fifty years (Oxford University Press, 1985). 
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
(©
 
Ke
ys
to
ns
, 
Pa
rs
 


### 66077: Putting the 'S' in UNESCO

Putting the ‘S’inUnesco 
F the many factors which com- 
O bined in 1945 to bring about the 
creation of Unesco the most 
important were undoubtedly the historic- 
al climate of the day and the overwhelm- 
ing political will of all nations, after the 
most destructive war ever, to establish 
mechanisms for the preservation of 
peace. 
A third crucial factor, the importance 
of which has often been under-estimated, 
was the contribution of individual men 
and women who, driven on by pas- 
sionately held personal convictions, left 
an indelible stamp on the infant Organi- 
zation; outstanding among them were 
“the men who put the § in UneSco”. 
In fact, the original letter of invitation 
which resulted in the establishment of 
CAME (Conference of Allied Ministers 
of Education) spoke only of educational 
questions, although the ministers’ discus- 
sions rapidly broadened to cover a wide 
range of cultural and some scientific 
topics. At the end of 1943, when it was 
proposed to widen membership of 
CAME, the Conference was still talking 
in terms of creating a permanent interna- 
tional organization “with the object of 
promoting co-operation in educational 
matters” (UNEO?). 
When the United States became 
associated with CAME, the US delega- 
tion arrived with a plan for a United Na- 
tions Organization for Educational and 
Cultural Reconstruction (UNECREC?), 
while by January 1945 the US State De- 
partment was referring to the creation of 
a United Nations Educational and Cultu- 
ral Organization (UNECO?), and it was 
The destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasa- 
ki by atom bombs in August 1945 made the 
consequences and uses of scientific re- 
search the focus of intense concern, re- 
flected in the debates which led to the 
creation of Unesco and defined the scope 
of its activities. Left, the mushroom cloud 
over Nagasaki, 9 August 1945. 
an organization with this provisional 
name that the Conference of November 
1945 set out to establish. 
It was against this background that, 
behind the scenes, a number of scientists 
were fighting desperately for the inclu- 
sion of Science both in the title of the 
organization and in the content of its 
programmes. 
The fight was spearheaded by Joseph 
Needham, head of the British Scientific 
Mission in China, ably seconded by Ju- 
lian Huxley. The documents reproduced 
below give an insight into the course of 
the struggle and into Needham’s obsti- 
nate, and finally successful, single-min- 
dedness. 
On 29 December 1943, Needham outlined 
for the first time his conception of an 
International Science Co-operation 
Service: 
I would like to indicate, in just a few 
words, what I feel is necessary in post-war 
International Science Co-operation. I be- 
lieve that the time has gone when enough 
can be done by scientists working as indi- 
viduals, or even as organized groups in 
universities, associations, etc., within in- 
dividual countries, and contacting each 
other across national boundaries, as indi- 
viduals. Science and Technology are now 
playing, and will increasingly play, so 
predominant a part in all human civiliza- 
tion, that some means whereby science 
can effectually transcend national bound- 
aries is urgently necessary. The Science 
Co-operation Offices which have already 
been set up in the capitals of the United 
Nations are a piece of machinery which 
ought to continue after the war. The need 
for contact can be met neither by institut- 
ing “scientific attachés” at all Embassies, 
for that would be too subject to diploma- 
tic formalities, nor by sending from one 
country to another industrial scientists 
whose loyalty is to particular commercial 
interests, for then their advice is likely to 
be neither disinterested nor unbiassed. 
What I should like to see is some kind of 
International Science Co-operation Ser- 
vice, whose representatives in all lands 
would have semi-diplomatic status and 
full governmental facilities in com- 
munication and transportation, but who 
would be drawn from either governmen- 
tal or academic laboratories—to which 
after their period of service they might 
return—and would therefore be free 
from commercial entanglements. One of 
the immediate aims of such an Interna- 
tional Service would be the conveyance 
of the most advanced applied and pure 
science from the highly industrialized 
Western countries to the less highly in- 
dustrialized Eastern ones; but there 
would be plenty of scope for traffic in the 
opposite direction too. 
Needham developed these ideas in three 
detailed memoranda which he sent to a 
large number of diplomats, politicians 
and men of science in the Allied countries, 
following up this initiative by personal 
contact with important personalities in the 
United States, Britain and the Soviet Un- 
ion. From them he learned of the proposal 
for a United Nations Educational and 
Cultural Organization and he immediate- 
ly saw this as suitable vehicle into which to 
integrate his International Science Co- 
operation Service. It was in his third 
memorandum, entitled “The Place of Sci- 
ence and International Scientific Co- 
operation in Post-war World Organiza- 
tion” and dated 15 March 1945, that the 
name “Unesco” appeared for the first time in 
a published document (see extract from 
Needham’s own summary to Memoran- 
dum II below). 
SUMMARY 
1) An International Science Co-opera- 
tion Service (ISCS) has been proposed. It 
is shown that there are immense tasks for 
the benefit of humanity in the rapid ex- 
pansion and dissemination of knowledge 
lying before such an organization. Espe- 
cially in rendering assistance to scientists 
and technologists in the more outlying 
parts of the world, there is much which is 
not being done, and which could not be 
done, by any other agency. 
21

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### 66077: Putting the 'S' in UNESCO

> 2) The United Nations Educational and 
Cultural Organization (UNECO), now 
being planned, could embody the 
machinery proposed above, subject to 
certain conditions being met. It would be 
desirable to include the word “Science” 
in the title, so that it should be named 
UNESCO, and to ensure that its constitu- 
tion covers international interchange in 
Applied as well as Pure Science. 
  
There was at first some opposition to 
Needham’s proposal as the following ex- 
tracts from a letter dated 11 May 1945 
from a British Foreign Office official to a 
colleague in the Ministry of Production 
demonstrate: 
(...) We have already had copies of Dr. 
Needham’s remarks from several 
sources. Insofar as his anxiety about the 
position of science in the proposed Un- 
ited Nations Organization for Education- 
al and Cultural Co-operation is concer- 
ned, I can assure you that the claims of 
science will certainly not be overlooked 
when the new organization begins its acti- 
vities (...) Dr. Needham’s observations 
were reported to the Executive Bureau of 
the Conference of Allied Ministers of 
Education by the Secretary of its Science 
Commission, Dr. J.G. Crowther. There 
was a general feeling against including 
the word “science” in the title of the 
organization on the ground that it implied 
a distinction between science and culture, 
which not merely the English language 
but British usage would not sustain (...) 
  
Meanwhile, Julian Huxley had been 
pressing the case for science behind the 
scenes. On 14th August 1945 he wrote a 
letter (see opposite page) to Philip Noel- 
Baker at the British Foreign Office in 
which he summarized the main points of a 
In the forefront of the drive to include sci- 
ence in Unesco’s activities was the British 
biochemist, sinologist and historian of sci- 
ence Joseph Needham (b. 1900), below. 
  
  
  
conversation the two men had had earlier 
in the day and from which the following 
extracts are taken: 
(...) a number of scientific men are con- 
cerned that the proposed new cultural 
and educational organization of the Un- 
ited Nations should be more definitely 
scientific than now appears. Culture does 
not cover all of science, any more than 
science covers all of culture. To use an 
Americanism, we want to put the S in 
UNESCO. This, it seems to us, could be 
achieved (1) by inserting “Scientific” in 
the title, (2) by having the organization 
essentially tripartite, one section dealing 
with education in the narrow sense, the 
second with culture in the sense of the 
humanities and arts, the third with sci- 
ence, pure and applied (...) Unesco 
should have definite positive functions in 
all sections—in education in actually pro- 
viding certain types of educational facili- 
ties, in culture in positive stimulation of 
e.g. the arts, and in science in just such 
functions as you outlined (...) 
  
Even when the Conference which was to 
establish Unesco began on 1 November 
1945 the battle was not won. In his speech 
of welcome to the delegates the British 
prime minister, Clement Attlee, spoke at 
some length about education and culture 
but said not a word about science. Never- 
theless, the mushroom clouds over 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki had made sci- 
ence and scientific research the burning 
question of the day and in her opening 
speech, Ellen Wilkinson, British minister 
of education and President of the Con- 
ference, declared: 
Though Science was not included in the 
original title of the Organization, the 
British delegation will put forward a 
proposal that it be included, so that the: 
title would run “Educational, Scientific" 
and Cultural Organization”. In these 
days, when we are all wondering, perhaps 
apprehensively, what the scientists will 
do to us next, it is important that they 
should be linked closely with the humani- 
ties and should feel that they have a res- 
ponsibility to mankind for the result of 
their labours. I do not believe any scien- 
tists will have survived the world cata- 
strophe, who will still say that they are 
utterly uninterested in the social implica- 
tions of their discoveries. 
These words of Ellen Wilkinson summed 
up the anxieties felt by a majority of the 
delegates and on 6 November 1945, dur- 
ing the third session of the First Commis- 
sion of the Conference (whose task it was 
to decide on the title of the Organization, 
to draft the preamble to the Constitution 
and to define its objectives and principal 
functions), “S” for Science was finally 
incorporated into the title of the new body 
henceforth to be known as The United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultu- 
ral Organization. |

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

16, Queen nne's Gate, 
London. SW 1 
Whitehall” 7245 
Lith August 1945 ° 
The Rt. Honi Philip Noel-Baker, M.P. 
The Foreign Office, 
Whitehall, S.W.1. 
  
My dear Noel-Baker, 
I thought you might like to have the heads of our discussion thi 
morning in writing. Here they are:=- 9 ' 
In the first place, & number of scientific men are concerned that the 
proposed new cultural and educational organisation of the United Nations should 
be more definitely scientific than now appears: Culture does not cover all of 
science, any more than science covers all of culture. ' To use an Americanism, 
we want to put the S in UNESCO. This, it seems to us, could be achieved (1) by 
inserting entific" in the title, (2) by having the organisation essentially 
tripartite, one section dealing with education in the narrow sense, the second 
with culture in the sense of the humanities and arts, the third with science, 
pure and applied; the threes to have, presumably, somewhat overlapping membership 
and being under a central coordinating committee; but they would be ths main 
exeGutive agencies. ternative would be to have a totally separate 
United Nations Scientific Orgpnisation Tmt T am Armnead +a +ha nrmaenscasws 
multiplication of agencies on { 
them being axed in periods or a 
As a first step towards “aa : 
country might be asked to sen uf ~~ 
in November (certainly not mo © 
content with one in view of t 
1. The Royal Society, so later these delegates, together with one or two representatives of the 
science in general. (I bodies concerned, might be asked to meet the Government departments 
to the Kbreign Secretar concerned for discussion, 
' I hope that foreign Governments will slso be specifically asked to 
send adequate scientific representation. Possibly this may already have 
been done, but I should not imagine so. TI think we want to be sure that 
younger men and the applied scientists are repwesented, as well as their 
elders and the more academic branches. : 
2. The Association of Scie 
professional capacity ( 
  
3. Parliamentary and S 
titutes. s | 
Then it would appear to be important, and, 11desd TEIL, that the 
Government should have a scientific adviser on stent questions of 
international scientific organisation. I would venture to suggest that 
Dr. Joseph Needham, F.R.S., now head of the British Scientific Mission to 
China, could be secured for a few months for this purpose (though I feel that 
he should not bs kept too long fron his most useful work in China). 
In discussion, you raised the question whether thers was not room for 
a separate solentific organisation to undertake more positive functions for 
social welfare, £.g. in relation to erosion, pest-control, health, ete. 
When I said that'I felt it would be undesirable to duplicate the scientific 
ssotion of the UNESCO, you. said that in your view UNESCO would only be 
“cultural”. On reflection, I fear I feel I must disagree with you. UNESCO 
should have definite positive functions in all sections - in education in 
actually providing certain types of educational facilities, in culture in 
positive stimulation of e.g. the arts, and in science in just such functions 
as you outlined, Further, apart from the undesirsbility in principle of 
multiplying agencies, there is the difficulty that one does not wish to 
dissipate the all-too-scarce scientific manpower available. 
There does, howevsr, seem to me to be a case for representation of 
science at a higher level - in relation to the (a) Qocial and Feonomic @uncil 
and to the (b) Security Council. In regard to (a) there will be need 
fof occordination and sdvice on the scientific aspects of many organisations 
under the Council, e.g. health, food, UNESCO, eto., and I should imagine there 
will be similar need in relation to (b). In the latter case, you certainly 
want a strong scientific body to deal with problems such as research for 
war, including research on atomic bombs, etc. Whether these two high-level 
committees could be combined I do not know - probably not, but this whole 
question appears to me to need further discussion. 
Many thanks for the sympathetic understending you showed towards these 
| 
problems. 
Yours sincerely, 
«) . SU | ) { e 
a 
wi
 
— 
  
| 23 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Pu
bl
ic
 
Re
co
rd
 
Of
fi
ce
, 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 66078: Early days

Early days 
by Julian Huxley 
In this extract from the second volume of his auto- 
biography, Memories II (1973), published here by kind 
permission of George Allen and Unwin Ltd., the late Sir 
Julian Huxley evokes the exciting period from his 
appointment in March 1946 as successor to Sir Alfred 
Zimmern as Executive Secretary of the Preparatory 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Commission to his 
early days in Paris as the first Director-General of 
Unesco. 
Text (© copyright. Reproduction prohibited 
HE offices of the Commission 
T were in Carlos Place. The first 
time I entered its portals in my 
new capacity, I was very nervous, as if I 
were both a Headmaster and a boy enter- 
ing school for the first time. However, 
Mrs Brunauer) knew the repes and I 
soon found my feet in this strange job. 
Once 1 had settled down, I felt that I 
should try to clarify my own ideas about 
the role of the Organization. So I took a 
fortnight off and went once more to stay 
with Ronald Lockley (with whom I had 
made the film The Private Life of the 
Gannet on an island off the Pem- 
brokeshire coast); he was now occupying 
a farm on Dinas Head, also in Pem- 
brokeshire. There, in the intervals of 
walks and talks, exploring the promon- 
tory and basking with my host in shel- 
tered nooks overlooking the bird- 
haunted sandstone cliffs, [ wrote a sixty- 
page pamphlet entitled Unesco, Its Pur- 
pose and Its Philosophy (see page 28). 
In this, besides stressing its obvious 
duties in promoting cultural exchanges 
and giving help to the educational sys- 
tems of backward (or, as we say now, 
“underdeveloped”)® countries, I main- 
tained that it could not rely on religious 
doctrine—there was strife between diffe- 
rent religions and sects—or on any of the 
conflicting academic systems of philo- 
sophy. Unesco, [ wrote, must work in the 
context of what I called Scientific Huma- 
nism, based on the established facts of 
biological adaptation and advance, 
(1) Mrs. Brunauer, of the USA, had been assistant to 
the previous Executive Secretary, Sir Alfred Zimmern. 
(2) With changing times and circumstances these coun- 
tries are now referred to as the “developing” countries. 
24 
brought about by means of Darwinian 
selection, continued into the human 
sphere by psycho-social pressures, and 
leading to some kind of advance, even 
progress, with increased human control 
and conservation of the environment and 
of natural forces. So far as Unesco was 
concerned, the process should be guided 
by humanistic ideals of mutual aid, the 
spread of scientific ideas, and by cultural 
interchange. 
This was presented to the Commission 
and was ordered to be printed as an offi- 
cial document. But one Saturday, when I 
was about to go to Oxford to look for 
possible staff, I heard that Sir Ernest 
Barker, the historian, who had been 
appointed to the Commission in view of 
his work on the Committee of the 
League’s Institute of Intellectual Co- 
operation (see page 6), was to be present 
at the meeting which was to discuss Un- 
esco’s role in philosophy. He and I had 
previously quarrelled over my attitude to 
established religion when I was Professor 
of Zoology at King’s College, London, of 
which he was Principal, and I scented 
trouble, rightly suspecting that he would 
attack my pamphlet. 
As an ardent churchman, he argued 
forcibly against Unesco’s adopting what 
he called an atheist attitude disguised as 
humanism, and got the members to agree 
to state, when circulating my document, 
that it expressed merely my personal 
views, not those of the official Commis- 
sion. 
Looking back, 1 think he was right. 
Though Unesco has in fact pursued 
humanistic aims, it would have been un- 
fortunate to lay down any doctrine as a 
basis for its work. Further, a purely 
humanist tone would have antagonized 
the world’s major religious groups (...) 
Meanwhile, there was the difficult 
business of recruiting staff: this I had to 
begin, whether or not I was eventually 
appointed Director-General. Some I 
appointed directly, like Joseph 
Needham, the eminent Cambridge 
biochemist, who was also interested in 
Chinese culture and in the history of sci- 
ence; and John Bowers, who was recom- 
mended to me by a war-time colleague 
for his first-hand experience of an under- 
developed country’s basic needs. 
One virtually appointed himself—with 
excellent results. I had to find someone to 
take charge of the Libraries section. 
Desmond Bernal had recommended an 
English woman librarian, but I was not 
sure of her competence, and asked Ed- 
ward Carter, my Hampstead neighbour 
(and Librarian of the Royal Institute of 
British Architects), for advice. His re- 
sponse was simple—“Why not me?” (...) 
Edward was excellent, especially in 
getting Unesco to set up good modern 
libraries in underdeveloped countries. 
Later, I was to see the one in southern 
Nigeria, and be delighted to find that it 
was not only housed in a fine building (as 
was to be expected from a man interested 
in architecture), but also well-stocked, 
and with many readers in its spacious 
rooms. 
Others were recommended to me by 
friends. Thus Sir Kenneth Clark recom- 
mended the young Australian, Peter Bel- 
lew, as head of the Fine Arts section (...) 
Still others were wished on me by their 
Governments. While the Preparatory 
Commission was still in London, Julien 
Cain the charming and learned head of

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 66078: Early days

the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, 
came over with a young man called Jean 
Thomas, who was officially recom- 
mended by the French authorities as my 
Deputy. It was understood that, in return 
for waiving the right to nominate the top 
man, France should be the home of the 
Organization and one of its two deputy 
Director-Generals should be a French- 
man. Thomas and I got on excellently 
throughout my term of office, while 
Julien Cain became an influential mem- 
ber of the Executive Board. He and his 
gifted wife (she had once acted as Paul 
Valéry’s secretary) became close friends 
of Juliette'® and myself. 
Professor Pierre Auger was also re- 
commended by the French, for a post in 
the Science Department. He was an ex- 
cellent physicist, balancing the bio- 
logically competent Needham, and even- 
tually succeeded him as Head of the 
Department. 
Alva, sociologist wife of the celebrated 
Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal, took 
charge of the Social Sciences Division, 
and I myself asked John Grierson, the 
pioneer of documentary films, to look 
after the Cinema section of the Arts De- 
partment. Flora McGlade (always known 
as Mac) was already in my office, having 
been Zimmern’s assistant on the Prepara- 
tory Commission. She stayed as one of 
my secretaries all through my time at 
Unesco. I also kept Friedl Rothschild, 
who had worked for me at P.E.P.,®® but 
soon had to add others to my personal 
staff: Mrs Paulette Matthews, as a second 
(3) Juliette Huxley, née Baillot, Julian Huxley’s wife. 
(4) Political and Economic Planning, a British indepen- 
dent cross-party opinion group. 
 
The British scientist, philosopher and edu- 
cator Julian Huxley (1887-1975) was Un- 
esco’s first Director-General (1946-1948). 
secretary to deal with the flood of official 
correspondence; and Claude Berkeley, 
cousin of the composer of the same name, 
as my personal assistant, constantly 
called on to deal with complaints, and to 
prepare for the visits and travels I had to 
undertake. 
Alfred Métraux took charge of most of 
the work in Anthropology and Sociology, 
while Guy, his younger brother, after 
working in various sections, later became 
the very efficient Secretary of the Com- 
mission dealing with Unesco’s History of 
Mankind. 
Emilio Arenales, nominated by Guate- 
mala, was very useful in dealing with 
Latin American countries in general; 
with Manolo Jiménez for Mexican affairs 
and for dealing with internal procedure. 
Then there was Dr Irina Zhukova, 
Russian by birth, who worked in the Phy- 
siological section of the Science Depart- 
ment, with special responsibility for 
liaison with WHO, the World Health 
Organization (...) 
So I could run on. I secured another 
Frenchman, Michel Montagnier, to deal 
“with arrangements for Conferences, 
which he did with great efficiency; a 
Swiss, André de Blonay, to cope with the 
affairs of national delegates, especially 
during General Conferences; while a 
Chinese Professor, Dr Kuo, was made 
Head of the Division of Education. 
Later in the year an American, Walter 
Laves, was nominated by the USA to 
deal with questions of internal adminis- 
tration. These, unfortunately, often 
25 
Ph
ot
o 
Un
es
co
 
>

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 66078: Early days

p caused trouble—there were jealousies 
between different Divisions—and once, I 
remember, I had to intervene between 
one Division and the staff responsible for 
preparing Unesco’s budget. The Division 
Head thought that the Budget men 
should come to his office, while they 
expected that everyone, even Assistant 
Director-Generals, should come to them 
at their request. I cut the Gordian knot by 
inviting both parties to meet in my own 
office. 
But much more taxing than such 
squabbles was establishing the pro- 
gramme for the coming year. This, 
together with an estimate of its cost, had 
to be laid before the next General Con- 
ference, which could in theory (and 
sometimes did in practice) cut out some 
item, refuse to grant necessary finance, 
or even press for new items to be 
included. 
This task was made more difficult by an 
anomaly in the relations between the Ex- 
ecutive Board and the Director-General. 
Under the original constitution, the 
Board was given a hand in framing the 
programme, in consultation, of course, 
with the Director-General. This led to so 
many disagreements, and such waste of 
time, that in 1948 the arrangement was 
altered: from then on, the Director- 
General had sole responsibility for pre- 
paring the Programme, while the Board 
could only offer comment or criticism. 
This is merely one example of the way 
in which everything had to be impro- 
vised, and arrangements made to patch 
up the differences of interest between 
various Divisions, the Director-General 
and the Board. These were perhaps in- 
evitable in a new organization—indeed a 
new kind of organization, for its scope 
was very much wider than that of the 
original League’s Institute of Intellectual 
Co-operation. At any rate, they gave me 
plenty of headaches during my term of 
office (...) 
Headaches, yes, but also interest, and 
indeed excitement—the excitement of 
being in charge of a vast new internation- 
al experiment, a stimulus which kept me 
going through the gruelling two and a half 
years of my tenure of office. 
Once I started work at Unesco’s head- 
quarters in Paris, I had to deal with the 
Executive Board over all major prob- 
lems. In 1947, the Board numbered only 
eighteen members. These were chosen 
from the delegates of member-states, al- 
ways one from the UK, France and the 
USA (and a Soviet delegate when the 
USSR joined Unesco), one from the 
country where the next conference was to 
be held, and representatives of other 
countries to make up its number. 
In 1947, it included some very disting- 
uished men—John Maud (later Lord 
Redcliffe-Maud) from Britain, Archibald 
MacLeish from the USA, Pierre Auger 
(soon to became head of Unesco’s Natu- 
ral Sciences Division), Dr. Photiades 
26 
from Greece, Professor Paulo E. de Ber- 
rédo Carneiro (later Chairman of the In- 
ternational Commission for a History of 
the Scientific and Cultural Development 
of Mankind), Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrish- 
nan, statesman and philosopher from 
India, Ronald Walker from Australia, 
etc. (...) 
The original principle was that Board 
members should be men distinguished in 
education, the sciences and the arts, from 
different regions, but voting as indi- 
viduals, not as representing their own 
country. It was a fine idea, but it did not 
work out. Board members were almost 
always distinguished, but they usually 
voted in favour of measures approved by 
their Governments. So eventually they 
became representatives of their own 
countries, as well as specialists in some" 
field of Unesco’s work. 
Another difficulty arose over Unesco’s 
budget. The Board was originally em- 
powered to propose a budget sufficient to 
carry out the programme submitted to 
each General Conference. This led to 
many squabbles, members of the Board 
too often making proposals that would 
benefit mainly their own country or re- 
gion. They had the duty of consulting the 
Director-General, but frequently the 
consultation was merely formal. 
This system was quite illogical, and 
during my term of office the Director- 
General became responsible both for the 
details of the programme, and for pre- 
senting the budget estimate. Of course, 
he had to consult the Board and take into 
account any comments or objections they 
might make, but the unworkable system 
of divided authority was scrapped (...) 
It had been laid down by the London 
Conference’ that Unesco could seek 
help in technical matters from non- 
governmental International Agencies 
concerned with subjects within Unesco’s 
purview; and, if necessary, aid in the 
creation of new ones. It was on 
Needham'’s advice that ICSU, the Inter- 
national Council of Scientific Unions, be- 
came the first of such bodies to be 
attached to Unesco. We provided it with 
rooms in Unesco’s headquarters in Paris, 
and salaries for its staff: previously, the 
Cambridge professor who was its secret- 
ary—and sole executive—had to dictate 
all its correspondence in his College 
rooms! 
The ICSU gave Unesco much valuable 
advice—on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, on regional centres for scientific 
co-operation and exchange of know- 
ledge, on the calling of international sci- 
entific congresses, and on liaison with 
other International Agencies concerned 
with science, such as FAO for agricul- 
tural science and applied ecology, and 
WHO for medicine, physiology and so- 
cial well-being. 
(5) United Nations Conference for the Establishment 
of an Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, 
London, | to 16 November, 1945. 
Soon after, I had a surprise visit from a 
wealthy American art-lover, a trustee of 
the Buffalo Art Gallery, and agreed to 
recommend that an International Com- 
mission on Museums should be attached 
to the cultural section of Unesco. Thanks 
to its advice (and that of other interna- 
tional bodies concerned with the arts}, 
Unesco has done valuable work since 
then, both in giving financial aid to gal- 
leries and museums, and also in pub- 
lishing and distributing excellent repro- 
ductions of little-known paintings, sculp- 
tures and architectural achievements 
from various countries, especially repro- 
ductions which could be used in schools. 
In the hot summer of 1947, we also set 
up an International Theatre Institute (for 
drama, opera, films and ballet) at the 
insistence of Jack Priestley, an American 
called Kuntz and John Grierson. The 
committee responsible for this comprised 
many well-known names in dramatic 
circles, such as the French producer and 
actor Jean-Louis Barrault, Sir Tyrone 
Guthrie from England, and Lillian Hell- 
man from the USA (...) 
The Commission moved to Paris in late 
November, 1946, and we and other dele- 
gates had our offices in the former Hotel 
Majestic, where the Peace Conference 
was held after the First World War. Dur- 
ing the Second World War, it was com- 
mandeered by the Germans, and my offi- 
cial room had the “distinction” of having 
been the office of the notorious Nazi 
Commandant of Paris. Thus my occupan- 
cy visibly symbolized the transition from 
war and racialism to peace and cultural 
co-operation. 
The full Executive Board was now in 
daily session, discussing not only Un- 
esco’s terms of reference and its immedi- 
ate activities, but also whom to nominate 
as Director-General. 
Archibald MacLeish, the distinguished 
American writer and poet, who was also 
Librarian of Congress, had written a bril- 
liant preamble to Unesco’s Constitution, 
in which he had stressed Unesco’s role in 
promoting Peace—“Peace through Edu- 
cation, Peace through Science, Peace 
through Culture, Peace everywhere in 
the hearts of men”—a starry-eyed hope 
rather than a guide to practical action. 
The USA wanted him as Director- 
General, but he declined, saying he could . 
not spare the time from his real work in 
literature. The British delegate, Sir John 
Maud, put forward my name, and there 
were one or two other candidates (...) 
Eventually John Maud came to tell me 
that I had been duly elected, but for two 
years only, in place of the constitutional 
five (...) 
Looking back today, I am grateful for 
having been appointed, but also grateful 
that I did not have to serve for five years: 
it would have been too geat a strain (in- 
deed one later Director-General found 
the job too much for him and had to 
resign in the middle of his term). |

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 66079: Can we educate for world peace?

Can we educate for world 
  
peace? 
Extracts from the opening remarks by Archibald MacLeish 
during a radio discussion with Dr. F.L. Schlagle, President of 
the U.S. National Education Association, Mr. Herbert Emmer- 
ich, Director of the Public Administration Clearing House, and 
Dr. Francis Bacon, member of the Educational Policies Com- 
mission of the National Education Association, broadcast on 12 
December 1945, one month after the establishment of Unesco. 
“Of course we can educate for world peace. 
I'd be willing to go a great deal farther than 
that, I'd be willing, for my own part, to say 
that there is no possible way of getting 
world peace except through education. 
Which means education of the peoples of 
the world. All you can do by arrangements 
between governments is to remove the 
causes of disagreement which may become, 
in time, causes of war. But peace, as we are 
all beginning to realize, is something a great 
deal more than the absence of war. Peace is 
positive and not negative. Peace is a way of 
living together which excludes war, rather 
than a period without war in which peoples 
try to live together. 
“But the difficulty with this kind of dis- 
cussion is not the answers. The difficulty is 
the questions. And the trouble with the 
questions is that they are put—have to be 
put—in words which have lost their fresh- 
ness and their reality of meaning (...) 
“The real problem (...) is one that goes a 
lot deeper. It has to do with the effect on the 
human mind of words like ‘international 
understanding’ and ‘education’ and ‘cul- 
ture’ (...) 
“Before we can talk intelligently and 
meaningfully, therefore, about questions 
like education for peace, or the creation of 
international understanding, we have got to 
find the abrasives which will scrape these 
words down to their living meanings again. 
For some reason which I have never been 
able to understand, people are quite willing 
to believe that anything you call ‘econo- 
mics’ is real and that you call ‘politics’ is 
a. J 
~~ F ¥ 
aN 
- 
A ———— 
RE) 
fs 3 No 
2 
Shy Wo at A AP “e 
at hs 7a A Xi | We 
US poet and Librarian of Congress Archi- 
bald MacLeish (1892- 1982) was Chairman 
of the Committee which drafted the Pre- 
amble to Unesco’s Constitution. 
  
  
exciting, but that anything you refer to 
under the general words which describe the 
life of the human mind is necessarily dull 
and stale and unrealistic and fuzzy (...) 
“Actually, in the world we live in, which 
is very different from the world we think we 
live in, the relations of peoples to each 
other in terms of the things they think and 
the things they believe and the things they 
hope, in terms, that is to say, of their mental 
processes, of the things that distinguish 
them as men, are far more vivid—make, to 
be brief, far more sense than the economic 
and political arrangements between gov- 
ernments which capture the front pages of 
our minds as well as of our newspapers(...) 
“I am not belittling the tremendous im- 
portance of economic solutions for econo- 
mic difficulties and political cures for poli- 
tical mistakes. I am saying that these things, 
important as they are, are far less important 
than the creation of a world of words and 
images and mutual knowledge within which 
people may talk to each other. 
“What we tried to do in London was to 
invent an international instrument which 
could help us all to create that world by the 
use of all the channels of communication— 
education and radio, press and scholarship, 
motion pictures and music, journalism in all 
its forms and living, enduring arts. If the 
question you are discussing is the question 
whether our international instrument will 
work, I am going to ask my colleagues 
Emmerich and Schlagle to put me down as 
voting Yes.” [| 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 66080: The Application of science and art

The application of science 
NESCO cannot be highbrow and 
| | confine itself solely to “pure” sci- 
ence, and “fine” art. It cannot do 
so, because it must concern itself with the 
whole of humanity, not only with the spe- 
cialists, the highly educated élite, or the 
privileged few, and 1s expressly charged 
with advancing the ideals of equality of 
educational opportunity; and this is not 
possible if Unesco’s concern with science 
and art is confined to the encouragement of 
the scientist and the artist and to the learned 
study of their achievements. It cannot do so 
for another reason—because its Constitu- 
tion lays upon it the duty of advancing the 
common welfare of mankind. For the 
advancement of human welfare depends in 
the main upon the right application of sci- 
ence—physical, biological, psychological 
and social—and also, in the sphere of emo- 
tional and spiritual satisfactions, upon the 
application of the arts. 
Unesco must therefore concern itself 
with the widest extension and the fullest 
application both of the sciences and of the 
arts. It has, of course, neither the right nor 
the wish to deal with the detailed problems 
of nutrition and agriculture, medicine and 
health, to however great an extent they 
depend on the applications of science, 
since, to cope with them, other Agencies of 
the United Nations have been created. 
With the scientific bases of these questions, 
however, it must concern itself and must 
therefore establish a proper liaison, with 
clear delimitation of functions, between it- 
self and the FAO [Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations] and 
the World Health Organization. The same 
holds for those applications of the sciences 
which, because of their importance for 
labour welfare, fall to be dealt with by the 
ILO [International Labour Organisation], 
and of those which, because of their military 
importance, fall within the province of the 
Atomic Energy Commission of the Security 
Council. 
Further, it is clear that practical problems 
of economics and of social structure and 
welfare, in so far as they are to be dealt with 
by an international body, must be the con- 
cern of the Economic and Social Council, 
while certain sectors of social anthropology, 
such as culture-contact between more and 
less advanced cultures (which include prob- 
lems not only of applied science but also of 
art and literature and of education), will be 
28 
and art 
the primary concern of the Trusteeship 
Council and of the section of the Economic 
and Social Council dealing with non-self- 
governing peoples. 
This overlap, however, far from de- 
barring Unesco from concerning itself with 
the applications of the sciences and the arts 
in general, makes it all the more imperative 
that it should do so, and should do so in a 
particular way. These other Agencies and 
organs of the United Nations which we have 
mentioned are concerned with particular 
fields or problems some larger, some more 
specialized. Unesco alone is charged with 
the comprehensive task of studying and 
promoting all the higher activities of man 
and their applications, and of doing so in a 
co-ordinated way, subject to a definite set 
of purposes. 
What Unesco can do in this vast sphere of 
the practical application of creative know- 
ledge and art is, accordingly, to study the 
problems in correlation, to endeavour to 
promote the best methods of translating 
theory into practice, and to give guidance as 
to right application. The terms best and 
right are not used merely in the technical 
sense of most immediately efficient, but as 
definitely implying value-judgement. It is 
possible to exploit new agricultural 
methods in a way that is in the long run 
technically disastrous to agriculture itself, 
by causing soil exhaustion or erosion, but it 
is also possible to do so in a way which is 
technically sound but socially wrong—by 
causing over-population, for instance, or by 
ruining natural beauty or causing the ex- 
tinction of striking or interesting species of 
animals and plants, or by creating a depress- 
ed agricultural class with unduly low stan- 
dards of living. Similarly, it is possible to 
devote too much attention to exploiting the 
discoveries of mechanical, physical and che- 
mical science, to the grave detriment of 
interest in the arts and appreciation of the 
value of beauty in everyday life and of 
artistic creation as a human activity; while a 
contrary effect is also all too readily pos- 
sible, when religious prejudice or cultural 
obscurantism puts obstacles in the way of 
scientific research and new knowledge, or 
their beneficent applications. 
Again, there are fields with which other 
Agencies are not expressly or immediately 
concerned. No other United Nations Agen- 
cy deals with the important question of 
seeing that the arts are properly and fully 
applied, or that provision is made for satis- 
fying man’s need for aesthetic enjoyment, 
whether of scenery and natural beauty, of 
the everyday furniture of life, of buildings 
and cities, or of great works of art and music 
and literature. Nor is any other Agency 
concerning itself with such important ap- 
plications of the sciences as the disciplining 
of the mind to produce so-called mystical 
experience and other high degrees of spir- 
itual satisfaction; or with the application of 
psychology to the technique of government, 
or to preventing the abuse or the exploita- 
tion of democracy. 
Thus in this general field Unesco should 
pursue three main objectives. First, it 
should discover what applications of science 
and art are not being considered by other 
United Nations organizations, and then 
pick out from among them those it thinks 
most important to promote or to study. 
Secondly, it should study the practical ap- 
plications of science and art as a particular 
social problem, to discover what are the 
reasons which prevent, frustrate or distort 
them, what are the effects of undue speed or 
undue delay. Such a study should be of 
considerable help in promoting the technic- 
al efficiency of this process—a problem 
which will become steadily more pressing 
with the increase of scientific knowledge 
and of social complexity. And the third 
objective, the most difficult though perhaps 
also the most important, is to relate the 
applications of science and art to each other 
and to a general scale of values, so as to 
secure a proper amount and rate of applica- 
tion in each field. If such a task were satis- 
factorily carried out, and if its findings were 
acted upon, this would constitute one of the 
most important contributions towards dis- 
covering and pursuing the desirable direc- 
tion of human evolution—in other words, 
true human welfare. [| 
Julian Huxley 
 
Extract from Unesco Its Purpose and its Philo- 
sophy. This document was wriften by Julian Hux- 
ley during a fortnight's holiday taken in 1946 
shortly after his appointment as Secretary- 
General of the Preparatory Commission.

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
          
  Ph
ot
o 
U
n
e
s
c
o
 
From premises in Grosvenor Square and 
Belgrave Square in London, Unesco 
moved to the Hotel Majestic in Paris in 
1946. Photo shows a salon at the Majestic 
transformed into a conference room. 


### 66081: Finding a home for UNESCO

Finding a home for Unesco 
URING 1945, the question 
D arose of where the proposed 
new Organization was to be 
situated. A number of countries had ex- 
pressed their desire to provide a home for 
the Organization, but France, which still 
housed the International Institute of In- 
tellectual Co-operation (IIIC, see page 
6), an offshoot of the former League of 
Nations, pressed her claim with particu- 
lar forcefulness. 
The French representatives in London 
seem to have interpreted a certain reti- 
cence about Paris as the location of the 
Organization on the part of the British 
Government as a desire to see Unesco 
situated in London. This, however, was 
far from being the case. 
In common with many other countries, 
Britain was concerned about the French 
desire to prolong the life of the IIIC, 
which the French believed should pro- 
vide the Secretariat for Unesco. Most 
other governments were anxious to make 
a complete break with the institutions of 
the old League of Nations. When this was 
accepted by the French Government, the 
way was clear for Paris to become the 
home of Unesco headquarters. The docu- 
ments reproduced below illustrate the 
final stages in the process which led to 
agreement on Paris as the seat of Unesco. 
 
Extract from a Foreign Office memoran- 
dum dated 30 June 1945. 
(...) I doubt very much whether we shall 
wish to have an organization permanently 
on our hands in London, and in these 
circumstances it seems to me important 
that we should assure the French that 
these plans” are in no way designed to 
rush Allied nations into decisions which 
do not take proper account of French 
interests (...) 
(*) The plans referred to were for the convening in 
London of the Conference which was to establish 
Unesco. 
29

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### 66081: Finding a home for UNESCO

FINDING A HOME FOR UNESCO 
  
Letter from Léon Blum, chief French de- 
legate to the Conference for the Establish- 
ment of an Educational and Cultural 
Organization (London 1 to 16 November 
1945), to Clement Attlee, prime minister 
of the United Kingdom. 
Claridge’s 
Brook Street, W.1. 
Sunday 4 November 
My dear friend, 
You will remember that, last Wednes- 
day, when I arrived at Downing Street, I 
had just left our friend Ellen Wilkinson. 
You will no doubt also recall that with 
regard to a subject close to our hearts in 
France—the location in Paris of the future 
educational and cultural organization— 
she had assured me that we should not 
lack British support, unless there should 
be opposition on the part of the United 
States. I spoke about this in the most frank 
and open manner with the head of the 
American Delegation, Mr. Archibald 
MacLeish, and have, in my turn, been 
able to assure Ellen Wilkinson that the 
opposition in principle that she seemed to 
fear does not exist. The American Gov- 
ernment has taken no advance decision. 
The Delegation has its hands free and, in 
Mr. MacLeish’s opinion the French re- 
quest would be heard sympathetically by 
his colleagues. 
Please forgive me for keeping you 
posted about this matter, apparently 
minor, yet in reality rather important. 
Your faithful friend, 
Léon Blum 
Perhaps I shall be fortunate enough to see 
you again for a moment or two before you 
leave. I am taking the liberty of sending 
you a copy in French of a book I wrote in 
one of the first of my prisons, the English 
translation of which is now being com- 
pleted by William Pickles. 
30 
—wde 
[This telegram is of particular secrecy and should be 
retained by the authorised recipient and not passed on] 
[EN CLAIK] SPECIAL (WOKLD ORGANISATION) 
FROM FOREIGN OFFICE TO PARIS 
No,2712 Saving 10th November, 1245. 
Repeated to: Washington No,11340 
Moscow No. 5074. 
Commission 4 of the United Nations Educational 
Conference this afternoon unanimously decided to 
recoumend to the Conference that Paris should be the 
site of the proposed Educational Scientific and 
Cultural Organisation, 
2. The motion in favour of Paris was made 
by our delegation supported by the United States, 
Chinese, Belgien, Brazilian, Colombian and other 
delegates by acclavation, \ 
%. Confersnce is still in Commission stage. 
London is reconmended as site of Interim Commission 
which will be created to prepare for the first 
meeting of the new organisation, 
Confidential telegram sent on 10 Novem- 
ber 1945 by the British Foreign Office in- 
forming the French authorities that their 
offer to provide Unesco with a seat in Paris 
had been accepted. 
Reply from Mr. Attlee to M. Léon Blum. 
10, Downing Street, 
Whitehall. 
7th November, 1945 
My dear friend, 
Thank you for your letter of Novem- 
ber 4th. As you know, the British attitude 
to the question of the siting of the Educa- 
tional and Cultural Organization is at pre- 
sent under consideration; and I hope my 
colleagues will be able to let you know our 
views shortly. 
Thank you also for sending me a copy 
of your hook “A I’Echelle Humaine”. I 
shall always value it and the friendly in- 
scription which you have written in it. 
It was a great pleasure to meet you 
again after all these years. 
Yours ever, 
C.R. Attlee 
 
Extract from the Final Act of the United 
Nations Conference for the Establishment 
of an Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization. 
After consideration of these drafts and 
proposals the Conference drew up a Con- 
stitution establishing an Educational, Sci- 
entific and Cultural Organization and an 
Instrument establishing a Preparatory 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Commission. The Conference also 
adopted the following Resolution: 
“The seat of the United Nations Educa- 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organiza- 
tion shall be in Paris. 
“This Resolution shall not in any way 
affect the right of the General Conference 
to take decisions in regard to this matter 
by a two-thirds majority.” 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Pu
bl
ic
 
Re
co
rd
 
Of
fi
ce
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 66081: Finding a home for UNESCO

a 
—
 
  
ci
en
ce
s 
Po
li
ti
qu
es
, 
ar
n 
a“ 
d
e
 l
a 
F
o
n
d
a
t
i
o
n
 
Nati
onal
e 
«ie 
;
 x
 
Ph
ot
o 
(OF 
Ar
ch
iv
es
 
d 
Hi
st
oi
re
 
Co
nt
er
np
or
an
 
  
"pe $rp0 
lon, Lomas €7 UNESCO, Le vom 
9 J 3 
oy lakes x CAT Ian, 
  
gre Toh rd leo 
et A 
ey 
Extract from a radio broadcast made by 
M. Léon Blum early in 1946. 
U-NES-CO 
Do not forget these three exotic-sounding 
syllables. 
U-NES-CO—perhaps you have already 
heard them somewhere. You will certain- 
ly hear them repeated often in the future. 
These three exotic-sounding syllables are, 
as you have already guessed, made up of 
the initials of a rather long name. 
The United Nations Educational, Scien- 
tific and Cultural Organization. 
Unesco is one of the sections, one of the 
departments of the International Com- 
munity, founded by the United Nations in 
the midst of war, at Dumbarton Oaks and 
at San Francisco. 
What is of particular interest to all 
citizens of France is the location and the 
purpose of Unesco. 
Its headquarters? 
During the Conference for the estab- 
lishment of Unesco which was held in 
London at the end of last year, the French 
Delegation managed to ensure that its 
headquarters would be sited in Paris. This 
decision did not make a great impact at 
the time, and I regret this because it was 
an important decision. The representa- 
tives of over 40 nations, gathered together 
from every continent, agreed in the opin- 
ion that the Paris of the Liberation re- 
mained the natural centre of international 
culture and spirituality. The Preparatory 
Commission is still in London, but the 
installation of Unesco in Paris will begin 
next autumn. The Hotel Majestic, made 
available by the Government of the Re- 
public, will be Unesco’s provisional head- 
quarters. 
Its purpose 
The London Conference defined Un- 
esco’s purpose at the highest spiritual 
plane. The United Nations, determined to 
create and organize a peaceful world, are 
aware that the foundations of Peace are as 
much psychical, sentimental, and spir- 
itual, as political, economic and social. 
The spirit of Peace is one of the conditions, 
one of the elements of Peace. The spirit of 
Peace pre-supposes mutual knowledge 
and understanding between peoples; it 
implies the co-operation and solidarity of 
all States in the wide fields of Education, 
Scientific knowledge, and General culture 
{v.o0) [| 
 
Script of a radio broadcast early in 1946 
during which Léon Blum presented to the 
French people the new organization which 
had just been created in London. As head 
of the French delegation to the Conference 
which established Unesco, Léon Blum had 
successfully argued that the seat of 
Unesco should be in Paris. 
In 1936 the French writer and socialist 
leader Léon Blum (1872-1950) became pre- 
mier of the first Popular Front government, 
supported by a coalition of parties of the 
left which broke up in 1938, the year in 
which this photo was taken. A supporter of 
a firm policy against Hitler, Léon Blum was 
arrested in September 1940 and while in 
prison wrote a book, A I'Echelle Humaine 
(For All Mankind), in which he expounded 
his humanist conception of socialism and 
urged his party to resist. Deported to 
Dachau and then Buchenwald in 1943, he 
was liberated in 1945. In 1946 he formed an 
all-socialist government which brought in 
the institutions of the Fourth Republic. 
Ph
ot
o 
Re
né
 
Da
zy
 
©)
 
Ed
im
ed
ia
, 
Pa
ri
s 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### IGNORE

Foundations 
= 
nor 
. - . 
  
32

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

adv 4d wT : 
WW " 
  
  
Inaugurated on 3 November 1958, Unesco 
House was built on a site previously occu- 
pied by a cavalry barracks to the rear of the 
Ecole Militaire, on a three-hectare site 
made available by the French Govern- 
ment. Photos 1 and 2 show the progres- 
sive demolition of the last remaining bar- 
rack buildings, top right hand corner of 
site, and early stages in the construction 
of Unesco’s new home. Plans for the new 
buildings were prepared by three great 
contemporary architects: Marcel Breuer 
(United States), Pier Luigi Nervi (Italy) and 
Bernard Zehrfuss (France), and approved 
by an international panel whose members 
included Le Corbusier (Charles-Edouard 
Jeanneret) and Walter Gropius, the foun- 
der of the famous Bauhaus school of de- 
sign, art and architecture. Photos 3 and 4 
show the Conference building during 
construction. This fine structure has fluted 
walls of unequal height which slope 
outwards, supporting the extremities of 
the roofing. This sloping roofing, set on 
two asymmetrical levels, rests at its centre 
on a row of six concrete pillars. Photo 5, 
over a hundred tons of concrete were 
poured in the construction of the soaring 
portico which marks the entrance on the 
southwest-facing facade of Unesco head- 
quarters and which has been described as 
“a triumph of imaginative engineering”. 
Photos 1, 2 and 3. R. Szczesnowicz, Unesco 
Photo 4. Unesco 
Photo 5. © G. Bozelec 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

  
              
Unesco officially became fully operational 
on 4 November 1946, when Greece be- 
came the twentieth State to deposit the 
instrument of ratification at the Foreign 
Office in London. It was on this date, the 
fortieth anniversary of which will be 
commemorated by the Unesco Courier 
  
                                  
 
Photo Unesco/Eclair Mondial 
next year, that a great ideal became a prac- 
tical reality. The First General Conference [Ii | 
of Unesco opened in Paris on 20 Novem- 
ber. Above, the inaugural session of the 
Conference which was held in one of the 
great amphitheatres of the Sorbonne. 
  
 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office: 
Unesco, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 68 French francs. 2 years (valid only in 
France): 120 French francs. Binder for a year’s issues: 
52 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit line reads “Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles reprinted must 
bear author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on 
request. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless 
accompanied by an international reply coupon covering pos- 
tage. Signed articles express the opinions of the authors and 
do not necessarily represent the opinions of UNESCO or those 
of the editors of the UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and 
headlines are written by the Unesco Courier staff. The boun- 
daries on maps published in the magazine do not imply official 
endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations. 
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform (microfilm and 
or microfiche) by: (1) Unesco. 7 Place de Fontenoy. 75700 
Paris. (2) University Microfilms (Xerox). Ann Arbor. Michigan 
48100. U.S.A.: (3) N.C.R. Microcard Edition. Indian Head. Inc.. 
111 West 40th Street. New York. U.S.A.; (4) Bell and Howell 
Co., Old Mansfield Road. Wooster, Ohio 44691. U.S.A. 
Assistant Editor-in-chief: Olga Rodel 
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb 
Editors: 
English: Howard Brabyn (Paris) 
Roy Malkin 
French: Alain Lévéque (Paris) 
Neda el Khazen 
Spanish: Francisco Fernandez-Santos (Paris) 
Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Russian: Nikolai Kuznetsov (Paris) 
Arabic: Sayed Osman (Paris) 
German: Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese: Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi: Rajmani Tiwari (Delhi) 
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew: Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian: Hossein Razmdjou (Teheran) 
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish: Mefra llgazer (Istanbul). 
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona) 
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean: Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwa 
(Dar-es-Salam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene: Vito- 
mir Sudarski (Belgrade) 
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian: Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek: Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala: S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish: Marjatta Oksanen Helsinki) 
Swedish: Inger Raaby (Stockholm) 
Basque: Gurutz Larranaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai: Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
Braille: Frederick Potter (Paris) 
Research: Christiane Boucher 
Hlustrations: Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design: Georges Servat 
Promotion: Fernando Ainsa 
Special projects: Peggy Julien 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor- 
in-Chief in Paris. 
BRODARD GRAPHIQUE. COULOMMIERS - Depot legal C1 - Octobre 1985 - IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) 
34 PHOTOCOMPOSITION: Ateliers de I Unesco. MONTAGE: MicroCompo - 17 rue Beranger - 75003 Paris PHOTOGRAVURE: Dawant - 13 rue des Arquebusiers - 75003 PARIS.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

Just Published 
In the industrially developed world 
many of today’s most urgent problems, 
such as environmental pollution, 
nuclear power, and unemployment 
caused by technological innovation, lie 
on the frontiers between science and 
technology. By contrast, Third World 
countries are faced with the problem of 
too few scientists, too little research, 
and insufficient funds for technological 
development. In Science and 
Technology in World Development, 
Robin Clarke examines the 
relationships between science, 
technology and society in both the 
developed and the developing 
countries. He believes that a global 
view is essential because of the close 
links that aid and trade have forged 
between rich and poor countries. Only 
then can we see how research has 
ignored key issues for Third World 
development, and concentrated on 
matters relevant only to the rich and 
privileged. 
Published by the Oxford University Press in 
association with Unesco. 
Sold throughout the world by the Oxford 
University Press 
Paperback £4.95 in UK (Also available in 
hardback) 
iB 
Robin Clarke 
Science and 
Technology 
in World 
Development 
Published in association with Lihesto 
Foreword by Amadou Mahter MBow 
Director General 
  
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
AUSTRALIA. Hunter Publications, 58A Gipps Street, Colling- 
wood Victoria 3066; Publications: Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd. 
P.O. Box 33, Brookvale, 2100, NSW. Periodicals: Dominie Pty. 
Subscriptions Dept., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 2100, NSW. Sub- 
agent: United Nations Association of Australia, P.O. Box 175, 
5th floor, Ana House, 28 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne Victoria 
3000. AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co., Graben 31, 
A-1011, Vienna. BAHAMAS. Nassau Stationers Ltd., P.O. Box 
N-3138, Nassau. BANGLADESH. Bangladesh Books 
International Ltd., Ittefaq Building, 1, R.K. Mission Rd., Hatkhola, 
Dacca 3. — BARBADOS. University of the West Indies 
Bookshop, Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown. 
BELGIUM. ‘Unesco Courier’* Dutch edition only: N.V. 
Handelmaatschappij Keesing. Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne- 
Antwerpen. French edition and general Unesco publications 
agent: Jean de Lannoy, 202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Brussels, CCP 
000-0070823-13. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, P.O. 
Box 81, Gaborone. BURMA. Trade Corporation No. 9, 550-562 
Merchant Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. 
Ltd., 2182 St. Catherine Street West, Montreal, Que. H3H 1M7. 
CHINA. China National Publications Import and Export 
Corporation, P.O. Box 88, Beijing. CYPRUS. "MAM", 
Archbishop Makarios 3rd Avenue, P.O. Box 1722, Nicosia. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. — S.N.T.L., Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 
1; Ve Smeckach 30, P.O.B. 790 - 111 - 27 Prague 1 {Permanent 
display}; Zahranicni literatura, 11 Soukenicka, Prague 1. For 
Slovakia only: Alfa Verlag. — Publishers, Hurbanovo nam. 6,893 
31 Bratislava — CSSR. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export-OG 
Tidsskriftservice 35 Norre Sogade, DK-1870 Kobenhavn K. 
EGYPT (ARAB REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for Unesco 
Publications, No. 1 Talaat Harb Street, Cairo. ETHIOPIA. 
National Agency for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis Ababa. 
FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, Keskuskatu 1, SF-00100 
Helsinki 10; Suomalainen Kirjakauppa Oy, Koivuvaarankuja 2, 
01640 Vantaa 64. FRANCE. Librairie de I'Unesco, 7, place de 
Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, C.C.P. 12598-48. GERMAN 
DEMOCRATIC REP. Buchhaus Leipzig, Postfach 140, 710 
Leipzig or from Internationalen Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. 
FED. REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco Courier {German, 
English, French and Spanish editions}: Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher 
Unesco-Kurier Vertrieb, Basaltstrasse 57, D 5300 Bonn 3. For 
other Unesco publications: Karger Verlag, Germering/Manchen. 
For scientific maps only: Geo Center, Postfach 800830, 
Stuttgart 80. GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Ltd., P.O. 
Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Suppliers Ltd., P.O. Box 7869, 
Accra; The University Bookshop of Ghana, Accra; The University 
Bookshop of Cape Coast; The University Bookshop of Legon, 
P.O. Box 1, Legon. GREAT BRITAIN. See United Kingdom. 
HONG KONG. Federal Publications {HK) Ltd., 5A Evergreen 
Industrial Mansion, 12 Yip Fat Street, Aberdeen. Swindon Book 
Co., 13-15, Lock Road, Kowloon. Hong Kong Government 
Information Services, Publication Centre, Baskerville House, 22 
ice Street. HUNGARY. Kultura-Bushimport - ABT, P.O.B. 149 - 
H-1389, Budapest 62. ICELAND. Snaebj6rn Jonsson & Co., 
H.F., Hafnarstraeti 9, Reykjavik. INDIA. Orient Longman Ltd.,   
Kamani Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chittaranjan 
Avenue, Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salai, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh, Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 Mahatma 
Gandhi Road, Bangalore-560001; 3-5-820 Hyderguda, 
Hyderabad-500001. Sub-Depots: Oxford Book & Stationery Co. 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 70016; Scindia House, New Delhi; 
Publication Unit, Ministry of Education and Culture, Ex. AFO 
Hutments, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Road, New Delhi 110001. 
INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Booksellers, 29 JI. Oto 
Iskandardinata lil, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI Dr Sam Ratulangie 37, 
Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution Co., 
28, Vessal Shirazi Street, Enghélab Avenue. P.O. Box 314/1486, 
Teheran; Iranian Nat. Comm. for Unesco. 1188 Enghlab Av., 
Rostam Give Building, Zip Code 13158, P.O. Box 11365-4498, 
Teheran. IRAQ. McKenzies Bookshop, Al Rashid Street, 
Baghdad. IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd, 
Ballymount Road, Walkinstown, Dublin 12. ISRAEL. A.B.C. 
Bookstore Ltd., P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Road, Tel Aviv 
61000. ITALY. Licosa {Libreria Commissionaria Sansoni, S.p.A.} 
Via Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 50121 Florence. 
JAMAICA. Sangster’s Book Stores Ltd., P.O. Box 366, 101 
Water Lane, Kingston. University of the West Indies Bookshop, 
Mona, Kingston. JAPAN. Eastern Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 
3-chome Bunkyo-ku Tokyo 113. KENYA. East African Publishing 
House, P.O. Box 30571, Nairobi; Africa Book Services Ltd., 
Quran House, Mfangano Street, P.O. Box 45245, Nairobi. 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box 
Central 64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Ltd, 
POB 2942, Kuwait; for the Unesco Courier; Farafalla Press 
Agency, P.O. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwait. LESOTHO. Mazenod 
Book Centre, P.O. Mazenod. Lesotho, Southern Africa. LIBERIA. 
Code and Yancy Bookshops Ltd., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia. 
LIECHTENSTEIN : Eurocan Trust Reg. P.O.B. 5 - 9494 Schaan. 
LIBYA. Agency for Development of Publication & Distribution, 
P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoli. LUXEMBOURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 
22, Grande-Rue, Luxembourg. MALAWI. Malawi Book Service, 
Head Office, P.O. Box 30044 Chichiri, Blantyre 3. MALAYSIA. 
University of Malaya Cooperative Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 
22-11. MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic Street, Valletta. 
MAURITIUS. Nalanda Company Ltd., 30, Bourbon Street, Port: 
Louis. MONACO. British Library, 30 bd. des Moulins, Monte- 
Carlo. NEPAL. Sajha Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. 
NETHERLANDS. KEESING BOEKEN B.V., Joan Muyskenweg, 
22, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. NETHERLANDS 
ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine N.V., P.O. Box 200, Willemstad, 
Curacao. N.A. NEW ZEALAND. Government Printing Office, 
Government Bookshops at: Rutland Street, P.O. Box 5344, 
Auckland; 130, Oxford Terrace. P.O. Box 1721 Christchurch; 
Alma Street, P.O. Box 857 Hamilton; Princes Street, P.O. Box 
1104, Dunedin, Mulgrave Street, Private Bag, Wellington. 
NIGERIA. The University Bookshop of Ife; The University 
Bookshop of Ibadan, P.O. 286; The University Bookshop of 
Nsukka; The University Bookshop of Lagos: The Ahmadu Bello 
University Bookshop of Zaria. NORWAY. Johan Grundt Tanum, 
P.0.B. 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1, Narvesen A/S; Subscription and   
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
Trade Book Service. P.O.B. 6125 Etterstad, Oslo 6; Universitets 
Bokhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Blindern, Oslo 3. 
PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-1-azam, P.O. 
Box No. 728, Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional 
Office for Book development in Asia and the Pacific, 39 Delhi 
Housing Society, P.O. Box 8350, Karachi 29. PHILIPPINES. 
National Book Store, Inc. 701, Rizal Avenue, Manila D- 404. 
POLAND. Orpan Import, Palac Kuitury | Nauki, Warsaw; Ars 
Polona‘Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No. 7.00-068 WARSAW. 
PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrade Ltda. Livraria Portugal, rua do 
Carmo 70, Lisbon. SEYCHELLES. National Bookshop, P.O. Box 
48, Mahé; New Service Ltd., Kingsgate House, P.O. Box 131, 
Mahé. SIERRA LEONE. Fourah Bay, Njala University and Sierra 
Leone Diocesan Bookshops, Freetown. SINGAPORE. Federal 
Publications (S) Pte Ltd. Times Jurong, 2 Jurong Port Road, 
Singapore 2261. SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Modern 
Book Shop and General, P.O. Box 951, Mogadiscio. SOUTH 
AFRICA. For the Unesco Courier {single copies) only: Central 
News agency, P.O. Box 1033, Johannesburg. SRI LANKA. Lake 
House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata P.O.B. 
244 Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, 
Khartoum. SWEDEN. Ali publications A/B.C.E. Fritzes Kungl, 
‘Hovbokhandel, Regeringsgatan 12, Box 16356. 10327 
Stockholm 16. For the Unesco Courier: Svenska FN Forbundet, 
Skolgrand 2, Box 150 50 S- 104 65, Stockholm; Wennergren- 
Williams, Box 30004-S-104, 25 Stockholm; Esselte 
Tidskriftscentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62 - 101 20 
Stockholm. SWITZERLAND. All publications: Europa Verlag. 5 
Ramistrasse. Zurich. Librairie Payot, rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 
11, C.C.P. 12-236. Librairies Payot also in Lausanne, Basle, 
Berne, Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and Zurich. TANZANIA. 
Dares Salaam Bookshop, P.0O.B. 9030 Dar-es-Salaam. 
THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd., 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, 
Siyaeg Phaya Sri, P.O. Box 402; Bangkok: Suksapan Panit, 
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok; Suksit Siam 
Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. TRINIDAD AND 
TOBAGO. National Commission for Unesco, 18 Alexandra 
Street, St. Clair, Trinidad, W.I. TURKEY. Haset Kitacovi AS, 
Istikial Caddesi, N° 469, Posta Kutusu 219, Beyoglu, Istambul. 
UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop, P.O. Box 7145, Kampala. 
UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. Stationery Office, H.M.S.0., P.O. 
Box 276, London, SW8 5DT, and Govt. Bookshops in London. 
Edinburgh, Belfast, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol; for 
scientific maps only: McCarta Ltd., 122 King’s Cross Road, 
London WC 1X 9 DS. UNITED STATES. Unipub, 205 East 
42nd Street, New York, N.Y. 10017. Orders for books & 
Periodicals: P.O. Box 1222, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. U.S.S.R. 
Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, Moscow, 121200. YEMEN. 14th 
October Corporation, P.O. Box 4227, Aden. YUGOSLAVIA. 
Miadost, llica 30/11, Zagreb: Cankarjeva Zalozba, Zopitarjeva 2, 
Lubljana; Nolit, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA. National 
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Ltd., P.O. Box 2664 
Lusaka. ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union 
Avenue, Harare.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/066614engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

  
    
3 
£4
] 
BF
 
F
R
 
   
    
hai “ : a 
mr ~— RE tag 
Ny 
ig " = 
      
   
: Ford =e 
: 
Tr ay ae 
Ti oy F3) 
a LE TE af . rr 
goad 5 4 
a SEA 
x » 
Il qt EE     