# [189455](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
FROM HERDERS TO ARCHITECTS 
MAN’S IMPRINT 
ON WORLD HERITAGE 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
Contents 
2007 - N° 6 
 
 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
Q
/
S
t
e
f
a
n
 
H
o
e
h
 
down through the ages. 
FROM HERDERS TO ARCHITECTS: 
MAN'S IMPRINT ON WORLD HERITAGE 
Six thousand years separate the Sydney Opera House from Twyfelfontein. 
These two sites just inscribed on the World Heritage List add to its extraordinary 
richness, which the UNESCO Courier aims to illustrate. Among twenty-two new 
z sites, the Courier focuses on five that reflect the diversity of world heritage   
 
#4 “C’ LIKE COMMUNITY: 
om INTERVIEW WITH 
3%  TUMUTEHEUHEU 
A wo tis a site in New Zealand, Tongariro National 
Park, which was the first cultural landscape inscribed on the World 
Heritage List in 1993. Cultural landscapes, for which intangible 
aspects are as important as tangible ones, have changed the face 
of World Heritage. 3 
GRAVE ENGRAVINGS 
¥ Twyfelfontein, Namibia, a rock art site with 
few rivals, has just been added to the World 
Heritage List. It is on its boulders that the 
prehistoric inhabitants of the valley chose to reveal how they 
perceived their world. More. 4 
 
THE GRAND OLD LADY 
AND THE PLASTIC CHAIRS 
On the border between East and West, the 
  
SHAH JAHAN’S 
—o atte HEAVEN AND HELL: 
=| THE RED FORT IN DELHI 
BESS Jewel of Mughal architecture, the Red 
Fort in Delhi was built in a unique style — shahjahani — by India’s 
fifth Mughal emperor, Shah Jahan. This new World Heritage site 
has grown in historical stature with the passage of time and now 
symbolizes India’s independence. For its founder, it was heaven 
on earth. ..then hell. 8 
  
  
THE DIAOLOU OF KAIPING 
In Kaiping, Guangdong province (China), 
several thousand fortified towers stand: 
the diaolou. Their unique architectural 
style blends Western imports with traditional Chinese 
elements. 10 
PEOPLE 
FOR THE UNIVERSITY - 
THE UNIVERSITY FOR THE 
island of Corfu is shaped like a handle, thrusting 
from the lonian Sea towards the Adriatic, not far from Italy. The little 
streets of Corfu, just inscribed on the World Heritage List, exude 
its Roman, Byzantine and Venetian past. The Greek artist Katerina 
Zacharopoulou takes us on a tour. 6 
PEOPLE 
ctavio Paz, Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros and other 
celebrities have left their traces on the campus of the University 
of Mexico. Spreading out over seven million square meters, this 
intellectual breeding ground is also by its architecture a unique 
example of 20th century modernism. 12 
THE DAWN OF HUMAN LIFE 
As Twyfelfontein, Namibia's archaeological site, earns its place this year on the World Heritage List, 
The UNESCO Courier takes us on a journey backwards in time, to a selection of cultural heritage 
sites in different regions of the world where humans first marked their presence. 14 
THE WORLD HERITAGE INTERNATIONAL SAFEGUARDING CAMPAIGNS 
UNESCO's international safeguarding campaigns, the first of which was launched in the 1960s, 
often served asa springboard for the nomination of sites on the World Heritage List. 15 

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

IEE ECU CUE EL Mo] Te ET {e) National Par 
which was the first cultural landscape inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1993 
OT HTT EINE] [ToL (I AULT RIT EN To] CY I Ta CET CRE TR [ole g EL LEER Ty [e [Lo] (XT [TS 
(EVCRGENL CORO CRETE A [Td [sl [Sg] ET 


### 210802: C like community: interview with Tumu Te Heuheu

  
“C” LIKE COMMUNITY 
INTERVIEW WITH TUMU TE HEUHEU 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
N
i
a
m
h
 
Bu
rk
e 
Tumu te Heuheu, Chairperson of the 
ommittee of the World Heritage 
Tumu Te Heuheu, Paramount 
Chief of the Central North Island 
Tuwharetoa Tribe and 
Chairperson of the World 
Heritage Committee answers 
Jasmina Sopova’s questions. 
He emphasizes the role 
of communities in the 
preservation of World Heritage. 
Does the distinction 
between tangible and 
intangibleheritage apply 
to the Pacific cultures? 
Tangible and intangible heritage 
are often indivisible within the Pa- 
cific where the land is usually in 
customary ownership. An example 
is East Rennell which is a unique 
World Heritage site in that it is un- 
der customary ownership and man- 
agement. 
In Pacific cultures, indigenity is 
not separate from heritage. Heri- 
tage defines cultural identity and 
cannot be separated from social, 
economic and environmental well- 
being. It can be viewed in a holistic 
way, that is to say that indigenity 
embraces all life that is both tan- 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
    N . 
31st session 
gible and intangible, and is under- 
stood through cultural traditions. 
You just launched the World 
Heritage - Pacific 2009 
program. What does it entail? 
The Pacific 2009 Action Plan 
was developed at a World Heri- 
tage workshop held at Tongariro in 
2004. It established the strategic 
objectives and priorities for Pacific 
Island nations and was structured 
around the four ‘C's as outlined by 
the World Heritage Committee, 
namely: Credibility, Conservation, 
Capacity-Building and Communi- 
cation. It also identified the need 
that necessary funds and resourc- 
es be identified and made avail- 
able through partnership efforts 
and related national implementa- 
tion plans. 
During the Pacific Island World 
Heritage workshop, held at Ton- 
gariro, in February 2007, it was 
most encouraging to note the sig- 
nificant progress made in the Pa- 
cific since the development of the 
Action Plan. This illustrates that 
important work is being done in 
Pacific Island countries especially 
3 
in regard to the preparation of Ten- 
tative Lists which are required for 
nomination to the World Heritage 
list. There was also considerable 
evidence of stronger links between 
Pacific Island delegates and tech- 
nical experts who work in the Pa- 
cific. 
What role should communities 
play in the protection 
of heritage? 
Communities are integral to the 
protection of heritage, both tan- 
gible and intangible. In the Pacific, 
this is particularly important given 
the intangible values, the unique 
Pacific culture and the fact that 
most land and resources are under 
customary ownership and control. 
During our workshop, last Febru- 
ary, it was agreed to add what is 
known as the ‘fifth C' to the stra- 
tegic objectives identified in the 
Pacific 2009 Action Plan. This ‘C’ 
is for community. Without commu- 
nity involvement and commitment 
heritage protection may not suc- 
ceed. As well, it is believed that 
heritage protection should bring 
together the needs of communities 
because people need to be at the 
heart of conservation. 
In practice this means that rel- 
evant communities are actively 
involved in the identification, man- 
agement and conservation of all 
World Heritage sites. 
What is your main objective 
as Chairperson of the World 
Heritage Committee? 
As Chair of the World Heritage 
Committee | want to promote 
the protection of the world's 
natural and cultural heritage 
(both tangible and intangible). 
In particular those parts of the 
world where there is under- 
representation on the List of ar- 
eas needing protection. 
The Pacific has one of the highest 
proportions of indigenous peoples

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=4) 0

### 210802: C like community: interview with Tumu Te Heuheu

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
I
n
e
z
 
Fo
rb
es
 
  
Tongariro National Park, New Zealand. 
within national populations and 
one of the lowest population den- 
sities of any inhabited region of 
the world. It is under-represented 
in the World Heritage system and 
this role provides an opportunity 
to profile, promote and showcase 
the unique diversity of the natural 
DE a 
and cultural heritage of the Pa- 
cific to the world. 
At the Christchurch meeting 
(Editor's note: 31st session of 
the World Heritage Committee 
which was held in New Zealand, 
from 23 June to 2 July 2007) an 
appeal to establish a Pacific fund 
to which the international commu- 
nity will contribute financially was 
launched. Among many things, this 
will help advance the implementa- 
tion of the World Heritage Con- 
vention in the Pacific. Hl 
- i 
CHC CTT ET JERE (el EE LE CRO RE AN CIE EEF TE oT Te fo [-] 
CRU RY [oTq(e fy [CTI ele TR NE | AER oT Mf Te] [e [STR Ly EVR [Ro CH TES (of [Wl Ts Lg ELT) 14 
RU CREE Ro Tel (oN (TCE TH Tod WR TATA o ToT (rT TETe Ri TT Tg 


### 210803: Grave engravings

 
GRAVE ENGRAVINGS 
    
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
T
h
o
m
a
s
 
D
o
w
s
o
n
 
A giraffe, antelopes and a spotted lion with four toes: 
  
a i ST 
a » I ft ER 
PCE a a 
’. 
     
one of the most famous rock engravings at Twyfelfontein. 
   
  
     
    
n a relatively remote and isolated 
alley in the semi-desert environ- 
ent of western north-central Na- 
ibia is what must surely be the 
ost spectacular accumulation of 
ock engravings in all of southern Af- 
rica. And certainly a rock art site with 
few rivals around the world. This well 
known group of rock art sites has 
come to be known by the misnomer 
‘Twyfelfontein, Afrikaans for doubi- 
ful fountain. The valley's spring is far 
from fountain-like, and although it is 
small it is actually quite dependable. 
The Damara name, /Ui-//Ais or jump- 
ing waterhole, is perhaps more ap- 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
propriate. Driving into the valley one 
is struck by the wide-open and san- 
dy valley floor with its dry river beds. 
Even more striking are the valley 
sides and the enormous boulders 
that appear to be literally tumbling 
down towards the bottom. It is on 
these boulders that the prehistoric 
inhabitants of this valley chose to re- 
veal how they perceived their world. 
We know from excavations by Dr 
Eric Wendt, one of Namibia's pio- 
neering archaeologists, that prior 
to European colonial engagements 
two kinds of people lived in the val- 
ley for extended periods of time. Ex- 
4 
cavated remains indicate that hunt- 
er-gatherer peoples were the first 
occupiers; artefact assemblages are 
typical of the Late Stone Age dat- 
ing from 6000 to 2000 years ago. 
These Stone Age hunters and gath- 
erers made most of the engravings 
and probably all the paintings; iconic 
imagery — depictions of animals and 
humans. Then sometime between 
2000 - 2500 years ago the sec- 
ond group of occupiers arrived In 
the valley: Khoekhoen people who 
herded sheep and goats and had 
ceramic pots. Rock art made by the 
herders is unmistakably different to 
that of the hunters and gatherers; it 
is thought to be entirely geometric, 
including, at Twyfelfontein, pecked 
circles, and rows and rows of dots. 
Much more is known about the rock 
engravings and paintings made by 
southern African hunters and gath- 
erers, than the enigmatic geometric 
imagery of herder groups. In fact this 
distinction has only recently been 
developed by Sven Ouzman and 
Benjamin Smith, rock art research- 
ers working in South Africa, and it 
enables a much greater understand- 
ing of the peopling of southern Af- 
rica and their making of the various 
rock art traditions there.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=5) 0

### 210803: Grave engravings

There are various estimates of 
how many engravings and paint- 
ings there are at the Twyfelfontein, 
but it is difficult, if not impossible 
to provide a definitive count. Ernst 
Scherz, who produced an impres- 
sive and unsurpassed documenta- 
tion of Namibian rock art, said that 
there were around 2500 engrav- 
ings, but modern estimates exceed 
5000 individual depictions. 
The hunt: 
an interpersonal 
dialogue 
Painted and engraved images we 
see today on the rock surfaces of 
southern Africa, certainly those we 
can ascribe to hunters and gather- 
c 
o 
[24 
Ed 
3 
[a] 
[23 
© 
£ 
S 
= 
= 
Q 
Oo 
2} 
| 
Zz 
> 
© 
  
few. It is these human activities that 
tend to dominate the rock paintings. 
Hunting is a common theme in the 
rock paintings of southern Africa, 
including those at Twyfelfontein. 
For a long time images that depict 
the hunt and/or its paraphernalia 
were thought to depict hunter-gath- 
erers attempts to acquire food. Our 
understanding of the way in which 
hunters and gatherers the world over 
think about the hunt shows this kind 
of interpretation is grossly naive. The 
hunt reveals an interpersonal dia- 
logue between two sentient beings 
in the world: human and non-human 
animal. Hunting for hunter-gatherers 
is not simply about the procurement 
of food, it is a skilled way of engag- 
  
Students from the University of Namibia copying engravings. 
ers, reveal a world in which both hu- 
man and non-human beings actively 
engaged with one another, and their 
many and varied attempts to main- 
tain the flow of supematural potency 
between constituents of that world. 
The continued flow of supematural 
potency between animals, and other 
animate and inanimate beings, and 
humans was fundamentally important 
for the reproduction of the world in 
which the hunters and gatherers lived. 
Human beings, be they accom- 
plished hunters, gatherers, or sha- 
mans, mothers or fathers, or their 
children, were all sentient beings, 
who in their day to day engagements 
with each other and the landscape in 
which they lived were intimately and 
actively involved in world-renewing 
activities. And those activities includ- 
ed hunting, gathering, sexual inter- 
course, and trancing to identify a 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
c 
0 
[23 
Ed 
<) 
0 
[23 4] 
cl 
[<) 
= 
= 
= 
eo} 
Oo on 
w 
Zz 
oF 
or 
ing with the world that ensures the 
circulation of supernatural potency. 
The hunted provides food and sus- 
tenance, while the hunter ensures 
he and his community behave re- 
spectfully towards this act of giv- 
ing. So-called avoidance behaviours 
associated with the hunt are exten- 
sively documented for southern Afri- 
can hunter-gatherers. The Canadian 
anthropologist Mathias Guenther, 
    » ve 
Twyfelfontein Valley at sunset. 
5 
who has carried out ethnographic 
work amongst southern African 
San communities for several de- 
cades now, suggests that the pres- 
ence of these actions shows that 
“activated in each hunt is a feeling 
of sympathy, and the implicit recog- 
nition that the animal is a moral and 
sentient kindred being". 
Something 
unfamiliar 
The engravings, particularly those at 
Twyfelfontein, have very few depic- 
tions of humans; by far the majority 
of the engravings at Twyfelfontein 
depict animals and their spoor. But 
many of these depictions are not 
simply realistic depictions of ani- 
mals and their tracks. Often these 
engraved images have features that 
indicate we are dealing with some- 
thing unfamiliar to our way of think- 
ing about the relationship between 
humans and animals. A number of 
the depictions of animals have ‘un- 
real’ features. For example, many 
rhinoceros have exaggerated horns, 
lion spoor often have more than four 
toes, and giraffe are sometimes de- 
picted with greatly elongated necks. 
These ‘unreal’ features demonstrate 
the active role animals were believed 
to play in maintaining the flow of su- 
pernatural potency. 
The rock engravings at Twyfelfon- 
tein revealed a deeper understand- 
ing of the world to the hunters and 
gatherers that lived there in the past. 
Today these engravings set the 
stage for a different kind of relation- 
ship, that between tourists and the 
past. Despite the sad and unavoid- 
able fact that tourism adds further 
pressure to the natural weathering 
processes that are slowly destroying 
southern Africa's cultural heritage, 
the rock art of the Twyfelfontein Val- 
ley continues to shed light on the 
different peoples that have created 
this irreplaceable heritage. 
Thomas A. Dowson, 
a South African archaeologist, 
has carried out extensive research 
in the Twyfelfontein Valley, 
and the surrounding area.

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=6) 0

### 210805: The Grand old lady and the plastic chairs

THE GRAND OLD LADY 
AND THE PLASTIC CHAIRS 
(OT Id T=W oo] (o [ST os EVAL WE ET Lo LT A TERE PET Lo lo 0) o {TIERS ET o To MTL CRE 21g Le = 
GIT RI ROCA EL BEER OTE ER CY GE TR Tl {e111 B11 
he little streets of Corfu, just inscribed on the World Heritage List 
UL ENC N ELM SEG EEL RHEE REE A 
LEK CE ELSE GERL To ET (oo Lol [TTR LCE Eo] I Ro] 
  
  
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
A
l
i
d
a
 
Bo
ye
 
iad _- 
Corfu seen from the old fort. 
    
 
   
or a long time Corfu has been a 
urite destination for all sorts of 
i Cosmopolitan society of 
the™ 960s, tourists in groups, poets 
and academics, Greeks from the 
farthest reaches of the country — all 
who wanted to come visit this is- 
land had good reason. It is true that 
a place such as this — inhabited, 
ruled or described by such person- 
alities as Dionysos Solomos, Jean 
Capo of Istria or Lawrence Durrell 
— has an aura that goes beyond its 
natural beauty, although that cer- 
tainly plays a role in its renown. 
Here, like everywhere, everyone 
forms, not to say draws, his or her 
own picture of the place. For me, 
I've kept the first, practically defini- 
tive impression of Corfu | was filled 
with when | arrived, still a child, with 
my parents, on this island that my 
mother was from, and with which 
my father had fallen so in love he'd 
partially abandoned his ties to his 
own birthplace, Constantinople. 
The contrast between East and 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
  
West gave me the feeling that | was 
coming from an indefinable place 
and arriving in a European city. A 
sensation that the island | could 
perceive from the boat, as it slowly 
approached the port, was the des- 
tination chosen by a fairy who sent 
me there so that | could discover 
secrets. | would later understand 
that this childish fantasy was in- 
spired by two things: the roofs on 
the houses and the incredible, ro- 
mantic landscape all around. 
With its city dwellers and the Ital- 
lan style of their ways, its villagers 
who all had the appearance, at the 
time, of administrators for important 
landowners, with the atmosphere 
of the nightlife of the 1960s domi- 
nated by the personality of Aristo- 
tle Onassis, “the richest man in the 
world", Corfu was indeed opening 
to me like a book of fairy tales. 
Mainly there were the little streets 
that exuded History. History with 
European roots, with its lords and 
aristocrats, men of letters, painters 
6 
and musicians, with its struggles 
for independence, its avant-gardes 
and precursors, its fortresses and 
palaces, local and foreign customs, 
its peasant houses and lordly resi- 
dences portraying the diversity of 
humankind. 
Self-discovery 
Corfu is not a holiday island, at least 
for me. As Lawrence Durrell, who 
lived there, said: “Other countries 
may offer you discoveries in man- 
ners or lore or landscape; Greece 
offers you something harder — the 
discovery of yourself?" Corfu is cer- 
tainly Greece, but also a Mediterra- 
nean bridge of the Orient towards 
the Occident. Besides self-discov- 
ery, it awakens in people some- 
thing profoundly human, a sort of 
melancholy, indefinable nostalgia, 
something heavy, like a definitive 
and hopeless love, like a romantic 
interior landscape. 
We each have our own paradise. 
And the island of mass tourism and 
a carefree life, turquoise sea and 
fancy hotels, the island in the travel 
agency brochures, isn’t one. Real 
paradise is the smile of the Corfiot 
woman wearing a white scarf on her 
head, sitting in the afternoon on the 
step of her house in Aghios Markos, 
and behaving as if she didn't know 
that two steps from her peaceful vil- 
lage in Ypsos thousands of motor- 
cycles are roaring, on the road to 
innumerable taverns, restaurants, 
cafes, bars and night clubs con- 
centrated on the sea shore. The 
real paradise is the city in October 
when you wander the little streets 
and you discover the bookshop

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=7) 0

### 210805: The Grand old lady and the plastic chairs

“O Plous” (The Crossing), before 
a sudden shower pushes you into 
the Liston café. The real paradise 
are those fragrances whose origins 
you're unsure of: a blend of air from 
sea and cypress, moistened earth 
and jasmine, from an old closed 
home and wet grass. 
A cosmopolitan 
aristocrat 
There are in the world many deeply 
moving towns teeming with archi- 
tectural treasures, surrounded by 
  
breathtaking vistas, exotic beach- 
es...Corfu isn't the only one. But 
at the same time Corfu is unique. 
It's enough to go once at Easter 
CORFU: 
time to understand that. Corfu is 
simply spectacular on those days 
of mourning transformed into days 
of celebration. Musical groups mul- 
tiply in the town, handsome young 
people, usually blond, play music, 
fireworks tossed from the Citadel 
complete the décor. 
The Corfiots are very proud of 
their island, and let's be honest, 
they feel superior to Greeks from 
other regions. So do Cretans, you 
say, and people from the Cyclades 
too, but for other reasons. That is 
MEDITERRANEAN STEPPING-STONE 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
A
d
r
i
a
n
 
Re
il
ly
 
The Old Fort by the 
    
Harbour. 
BETWEEN EAST AND WEST 
   
Colonized by the Corinthians around 734 B.C, 
Corfu was dominated successively by the Romans, Byzantines, Venetians, French and British. 
The picturesque island, whose Old Town of the same name has just been added to the World Heritage List, 
has kept souvenirs from all these phases. 
In the lonian Islands, Corfu lies far- 
thest to the north, close to the Alba- 
nian coast but also the closest point 
in Greece to Italy. Because of its stra- 
tegic position on the border of East 
and West, the small and scenic island 
has been caught up in the Mediterra- 
nean’s battles and conquests through- 
out history. A Corinthian colony from 
about 734 BC, it fell successively into 
the hands of the Romans, Byzantines, 
Venetians, French and British. For four 
centuries, however, its fortifications 
were used to defend the maritime trad- 
ing interests of the Republic of Venice 
against the Ottoman Empire. 
Corfu has been a part of modern 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
Greece since 1864, yet it still trea- 
sures remnants of foreign influence in 
its chequered past, all the way down 
from antiquity. The splendid Venetian 
citadel, today the setting for concerts 
and other cultural events, testifies to 
the tumultuous sieges Corfu endured. 
Both the Old Citadel and New Fort, 
outstanding medieval military monu- 
ments built by Venice's best architects 
and engineers and restructured by 
the British, have been selected for the 
World Heritage List. 
Between the two fortresses midway 
along the island's eastern coastline, 
lies Corfu’s Old Town. With its labyrinth 
of quaint little streets crammed within 
the fortifications, it too is now part 
of the World Heritage site. Marked by 
its Italian-style architecture, it also 
boasts Eastern Orthodox churches 
(one containing the mummified re- 
mains of patron Saint Spiridion) 
while its vast main esplanade in- 
corporates a very British cricket 
field. In structure and form, as well 
as in its life-style, arts and letters, 
Corfu represents a unique entity, 
having absorbed by osmosis both 
Eastern and Western characteristics. 
This ensemble has been preserved 
alive and substantially intact until 
today, and World Heritage recognition 
will help keep up that momentum.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
A
d
r
i
a
n
 
a
 
  
Orchestras abound during August festivities in Corfu. 
a question that concerns and it is 
History, far from what I'm talking 
about. What | mean here, it seems 
to me that Corfiots, as heirs to a 


### 210805: The Grand old lady and the plastic chairs

great civilization, are both ancient 
and modern. They are Greek, but 
also a little Italian. They care about 
their heritage, and at the same time 
they destroy it. Like everywhere in 
Greece, you say, but in Corfu the 
contrast sometimes takes on ex- 
cessive proportions. Is it possible 
to make past, nature and globaliza- 
tion coexist without damage? 
Corfu is a cosmopolitan aristocrat 
who suffers from plastic chairs. 
Fast-food doesn't suit her any more 
than motorcycles and vulgar behav- 
iour. She needs to be treated like 
a great lady in the old days, with 
respect...But, we know, in our day, 
just about everywhere in the world, 
great ladies are having a difficult 
time.. H 
Katerina Zacharopoulou, 
Greek artist, directs and presents 
a show about art, 
“Time for Images”, on ET1, 
the national television channel. 
Jewel of Mughal architecture, the Red Fort in Delhi was built in a unique style 
WELELERT - by India’s fifth Mughal emperor, Shah Jahan. This new World Heritage si 
EER [TT IG TES OT (oe RS ETT CRU Ri CY ECE Te [Xe] RT CIET [Mi To) 
Lo To [PLE Co [ERT Lo (eT oT [a OEY TotW ToT | £5 (1113 Lo [TAY VTE ER ETT Jo] WCE Ta FR ET J) [20 


### 210806: Shah Jahan's heaven and hell: the Red Fort in Delhi

 
SHAH JAHAN’S HEAVEN AND HELL 
THE RED FORT IN DELHI 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
R
o
b
i
n
 
Se
ar
le
 
       jh AT 
pH. ETL 
, LAE ON BS an 
Shahjahanabad’s Red Fort (Old Delhi). 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
  
   
 
   
   
   
f there be a paradise on earth, 
it is here, it is here" reads the in- 
scription at the entrance of Qala-a- 
Mubarak’a’ The couplet by the Per- 
sian poet Amir Khusrau reveals the 
intention of Shah Jahan's architects. 
[hey designed a citadel to match 
the Koran's description of paradise, 
not unlike Ispahan in Iran. 
Shah Jahan is known as the man 
who so loved his favourite wife, 
Mumtaz Mahal, “light of the palace’, 
that after she died in 1631, he put 
20,000 builders to work on the fa- 
mous Taj Mahal in Agra; the mauso- 
leum in her memory was inscribed 
on the World Heritage List in 1983. 
He was also a mighty emperor who

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

“They have inlaid stone flowers in marble, 
which surpass reality in colour, if not in fragrance” 
Abu Talib Kalim, Shah Jahan's court poet. 


### 210806: Shah Jahan's heaven and hell: the Red Fort in Delhi

brought the greatest glory to the 
Mughal empire, founded in the 16th 
century by Babur, “The Leopard’, 
descendant of the fierce warlord Ta- 
merlane — to whom we owe another 
fabulous World Heritage site, the 
14th century Samarkand, now in Uz- 
bekistan. 
Shah Jahan will undoubtedly be 
remembered as the dynasty's great- 
est art lover and builder. His legacy, 
the Qala-a-Mubarak'a) known as the 
Red Fort, was a citadel at the heart 
of the capital, serving as both impe- 
rial residence and government head- 
quarters. 
The new red capital 
When he decided to move the capi- 
tal from Agra to Delhi in 1638, the 
emperor gave orders to build his 
“paradise on earth” on the banks of 
the river Yamuna, just like the Taj Ma- 
hal. Today it is called Old Delhi, but 
then it bore the name of its founder: 
Shahjahanabad. 
Begun in 1639 and completed 
probably in 1648, the Red Fort ac- 
commodated some 3,000 people. 
It is the first Mughal palace fort de- 
signed according to an octagonal 
grid pattern, which later became an 
architectural characteristic of the dy- 
nasty. Made primarily in brick, clad 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
R
o
b
i
n
 
Se
ar
le
 
. - dd 
Bas . 4 o 
Jd > 
Tey 4 ! 
BE | 
Ses Pov : ree — 
- _- - . g 4 
Fa ' 
. . . - 
i. o-~ ” Py 
R TR Sa — = 
PO - 
r 5 Oe, 
: = 
rr a “ 
The Red Fort’s walls are more than two kilometres long. 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
with sandstone or red marble, it rep- 
resents a harmonious fusion of Per- 
sian, Timurid and Indian elements, yet 
it is based on Islamic prototypes. The 
unique style, also distinguished by its 
complex geometric compositions, is 
named after the emperor: Shahjah- 
ani. 
Connected in the north to Sa- 
limgarh, an earlier fort built by Isma 
Shah Sur in 1546, the walls of the 
Red Fort stretch out for more than 
two kilometres. Their height varies 
from 16 metres on the river to 36 me- 
tres on the town side. Two entrances 
allowed access to the citadel: the 
Delhi and Lahori gates. The first was 
used by soldiers and servants of the 
court. The second, facing the town 
of Lahore and giving onto the Chatta 
Chowk (palace market) was reserved 
for visitors and the emperor himself. A 
wide north-south road ran alongside 
the market. It set the border between 
the military camp to the west and the 
palace in the east. 
Peacock throne 
and lotus pool 
When the powerful and inconsolable 
Shah Jahan arrived for a public audi- 
ence in the hall designated for that 
purpose, the Diwan-i-Am, he passed 
by the drum house (naubat khana or 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
R
o
b
i
n
 
Se
ar
le
 
naqgarkhana), a three-storey rectan- 
gular building for the musicians. In 
the audience hall stood the throne, 
incrusted with semi-precious stones, 
as elaborate and majestic as Solo- 
mon'’s if not an actual copy. 
But an even more sumptuous 
throne awaited him in the Diwan-i- 
Khas, the hall for private audiences, 
where he met his ministers and court- 
iers. More than 100 rubies and the 
same number of emeralds enhanced 
the splendour of the two peacock ef- 
figies standing behind the royal seat, 
as well as countless diamonds, sap- 
phires and rare pearls. The famous 
Peacock Throne had been taken as 
war booty from Iran by Nadir Shah. 
It was in 1739, a century after con- 
struction of the Red Fort had begun, 
when the “Persian Napoleon” had 
devastated Delhi with fire and sword. 
Having disposed of affairs of state, 
Shah Jahan retired to the Khas Ma- 
hal, his private pavilion with bed- 
rooms, prayer rooms and a tower 
from which the emperor would speak 
to the people. The Khas Mahal was 
part of a series of royal pavilions in 
white marble giving onto the Yamuna, 
linked one to the other by a channel 
whose sparkling waters justified its 
name of Nahr-i-Behisht, the stream of 
paradise. 
To relax, Shah Jahan would retreat 
to one of the hammams, where hot 
and cold water flowed through pipes 
and the walls’ floral motifs created 
the impression of a garden. And at 
i 
palin      
  
The Red Fort's walls hide unexpected treasures.

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

the southern end of the alignment 
was the ultimate paradise: the zena- 
nas, or women's quarters, consisting 
of one-storey pavilions also linked 
with channels and pools. His wives 
and mistresses lived in the Rang Ma- 
hal pavilion (palace of colours), with 
ceilings adorned with gold and silver 
motifs reflecting the water and white 
marble of the magnificent lotus pool, 
a favourite ingredient of Mughal archi- 
tecture. 


### 210806: Shah Jahan's heaven and hell: the Red Fort in Delhi

Symbol of power 
Shah Jahan lived less than 20 years 
in earthly paradise and ten years in 
hell, in the very same place. When he 
fell ill in 1657, he was deposed and 
imprisoned in the fort until his death 
in 1666, by his own son Aurangbzeb. 
Thanks to the latter we have the 
Moti Jasjid, the Pearl Mosque, which 
he built for his own use in 1659, to 
the west of his father's hammames. 
The white marble mosque’s prayer 
room floor is inlaid with the outline 
of a prayer carpet in black marble. To 
the north of the mosque is laid out the 
splendid Hayat-Baksh Bagh, the life- 
giving garden, its sections also sepa- 
rated by water. 
But little remains of the heavenly gar- 
dens. Since its construction, the fort 
has undergone much modification, 
the British in particular considerably 
changing its structure. In 1857, when 
the British crown took command of 
the Raj, it made the fort the British In- 
dian Army's headquarters. As a result, 
pavilions were torn down and colonial 
style military buildings replaced them, 
while Mughal gardens were trans- 
formed into English ones. 
In 1947, after India declared its inde- 
pendence, the Indian army took over 
the Red Fort and turned it into the 
symbol of the British colonial power's 
defeat. The proof: the first Indepen- 
dence Day celebrations took place 
there, on 15 August 1947. And since 
then, every year, the Prime Minister 
gives his Independence Day speech 
on this historically significant site. 
Appasamy Murugaiyan, 
Indian linguist 
In Kaiping, Guangdong province (China), 
several thousand fortified towers stand: the diaolou. 
heir unique architectural style blends Western imports 
ith traditional Chinese elements. 


### 210807: The Diaolou of Kaiping

  
THE DIAOLOU OF KAIPING 
  
    
    
   
ate one night in 1922, more than 
00 bandits advance single file in the 
arkness. They have just abducted 
he 23 pupils and headmaster of the 
an village school and they are 
leading them back to their hideout. 
r route takes them past the vil- 
lage of Yingcun, dominated by the 
Hongyi Lou, a diaolou built by Chi- 
nese émigrés on their return from the 
United States for the protection of 
their families. They stored their weap- 
ons in it and installed an electric gen- 
erator and an alarm siren, brought 
back from overseas. 
As soon as the sun sets, men stand 
guard at the top of the fortified tower, 
where villagers sleep. That night they 
spot odd, furtive shadows. Imme- 
diately they turn on the searchlight, 
sound the alarm...The petrified ban- 
dits are trapped in the glare and din 
of these unknown devices. From the 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
Z
h
u
 
We
nj
ia
n 
   
 
An Lu, fortified towers in Zili village (Kaiping). 
10 
{ FE

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=11) 0

### 210807: The Diaolou of Kaiping

top of the diaolou, the guards open 
fire. Panic ensues. Several bandits 
are shot; others head for the hills, 
while some of the prisoners flee. 
The villagers capture 12 bandits and 
save 17 pupils and the headmaster. 
Word of this exploit spreads far and 
wide. Now every town wants its own 
diaolou. 
Secular guardians 
Today, some 20 diaolou in 
the sub-prefecture of Kaiping 
are inscribed on the World 
Heritage List. Two hours from 
Canton, Guangdong’s capital, 
and four hours by boat from 
Hong Kong, Kaiping is in a 
remote corner of the province. 
Its diaolou stick up in the back- 
ground of villages, in green 
groves of bamboo or banana 
trees. Some loom above the 
rice paddies, on top of small 
mounds. They take various 
forms: castle keeps capped 
with crenellations and em- 
brasures, ornately decorated 
belfries, finely sculpted tow- 
ers. Some are made of stone, 
some in pise (compressed 
earth) and others in brick, like 
the Yinglong Lou, the oldest of the 
diaolou still standing from the 16th 
century. Most, however, were built 
out of reinforced concrete between 
1920 and 1930 and comprise four 
or five storeys. A distinguishing char- 
acteristic is their blend of Chinese 
and western architectural elements. 
The diaolou were used for defence 
in times of upheaval. They flourished 
particularly in the late Qing dynasty 
(1644-1911), when countless local 
wars ravaged China — the bloody 
Taiping rebellion (1851-1864) to cite 
but one — and during what is known 
as the Warlord period, when power- 
hungry military leaders wreaked hav- 
oc in the country, between 1916 and 
1926. 
Double-Happiness 
and Acanthus leaves 
But dangerous times are not the 
only explanation for the profusion 
of diaolou. Their construction was 
financed by émigrés. At the end of 
the 19th and beginning of the 20th 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
Z
h
u
 
We
nj
ia
n 
century, Kaiping was a centre of Chi- 
nese emigration. Many of its citizens 
worked as coolies (the name given 
to Chinese economic immigrants) in 
Southeast Asian mines and planta- 
tions, participated in the California 
gold rush and railroad construction 
across the American continent, or 
opened laundries, restaurants and 
= 
  
An Quan Lou, fortified tower (Kaiping). 
  
rly 
   
r A : 
shops. 
Returning home, they introduced 
the extraordinary composite architec- 
ture of the diaolou, which melds, for 
instance, auspicious Chinese motifs 
like the Double-Happiness symbol 
with acanthus leaves or classical col- 
onnades from the west. 
They also imported cement and 
steel into the region, which turned out 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
Z
h
u
 
We
nj
ia
n 
When the cupola appeared in local 
architecture, it was called 
“upside-down wok” 
11 
to have a determining impact on this 
unusual architectural style, with rein- 
forced concrete making cantilevered 
construction possible and facilitat- 
ing domes and other rounded forms. 
This was a great novelty. Incidentally, 
the expression “upside-down wok” is 
used in Chinese literature of the time 
to designate a cupola. 
A matter 
of prestige 
The diaolou represented pres- 
tige. They were status sym- 
bols, flaunting the prosper- 
ity and power of their owners, 
who consequently spent lavish 
sums on them. Some of the 
towers belonged to a single 
family and were used as resi- 
dences. Others were funded 
by a village or several families, 
with everyone getting a small 
room in which to store valu- 
ables or take refuge in case 
of danger. And some - like 
the Fang Clan watch tower 
near Zili - were lookout points, 
erected in strategic places on 
the outskirts of villages. 
The diaolou built by commu- 
nities were often named after 
the village or the traditional chieftain, 
while others were described by their 
function. Once the name was cho- 
sen, renowned artists were called in 
to trace the characters in calligraphy, 
which were then carved or moulded 
and displayed at the top of the main 
facade. The inscription adorning Rui- 
shi Lou, a nine-storey diaolou in the 
village of Jinjiangli, is the work of an 
abbot and celebrated calligrapher 
from Canton's Temple of the Six Ban- 
yan Trees. 
Most of these diaolou are aban- 
doned today, but nothing about their 
appearance evokes desolation. At 
nightfall, their sombre silhouettes 
stand at attention above the houses 
and continue to watch over the vil- 
lages of Kaiping. 
Patricia Batto, 
French Sinologist, 
is currently working on a book 
on the Kaiping region.

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=12) 0

### IGNORE

(0100: \V To Wo: VAD [TTs [ol STI MUD EAI To Wi ET Go RT (o [TTT Go IF Ty Lo Wl { [1 eC EY o) 1 ST EVN [54 
their traces on the campus of the University of Mexico. Spreading out ov 
seven million square meters, this intellectual breeding ground is also 
by its architecture a unique example of 20th century modernism. 


### 210808: People for the university, the university for the people

  
PEOPLE FOR THE UNIVERSITY 
THE UNIVERSITY FOR THE PEOPLE 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
Q
/
G
e
r
a
r
d
o
 
Te
na
 
To
rr
es
 
  
fu SC CL  
The facade of the Rector’s building decorated by David Alfaro Siqueiros. 
A 
he Central University City Cam- 
us of the Universidad Nacional 
utbnoma de México (UNAM) 
ises up above a sea of volcanic 
va. More than 150,000 stu- 
ents, teachers and staff work, 
and in some cases live, in this 
southern part of the valley of 
Mexico, which the volcano Xitle 
(“little navel”), today extinct, en- 
gulfed 2,400 years ago. 
Distant from the city in the past, 
the university campus is now a 
part of it. The demographic ex- 
plosion has obliged its “inhab- 
itants”, nicknamed “Pumas”, to 
share their oasis of science, art 
and sport with the 20 million peo- 
ple living in the Mexican capital. 
“The architecture of the Ciudad 
Universitaria is such that even 
those who have not studied at 
the University identify with it, be- 
cause it's a very Mexican space,’ 
declares Lourdes Cruz Gonzalez 
Franco, researcher and coordi- 
nator of Mexican architects’ ar- 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
chives. She underlines, “There 
is no clash between the Ciudad 
Universitaria and the big city. On 
the contrary, they are perfectly in- 
tegrated with each other in a flu- 
ent exchange 
The CU, as most people call 
it, has been instrumental in the 
major urban growth that Mexico 
City has known in the second 
half of the 20th century: since 
the beginning of its construction, 
avenues have come into being, 
others have been enlarged, like 
the Insurgentes Avenue, one of 
Mexico City's most emblematic. 
Functional 
space 
The Ciudad Universitaria was de- 
vised in the 1940s to concentrate 
in a single space all the differ- 
ent schools and departments of 
UNAM, up until then scattered all 
over the capital. The construction 
began in 1949 over seven mil- 
lion square metres and lasted for 
12 
three years. “Mario Pani, Enrique 
del Moral and Mario Lazo opted 
for a modern architecture using 
cubical volumes and glass prisms. 
The functional and rational vision of 
space gave a new interpretation to 
an environment that the Xitle's lava 
had made inhospitable,” explains 
Lourdes Cruz. 
Though the complex was de- 
signed more than 60 years ago for 
a population of some 25,000 peo- 
ple, the Ciudad Universitaria has 
lost none of its functional character 
today, even though in the 1970s it 
became necessary to add two new 
developments — one for scientific 
research and the other for human 
sciences — as well as a cultural 
centre and several multidisciplinary 
campuses. 
Beautiful 
space 
The site that has just been inscribed 
on the World Heritage List corre- 
sponds to UNAM's central cam-

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=13) 0

### IGNORE

[4 
g 
© 
I] 
5 
= 
° 
° 
g 
[5] 
[9] < 
Qo 
oO 
n 
pri 
Zz 
> 
© 
  
The CU is a masterpiece of architecture, engineering, landscaping and art. 


### 210808: People for the university, the university for the people

pus. It represents a unique example 
of 20th century modernism in re- 
gard to architecture, engineering, 
landscaping and arts. It is further- 
more a modernism largely inspired 
by Mexican tradition. The campus 
comprises the most noteworthy 
buildings including the Rector 
Tower, the Central Library and the 
University Olympic Stadium used 
for the 1968 Olympic Games and 
the 1986 soccer World Cup. 
Seen from above, the open sta- 
dium resembles a volcano surg- 
ing out of the earth. Like other CU 
buildings, it was constructed out 
of volcanic stone from the Xitle. 
Famous Mexican painter Diego Ri- 
vera (1886-1957), known for his 
murals, decorated its facade with 
a high-relief multicoloured mosaic 
symbolizing the homeland, peace, 
the university and sports. “This 
masterpiece of Diego Rivera's 
mural painting was intended to 
retrace the history of sport in the 
pre-Hispanic and contemporary 
world and to continue all along the 
stadium's enclosure, but it was left 
unfinished," says Lourdes Cruz. 
Another symbolic building, the 
Rector Tower, with its coat of arms 
representing a double-headed bird 
(Mexican eagle and Andean con- 
dor) and its aphorism, “The spirit 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
will speak through my race’, is fur- 
ther proof that in Mexico, art and 
architecture are one. The facades 
of this high tower, a landmark stu- 
dents rely on, is adorned with three 
painted murals by another famous 
Mexican, David Alfaro Siqueiros 
(1896-1974), with eloquent titles: 
“People for the university - the uni- 
versity for the people”, “Dates in 
the history of Mexico” and “New 
University emblem”. 
The painter and architect Juan 
O'Gorman (1905-1982), born 
of an Irish father and Mexican 
mother, gave us the 4,000 square 
metres of frescoes covering the 
Central Library facades. Thanks 
to O'Gorman, the outside walls of 
the ten-storey building decorated 
in multicoloured stones from dif- 
ferent regions of the country tell 
the story of Mexico from the pre- 
Hispanic era to modern times, dra- 
matizing the age-old duality of life 
and death. 
Space 
for involvement 
With 18 departments, six national 
schools and 28 research institutes, 
the CU provides fantastic study 
space. But it also provides space 
for leisure. Its platforms and stair- 
cases open to the sky, recalling 
13 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
G
e
r
a
r
d
o
 
Te
na
 
To
rr
es
 
those of pre-Hispanic cities like 
Teotihuacan (north of Mexico City) 
and Monte Alban (Oaxaca, south 
of the country), are crammed with 
students resting or rehearsing the- 
atre pieces, taking advantage of the 
décor and the acoustics. “We have 
a feeling of freedom, says Zully 
Gongora, drama student, who with 
a group of schoolmates is prepar- 
ing a play in front of a wall made of 
volcanic stone and decorated with 
pre-Hispanic symbols. 
And Luis Alberto Garcia, a gradu- 
ate of the political science depart- 
ment at UNAM, adds, “We Pumas 
are proud of CU, not just because 
of its architecture but also because 
some of our country’s great thinkers 
passed through its lecture halls” He 
mentions, among others, three Mex- 
ican Nobel Prize winners: Alfonso 
Garcia Robles (Peace, 1982), 
Octavio Paz (Literature, 1990) et 
Mario Molina (Chemistry, 1995). 
An intellectual breeding ground, 
the CU was in the middle of the ac- 
tion when student protests culmi- 
    
The CU's Central Library was decorated 
by Juan O'Gorman. 
nated in the tragically well-known 
massacre of Tlatelolco, which 
occurred outside its walls 10 days 
before the start of the 1968 Olym- 
pic Games. Students have also 
held regular major strikes — 1968, 
1987, 1999 - aimed primarily at 
defending free public education, 
as guaranteed by the Mexican 
constitution. So far, they have been 
successful. 
Gerardo Tena, 
Mexican journalist

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=14) 0

### IGNORE

WORLD HERITAGE READINGS 
The dawn of human life 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
/
B
o
u
s
q
u
e
t
 
Lower Valley of the Awash 
(Ethiopia) 
In 1974, scientists in eastern Africa 
unearthed a remarkably complete skel- 
eton of a female hominid, an early an- 
cestor of humans. The team from the In- 
stitute of Human Rights nicknamed her 
Lucy, after the Beatles song, dating her 
at more than 3 million years old. Small 
in height, she had long arms and short 
legs which allowed her to walk upright, 
marking an important step in human 
evolution. This site has been on the List 
since 1980. 
Sangiran Early Man Site 
(Indonesia) 
nscribed on the List in 1996, this 
fossil-rich area on the island of Java 
has been continuously inhabited for 
the past one and a half million years. 
The Dutch anatomist Eugene Dubois 
discovered the remains of the Java 
Man here in 1891, one of the earliest 
specimens of “Homo erectus”. In the 
1930s, the anthropologist GHR von 
Koenigswald found more remains, 
notably Sangiran 2 who could be as 
old as 1.6 million years. 
Archaeological Site 
of Atapuerca 
(Spain) 
These caves constitute an excep- 
tional example of continuous human 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
   
As Twyfelfontein, Namibia’s archaeological 
site, earns its place this year on the World 
222% Heritage List, The UNESCO Courier takes us 
; on a journey backwards in time, to a selection 
#544) of cultural heritage sites in different regions 
Ho. an 
occupation, dating back to nearly 
a million years ago when the earli- 
est known Europeans settled here, 
leaving behind drawings, stone tools 
and other traces of their civilization. 
This unique geographical location 
also provides a link to the human 
evolutionary line from Africa. It was 
inscribed on the List in 2000. 
Kakadu National Park 
(Australia) 
This site, on the List since 1981, 
is home to a wide range of wetland 
and woodland ecosystems, contain- 
ing many rare species. Ancient rock 
drawings attest to cultural traditions 
going back more than 50,000 years, 
making it the continent's oldest 
known human settlement. Its cultural 
landscape is a unique showcase of 
the relationship between humans 
and their environment. 
Serra da Capivara 
National Park 
(Brazil) 
Discovered in the 1960s, these 
mountains are home to several hun- 
dred caves painted by the communi- 
ties that inhabited them as far back as 
25,000 years ago, leaving an invalu- 
able testimony of their hunting prac- 
tices, dances and other rituals. Some 
of the oldest archaeological elements 
14 
of the world where humans first marked 
their presence. 
in the Americas are preserved here, 
as well as unique plant and animal 
species, unknown elsewhere. This 
site is on the list since 1991. 
Tassili n’Ajjer 
(Algeria) 
As early as 7000 BC, when the Sa- 
hara was a green and fertile place, 
generation after generation of Tuareg 
illustrated the animals around them. 
Today, thousands of these rock paint- 
ings and engravings, spread out in an 
area covering 80,000 square kilome- 
tres, provide one of the world’s finest 
open-air museums of prehistory. This 
national park was inscribed on the 
List in 1982 and is also a UNESCO 
Biosphere Reserve since 1986. 
Head-Smashed-In 
Buffalo Jump 
(Canada) 
At the foothills of the Rocky Moun- 
tains, below a promontory plunging 
18 metres into the valley below, 
are remains of thousands of game, 
arms and tools. The native peo- 
ple of the North American plains 
practised a hunting custom 6,000 
years ago, driving buffalo over a 
precipice, thereafter working the 
hides and bones in workshops in 
the down in the valley. This site was 
added to the list in 1981.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

The World Heritage international 
safeguarding campaigns 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
ER a — 
Monuments of Nubia 
(Egypt and Sudan) 
The construction of a dam threat- 
ened to submerge the 3,000-year- 
old monuments and temples of 
ancient Nubia when UNESCO 
launched this campaign in 1960. 
Over a period of 20 years, a total 
of 22 monuments and architectural 
complexes were painstakingly dis- 
mantled stone by stone, and reas- 
sembled on other sites, an immense 
technological challenge requiring 40 
technical missions from five conti- 
nents. The Nubian Monuments were 
inscribed on the List in 1979. 
City of Venice 
(Italy) 
UNESCO launched this cam- 
paign in 1966 after the city was 
devastated by floods a year earlier, 
providing technical expertise and 
financial aid. The international syn- 
ergy from this project was an im- 
portant source of inspiration to the 
founding efforts of the 1972 World 
Heritage Convention. Venice and 
its lagoon were inscribed on the 
World Heritage List in 1987. 
Moenjodaro 
(Pakistan) 
When the campaign was launched 
in 1974, the ruins of this huge city, 
built entirely of unbaked brick in the 
third millennium BC, were threat- 
ened with flooding from the Indus 
The UNESCO Courier 2007 N°6 
      Ta oo . 
¥ \, ’ # 4 y 
rr . 
E) M - " y 3 
5 5 
View of Paharpur's Great Monastery (Bangladesh). 
River and encroaching salinity. 
Moenjodaro was inscribed on the 
List in 1980. The campaign was 
completed in 1997, setting up a 
master plan to ensure the sustain- 
ability of the conservation work. 
Island of Gorée 
(Senegal) 
This island, the largest slave-trading 
centre on the African coast, was al- 
ready placed on the List in 1978, 
when UNESCO appealed to the in- 
ternational community in 1980, not 
only to protect and develop its archi- 
tectural heritage, but also to preserve 
this reminder of human exploitation as 
a sanctuary for reconciliation. 
City of Hué 
(Viet Nam) 
Capital of unified Viet Nam in 1802, 
Hué was a political, cultural and re- 
ligious centre under the Nguyen 
dynasty until 1945. lts 19th century 
palaces, mausoleums and pagodas 
were ravaged by war, monsoons 
and vegetation. The safeguarding 
campaign, launched in 1981, led to 
the listing of the complex of Hué’s 
monuments in 1993. 
Tyre and its Surroundings 
(Lebanon) 
Besieged by Alexander and Ne- 
buchadnezzar, threatened by war, 
urbanization and the erosion of 
time, this ancient Phoenician city 
15 
UNESCO's international safeguarding 
campaigns, the first of which was launched 
in the 1960s, often served as a springboard 
for the nomination of sites on the 
World Heritage List. Indeed, 
the very concept of World Heritage 
developed from these early initiatives. 
Some examples from among 
the 26 campaigns. 
was entered on the List in 1984. 
A “heritage alert” drew internation- 
al attention in 1987, followed by 
a safeguarding campaign in 1998. 
A UNESCO mission visited the 
site in 2006 and reported on post- 
war damage. 
Historic Monuments 
of Paharpur and Bagerhat 
(Bangladesh) 
Bangladesh is home to two cultur- 
al treasures — the monastery com- 
plex of Paharpur, built around 780 
AD, and the 13th century mosque 
city of Bagerhat. Over time, mon- 
soon floods, tropical vegetation and 
soil salinity have not spared them. 
In 1985, as Bagerhat became a 
World Heritage site, the safeguard- 
ing campaign began. 
Jesuit Missions of the Guaranis 
(Argentina, Brazil 
and Paraguay) 
From 1609 onwards, the So- 
ciety of Jesus set up missions 
within the frontiers of several 
South American colonies. These 
were intended to serve as mod- 
els for integrating the indigenous 
population, socially and culturally 
as well as politically and economi- 
cally. A number of these missions 
were inscribed on the list from 
1983 to 1993. The campaign 
for their restoration was launched 
in 1988.

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/189455eng.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

ro 
        
  
United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Organisation 
des Nations Unies 
pour I'éducation, 
la science et la culture 
Organizacion 
de las Naciones Unidas 
para la Educacion, 
la Ciencia y la Cultura 
OpraHu3auus 
O6beanHeHHbIX Haumin no 
BOMpPOCaM 00pa3oBaHus, 
HayKn UN KYJbTYpbl 
Sata any aliie 
Lally alally Loy 
BA EAE, A 
Brg ROUEAAR 
  
  
  
         
  
   
The UNESCO Courier is published by 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
http://www.unesco.org/fr/courier 
General inquiries, reprint and reproduction rights 
f.ryan@unesco.org 
+ 33 (0)1 4568 15 88 
Director 
Saturnino Muiioz Gomez 
Editor in Chief 
Jasmina Sopova - j.sopova@unesco.org 
Rédacteurs 
Arabic 
Bassam Mansour 
assisted by Zaina Dufour 
Chinese 
Weiny Cauhape 
English 
Ariane Bailey 
French 
Agnes Bardon 
Russian 
Katerina Markelova 
Spanish 
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz 
Photo 
Fiona Ryan - f.ryan@unesco.org 
PDF Layout 
Gilbert Franchi 
Web platform 
Stephen Roberts, Fabienne Kouadio, 
Chakir Piro 
Articles and photos credited UNESCO may be reproduced 
and/or translated providing the credit line reads 
“Reproduced from the UNESCO Courier” and includes 
date and hyperlink : http://www.unesco.org/courier 
Articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO. 
Photographs belonging to UNESCO may be reproduced freely. 
They must carry the following caption: 
© UNESCO and photographer's name. For high resolution, 
please contact the Photobank: photobank@unesco.org 
Photographs without UNESCO credit require specific authorization. 
Boundaries on maps do not imply official endorsement 
or acceptance by UNESCO or the United Nations of the countries 
and territories concerned