# [078356](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf) 0

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
    
      
    
ey 
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

I rh n ’ \ i ! . L : Pl Ts 3 . hd : 
i km I : . vd . [ 
i 
% FAMILY FESTIVAL. A mother places tiny lamps 
is before the family shrine in an Indian home. India, 
a land of 400 million people with many languages, 
pe : i J fe A ei i : ed ll 4 I artistic patterns and religions, is an unfamiliar 
        
     
 
   
         
h. 
spectacle to Occidental eyes. But its rich cul- 
i tural and religious heritage has much to offer the 
Westerner who will look beyond the superficial 
veil of the exotic. ) 
| 
il 
i ita 
fie 
rd 
ry 
8d 
df 
il 
| 
   
a
 
a
 
wd
 
F
d
 
  
Ad

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

SEPTEMBER 1963 
16TH YEAR 
Th A wiNpow OPiN GN THE WORLD 
Co, 
mi ourier 
Contents 
No. 9 
PUBLISHED IN 
  
  
NINE EDITIONS Page 
English 
French 
Spanish 4 
Russian 
German 
Arabic 
U.S.A. 1 2 
Japanese 
Italian 
18 
24 
28 
COVER PHOTO 
Frank J. Malina at work in 
his studlo near Paris. His 
paintings, using artificial light 33 
and real movement, have 
brought a revolutionary new 
vislon to art by translating 34 
the accelerated rhythm of our 
time Into novel aesthetic 
forms. See photo story page 
18 and article page 12. 
© Paul Almasy, Paris 
Published monthly by 
The United Nations 
Organization 
Editorial Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, France 
Editor-in-Chief 
Sandy Koffler 
Assistant Editor 
René Caloz 
Associate Editors 
English Edition : Ronald Fenton 
French Edition : Jane Albert Hesse 
Spanish Edition : Arturo Despouey 
Educational, 
BLINDFOLDED TRAVELLER IN NEW DELHI 
Advice to a young man from the West 
By Georges Fradier 
MOVEMENT AND LIGHT IN TODAY'S ART 
New dimensions in painting and sculpture 
By Frank Popper 
MALINA: ARTIST-SCIENTIST OF THE SPACE AGE 
TRACKING THE HURRICANE 
Science helps to fight a world-wide scourge 
By E.R. Yarham 
WHEN FLIGHT WAS SILENT 
The balloon age—a vanished era of air travel 
By David Gunston 
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 
FROM THE UNESCO NEWSROOM 
Scientific and Cultural 
Russian Edition : Veniamin Matchavariani (Moscow) 
German Edition : Hans Rieben (Berne) 
Arabic Edition : Abdel Moneim El Sawi (Cairo) 
Japanese Edition : Shin-lchi Hasegawa (Tokyo) 
Italian Edition : Maria Remiddi (Rome) 
Layout & Deslgn 
Robert Jacquemin 
(M. C. 631, 183 A) 
THE UNESCO COURIER is published monthly, exceptin July and August when 
itis bi-monthly {| issues a year) in English, French, Spanish, Ruisian, German. 
Arabic, Japanese, and Italian, In the United Kingdom itis distributed by H.M, 
Stationery Office, P. O. Box 569, London, 5S. E, |. 
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted may be reprinted providing 
the credit line reads "Reprinted from THE UNESCO COURIER, plus date 
of issue, and two voucher copies are sent to the editor. Signed arucles re- 
printed must bear author's name. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned 
unless accompanied by an international reply coupon covering postage, Signed 
articles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of THE UNESCO COURIER. 
The Unesco Courier is Indexed monthly in The Readers’ Guide to 
Periodical Literature published by H., W. Wilson Co.,, New York. 
Annual subscription rates: 10/-stg. ; $3.00 (Canada) ;7.00 
French Francs or equivalent. Single copies I/-stg. 30 
cents ; 0.70 F. 
Sales & Distribution Offices 
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7°, 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in-Chief.

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

  
by Georges Fradier 
This article has been written by Georges Fradier as 
a letter to a young man from the West, Joris van W., 
who is visiting India. Replying to the young man’s 
complaint that he was bored and disappointed by 
a performance of the Indian epic, *‘‘ Krishna Leela”, 
Georges Fradier explains that he has only himself to 
blame. Lack of curiosity and indifference have pre- 
vented him from sharing in a unique cultural experience. 
THE CELESTIAL FLUTIST. In all lands, 
simple or idealized images of legendary heroes 
and divinities who embody in themselves the 
basic values of a culture are passed down 
from generation to generation through poetry, 
epics and folk tales. In India the legends 
surrounding Krishna, a youthful and lovable 
incarnation of Vishnu, have won him a special 
place in the affections of the people. Left, 
a folk mural of Krishna the flute-player. Right, 
an image of this celestial musician whose exploits 
have inspired innumerable songs and dances. 
EAR Joris, 
To find oneself in Delhi, or New Delhi on a March 
evening, as I'm sure you must have felt though you 
didn’t say so in your letter, is an experience prized by all 
its inhabitants, rich and poor alike, and still more by the 
Western tourists for whom it must be little short of a 
miracle. Such evenings are indescribable; those who have 
known them try to convey their impressions by words 
like soft; warm; sweet and scented air; starry skies; 
rustling palm trees... 
But all these words are inadequate, for who can say 
for instance that the tall palm fronds in the gardens of 
wealthy New Delhi homes stir the emotions more than a 
few leaves glimpsed in the humbler and still more peace- 
ful sidestreets beyond the Kashmir Gate. And who can 
say why the soft air so often mentioned should be as 
palpable at nightfall among all the backfiring motorcycle 
taxis in Connaught Circle as in the velvet solitude of 
the Lodi Gardens. 
Winter is over and the pitiless summer is still a few 
weeks off. The lawns and other open spaces are not yet 
swarming with the crowds who escape from the old blocks 
of flats ‘without balconies or air-conditioning to find a 
night’s sleep. You can wander alone between the Red 
Fort and the Great Mosque where the fields are still green 
or in the Ramlila Gardens bathed in moonlight and 
caressed by the soft night breezes. 
You must surely have fallen under the spell—almost too 
powerful for people in our part of the world—cast by 

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

  
 
   
nature which at this time of the year becomes a sheer 
delight with the same fresh yet uneffusive spontaneity 
‘we find in the welcome extended by the Indian people, 
whom you describe as the most hospitable in the world. 
Unless you were ill in bed, all this must have given you 
renewed pleasure in life and added reason for living. 
Such are the delighis-—or illusions—bestowed by February 
and March in northern India where musicians from time 
immemorial have sung of them wlth matchless fervour. 
And so these spring evenings or nights might even be 
descrlbed as cultural values. 
In India spring has been given a more exalted place 
than, perhaps, in any other part of the world. In Europe 
it makes you hum an air by Mozart or a “pop” tune or 
it brings to mind a Botticelli figure. Here it has been 
embodied in divine legends that for three thousand years 
have been the never-failing inspiration of poets, sculptors, 
painters and even philosophers. 
Since you already had some knowledge of its literature 
‘when you set out for the East, I feel I can speak to you 
of the Ramayana, an epic which is comparable only with 
the Iliad in the lasting influence it has exerted on the 
thinking of a whole people. I want to talk about it to you 
(because of your March evening in Delh{) as I imagine 
you know your way about Hndu mythology and are not 
content, when you visit temples with their crowds of 
tourists, merely to admire the statues without any idea 
of what they represent. Just picture a tourist in Ghent 
who, on the grounds that he is an agnostic, sees no more 
than lines and colours in the Retable of the Lamb. 
Photos @ Richard Lannoy 
When presented with an effigy of the Iiindu Trinity, 
you of course can put a name to the three faces of 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. You have grasped that 
Vishnu symbolizes perpetual life—the sheer will to live. 
He is the power that holds the world together. But for 
him everything would disintegrate, and when sleep over- 
takes him the universe shrinks to nothing. lle is the 
hope of all mortal things; and so the Hindus will tell you 
that he is the god of all religions. ‘That is why, every 
few hundred or thousand years, when the world seems 
threatened with collapse, he comes down In bodily form 
to give it new strength and life. You could never re- 
member all the many forms of his successive incarnations. 
But the two most famous and most splendid of these— 
Rama and Krishna—have to do with your night in March. 
The landscape and seasons in India cannot have 
changed much since these incarnations which are suppos- 
ed to have occured a few centuries apart, in relatively 
recent times, at the beginning of the “age of conflict”. 
I wouldn’t fcel too remote from them though. Rama for 
instance is the “Charmer” who must be familiar to you 
from Indlan literature and the sensitive people who have 
welcomed you, for all classes of society feel a very deep 
devotion to this god incarnated as a prince. 
The story of Rama not only extols the finest feelings 
—especlally loyalty and falthfulness to one’s word—but is 
also an inexhaustible source of inspiration for essayists 
and story-tellers, it is roughly comparable with the part 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

BLINDFOLDED TRAVELLER (Cont'd) 
Krishna’s flute calls from the forest 
played by Don Quixote in Spain. Many a scholar in 
India and beyond lts borders regards it as the origin of 
the tale of Prince Charming In Western legend, where 
the hero overcomes countless natural and supernatural 
obstacles before being reunited with his beloved. 
In India she is Sita whom you must have seen in the 
many prints and plaster images on sale In the bazaars. 
In one she is depicted holding a lotus flower, covered in 
jewels, sitting on Rama’s left knee; Rama has a serene 
smile on his face, set off by a resplendent necklace and 
ear-rings, with his hand ever ready to his bow. Behind 
him is his brother, the chaste and valiant Lakshman, 
also armed. Reposing at their feet is Hanuman, the 
monkey king, who triumphed over the evil spirits of 
ancient Ceylon. 
N-- that I mention this semi-divine animal, so 
devoted to Rama, you must wonder if Indian 
children have the same feelings about monkeys as the 
youthful visitors to the London, Hamburg or Antwerp 
Zoos. Almost Inevitably, monkeys should conjure up in 
the minds of Indians the army of Hanuman, just as a 
reader of the Little flowers of St. Francis is reminded by 
birds of the great saint, or a lover of poetry cannot help 
reciting Baudelaire when he sees cats. Are these com- 
parisons too far-fetched? But I only meant to bring 
home to you the diversity of each people’s bestiary. By 
the process of mental association, animals, too, can 
acquire the significance of cultural values. 
The story goes that Rama having sworn to have one 
wife only, promised to be reincarnated later so as to 
satisfy the passions he had kindled in his followers. And 
so he appeared as Krishna, the dark, comely god of love, 
all-fulfilling. We find him for instance in the miracu- 
lous forest of Brindaban not for from the Jumna, a 
paradise which for all its appeal to the senses is the most 
innocent that ever sprang from man’s imagination. One 
March evening in Delhi the spirit of Krishna was present; 
though you may never have read a line of the Bhagavata 
Purana you were assuredly fn Brindaban. 
In your letter you say: “Last night I was invited to an 
open-air performance called Krishna Leela; I thought it 
was never going to end. To begin with I was bored to 
death by the pompous speeches ‘with their mixture of 
patriotism, learning and philosophy, and then by the 
musie, which at first I found disquieting and then terribly 
monotonous. The performance was a kind of ballet or 
historical pageant with lovely costumes but incomprehen- 
sible blts of folk dancing. 
There was too much pantomine and an unending succes- 
slon of gods and evil spirits, persons and tableaux with 
no apparent connexion between them. If must all have 
been based on folklore. But does it mean anything 
today? Has it a message to bring? Who can say? 
Anyhow it put me to sleep?” 
M: dear boy, I'm twenty years older than you 
so can’t tell you as bluntly as I should that 
you're an utter fool. If you were my age, I wouldn't 
mince my words. Good luck and your kind hosts brought 
fabulous cultural treasures within your grasp one March 
evening. 
India, which is almost as vast as Europe and has as 
large and as varied a population, has other, many other 
treasures besides. But this is one of the most fascinating 
aspects of a heritage which belongs not merely to the 
past but keeps on growing; and it is one of the most sti- 
mulating aspects of that heritage. Your talk of endless 
speeches and a performance based on folklore shows that 
It was all completely lost on you. 
When the Oberammergau peasants vowed in the 17th 
century to play the Passion from time to time—a tradition 
they have adhered to down to the present day—was it 
nothing more than folklore? If despite the flood of 
tourists you managed to attend this performance it would 
never occur to you to think of it merely as a stage piece 
on the same level as a production of Parsifal or the Flying 
Dutchman. Instinctively you apply other standards; you 
will immediately feel absorbed and for several hours you 
will identify yourself with the actors as a Christian and 
even as a Bavarian. 
The ballet you watched—Iless solemn, with less ritual 
and less spontaneity—could not of course be equated with 
the Passion or even the mediseval Mystery Plays which 
could be made into a first-rate spectacle in any modern 
theatre. But at both the Mystery Plays and the Krishna 
Leela, the public's reactions are much the same—charged 
with emotion and with no trace of surprise. You yourself 
would have no difficulty in feeling at one with the spec- 
tators, and in understanding and experiencing the same 
emotions, provided that you too were first familiar with 
the story brought to life in the acting and dancing. 
I suppose that the choreographer had to rest content 
with a mere allusion, towards the end of the ballet, to 
the part played by Krishna as an adult in the feudal, 
cosmic war in which a host of princes of the same blood 
destroy one another. Krishna spends his childhood in the 
fields and woods among cowherds and milkmaids. The 
little prince Is entrusted at birth—so as to escape the 
massacre of the innocents-—to a family of kind, wealthy 
farmers and waxes in strength and mischief rather than 
wisdom. 
There are endless stories about all the pranks played 
by this spoilt child, but everyone is delighted with them, 
being powerless to resist the charm of this divine boy 
who, after getting into the most terrible mischief, turns a 
disarming smile on his nurses and later on his friends. 
He has any number of girls among his playmates, and 
they are ready to put everything aside—work, family, the 
past and present—to follow him or just to go looking for 
him in the forest. (Later on he was to acquire lawful 
wives by scores and then by hundreds, ending with a 
grand total of sixteen thousand eight hundred and eight). 
LL: all who come into contact with Krishna 
as a child or a young man, they have mo- 
mentary visions of his divinity, seeing him in a flash as 
Vishnu. Usually the transfiguration passes as it came, 
their worship or ecstasy fades in the light of not-quite- 
common day; his adoptive parents return to their foil, a 
warrior to battle, girls begin dancing and vanish into the 
darkness, summoned by a flute. Please never tell me 
again that you found that flute monotonous. 
In your neglect of the peculiar qualities of the Krishna 
story you closed your eyes to the exceptional talents of 
the dancers performing before you. Some figures of the 
dance had a “merry peasant” atmosphere, a colourful 
liveliness you must have enjoyed; for capering in a circle, 
hands on hips, to a simple measure, has an unfailing 
charm, and the most universally familiar themes of our 
century are those of folklore, with its pottery, textiles, 
basket-work and ballets. 
The round dances have their rightful place of course in 
a fairy-tale that was born of the people and still belongs 
to them. But in the “classical” dances, products of a 
supremely refined art you seem to have perceived only 
conventionality and symbolism. True, their technique is 
conventional, like that of the Bolshoi Theatre and Covent 
Garden. 
The masters who teach them In schools such as the 
Bharatiya Kala Kendra at Delhi are the direct heirs of 
those who formerly brought renown to the courts of 
princes or emperors. Incidentally, their learning is the 
more precious for being ephemeral; the classical tradition 
and the kathak style had nearly vanished from Repub- 
lican India, and are preserved only through the gener- 
osity of unusually devoted and wealthy patrons. 
This is the most difficult of all styles of dance, but the 
long years of remorseless discipline that are required in 
order to master it confer an incredible freedom. Try to 
spend a few hours, a few days if possible, among these 
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

LORD OF 
THE DANCE 
NED SL h - §r 
© Richard Lannoy 
India’s dances are an expression of every aspect of life and even symbolize life itself: 
Siva, who represents both creation and destruction, is also Lord of the Dance. He is 
often depicted surrounded by an arch of flames (destruction) and holding a small drum 7 
(the rhythm of creation). Above, an 8th century A.D. figure of Siva in the famous 
rock-hewn underground temples of Ellora, in Hyderabad, southern India.

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

Chasing a demon (Kathakali) 
  
Photos © Richard Lannoy 
Siva (Bharata Natyam) 
fl  
of d rhs 
ndi a's T rich 1": oritage rar 
religious and adn temple dances (Bha- - 
LEI EWEDD IEUT ICEUTSEIG [ETE [CEGEDEY ) 
if 
‘down to simple folk dance Its five major 
schools of classical dance are the ELEC] 
ENE GE EG ELE ‘and the Mohili PN 
in SELON India, and the Kathak and the 
Manipuri in the north. In these Ene id . 
gesture language of the 
‘that are as strict as they are ge foe 
“gestures, through which the audience follows 
RULERS CIAL EU ECL by the dance, offer to the 
performer EROCELEE expression as eloquent 
as the spoken word. "Right, opposite page, 
‘a pose from a Bharata Natyam dance depict 
y ing SHEERS El UR GER EI CL RO ignorance . 
Some examples of the finger movements, or 
“‘mudras'’, are seen in these photos With their 
infinite variatvaets ‘combinations RUCAE-TRVEL Te 3 
o interpret dramatic works, poetry, prose and d 
E oe Artes fy Mie HOES GENES 
eanings of this symbolic language easy to 
‘understand and connoisseurs can follow wW 

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

(Bharata Natyam) 
  
  
        
  
   
  
Shyness 
(Bharata Natyam) 
Crocodile 
(Kathakali) 
Govt. of India 
  Heavy rain (Kathakali) Slight rain (Kathakali) 

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

10 


### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

BLINDFOLDED TRAVELLER (Cont'd) 
No longer a foreigner 
singers and musiclans, in their school. You will have an 
opportunity, perhaps unrivalled elsewhere, of watching 
performers of all ages in a display of virtuosity, with an 
incomparable mastery of their art and control of their 
limbs. 
Take your seat In the unadorned hall, resonant with 
the unchanging drone of the tambura, the basic single- 
stringed instrument. The dancer bows to you, stands 
motionless for a moment, then clicks her fingers lightly 
to the tabla player’s tones which grow more and more 
irresistible. She comes forward and bends as though to 
kiss the feet of the guru, who is seated at your side. She 
walts silently for an instant, about to begin her dance. 
She begins... When, at a sign from the guru, she stops, 
you do not know whether she has been dancing for half 
an hour or an hour. She could have gone on all day, 
with more and more intricate steps, seemingly improvised, 
never ‘weary, never frenzied, never mechanical but on the 
contrary with Increasing physical control and ever- 
growing rapture. 
H ER grace, skill and tireless vigour will no doubt 
teach you more about the Dance, with its ca- 
pacity for beauty and indeed for ecstasy than you could 
ever learn from any ballet performance. In any case I 
hope that this dancer with her technical mastery over 
every least gesture and expression, from flashing eyes to 
the musical tinkle of rings as her bare feet tread the 
marble floor, will restore your feeling for the wonders of 
the Krishna Leela, which evaded you the other evening. 
And this will probably reveal to you before long the 
Krishna of the poets. Your recollection of that dancer 
—so completely “traditional”, though born about 1940—is 
bound to be a help as you turn the pages of the Gila 
Govinda, the “Song of the Herdsman”, written by Jaya- 
deva eight hundred years ago, and then the variations, 
differing in their depth of mysticism and in their inge- 
nuity, composed between the fifteenth and eighteenth 
centuries by a dozen lyric poets from Princess Mira Bal 
to Blharl Lal and Kali Das. Translations are not hard 
to come by. 
You ‘will find it even easier to appreciate certain sets of 
engravings and reproductions, for the loves of Krishna are 
the great inspiration of Indian painting and the producer 
of what you took to be a “folk” ballet used the .old Pun- 
jabl painters as his guides. They used to illustrate ma- 
nuscripts of which Krishna was the hero; but even quite 
lately he ‘was the favourite theme of Jamini Roy in Bengal 
and of George Keyt in Ceylon. So to familiarize yourself 
with Krishna you need not delve into the past, for he 
has not suffered the fate of Apollo and Orpheus who are - 
now relegated to schoolrooms on the classics. 
The Krishna Leela is proof of this, Its ingenuousness 
left you cold. Its ardour--a mingling of sensuality and 
religion—disappolnted you. Its wealth of poetry bored 
you. You are of course at liberty to attribute this frustra- 
tion to accident, long-winded speeches, or even the fact 
that it was too dark to read the programme. Why not? 
But when you are told of the worthy 18th century mathe- 
matican who went to a Racine tragedy and asked, as he 
left the theatre, “What does it prove?” it is not Racine 
you find pitiable. 
HE sole purpose of that dancing, singing and 
mime based on the Krishna legends was to 
give you pleasure; neither the choreographers nor the 
dancers were trying to convey abstract truths, to teach 
you local history, or to thrust doctrines down your throat. 
The divine legend they acted out is probably meant to 
announce that life is ‘worth living and that the world can 
shake off its terrors; but that is the burden of all music 
and dance—of all art, most likely—though they preach 
only to the converted. 
You do not invariably close your eyes and ears to beauty 
and imagination. But this time you ‘were unable to 
escape from yourself and your habits, to forget your em- 
barrassment, which was that of a foreigner clinging des- 
perately to his foreign standards. 
Finding yourself unmoved by the magnificent scenery 
and costumes, you might perhaps have whiled away the 
performance by pretending to be a historian of races and 
religions: a dignified amusement, as a substitute for the 
message you hoped to find. You would then have noted 
for instance that Krishna (and Rama too) always has a 
very dark skin, shown by some painters as mldnight blue, 
and that he is not a Brahman but an aristocrat, a warrior. 
You would have pondered over the disputed question of 
his Dravidian origin with the conflicts and exchanges it 
implies in Vedic times, and the fact that even in more 
recent centuries the Aryans have not entirely driven out 
the ancient population whose races and languages still 
predominate in southern India. It is to these multiple 
influences that Indian culture owes its richness and com- 
plexity. Such considerations are by no means idle and, 
I repeat, they would have passed the time for you. But 
frankly, they are utterly remote from the Krishna Leela, 
which offers nothing but delight. 
It is true that to understand its joyous language you 
need to know the sort of things I have been telling you 
here, and a little more as well. Nothing would have been 
easier. Quite apart from books, you had only to ask one 
or another of your friends in Delhi; not necessarily the 
most learned of them. A few hints, recollections or 
anecdotes ‘would have put you on the right track. 
Indeed, the tone in which people talked to you of Krish- 
na's legends, if not of his worship, would itself have put 
you in the right mood for the performance. Then you 
would have been ready to understand—not only the 
sequence of scenes and episodes you now find puzzling, 
but the deeper meaning of this tremendous story which 
unfolds itself simultaneously on earth and on the super- 
natural plane and piles up a glorious heap of absurdities 
as a firm foundation for the triumph of life and love. 
Fo you to come away in a cold and rather con- 
temptuous mood from a performance that 
delights an entire nation is not, in your opinion, a very 
serious matter. It is only a pity for you yourself. Go 
to see the Krishna Leela again; or, if it is given while 
you are there, to the Ram Lila, but try to give it your 
full attention. Allow yourself to be moved. Enjoy the 
story right through, try to judge the dancers and musi- 
cians by their own standards, in the light of what they 
are trying to do and express. 
I am not suggesting that this will automatically make 
India, with its history, its civilization and its dally life, as 
familiar to you, as intelligible, as crystal-clear as your 
own native town. It isn’t as easy as that. But I promise 
you that you will feel a bit less of a stranger there. In 
coming to understand such an important element in its 
culture you ‘will have moved into a new dimension of 
intelligence and sensitivity, even if you have not pene- 
trated very deeply into modern India or the Hindu 
doctrines. 
Unless you become an Indian, however awkwardly, at 
theatrical performances and concerts, for want of any 
better opportunity, you will never cease to 'wonder, with 
the foolishness common to all impatient travellers, “how 
anyone can be Indian”. If this temporary conversion 
strikes you as impossible, I really cannot see why you 
should stay any longer in India. You see what I mean, 
I hope: become an Arab when you go to Lebanon. And 
let us hope that the Indians will transform themselves 
Into Swedes, Italians and Greeks when they have the 
chance. 
This text is taken from Encounters and Celebrations, a study 
on the mutual appreciation of cultural values in Orient and 
Occident by Georges Fradier, shortly to be published by Unesco 
in English, French and Spanish.

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 63346: Blindfolded traveller in New Delhi

RAMAYANA 
SPECTACLE 
 
© Richard Lannoy 
These children have put on traditional costumes and masks with grotesque features 
for their parts in a performance of the Ramayana. This great Indian epic, dating back 
over 2,000 years, tells the story of Rama, a “Prince Charming” who overcame a 
thousand and one obstacles to win his beloved Sita. Today, as in the past, the legendary 
adventures of this hero captivate audiences in India and other Asian countries. 
11

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

Vardanega 
12 
  
5 J § : 
wo] AB a) 
al 
 

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

  
MOVEMENT & LIGHT 
IN TODAY'S ART 
KINETICS - The science of the motion of 
bodies as produced by the forces acting 
upon them. Motion involves the ideas of 
space and time. We measure space by the 
time which a body takes to move from 
one part of space to another. Heraclitus 
was the first to insist on the fact of 
movement as constituting the most 
characteristic aspect of the universe. 
— Dictionary of Philosophy 
and Psychology 
by James Mark Baldwin 
  
by Frank Popper 
M AN’s ideas about movement have varied 
considerably through the ages. In turn he has 
feared It and has longed to halt its flight; he has wished 
to take part in it, then to analyse it, and finally to make 
use of it. Ever since prehistoric times the artist has tried 
to give visual expression to movement, and seeking ways 
to represent it, he has been torn between the urge to arrest 
each changing scene that met his eye and the wish to 
breathe new life into the vision he had just set down. 
Increasing powers of analysis brought greater knowledge; 
fresh materials became available for the artist's use, and 
movement began to find expression in new ways. 
So we should not be surprised today to witness the emer- 
gence of Kinetle art, i.e. the use of mechanical, or visual” 
and “natural” movement, and to find others who are 
reviving the sporadic studies of a few pioneers, such as 
the American, Thomas Wilfied, the Hungarian, Laszlo 
Moholy-Nagy and the Russian composer, A.N. Bcriabine, 
CONT'D ON PAGE 13 
li. : rin 
+ 
hs 
4 
a3 
   
   
  
Galerie Denise René SCULPTURE, REVOLVING AND HYDRAULIC. Today's search for new artistic expression 
is reflected in these sculptural works of transparent plastic, incorporating light and movement, 
produced by artists from Latin America. Left, detail of a work by Gregorio Vardanega, **Synchronistic 
Development of an Infinite Circle’. This recent work is one of the descendants of the suspended 
constructions created about 1920 by a pioneer of kinetic art, the Soviet artist, Alexander Rodchenko. 
Above, two phases of ** Hemisphere of Water'', by Gyula Kosice, photographed in motion. In his 
“hydraulic sculptures’, Kosice obtains striking effects from the refractions of colours through 
water. Vardanega (born in Italy) and Kosice (originally from the Carpathian Mountains) represent 
the two main lines of artistic research which have done much to develop kinetic art In Argentina.

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd; 
REIT A 
      
    
   
—
 w
y
 
WN
 
2d,
 
T
O
 
E
E
 
P
I
 
Y
r
 
b
e
y
 
    “
I1
y/
 
2 
  
   
LN 
w
M
I
E
 
Hs
 
A
E
A
E
S
E
R
E
 
  
A
E
 
h
o
 
Ta
 
-e
 
Ki
r 
© Alexis, Brussels 
  
  
© Robert Doisneau, Paris 
MOBILE FRESCO BY A 
CYBERNETIC TOWER. 
At the Palais des Congrés in 
Liege (Belgium), Nicolas 
Schéffer offers the visitor 
a grandiose spectacle called 
“ Forms and Light”, Behind 
the vast, glass facade of 
the building (above right) 
is a huge (16,000 square 
feet in area) semi-trans- 
parent plastic screen on to 
which variable coloured 
images are projected. The 
rhythm and movements of 
the: images forming this 
mobile fresque can be varied 
and controlled by commands 
recorded on tape and are 
synchronized with a sound- 
track playing electronic 
music. To the right of the 
palace rises the *“ Cybernetic 
Tower ”, (detail left) a metal 
sculpture 170 feet high. 
Schoffer’s Tower is control- 
led by an electronic brain 
sensitive to atmospheric 
changes, and it is these 
which regulate the move- 
ments of the sculpture’s 
64 mobile blades or vanes.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

  
  
Search for a new dimension 
all of whom made a very direct use of light in art to give 
an impression of actual movement. 
Scriabine had rays of coloured light projected as an 
accompaniment to his symphony, Prometheus, and 
Wilfred designed an instrument he called the Claviluz; 
by “playing” on its keyboard he cast moving shapes and 
colours on a screen. In our own day the most Important 
work with light and real movement is belng done in 
painting by an American, Frank J. Malina, and in 
sculpture by a Frenchman, Nicholas Schiffer. 
Nuclear fission, cybernetics and the whole range of 
scientific discoveries are making a deep impact on the 
outlook of the average person; their effect on the artist 
is no less marked. And it is against this background of 
modern science and its relationship to the basic preoccu- 
pations of art, that it Is interesting to examine the new 
role played by light and movement. 
What actually are the latest developments in this field 
of art? What objections to their work do these artists 
have to face? And how are these criticisms answered? 
Apart from works which make use of artificial light and 
movement, there are today three distinct trends in which 
the element of time is a paramount factor. 
The first uses mechanical movement for varlous pur- 
poses. The aim is to convey the idea of a machine in 
operation, using light solely to Illuminate and emphasize 
the functioning of the mechanism. 
This mechanical or mechanistic trend, which tries to 
be both amusing and poetic, has a fairly recent history 
of some Importance. Francis Picabla, a French artist, 
visualized ‘what he called “irrational machines.” Another 
Frenchman, Marcel Duchamp, actually bullt some in 
1913. He constructed his first “ready made”—a blcycle 
wheel mounted on a stool—and followed it up with 
various pieces of “high precision optical apparatus,” as 
he called them, such as the “rotary hemisphere.” Man 
Ray, the American photographer, was also constructing 
“ready mades” at this perlod—among them a mobile 
arrangement of coat hangers; while two Russians, Viadi- 
mir Tatlin and Naum Gabo, included mobile elements in 
their constructions. 
Ao other great pioneers of mechanical 
movement, we of course find Alexander Calder, 
of the U.8.A. Calder, though, first used mechanical pro- 
pulsion In his Circus and in the toys he designed before 
producing his “Mobiles” —sculptures made up of suspend- 
ed metal plates and wires, which are delicately poetic yet 
amusing at the same time. More recently, Jean Tinguely, 
of Switzerland, has been trying to advance beyond the 
mechanics of science to a new kind of “metaphysics,” 
illustrated by the titles of his constructions—Métaméca- 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
15

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd) 
Electronics enters the world of art 
nique, Métamatic, Relief Métamécanique Sonore. A Bel- 
gian, Pol Bury, uses a concealed motor to give slow move- 
ment to his three-dimensional constructions made of wood 
metal and other materials. 
The second trend is based on the movement of the 
spectator's eyes, either by the manner of looking at the 
work (the eye is guided) or by changing position before 
it and so causing the eye to move. A Hungarian-born 
French artist, Victor de Vasarely, and a Venezuelan, J.R. 
Soto, are reviving a long-standing tradition that leads us 
back to the linear and perspective frompe Uceil works of 
the Renalssance and Baroque periods. 
Vasarely began his study of the subject before the war, 
by experimenting with transparent plaques which slid in 
grooves. He became the leader of a movement known as 
Cinétisme Plastique. His designs are usually constructed 
with simple elements—diverging lines or geometrical 
figures skilfully repeated, cut out and superimposed. 
These may be black and white or polychrome; it is their 
juxtaposition which gives them depth and creates a 
three-dimensional effect. The spectator’s change of posi- 
dimension—duration. These qualities relate Vasarely’s 
work to architecture, to which it may indeed belong. 
By the play of specially wrought metallic shapes 
suspended before a fluted background, Soto achieves a 
poetic effect of great subtlety. Similar frompe U'ceil effects 
are achieved by Francisco Sobrino and the Frenchman, 
Yavaral, with plexiglass and vinyl wire. 
The third trend is exemplified by artists who, though 
working in a similar vein to those just mentioned, use 
natural elements such as air, water and fire to achieve 
actual motion. 
One group, employing here light and ingeniously 
suspended materials, obtains movement in the same way 
as Calder does with his “Mobiles” by using air as the 
motive force. Thus, J. Le Parc, of Argentina has built 
structures made of tiny metallized plastic plaques which 
move ‘with the air and shimmer with light. Another 
Argentinian, G. Kosice, introduces the force of water into 
his “hydraulic sculpture,” while the Frenchman, B. Au- 
bertin uses matches in his “fire pictures” to produce a 
tion when looking at a picture gives the work yet another real “firework display.” In addition to these three main 
Ultra-modern devices 
are used by Nicolas 
Schoffer to impart 
movement to his 
sculptural composi- 
tions. Left, part of 
the electro-mechani- 
cal equipment operat- 
ing the cybernetics 
system which controls 
the movements of 
Schoffer’'s “Tower” 
at Liége, Belgium. 
The apparatus seen 
here varies the orders 
given to the control 
system and thus en- 
sures a spectacle of 
the greatest variety. 
© Doisneau-Rapho, Paris  

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

trends mention might be made of the work of the Greek 
sculptor, V. Takis, and his use of the magnet and its 
power of attraction. 
Thus far, reflected or refracted light have played a 
limited role. Before going on to consider artists who have 
used it more deliberately, let us look at some of the 
criticisms levelled at this new form of art. 
The main objection is voiced by lovers of painting, art 
historians and by painters themselves. They maintain 
that the sudden introduction of movement into a picture 
destroys the subtle balance which exists in every well- 
harmonized composition. Movement can only be adequa- 
tely expressed, they say, by the general rhythm of a 
picture, by the lines of force or the vibration of the 
fields of colour; and only thus can the feeling for beauty, 
the artist’s sensitivity remain unimpaired. 
Many persons have also found it extremely difficult to 
accept as legitimate art some of the latest trends in 
sculpture. According to Moholy-Nagy, the art of sculpture 
has evolved from a block like the pyramids to modelled 
sculpture (both solid and hollow) and so on down to 
contemporary forms in which the sculpture is perforated, 
suspended in the air, and finally endowed with movement 
as in kinetic sculpture. 
HE mast traditional works of art draw their 
vitality from the various internal rhythms 
connected either ‘with subject or with form. Yet this 
same rhythmic interplay is the guiding principle of pre- 
sent-day kinetic art. The artist tries to achieve a satis- 
factory combination of the rhythm of the moving object 
(mechanical rhythm) with the rhythm of human per- 
ception (psychological rhythm) and the zsthetic rhythm 
(our appreciation of the work of art). 
Another more sweeping type of criticism denies any 
connexion between scientific and artistic invention. Or, 
in other words, scientific inventions such as cybernetics 
and electronics cannot be used to create works of art 
and, by the same token, artistic creation can have no 
bearing on the widening of human knowledge. 
Obviously, present-day research in science takes place 
on a scale vastly different from that in art. Setting up 
a scientific laboratory demands vast resources and great 
discoveries are often the result of collaboration between 
several scientists, even whole teams of scientists. All the 
same, one can hardly imagine that a scientist, even a 
highly specialized one, could wholly ignore the sense of 
the =sthetic, since he must have it to picture the complex 
physical phenomena of our universe as well as the ssthe- 
tic needs of mankind to which his work is dedicated. 
A: for the artist, it is equally clear—if we agree 
that artistic creation is partly a conscious pro- 
cess—that a scientific understanding of the means he 
employs, of the world around him and of his own per- 
sonality can hardly fail to enrich the artist’s art. But it 
would be going much too far to say that scientific inven- 
tion and artistic invention are one and the same process. 
Yet the artist and scientist have often been combined 
in one person: Leonardo da Vinci was an illustrious 
exaniple of this, and so were all the great figures of the 
Renaissance. Very few artists could lay claim to universal 
knowledge nowadays, of course, buf some 'who are working 
on kinetic art are actually carrying out scientific experi- 
ments. Their theoretical knowledge is such that, ‘with 
the help of specialists, they are able to use the most 
modern techniques in composing their works. 
The art of the cinema has already outgrown these 
difficulties. The cinema welcomed every invention that 
CONT'D ON PAGE 20   
Light, movement, depth and 
colour are all used by sculptor, 
Nicolas Schoffer, an innovator 
in the field of * lumino- 
dynamic” art forms. Shown 
here are three phases of 
his work, * Chronos". (1) 
* Chronos" immobile. (2) 
In movement. (3) At full 
speed. Now it is a complex 
interplay of light and shadow. 
Photos Yves Hervochon, Paris 
METAMORPHOSIS 
  17

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### IGNORE

18 
  
Malina 


### 63354: Malina: artist-scientist of the space age

MALINA : ARTIST-SCIENTIST OF THE SPACE AGE 
Malina 
CEPHEUS. One of a series of 
lumidyne paintings of the constella- 
tions of the Zodiac, 
Other constellations in this same 
group are shown 
25 by 25 cms. 
on page 20. 
n 1954 Frank J. Malina brought a new vision to art 
when he introduced electric light and movement 
into painting. We present here a few examples of his 
mobile electro-paintings, though admittedly still photo- 
graphs in black and white cannot do justice to the works 
which are based entirely on the continuous movement of 
shapes and forms and the changes and inter-reactions 
of various colours. It is no accident that all the examples 
shown are interpretations of heavenly bodies in outer 
space or artistic expressions of scientific phenomena. 
For Malina is a rare combination of great scientist and 
artist. A U.S. aeronautical engineer and geophysicist, 
he designed and launched America's first successful 
high-altitude rocket (the WAC Corporal) in 1945. He 
directed Unesco's first humid and arid zone research 
programmes from 1947 to 1953 when he resigned to devote 
himself completely to art. After the launching of the first 
astronaut he agreed to devote a portion of his time again 
to scientific work, and is now director of the International 
Academy of Astronautics and permanent representative 
to Unesco of the International Astronautics Federation. 
In his art Malina has sought to find new methods and 
forms of expression and a new rhythm characteristic of 
our modern age. By choosing his themes in the world 
of science he has tried to focus attention on the interplay 
between science and art in our time. To Malina, “ move- 
ment is a fact, an aspect of modern life, and it would be 
like tying our hands behind our backs not to use this 
important element in the plastic arts. » Science, he says, 
offers us a new vision of the universe generally unseen 
by the naked eye, but it is up to the artist to translate this 
vision into rhythmic, aesthetic terms. 
di
e 
L
o
y
 
a
 
e
e
,
 
He
 
re 
N
R
E
 
p
r

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### 63354: Malina: artist-scientist of the space age

NEBULA Il is a striking example of Frank Malina's kinetic art of our space 
age. This large painting measures 200 by 100 centimetres and was produced 
early in 1961. The background is painted in deep cerulean blue ; the nebulae 
are masses of vibrating, fluid light in yellow and white, animated by countless 
minuscule undulations. The whole effect is one of extraordinary beauty, 
giving the observer an impression of looking into interstellar space. . 
  
Malina 
1 PLUS 2 TRIANGLES. One of Malina's early kinetic paintings 
produced in 1955 and based on a mathematical theme. Here artificial 
electric light and blue, orange and green painted triangles are diffused 
and seen in motion appearing and disappearing through a wire mesh. 
    @© Paul Almasy, Paris 
PATHS IN SPACE. Detail of un- 
completed work of cover photo. Malina's 
revolutionary paintings are usually 
composed of four planes : first, a 
source of artificial light (electric bulbs 
and fluorescent tubes) placed behind 
revolving discs or ‘* rotors '' painted 
in patterns with opaque or transpa- 
rent oil paint; a tiny motor operates 
the rotors. In front of the rotor is 
placed the * stator", a fixed trans- 
parent plaque on which is painted 
the basic composition. The completed 
painting, combining movement, colour, 
and design, appears on the final 
plane, a translucid diffusing screen. 
hus, blue on the rotor passing a 
yellow area on the stator is seen as 
green on the diffusing screen. The 
work of art is enclosed in a frame 
and is then ready for hanging on a wall. 
POLARIS (1957). Here the North 
Star is shown at upper right along- 
side large orbit in motion within 
which is depicted an orbital flight 
of man around a planet. Squares 
in centre slowly change their colours 
with the Plough (Big Dipper) appear- 
ing in yellow every two minutes. 
Marc Vaux, Paris, 
  
   
19

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

20 
    AF LEETNEY. TT Rs 
THE HEARTBEAT OF A           
      
  


### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd) 
Unseen rhythms of our universe 
could be of use to it, and based its sesthetic theory on a 
precise relationship established between light and time. 
Movement as the technical principle of films, the move- 
ment of the camera, and many other kinetic features are 
of great importance here. 
Pioneers of abstract film-making, such as the American 
Hans Richter, and the Swede, Viking Eggeling, and their 
successors, have often taken the movement of forms as 
the central theme of their work. Motion picture cartoons 
from the earliest down the present day, are all related to 
our subject. So are drawings made directly on films like 
those of Len Lye, of New Zealand, and Norman McLaren, 
of Canada, and the work of a still younger generation. 
Another contribution was the film, Le Ballet Mécanique, 
the work of the French artist Fernand Léger, which 
brings us back to painting. 
Frank Malina, the American painter and scientist, has 
introduced light and movement directly into his pictures 
and in this respect three aspects of his highly original 
work deserve speclal consideration. 
Malina’s compositions are ingeniously constructed. 
After experimenting with an electronic system, he finally 
devised an electro-mechanical technique for his “electro- 
paintings.” The basic composition is painted in various 
colours on a fixed transparent plaque (the “stator”) while 
one or more elements (“rotors”) 'which are also painted, 
are moved by an electric motor. Light, from lamps 
incorporated in the construction, Is cast on a semi- 
transparent screen. 
Here, an Interesting attempt has been made to establish 
a real correlation between Science and Art. A glance at 
Malina’s career may help to clarify this point. He was a 
brilliant alrcraft engineer, and before the war had made 
a special study of rocket propulsion. He directed the 
development of the first successful American high- 
altitude rocket, and as such was one of the pioneers of 
FROG. One day in 1956 
Malina was reading a scien- 
  
NS 
a oh 
  tific article on the workings 
of a frog’s heart and was 
struck by the graphic design 
of its heartbeat. Shortly 
thereafter he produced this 
artist’s interpretation of the 
phenomenon incorporating 
artificial light. The painting 
illustrates a point often made 
by Malina that our universe 
contains many landscapes 
and designs undreamed of 
by many observers and 
artists and which offer rich 
subject matter for art today. 
Ea Te, a! Sion ng, 1 
Le on 8 - 
i Lo ¥., : SLR 
  
  
Boigontier-USIS 
astronautical development. Later Malina extended his 
field of research to geophysics. 
It is not surprising that the forms of his electro- 
paintings should be akin to those of coral, radiolaria, 
diatoma and crystals photographed through the micro- 
scope. This kinship with the physical universe is even 
more marked in the case of stars and galaxies. 
I: purely artistic terms, the work of Malina 
evokes the art of stained glass. The artificial 
light he sets behind the screens of his pictures Is a sub- 
stitute for the changing sunlight to which Gothic stained 
glass owes part of its miraculous quality. 
The way in which he divides his space, the intensity of 
his black-circled reds and blues, and the ever-changing 
rays of light all transform a picture by Malina into a 
kind of animated stained-glass window. Unlike stained 
glass windows, however, Malina’s pictures are enclosed in 
frames and are hung on walls like traditional paintings. 
Malina’s third important contribution to kinetic art is 
his co-ordination of rhythm—whether physical, human or 
sesthetic—by the use of continuous movement of coloured 
forms, 
Movement in Malina’s pictures may be compared to 
atomic, biological or astronomical rhythm. Psychologi- 
cally speaking, these movements express the speed of time 
as It is lived, not as it is shown on the clock face. They 
bring us closer to life and to human movement than to the 
prodigiously rapid movement of the universe which is 
something our minds cannot grasp. 
The investigation of human perception has not yet 
been carried very far in the aesthetic sphere ; but even 
so, the transposition of the rhythm of life into aesthetic 
rhythm is a particularly interesting feature of Malina’s

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

work. His essential purpose In trying to break away from 
traditional methods of painting, is to create a new rhythm, 
demanding the sustained attention of the spectator. 
This experiment has a certain relationship to musle. 
Indeed, in Malina’s latest works recorded music is linked 
to a mechanical and electrical source, so that its varia- 
tions influence the intensity, while the movement of the 
coloured forms keeps time with the music. 
One needs to see some of his one hundred kinetic pic- 
tures, such as Changing Times in the Lyons Museum, or 
Orbits III in the Musée d’Art Moderne in Paris, in order 
to appreciate at its true value Malina’s contribution to art. 
He has achleved a synthesis of art and science by evolving 
a new method for the direct transmission of coloured 
light, accompanied by continuous movement In which 
different rhythms combine to create a harmonious ‘whole. 
Nicholas Schoffer, the sculptor. works with the same 
concern for light, movement, depth and also colour. His 
sculptures are metallic structures in which curved and 
angular elements are arranged horizontally and vertically. 
His most recent works are placed behind large, semi- 
Malina has created a whole series of small | 
including those of the Zodiac. Painting at upper ri 
conspicuous of the northern constellations containing the stars which form the Plou are variations in colour presentation of the constellation Cygnus (the Swan), Marc Vaux 
transparent screens. on which synchronized variable 
Images are thrown—formed by the shadows and reflections 
of the revolving sculpture and the colours cast by a 
mobile disc. The source of light, though placed outside 
the sculpture, plays an important part. Schoétfer uses a 
kind of organ to project and vary his chromatic composi- 
tions. 
He Is interested, too. in the relationship between sound 
and image, and In his largest work, The Cybernetic Tower, 
a blece of sculpture 52 metres (170 feet) In height, the sound track (street noises, recorded and mingled with 
electronic music) plays its part in Formes et Lumiéres, a 
programme presented annually, from June to September, 
at the Palais des Congres at Li¢ge, Belgium. 
Schoffer’s Tower is controlled by an electronle computer 
sensitive to atmospheric changes, and it is these which 
regulate the movements of the sculpture. This skilful 
mingling of aspects of the environment with the most 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
umidyne paintings of the various constellations in the heavens, 
ght represents Ursa Major (the Great Bear), the most 
gh. The other paintings 
with the bright star Deneb. 
  
 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

22 
Photos Vasarely 


### 63350: Movement and light in today's art

ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd) 
 
\ VIRTUAL MOVEMENT 
Unlike the other works 
shown on these pages, 
this composition by Vic- 
tor Vasarely, “ Transpa- 
rency ” (below) does not 
actually move. The illu- 
sion of movement, or 
“virtual movement ”, is 
produced solely by the 
change of position of the 
viewer in relation to the 
work. Vasarely sees a 
place for these art forms 
in the architecture of to- 
morrow's cities. Left, an 
earlier work by Vasarely 
showing how a form is 
obtained by deviations in 
pattern of straight lines. 
                                                
Interpreting life’s quickened pace 
subtle creations of the mind is typical of Schoffer’s victory 
over traditional limitations. 
In his earlier compositions sculpture was Schofler’s chief 
interest; but at Liége his Cybernetic Tower is now flanked 
by a giant screen on which moving forms and colours are 
projected from a series of “light mixers.” 
Other experiments in filtering, projecting and polarizing 
light have been made by the Italian artists Bruno Munari 
and G. Vardanega, by the Argentinians, Martha Boto and 
Le Parc and the Israeli artist, P. Hoenich who uses the 
sun as a source of light and natural wind for movement. 
Some of their revolving structures are lit from ‘within or 
reflected in mirrors. 
The introduction and synchronization of rhythm and 
movement in the theatre brings us closer to the “com- 
plete” work of art. In Russia, V.E. Meyerhold and J. An- 
nenkoff introduced the first mobile scenery. The German, 
Oscar Schlemmer and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy sought to 
establish a correlation between visual, spatial and musical 
movement in drama and in dance—that art of movement 
par excellence brought back to life by Serge Diaghilev at 
the beginning of the century. S.M. Eisenstein in Russia, 
Jean Cocteau in France and Walter Gropius in Germany 
even used films as part of the stage setting. Kandinsky 
in Russia achieved the first “complete” theatrical produc- 
tion by staging Mussorgsky’'s “Pictures from an Exhibi- 
tion.” 
The latest experiments again reveal a conscious effort 
to bring the audience into the performance so far as 
possible. J. Belson and H. Jacobs at San Francisco, 
have tried to create a new kind of drama by using 
electronic apparatus, while in France, Jacques Polieri has 
ideas about a theatre completely in motion. 
Similar methods are adopted in the Son ef Lumiére 
performances, the purpose of which is usually to bring 
some famous building to life and to recount its history. 
But the real impulse of kinetic art is towards a complete 
rhythmic synthesis by using elements derived from 
Kinetic art itself. 
It thus seems that new modes of artistic expression 
appeal to man’s hitherto neglected kinetic “sense,” the 
connexion being established chiefly by light. It is an art 
which strives to intensify the relation between this sense 
and the others through an association of rhythms. From 
the social standpoint, it may help to improve the stan- 
dard of aesthetic appreciation by disseminating and 
multiplying original images conceived by the artist. 
Kinetic art will not take the place of the other arts. 
The poetic, intimate quality of traditional painting, the 
three-dimensional message of sculpture and the stable, 
monumental quality of architecture will continue to be 
subjects for the aesthetic contemplation of mankind, But 
man’s additional need for an artistic link with the dyna- 
mism of life has always been of capital importance. In 
fact, it dominates man’s earliest writings and pictures. 
As the Twentieth Century progresses, the pace of life 
accelerates; distances shrink; man’s contacts with his 
fellow men become closer and closer. His ambitions lead 
him to explore other real worlds, and even his imaginary 
worlds are now formed from Increasingly familiar ele- 
ments. Will man falter and fail to keep up the pace, will 
our artists be unable to master the new techniques? Let 
us hope that the artist was right in believing, as many 
scientists do, that human resources like those of the earth 
have hardly begun to be exploited. 
FRANK PoPPER has made an exhaustive study of the 
development of new art trends and is now completing a 
doctoral thesis at ‘the University of Paris, to be entitled 
“The Image of Movement in the Plastic Arts since 1860.” 
He is also engaged on research at the Institut d’Esthétique 
et des Sciences de UArt, at the University of Paris.

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
 POP os 
Photos Groupe de Rech rche d'Art Visuel, Paris 
       
Two successive aspects of “ Instability ”, a work by the young Argentinian artist, Julio Le Parc, whose research in kinetic art has produced many varied. works, The play of shadows and light on a painted plaque with a polished rim is governed by a mobile object before the source of light. 
oe 
x 
 
ve r= 
ARTIST ON FILM 
By its very nature the 
cinema offered an Ideal 
springboard for aesthe- 
tic research combining 
the use of movement 
and light. In this con- 
nexion the short films 
of the Canadian artist, 
Norman Mclaren, are 
now world famous. A 
great experimentalist, 
Mclaren draws his films 
directly on the celluloid. 
Left, a cosmic move- 
ment from his stereo- 
scopic film, “ Around is 
Around”, He has also 
found a way of adding 
sound to his creations. 
By designing with pen 
and ink along the margin 
of the film where the 
soundtrack usually runs 
he has now produced a 
new kind of “ music”. 
National film Board of Canada 
23

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 63355: Tracking the hurricane

Orizontal p 
v. m, ast amoung 
of Meteorg] ogical da 
by 
Sr, 
 

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 63355: Tracking the hurricane

  
  
by E.R. Yarham 
] ne hurricane Carla which struck the United 
States in the early autumn of 1961, cost the 
Insurance market about 100 million dollars. The sum 
was made up of clalms from nearly 250,000 Texan and 
Loulslanan policy-holders. The claims related to damage 
to property and contents of buildings caused by the wind, 
and did not include marine, crop or livestock losses coy- 
ered by Insurance. While these Carla losses were 
substantial, they were not so great as those caused In 
1960 by Donna, which, at 150 millon dollars, proved the 
costliest New World hurricane on record. 
Such mighty tropical winds are not limited to the 
Caribbean, but are found In similar latitudes around the 
world. The chinese tai-fun (the “blg wind,”), the Phi- 
lippine baquios, the Australlan “willy-willy,” and the Bay 
of Bengal typhoon are all hurricanes under another 
name. The name, however, comes from the New World, 
where from the earliest days they were known to Euro- 
peans, to mariners, who learned to dread their terrors. 
Columbus got this first knowledge of the “big wind” from 
the Carib Indians who called it Hunraken, after their 
god of stormy weather. The Portugese explorers of the 
same period imported a variation of the name, Huracan. 
In the original scale of wind force devised for sailing 
ships by Admiral Beaufort in 1808, the word “hurricane” 
was used for a wind “such that no canvas could 
withstand.” Later a hurricane was deflned as a wind 
whose mean speed exceeded 65 knots. Sir Graham Sutton, 
the Director-General of the British Meteorological Office, 
has glven this description of the phenomenon: “In 
modern meteorology the name is reserved for a cyclonic 
disturbance of relatively small area, characterized by in- 
tense low pressure around which winds blow at very high 
speed. The more descriptive but cumbersome phrase. 
‘tropical revolving storm’ is often used in British official 
publications. The hurricane ranks with the tornado as a 
major destructive force and is more to be feared because, 
unlike, the tornado, it is relatively long-lived and capable 
of causing widespread ruin should it move inland.” 
0: an average the life of a hurricane covers 
nine days of destruction, and in Jamaica there 
Is a jingle which warns the inhabitants when to expect 
the big winds. 
June too soon, 
July stand by, 
Aygust look out you must, 
September remember, 
October, all over. 
However, as Hobart E. Stocking, of the U.S. Atomlc 
Energy Commission, has commented: just as June is not 
always too soon, neither do hurricanes always avold 
Jamalca in October. Spaniards of Colonial times were 
aware of seasonal varlations in hurricane paths. The 
church decreed that Ad repellendat tempestates be 
included in all masses recited in Puerto Rico during 
August and September but not In October, whereas the 
same appeal ‘was ordered in Cuban devotions during 
September and October. 
One of the most notorious of Caribbean hurricanes was 
that of September 7, 1900. Whereas the diameter of a 
hurricane is usually around 100 miles, this one eventually 
galned a diameter of destruction 300 to 600 miles in 
extent. The tempest reached its full maturity south of 
the Mississippi delta. Shaped like a cosmic gramophone 
record, hundreds of miles across but only thousands of 
feet thick, the maelstrom of screaming winds whirled at 
120 m.p.h. 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
25

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### IGNORE

TRACKING THE HURRICANE (Cont'd) 
Satellites sound the alert 
Viclous air heaved the ocean into gigantic windrows 
that moved with the speed of wind—and then the city of 
Galveston, Texas, was struck. First torrential rain 
accompanied by shrieking winds flooded the streets to a 
depth of four feet; then, striking with a force of 57lb. 
to each square foot, hurricane winds grasped waves 
already mountalnous and flung them against the cowering 
city. Like enormous battering rams the waves levelled 
street after street. Three thousand six hundred houses 
were, totally destroyed, not a structure in the city escaped 
serfous damage, and 6,000 people perished. 
Even the greatest vessels are sometimes unable to stand 
up against the ferocity of a full hurricane. One of the 
most historic escapes was that of the British warship 
“Calllope’” from the disastrous hurricane at Apla, Samoa, 
in March, 1889. Three American and three German 
warships were driven ashore with great loss of life. The 
“Calliope” succeeded in steaming out through the narrow 
entrance between the coral reefs in the teeth of the 
furious wind and a raging, confused sea, in which at times 
she was literally burled. It took her a full hour to cover 
a distance of half a mile. The accomplishment was a 
marvellous feat of seamanship. 
More recently, during a western Pacific typhoon, the 
U.S. Third Fleet cruiser, “Pittsburgh,” only a year old, 
had her bow ripped clean off by precipitous waves. Only 
a short time before three destroyers had gone down with 
the loss of 763 lives. The worst visitation In Hong Kong's 
history was in September, 1906, when In addition to 
heavy loss of life, In two hours there were sunk or 
seriously damaged In or near the harbour 67 European 
vessels, 652 Chinese junks, 54 lighters, 70 steam launches, 
and Innumerable sampans. 
Like all tropical hurricanes, typhoons bring winds of 
tremendous strength, and during the Swatow typhoon of 
August 1922, a sudden change of wind direction as the 
centre passed caused a huge wave to sweep over the town, 
occasioning an estimated loss of 50,000 lives. 
| HE willy-willy is a tropical cyclone experienced 
over north-west Australia, mainly in late 
summer, It originates in the hot Timor Sea, and first 
moves south-westwards, often causing severe losses to 
the pearl fishing industry. Then it recurves to the south- 
east, crosses the coast, where 1t causes more damage and 
brings heavy rain, and moves inland to the Great 
Australian Bight. 
A typical willy-willy carved a path 50 to 70 miles in 
width, wrecking townships and farms, and disrupting 
communications. Roads were blocked for miles by fallen 
trees, wheat silos, orchards, haystacks and fences were 
wrecked, and stock killed by falling trees. So flerce was 
the wind that a flock of seagulls was blown inland 75 
miles from the coast. 
USIS 
  
South Africa is also of victim of similar visitations. To 
mention one example—a terrific hurricane, tearing 
through darkness as black as night, struck parts of the 
Orange Free State one afternoon. The roofs of farm 
houses were wrenched off and stock hurled to the ground 
or blown along helplessly for long distances, and windmills 
(used for pumping water) were bent and broken. The 
hurricane, was followed by a destructive hailstorm lasting 
a quarter-of-an-hour, destroying wheat crops and all 
growing fruit. In the towns there was absolute darkness 
for 30 minutes, and many children became hysterical and 
terrified. The roof of an isolation hospital was jerked 
off and hurled 700 yards, where it crashed to the ground 
a shapeless mass. An enormous eucalyptus tree, 93ft. high 
and five feet in diameter, was uprooted as if it had been 
a reed and flung 100 yards away. 
A: has been pointed out. earlier, since the 
earliest days of its discovery by Europeans, the 
Caribbean has been notorious among sailors for its 
hazards during autumn. One of the worst tragedies, 
occurred in 1780. A terrible storm resulted in the sinking 
of an entire French fleet of 40 ships, with all their crews, 
off the island of Martinique. An English fleet anchored 
off St. Lucia met with the same fate. It was estimated 
that 9,000 people perished in the former island and 6,000 
in the latter. At Port Royal, Jamaica, fourteen hundred 
houses were flattened out as if they had been made of 
paper, and most of the Inhabitants were killed. 
One of the chief reasons for such heavy death-rolls 
in the past has been that the hurricane struck its vie- 
tims before they were aware of its approach, and so they 
were unable to make any preparations to shield themselves 
from its fury. 
To-day, happily, meteorologists are able to forewarn 
territories lying in the path of an oncoming storm of ifs 
imminence, and it is possible fo predict with some 
accuracy the path a hurricane is taking. This is made 
possible thanks to arrangements made under the auspices 
of the World Meteorological Organization whereby weather 
observations made simultaneously at thousands of stations 
all over the world are exchanged by an international tele- 
communications system. These observations provide the 
raw material for the synoptic charts which enable the 
meteorologist to detect tropical storms in their early 
stages of development, to forecast their movement and 
to issue warnings to the populations of threatened regions. 
Although such warnings cannot prevent gigantic damage, 
they do help to keep down the loss of life. 
This has been proved many time, as for example when 
one powerful hurricane swept the Gulf Coast. As it was 
a dozen people perished and several towns in Texas were 
absolutely ‘isolated. Had it not been for the precautions 
~ BULLDOZER 
! VS. 


### 63355: Tracking the hurricane

HURRICANE 
If warning of a hurri- 
cane's approach is given 
- , sufficiently early, mea- 
eo sures can be taken to 
protect property and 
lives. Here, a bulldozer 
raises a wall of sand to 
protect structures on a - 
beach from seas which 
will soon be lashed by 
hurricane force winds.

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### 63355: Tracking the hurricane

  
The American continent is particularly “hurricane prone”. One of Its defence outposts Is this floating 
station, Nomad |, anchored in the Gulf of Mexico, which is equipped to automatically transmit 
hourly information on the changing conditions of air and sea when windspeeds exceed 33 knots. 
taken when the alert was put out that the storm was 
heading for land the death roll would have been much 
higher. It had proved possible to evacuate all the inha- 
bitants of the lowlands. The titanic power of the wind 
was evident in the fact that everywhere the power lines 
were snapped and towns thrown Into darkness; trees 
were torn up like saplings; houses fell like cards; and 
families had to sleep in the open country for fear of 
collapsing buildings. 
As America suffers more than any other single country 
from hurricanes, and as scientific research is highly 
organized there, one is not surprised to find the warning 
System more advanced there than anywhere else. Since 
the end of the last war the United States Weather Bu- 
reau has greatly intensified its watch on approaching 
hurricanes. The, difficulty is that although they can be 
detected and tracked along their courses, nothing—so far, 
at any rate—has been devised which can check thelr rav- 
ages. For instance, the Bureau was able to watch the 
most destructive hurricane yet, Donna (It was named at 
the outset), from a network of radar stations strung out 
from Daytona Beach to Florida Keys, yet both scientist 
and the man-in-the-street had to stand helplessly by as 
it laid waste the countryside. The one advantage was 
that as the outcome of earlier warnings people were able 
too take shelter quickly. 
L: year the radar screen was much extended 
In both directions, and it now forms an 
unbroken chain stretching from portland in Maine, in 
the north, to Brownsville, Texas, almost on the Mexican 
border. In addition another recording device has now 
been stationed in the Gulf of Mexico 300 miles south of 
New Orleans. This is anchored to the ocean bed and is 
known as Nomad I. Unmanned, it Is equipped to 
transmit a five-minute weather bulletin every six hours, 
and if there are winds of more than 33 knots this is 
automatically switched to hourly transmission. In 1960 
a more primitive form of this apparatus was used, but is 
was able to pick up signs of hurricane Ethel and send 
WaInings to the mainland 48 hours before the storm 
arrived. 
Perhaps the most valuable ally of the meteorologists is 
the satellite, the latest scientific development. This was 
impressively shown in September 1961 during the career 
of the hurricane Esther, which fortunately missed the 
mainland. Esther was spotted on September 10 by Tiros 
III, America’s third television-equipped weather satellite. 
Reconnaissance planes were rushed to check on the in- 
formation from the satellite, and confirmed that a great 
hurricane with winds of 130 m.p.h. was surging across the 
Atlantic, but that the only land areas likely to be affected 
were those very close to the East Coast. 
Tiros III, launched from Cape Canaveral in July 1961 
is especially equipped to photograph the development and 
movement of hurricanes and other tropical storms. Its 
two wlde-angled T.V. cameras are designed to locate them 
when they are still no more than movements in tropical 
cloud patterns. And it has certainly lived up to its 
reputation as a hurricane spotter. 
During its first month of orbit it sent back more than 
6,000 pictures. These included photographs of many 
storms both in the Atlantic and the Pacific. These 
photographs, combined with the findings of hurricane 
hunter and research alrcraft, have provided meteorologists 
with vast amounts of fresh data on the behaviour of 
severe storms. They hope the next move will be to attack 
the hurricanes far out into the occan, and get them to 
dissipate their strength before they reach land. In the 
1961 season experiments were made with this object, 
consisting of “seedling” the storms with a chemical, stlver 
lodide. The hope is that the action of the chemical, 
converting super-cooled moisture to lee, will disturb the 
storms’ energy cycles. 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 63357: When flight was silent

    WHEN F 
WAS SIL     
by David Gunston 
E
R
 
I
R
 
S
S
S
 
I: the modern world where long-distance, jet- | 
driven air travel is an everyday occurrence, it 
is hard to belleve that there was once another age of air 
travel before aeroplanes were taken seriously. It was a i re 
romantic, adventurous, now vanished era of flight—the 
age of the balloon. 
Men first truly flew in balloons, and aviation really 
began ‘when these great cumbersome-looking aerial craft 
were used as a means of transport. In fact, the world’s 
first air pilots controlled only a large bag full of gas with 
a small wicker basket hanging beneath. 
When the Frenchmen, brothers Joseph and Etienne 
Montgolfier, profiting from the much earlier sclentific 
discovery that hot alr rose, launched thelr first workable 
balloon from the market-place at Annonay, ¥France, on 
June 5, 1783, it was to them merely an experiment. Yet 
all unknowingly they committed mankind to mastery of 
the air. 
They could persuade no one that their simple balloon, 
36 ft. in diameter, and filled only with hot air, would leave 
the ground, let alone carry 400 lb. in weight aloft. But 
at the appointed time, “their paper dome, filled with the 
smoke of burnt wood, amid the shouts of congregated 
men,” rose to nearly 6,000 feet, to land ten minutes later 
over a mile away. 
The intrepid Montgolflers were swift to follow up this 
success, for in the month of August they sent up another 
unmanned balloon, made this time of silk to an improved 
pattern and filled with “inflammable air,” or hydrogen, 
then newly discovered. This ascended to some 3,000 feet, 
but drifted for 15 miles from its Iaunching-place in a Paris 
park, to be set upon with pltchforks by terrified peasants 
when it landed in a field! 
Before that momentous year of 1783 was out, several 
other successful balloons were sent up, and on Novem- 
ber 21 came the world’s first real human flight. Piliatre de 
Rozier and the Marquis d’Arlandes risked their necks by 
going up in a large hot air balloon made of special paper. 
They rose from the Bois de Boulogne in Paris, stayed in 
the air for 25 minutes and travelled 5% miles over the 
city. 
To keep thelr balloon up they carried a fiery brazier 
slung beneath its open mouth, to produce a continual 
supply of hot air. This meant the fire had to be kept going 
at a fair rate, with terrible risk of the paper envelope 
igniting. In fact, de Rozler tock up with him a large 
sponge and some water, and coolly dealt with a small out- 
break of fire on the balloon casing. 
Their feat was capped in December 1783 by Professor 
J.A.C. Charles, who made the first voyage in a hydrogen 
balloon, flying 27 miles from the Tuileries in Paris in a 
rubberized envelope of his own design. 
In fact, Charles was the real father of the balloon. He Kk 
quickly saw that the hot-air-and-brazier method was too . - 
dangerous, and that the answer lay In a bag filled with © Paul Almasy, Paris 
a lighter-than-air gas. Hydrogen, although inflammable, 
08 seemed to him the best, and was in fact used for balloons 
   
CONT'D ON PAGE 30

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### 63357: When flight was silent

. ~ 
~ 
[= 
~~ 
  
The world’s first acronauts, the Marquis d’Arlandes and Pilatre de Rozier, rose above Paris on November 
21, 1783. Their balloon, shown here in 2a modern re-enactment of the event, stayed in the air for 25 minutes 29 
and travelled five and 2 half miles, over Paris opening the road to the conquest of the air. Ballooning 
continued as a popular sport until about 1910 when heavier than air machines began to be developed.

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

30 
  
    
CHANNEL CROSSING. The first aerial cros- 
sing of the Channel on January 7, 1785, was 
made by a Frenchman, Jean-Pierre Blanchard 
and an American, Dr. John Jeffries, of Boston. 
Unesco Photos 
EQUESTRIAN ASCENT. Ballooning soon grew its own crop of eccentrics—and showmen. Before 
a Bastille Day holiday crowd on a Paris race course in 1850, a Frenchman named Poitevin made a balloon 
SCIENCE FICTION, 1863. An “Aerial Vessel 
Designed for Exploration” was conceived and 
drawn by an early balloonist, Etienne Gaspard 
Robertson. Heavily loaded with equipment, 
including a telescope, this early piece of 
science fiction actually opened .a window on 
the future. Balloons have since been and are 
still being used for astronomical observation. 
ascent (above right) mounted on his pony, Blanche. This kind of fairground stunt, whose cruelty 
was rightly condemned, was started over half a century earlier by another Frenchman, Testu Brissy. 


### 63357: When flight was silent

WHEN FLIGHT WAS SILENT (Cont'd) 
Fantasy & scientific progress 
until coal gas became readily available in 1821. He also 
devised the strong rope netting over the balloon that 
safely supports the basket, or “car,” the control valve at 
the top, through which gas can be let out, and the cir- 
cular hoop below the rigging from which the car hangs. 
On his second ascent he rose alone to nearly two miles, 
and again landed safely. 
Hearing of these epic flights, wise old Dr. Samuel John- 
son prophesied that the age of the “flying coach” was 
near. In fact, ballooning became a reality before the 
dawn of the nineteenth century. 
In 1784, the first woman to fly, Madame. Thible, had 
gone up as a passenger from Lyons, in France, and later 
that year Interest shifted to England, where a young Ita- 
llan diplomat, Vincent Lunardi, made the first English 
flight. Over 20,000 highly sceptical and impatient specta- 
tors watched his small red and blue hydrogen bag ascend 
from the Artillery Ground in London. 
The pilot took with him a cat, a dog and a pigeon. 
The latter escaped soon after take-off, and the cat 
suffered so much from the cold that Lunardi touched 
down in Middlesex to release it. Taking off again, he 
finally landed at Standon, in Hertfordshire, where a stone 
monument commemorates his “traversing the regions of 
the air” for 21 hours. 
By 1784, in fact, basic ballooning principles had been 
established. So long as the complete craft, filled with gas, 
weighs less than the amount of alr it displaces, it will 
rise, leaving the ground after release of numerous sand- 
bag “anchors.” When the volume of the surrounding air 
equals the balloon’s weight exactly, the gas-bag remains 
suspended In space, “in equilibrium.” Once gas is 
released, however, air takes its place, making the weight 
heavier than that of the surrounding alr, and so the 
balloon drops. 
In practice, piloting a balloon was largely a matter of 
extreme watchfulness in the use of the ballast carried on 
board, usually sand in 20 Ib. or 30 lb. bags. Even a handful 
of sand dropped overboard would cause the envelope to 
rise from equilibrium. The pilot kept a constant eye on 
his simple altimeter, an ordinary aneroid barometer, and 
s0 judged his height. 
Among the hanging control ropes above the flyers’ 
heads, but kept in a separate sleeve and painted bright 
red to prevent accidental use, was the rip-line. When 
pulled, this tore out the long ripping-panel, about half 
one of the vertical panels, or “gores” from which the 
envelope was made. This instantly emptied the balloon 
of gas, and was used only on landing. 
As early as the second year of the balloon age, 1784, 
these strange aerial craft were used for scientific experi- 
mentation and travel, as well as being a fascinating 
novelty. Two hardy aeronauts, the Frenchman J. P. Blan- 
chard and Dr. John JefIries, of Boston, U.S.A. made the 
first scientific observations from a free-flying balloon, and 
in January, 1785, made the first pre-determined journey 
in one, across the English Channel, from England to 
France. 
They carried a compass with them, taking off when the 
wind was blowing in the right direction, and finaliy landed 
safely, but not before jettisoning their oars, food and sup- 
plies, and even some of their clothes to maintain height. 
Pilatre de Rozier and his friend Romain, trying to repeat

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 63357: When flight was silent

  
FLIGHT OF FANCY. This drawing wsa published 
in Vienna in 1801 with the explanation, “The latest 
invention: a balloon towed by eagles.” According to the 
artists ingenious flight of fancy, these birds in harness 
allowed themselves to be guided like a team of horses. 
this voyage in the reverse direction on June 15, 1785 in 
a balloon that oddly combined both the hot-air and hydro- 
gen type, tragically became the world’s first air casualties 
when their gas ignited and they crashed near Boulogne. 
Not long afterwards, on the express orders of Napoleon 
himself, the balloon became an engine of war. In June 
1794 the French army carried out military reconnaissance 
from a tethered gas-bag at Maubeuge. Balloons of one 
kind or another have been used for varying purposes in 
every major war since. 
Another use for balloons began in 1797 when the very 
brave French aeronaut, Garnerin, successfully tested the 
first real parachute from one. Parachuting from captive 
balloons became a popular feature of nineteenth century 
spectacles and outdoor entertainments, both men and 
women dropping to delight the crowds. In the same year, 
Testu Brissy went up mounted on a horse, ushering in a 
long series of balloon ascents by all kinds of animals, 
Including stags and a bull. 
All Europe went “balloonatic,” as the saying was. 
Hardy folk went up for the fun of it at fairs and the like, 
where the gaily-coloured and patterned envelopes were 
always sure to attract attention—and money. Gradually, 
however, men began to take this strange new form of 
transport seriously, even though all balloon journeys were 
at the mercy of the prevaillng winds. 
With cheap coal gas established as the lifting power, 
scientists, Inventors and explorers took to the air. Men 
could fly at last, but passively, standing uncomfortably in 
little wicker cars, at the mercy of the elements, yet in 
control of the climbing and falling of their overhead craft. 
What was it like to “enclose a cloud in a bag and sail 
upon the bosom of the air?” All balloonists agree that 
although it was exciting to risk danger and launch into 
the unknown in such a new way, the greatest single 
reaction was one of sheer elation. “Lingering in the deep 
blue vault of space,” though in fact seldom higher than 
about 10,000 feet, regularly gave aeronauts “a sensation 
Je, 
WA 
MID-AIR MARRIAGE. In 1865 an American bride, 
showing that she was immune both to vertigo and the 
limelight of publicity, agreed to be married in mid- 
air above New York. Already 80 years earlier the first 
female balloon passenger had flown from Lyons, France. 
of perfect quletude and restfuiness, and a feeling of how 
petty the earth and its concerns are,” sald one ploneer. 
Ballooning was In fact lke arriving at a mountaln 
summit without the fatigue of the climb. As the gas-bag 
always travelled at the exact velocity of the prevalling 
wind, there was no sensation of speed, rush or Indeed of 
any movement at all. Early balloonists used to throw out 
strips of paper to see whether they were rising or falling. 
And the overall sense of tranquillity was further marked 
by the complete and uncanny silence. 
In these old days flight really was completely stlent. To 
travel in a balloon offered, as one man sald, “a silence so 
profound that no sllence on earth can equal it.” Apart 
from the occasional slight friendly creak of basket or 
rigging, the only sounds heard came up from the earth. 
At low altitudes all were plainly audible: the concerted 
roar of traffic over towns, the whistle and rumble of 
tralns, the noise of dogs, cockerels, cattle and children. 
Above all, for the first time, men heard the full “incessant 
murmur of the commotlon of the waters” when over the 
sea. This was unlike the noise of the waves on the sea- 
shore, a strange, mighty rippling surge that in fact can 
only be heard from a balloon, 
Of course, there were hazards, though most aeronauts 
declared their huge craft were easy to handle. There was 
a decided chill when clouds or mist were entered, and 
above 10,000 feet it could be distinctly uncomfortable. If 
wet, ballast could freeze Into immavable blocks. Owing to 
the risk of fire from the coal gas, there was always a strict 
“no smoking” rule, and tall hats were taboo. When the 
rising envelope blew off surplus gas from its open neck 
tube hanging directly above the flyers the effect could be 
most unpleasant. 
Sometimes when hot sunshine quickly dried out rain- 
wetted rigging and caused a simultaneous slight loss of 
gas, the car would drop suddenly. perhaps only a couple 
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=32) 0

### 63357: When flight was silent

  
Unesco 
TRIPS BY CINEORAMA. Visitors to the Paris Exhibition of 1900 were offered the impressions of 
a balloon flight without ever leaving the ground. This attraction was made possible by a multiple- 
camera device, the “Cineorama”, developed by a Frenchman, Raoul Grimoin Sanson. A platform 
shaped like a balloon basket, over which hung a real balloon, was surrounded by a circular screen 
over 300 feet in circumference. Beneath it was a room equipped with ten film projectors. Grouped 
on the platform several hundred spectators could watch films, taken during real balloon flights over 
Europe and Africa, projected on the circular screen. After only a few performances the Cineorama 
was stopped by the authorities as a serious fire hazard. This spelt ruin for the inventor. 
WHEN FLIGHT WAS SILENT (Cont'd) 
No noise, no smell, no oil 
of feet, but forcefully enough to terrify the crew through 
the sensation of having broken loose. Lightning was 
always a danger to be reckoned with, and it was tricky 
trying to land on a chosen spot in a high wind. 
From about 1852 onwards some aeronauts grew in- 
creasingly dissatisfled with their inability to steer their 
craft or drive it forward. Attempts had long been made 
to propel balloons with wooden oars, without success, but 
yet another Frenchman, Henry Giffard, developed an 
elliptical gas-bag powered by steam-driven propellers. 
This was the true ancestor of the air-ship. 
But other enthusiasts were content to float freely in 
their “gallant and graceful aerial craft,” and ballooning 
did not begin to die out until about 1909-10, when the 
aeroplane became feasible. In 1862 the eminence of the 
static gas-bag was well demonstrated when the English 
weather expert James Glaisher and the noted balloonist 
Coxwell reached some 20,000 ft., a clear record for that 
date. Both men went up to make meteorological obser- 
vations, and were seriously affected by the cold and lack 
of oxygen. Incidentally, the balloon altitude record, 
achieved in 1960 by Capt. J. W. Klittinger of the U.S. Air 
Force, stands at 102,800 feet (19.13 miles). 
Another aspect of the balloon’s unattained powers was 
illustrated as long ago as 1897, when the Swedish explorer, 
Major S. A. Andrée, tried with two others to reach the 
North Pole in a giant hydrogen balloon made of the finest 
Chinese silk. With vaseline-soaked rigging to resist 
moisture and a specially large car, this monster deserved 
to succeed if ever a balloon did. 
Unfortunately, Andrée failed to reckon with the Arctic 
mist, and his balloon was forced down on the ice, heavy 
with frozen mist on the envelope, 288 miles and 65% hours 
after leaving Danes Island. The three men trekked by 
sledge over the drifting pack-ice for two and a half 
months before perishing of cold on White Island, but by 
an incredible chance their remains and last camp were 
discovered in 1930. Although 33 years old, and damaged 
by wet, some of Andrée’s photographs of his crashed 
balloon were later developed and printed. 
In the early years of this century, ballooning became an 
inexpensive sport followed by adventurous pioneers like 
Charles Rolls (partner of Henry Royce), T.O.M. Sopwith 
and J.T.C. Moore-Brabazon (now Lord Brabazon), Bri- 
tain’s first pilot. They used to go up at weekends, and 
take part in many events and races to see who could tra- 
vel the furthest before coming down. The 1914 record 
of 1,890 miles still stands. 
Since those days free-flying balloons have become 
almost extinct, but balloons of other types, not least the 
myriads of small weather balloons regularly released all 
over the globe, prove that the work of all those intrepid 
pioneers was not wasted. Yet when the aeroplane took 
over, something was lost, the strange attraction enjoyed 
by those first flyers. 
To quote Lord Brabazon, writing long afterwards: 
“I still maintain that ballooning is the only gentle- 
man’s way of going into the air—no noise, no smell, no 
wind, no oil—just peace... and the delight of having to go 
the way the wind willed, with the pleasant anticipation 
of landing in some remote spot.”

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### IGNORE

ROUSSEAU IN THE ROCKIES 
 
Sir, 
One of the enthusiastic publics for 
your magazine is a little prep school 
of very high academic standards that 
nestles in the mountains of the Western 
Slope of the Rockies, where for the 
past few years I have been happily 
teaching. At the moment we are 
enjoying your special commemorative 
issue devoted to Rousseau (Mar. 1963). 
It happens that next year I shall be 
teaching a college level course here, a 
year’s seminar on Voltaire and Rous- 
seau. I would like to order about 
seven copies of your March issue, for 
use as an introductory brochure for 
the course. 
J. Frank 
Colorado, U.S.A. 
THE FATE OF THE MAYAS 
Sir, 
In your March 1962 issue you 
state “We know nothing about the 
causes of the sudden disappearance 
of this amazing pre-Columbian 
civilization, whether it was by wars, 
epidemics or natural disasters”. 
As doctors, we know that the 
Mayas were wiped out in the middle 
of the 15th century by a great 
epidemic, which as we have now been 
able to confirm, was yellow fever. 
One of the characteristic symptoms 
of this yellow fever was vomito negro 
(hemorrhagic vomiting). The Aztecs, 
who were the closest neighbours of 
the Mayas, understood that bacteria 
were in some way responsible for this 
epidemic, They have left illustrations 
of the Mayas in the throes of 
hemorrhagic vomiting which show 
small demons on the substance being 
vomited. 
The Mayas considered this epidemic 
as a punishment inflicted by their 
Gods for it was limited to their 
territory. The reason for this is that 
the fever vector was a mosquito 
which never travels more than about 
150 yards from the water where it 
spends its larval stage. The outbreak 
was so deadly that it left hardly any 
survivors and even these were 
scattered. 
Prof. Erwin Gohrbandt 
Berlin W, 15 
WITH MALICE TO NONE 
 
Dear Sir, 
I heartily agree with M.J.M. Del- 
larg (Better Investments than Arms— 
March 1963) that international pub- 
lications such as yours could be ins- 
trumental in uniting the people of the 
world. 
Our leaders must be made to un- 
derstand that we bear no malice 
towards one another and the time has 
come for them to settle their differen- 
ces other than by building up stocks 
of weapons of unspeakable horror 
letters to the Editor 
with the constant threat of their use. 
I find it impossible to believe that 
the ordinary folk of any country want 
to deliberately attack their fellow men. 
W.M. Salmon 
Kenton, England 
DISCUSSION ON ‘THE ISLAND’ 
 
Sir, 
From reading your magazine 1 have 
often learned a great deal about the 
world’s peoples; but nothing has 
taught me as much as did the 
discussion on the film, “The Island” 
between a Japanese girl student and 
a man from Europe, published in 
your April issue. 
This is the road you should follow; 
it will lead you to your goal which 
is to bring the people in all countries 
closer together. The voices of the 
man and the young girl brought us 
close to hearts and minds of millions 
of people, outwardly so different, but 
inwardly so alike. A door was opened, 
a contact established and we began 
to understand. 
Keep on using this formula for 
it is more alive and more fruitful 
than scholarly speeches. I should like 
to see a similar discussion published 
in a future issue, but this time between 
a Japanese man and a European girl 
student. The subject? A representative 
occidental film which many readers 
are likely to have scen, such as 
“Room at the Top”, “Mourning 
Becomes Electra”, “La Strada”, 
“Executive Suite”, “Justice est 
faite”, “Dieu a besoin des hommes” 
or other even more appropriate 
films—those most likely to stimulate 
ideas of a deep, sincere and revealing 
kind. 
It would obviously be a good idea 
to present similar discussions between 
people from other parts of the world 
whose mutual lack of understanding 
is one of the most regrettable features 
of life today. 
M. Pakerar 
Saint-Maur, France 
FLAG OF THE FUTURE 
 
Sir, 
The first UNesco Courier that 1 
have read is the January 1963 
edition. I bought it because it was 
in English and there are so few 
papers or magazines in English that 
we can buy in Budapest. But as I 
turned the pages, 1 realized that it 
will mean far more to me than just 
an exercise for my English and to 
have some interesting news from the 
world. 
Your articles are very interesting 
and instructive. But more sympathetic 
still is your purpose to help the 
world, to give great help to all 
nations—undeveloped and others. 
I would like to see THE UNESco 
COURIER in our newspaper shops in 
Hungarian. We hope one day it can 
be done. And about mistrust among 
nations... After my experience in 
foreign countries and at home, | can 
say that nations do not know each 
other, We hear about countries 
because of their policy. But that isn't 
the best way to get to know other 
nations. There are so many good 
and wonderful things in every 
country—art, science, history, about 
which we should read or should see. 
We send men up above the ILiarth, 
but we should first look around our 
world because there are so many 
nations who live very badly. And 
many people die because of diseases 
and accidents who would not do so if 
nations would trust and help each 
other. We must save land and life 
not only for today but for those 
who follow. And the only way for 
this is: peace. So when I read your 
magazine, I read it as a flag of 
culture, a flag of the future, a flag 
of peace and life. 
Miklos Mati 
Budapest, Hungary 
UNESCO GIFT PROJECTS 
 
Sir, 
I am an adult education tutor with 
the University of Otago, New Zealand. 
My wife and I have interested a 
small study group of lively-ininded 
people in the problems surrounding 
the vast work of aiding under- 
developed areas of the world. We 
are especially interested in UNLsco's 
encouragement of cultural links to 
further mutual understanding among 
the peoples of the world. In this 
matter we are all under-developed, 
and our informal study group firmly 
believes that a great deal more could 
be ‘done practically in the struggle 
against sickness, poverty and ignor- 
ance, if more people could be encour- 
aged to take part in such activities 
as Unesco Gift Projects. 
We have studied your pamphlet, 
“You and Unesco”, and have also 
read with great interest the informa- 
tion about gift projects in ‘Tne 
Unesco Courter (February 1963). 
It is particularly the opportunity to 
develop cultural links which the 
projects offer, that interests my group. 
Among ourselves we have developed 
the habit of calling the group 
“person to person”... 
My wife and 1 are quite satisfied 
that if such schemes as the Gift 
Coupon Projects could be stimulated 
in any way, the whole concept of 
mutual understanding and the whole 
approach to assistance in under- 
developed rcgions of our globe, 
would take on a new vitality. 
Can you help us? We have spent 
more than a year discussing and 
corresponding at all levels. We have 
learnt a lot: now we wish to do 
something useful. 
Mervyn Palmer 
Oamahu, New Zealand 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### IGNORE

34 
From the Unesco New 
EW DITCHES FOR OLD: A drastic 
programme of reconstruction is being 
carried out on the Soviet Republic of 
Uzbekistan’s 100,000 kilometres of old irri- 
gation canals. Ditches will be straightened 
and their beds surfaced with concrete, and 
polymer films will be used to resist filtra- 
tion. By these measures it is expected that 
enough water to irrigate one and a quarter 
million acres will be saved yearly. 
ROTECTING MECCA PILGRIMS: 
Improved health facilities on the 
Mecca Pilgrimage site have led to a sharp 
drop in heat casualties, reports the World 
Health Organization. Special facilities now 
include hospitals with iced water tubs for 
cases of heat stroke, mobile health units, 
emergency drugstores and a modern ice 
factory at the foot of Mount Arafat. Over 
one million Moslem worshippers from 60 
countries went to Mecca this year, and the 
pilgrimage was free from quarantinable 
diseases. 
N ULTILINGUAL LIBRARY GLOS- 
SARY: A multi-lingual glossary of 
library terminology to aid international 
exchanges in library materials has been 
published by Unesco (x) Entitled “Voca- 
bularinm Bibliothecarii”’, the new and revis- 
ed edition lists over three thousand differ- 
ent library terms in English with equiva- 
lents in French, German, Spanish and Rus- 
sian. The first edition in 1953 listed only 
terminology in English, French and Ger- 
man. 
(x) “Vocabularium Bibliothecarii”, 627 
pages, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris-T’, 
Price: $5.75; 28/9 (stg) ; 20 Frs. 
JS ARTHQUAKES TO ORDER: A major 
series of experiments to test the resi- 
stance to earthquake shock of various types 
of housing is being carried out near Tash- 
kent. Soviet researchers have built houses 
complete with plumbing, sewage, gas 
mains and heating systems and are stimul- 
ating earthquakes by using explosive 
charges from 100 Ibs. to 200 toms in 
weight. 
      
          
} Pras Pa “a 
hi 
SOOM 
ein unl 
e NDERWATER FARM’: At Tria- 
bunne, on the eastern coast of Tas- 
mania, an “underwater farm” has been 
established where various species of sea- 
weed growing along some 300 miles of shal- 
low coastline will be exploited for scienti- 
fic purpose. The harvesting of seaweed, 
rich in a compound of alginic acid and 
sodium, will be carried out by a boat fitted 
with an underwater rotary reaper operat- 
ing three to four feet below the surface. 
Chemicals derived from the sodium com- 
pound are used in pharmaceutical products, 
cosmetics, foodstuffs and in dyeing and 
printing, 
E
R
 
  
     
    
PACE WATCH ON ANIMAL 
MIGRATIONS: Many problems of 
animal migration may soon be solved by 
information relayed from a satellite orbiting 
the earth, A special instrument fitted in 
a satellite 200 miles above the earth will 
pick up signals from tiny radios strapped 
to birds and beasts. Signals relayed by the 
satellite to 24 ground stations will enable 
scientists to track animals over an area 
1,600 miles wide on each orbit, different 
species being identified by their own radio 
frequencies. 
ORE ABOUT ASIA: A pioneer plan 
to teach young American students 
about Asia, including lessons in an Asian 
language, has successfully completed its first 
year. Called the Institute of Asian Studies, 
its goal is to prepare students to enter col- 
lege with greater knowledge of a non-west- 
ern culture and a good groundwork in an 
Asian language. So far the language taught 
has been the literary language of China, 
Mandarin, but next year’s course will in- 
clude Japanese. The project was launched 
by the head of a secondary school near 
Boston who enlisted co-operation from six 
other schools in the area. In New Zealand, 
the Education Department has announced 
that teaching about Asian countries is to 
be introduced in primary and post-primary 
schools. 
GAY AND COLOURFUL CZECH FOLK ART 
Left, 
  
CESKOSLOVENSKO: 3b 
§ Ny WN EN B 
a 8 al i 
NS 
\ Lal 
ez
 
         
Unesco 
Y
L
i
d
o
v
e
 
um
en
i 
Go
be
r 
bo
i 
e
n
o
 
the U.N.   PY PPP P
T 
T
I
T
 
P
I
T
Y
 
Y
Y
 
Y
Y
 
V
O
N
 
YY
 
   
a stamp dedicated 
Czechoslovakia is issuing this month in six 
denominations bearing gay and colourful designs 
based on Czech Folk Art. 
of the U.N. Postal 
Philatelic Service stocks all the U.N. stamps and 
first-day covers currently on sale as well as many 
stamps, like the one shown here, issued by 
Member 
important events in the history of Unesco and 
For prices and further details write: 
The Unesco Philatelic Service, Place de Fonte- 
to Unesco which 
As agent in France 
Administration, Unesco’s 
States to commemorate 
noy, Paris (7¢). 
  
     
      
  
 
T OCEAN CROSSROADS: A US. 
mobile research station, the “Eltanin”, 
a converted cargo ship, carrying 30 scientists 
and technicians, operates in Antarctic 
waters for about ten months each year, 
with rotating groups of scientists and 
crewmen. Much of its work has been 
carried out near the Antarctic Convergence, 
where the cold waters of Antarctica sink 
between the warmer waters of the Atlantic, 
Pacific and Indian Oceans. The area is 
of special interest to scientists because it 
is exceptionally rich in marine life, and 
may also play an important role in the 
climate of the southern hemisphere. 
J NESco AND YOUTH: A group of 
specialists met in Paris recently to 
prepare UNEsSco’s first international con- 
ference on youth which will be held in 
Grenoble, France, next year. This Paris 
meeting also discussed a study on the aims 
of out-of-school education which UNEsco 
will make prior to the conference. The 
results of this survey, which will cover train- 
ing for professional life, for leisure activi- 
ties, for citizenship and social life and for 
international life and understanding, should 
provide a world-wide picture of out-of- 
school education. 
Epucationar TV IN LIBERIA: 
The Government of Liberia has announced 
that educational TV programmes will be 
sent out from a transmitter due to be set 
up in the capital, Monrovia, before the 
end of 1963. Besides courses of study, the 
programmes will include telecasts on educ- 
ational themes. 
News Flashes... 
 
WB A plan to develop a world-wide weather 
forecasting system which will include the use 
of artificial satellites has been approved by 
the World Meteorological Organization. 
Known as World Weather Watch it will 
be run from three centres in Washington, 
Moscow and a so far unchosen city in the 
southern hemisphere. 
BW As its 200th project to speed economic 
development in low-income countries, the 
U.N. Special Fund is to help set up a tele- 
communications centre in Baghdad, capital 
of Iraq. Iraq's plan for development fore- 
sees expenditure of $94 million for moder- 
nization of telecommunications. 
BW A Union of African News Agencies has 
been set up following a UNESCO meeting on 
the development of national news agencies 
in Africa. The Union will link existing 
agencies and help to establish new ones 
with the aim of increasing the flow of news 
within the region and with the rest of the 
world. 
Wm Two highlights in the world campaign 
against malaria: the population in areas 
protected against malaria has reached 148 
million; Europe has been freed from the 
threat of this disease since the beginning of 
1963. 
BW Iceland's 6,000 fishermen are the world’s 
champions, catching on the average 115 tons 
per year per man. This is four to five 
times as much as their closest European 
counterparts and 30 to 40 times more than 
the world average. Im
p.
 
G
E
O
R
G
E
S
 
L
A
N
G
,
 
PA
RI
S,
 
IM
PR
IM
E 
EN
 
F
R
A
N
C
E
.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### IGNORE

   
   
  
   
   
ha
 
% so ases Stas ae See wall 
Order from any bookseller, or write direct to 
the National Distributor in your country. (See list 
below ; names of distributors in countries not 
listed will be supplied on request.) Payment is 
made in the national currency; rates quoted are 
for an annual subscription to THE UNESCO COU. 
RIER in any one language. 
AFGHANISTAN. Panuzai, Press Department, Royal 
Afghan Ministry of Education, Kabul, — AUSTRALIA. 
Melbourne University Press, 36% Lonsdale Street, 
Melbourne, C. [., Victoria. (A. 15/-}. — AUSTRIA 
Verlag Georg Fromme & C*., Spengergasse 39, Vienna V 
(Sch. 60.-}. — BELGIUM, Editions * Labor ”, 
342, rue Royale, Brussels, 3. NV Standaard-Boek- 
handel, Belgielei 151. Antwerp. For The Unesco 
Courier (100 FB) and art slides only: Louis de Lannoy, 
22, place de Brouckére, Brussels. CCP 3380.00. — 
BURMA, Burma Translation Society, 361 Prome Road, 
Rangoon, (K. 5.50). — CANADA. Queen's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont. ($§ 3.00). — CEYLON. The Associated 
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. Lake House Bookshop, 
100 Parsons Road, P.O. Box 244, Colombo, 2. (Rs. 9). 
— CHINA. World Book Co. Ltd., 99 Chungking South 
Rd., Section 1, Taipeh, Taiwan (Formosa). — CUBA, 
E.C.0.D.A.L.D., Neptuno 406, entre Manzique y San Nico- 
las Havana, (2.25 pesos). — CZECHOSLOVAKIA, Artia 
Led, 30 Ve Smeckich, Prague 2. — DENMARK. Ejnar 
Munksgaard, AfS Tidsskriftaidelingen, Prags Boulevard 47 
Copenhagen § (D.kr. 12). —~ ETHIOPIA. International 
Press Agency, P.O. Box 120. Addis Ababa. -~ FINLAND. 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu, Helsinki. 
(Fmk. 540). — FRANCE. Librairie de ['Unesco, Place 
de Fontenoy, Paris-7*. C.C.P. 12598-48. (7 F.). 
— GERMANY. R. Oldenbourg Verlag, Rosens- 
heimer strasse 145, Munich, For the Unesco Kurier 
(German ed. only) Bahren-felder-Chaussee 160, 
Hamburg-Bahrenfeld, C.C.P. 276650 (DM 8). —- GHANA 
Methodist Book Depot Ltd. Atlantis House, Commercial 
St., POB 100, Cape Coast. — GREAT BRITAIN. See 
United Kingdom, — GREECE. Librairie H. Kauffmann, 
28, rue du Stade, Athens. — HONG-KONG. Swindon 
Book Co., 64, Nathan Road, Kowloon. — HUNGARY. 
Kultura, P.O. Box 149. Budapest, 62, — INDIA. Orient 
Longmans Ltd. Indian Mercanule Chamber, Nicol Road, 
Bombay 1; 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13; Gun- 
foundry Road, Hyderabad, 1; 36a, Mount Road, Madras 2; 
Kanson House, 24/1 Asaf Ali Road, P.O. Box 386, New 
Delhi, 1; Sub-Depot: Oxlord Book & Stationery Co., 
17 Park Street, Calcutta 16, Scandia House, New Delhi. 
Indian National Commission for Co-operation with 
Unesco, Ministry of Education, New Delhi 3. (Rs. 7}. = 
INDONESIA. P. N. Fadjar Bhakti, Djalan 
Nusantara 22, Djakarta. — JRAQ. Mackenzie's 
Bookshop, Baghdad. -- IRELAND. The National Press, 
2, Wellington Road, Balisbridge, Dublin. (10/s). — 
ISRAEL. Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd.,, 35, Allenby 
Road and 48, Nahlat Benjamin Street, Tel-Aviv( 1 £ 5.50). 
-- JAMAICA. Sangster's Book Room, 91 Harbour 
Street, Kingston. Knox Educational Services, Spaldings. 
(10/-). — JAPAN. Maruzen Co. Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichame, 
Nihonbashi, P.O. Box 605 Tokyo Central, Tokyo. 
(Yen 670). — JORDAN. Joseph L. Bahous & Co. 
Dar ul-Kutub, Salt Road, P.OB. 66, Amman. — 
KENYA, E.S.A. Bookshop, P.O. Box 310167, Nairobi. — 
KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, 
P.O. Box Central 64, Seoul. — LIBERIA. Cole 
and Yancy Bookshops Led., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia, — 
LUXEMBURG. Librairie Paul Bruck, 22, Grand-Rue, 
Luxemburg. — MALAYAN FEDERATION AND 
SINGAPORE. Federal Publications Ltd., Times House, 
River Valley Rd., Stngapore (M. $500) — MALTA. 
Sapienza’s Library 26 Kingsway, Valetta. (10/-). — 
MAURITIUS, Nalanda Company Ltd, 30, Bourbon 
Street, Port-Louis. —MONACO. British Library, 30 Bld 
des Moulins, Monte-Carlo. {7 NF). ~ NETHERLANDS. 
N. VY. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout, 9, The Hague. 
(fl. 6). — NETHERLANDS WEST INDIES. G. C, T. 
Van Dorp & Ce. (Ned Ant.) N.V., Willemstad, Curacao. 
— NEW ZEALAND Government Printing Office 
Wellington, Government Printing Office, P.O. Box 5344, 
Auckland and Government Bookshops, Auckland, 
Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin (10/-). — NIGERIA. 
C.M.S. Bookshop, P.O. Box 4174, Lagos. (10/-}. — NOR- 
Over 300,000 subscribers 
Every month 
 
ONE AND A HALF MILLION 
PEOPLE READ 
THE UNESCO COURIER 
in English, Arabic, French, German, 
Japanese, Russian, Spanish and Italian. 
The aim of The Unesco Courier is to be neither 
too “technical” nor too “popular”. Its articles, 
richly illustrated with striking photographs, offer 
a vivid picture of the endless diversity of peoples 
and countries, a world on the march, the great 
adventures in science and the problems of our time. 
Annual subscription only 
$3.00 (Canada) ; 7 Fr. frs. 
10/-stg. ; 
Recent issues included: 
FREEDOM FROM HUNGER 
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU 
NEW HORIZONS IN MUSIC 
SAFETY FIRST AT SEA 
HISTORY OF MANKIND 
WAY. AS. Bokhjornet, Lille Grense. 7, Oslo 
For the Unesco Courier only: A.S. Narvesens Litteratur 
Tjeneste, Stortingigt. 4, Oslo, Postboks 115 (kr 13.20 
— PAKISTAN, The Waest-Pak Publishing Cor 
Led., Unesco Publications House, P.O. Box 374, 56-N 
Gulberg Industrial Colony, Lahore, — PANAMA, 
Cultural Panamena, Avenida 7a, No. T1-49, Apartado de 
Correos 1018, Panama, D.F. (Balboas3.}. -~- PHILIPPI- 
NES. The Modern Book Co., 508 Rizal Avenue P, O, Box 
632 Manila, — POLAND. "RUCH" ul. Wiloza Nr. 46, 
Warsaw 10 (ZI. 50). — PORTUGAL. Dias & Andrada 
Lda, Livraria Portugal, Rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon, = 
PUERTO RICO. Spanish English Publications Apartado 
1912, Hato Rey. — RHODESIA & NYASALAND. The 
Book Centre, First Street, Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. 
— SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop,P.Q,Box 1118, Khart- 
oum.— SWEDEN, A/8 CE. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbok- 
handel, Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm. — For The Unesco 
Courier:Svenska Unescoridet, Vasagatan 15-17, Stock- 
holm, C (Kr. 7.50); SWITZERLAND, Europa Verlag, 
5 Rimistrasse Zurich. Payot, 40, rue du Marché, Geneva, 
C.C.P. 1.236. ** Courier "only: Georges Losmaz, 1, rue 
des Vieux-Grenadiers, Geneva, C.C.P, 1-4811. (Fr. S. 8). 
— TANGANYIKA. Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, P.Q.B. 
9030, Dar-es-Salaam. =- THAILAND. Suksapan 
Panit, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue, Bangkok. (35 
ticals}, ~~ TURKEY. Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal 
Caddesi, Beyoglu, Istanbul, —- UGANDA, Uganda 
Bookshop, P.O. Box 145, Kampala. — UNION OF 
SOUTH AFRICA. Van Schaik's Bookitore, Libri 
Building, Church Street, Pretoria, For the Unesco Cou- 
rier (single copies) only: Central News Agency, P.O. 
Box 1033, Johannesburg. (10/-). ~~ UNITED ARAB 
REPUBLIC (EGYPT). La Renaissance d'Egypte, 9 Sh. 
Adiy-Pasha, Cairo. — UNITED KINGDOM. H.M. 
Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569, London, S.E.l, (10/.), ~ 
UNITED STATES. Unesco Publications Center, 
317 East 34th St, New York, 16, N.Y, ($5.00) 
and (except periodicals): Cofumbia University Press, 
2960 Broadway, New York, 27 N.Y. — U.5.S.R. Mez- 
hdunarodnaja Kniga, Moscow, G-200.— YUGOSLAVIA 
Yugoslovenska Knjiga, Terazije 27/11, Belgrade.

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/078356engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### IGNORE

ns 
  
ed era of ansport— 
is galy-dec eco rats cra ft 
Ar La . u e of Paris ent 
took placsdising zeremony c Eom emo me Jules Ve me's novel 
Around the Id in 80 Days ", whose hero, Phileas Fogg, 
accomplished one stage of epic ourney in a t balloon £ or th 
ste ry of m | n's first 1 bs sts of the 1 (+14 pat 28 
  