# [069653](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf) 2

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

    
Kd 
x 4 kL iy, ah ai , . phy - of a om 5 RT lia io | fom ae Lo Ni He gr a ey 0 A 
vr ! = bain » oF 8 =r pe. nC L gM ws NY r oo > 
bi hf J igen efi da wn i id uk : A diay 3 YL AE 
. n » : 
  
Yr TR TT Sa hh Cs 23 - § ‘ 
a ) - Al! 
Le i — 
  
- eee 
— - Te ————————————— tn » : EE ——— EE —— 
——— EI... 
“a " : v rr  ——INNETIWLEN 
CLA Ae i wd Salen PW ml 
¥a
 
YU Cardin: Mesa ath ou 
= aati a oe 
ye TL TI $e FG - a TA, 4 ‘ ‘ * . wae A | 
n N ? 
i w 
I 
" RL a 
is TR 1 al ¥ - ol a 
- = E 1 Lm. 
" - 
I 
—
 
T rT TRI TI 
 
» al aed 2 
‘ 
: 
‘3 a 4 4 a 
¢ a 
A 
d 
a 
La. 
ey 
oe awe} ra Cb 
  
  
     
  
are 
er, 
wis 
i 
WE . 
fl. 8 
a 
  
4 i . 
e 
L : 
R 
_ 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

   
    
 
A time to live... 
45 Mexico 
 
To the rescue 
Earthquakes are a grim fact of life for the 
people of Mexico. Mexico City, one of the 
world’s largest and oldest capital cities, is 
situated on the southern Mexican plateau in 
an area of volcanic activity and faulting of 
the Earth’s crust related to the shaping of 
the continental areas to the north and south. 
‘8 2X dd AE "id a A 
- TE ——— — ’ . : 
RE “ BE iat 
Tart aT Slane rao 
: aid FS ot A Ni bo : A 
., rn 
e
r
:
 
rat 
P
O
E
T
 
  
In September 1985, Mexico City was shaken 
by a powerful earthquake which caused se- 
vere damage in the heart of the metropolis. 
In an unprecedented effort of international 
solidarity, rescue teams from many coun- 
tries came to Mexico City to help in the work 
of rescuing and caring for the many victims. 
Ph
ot
o 
Ar
na
ud
 
Bo
rr
el
 
(€
) 
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### IGNORE

The Courier 
A window open on the world 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
 
Editorial July 1986 
39th year 
 
we live on is a tiny speck of rock and metal. The third 
EEN against the immensity of the Universe, the Earth 
: nt 385% LY Paty SE 
planet of the Solar System, counting outward from the Pan Sard ? Pah Ay 
L) N Cd oO 
Sun round which it orbits at a speed of 29.8 kilometres per Qo Ve RY rage a wi Q 
second, the Earth is located between Venus and Mars, at just i. v ho po N 
the right distance from the Sun (149,573,000 kilometres) to ( o> Vis 3 Val Pp) 
avoid being baked in perpetual heat or frozen in unending \ _— \ 3 
cold. : 8 
In this issue of the Unesco Courier our purpose is to offer \ oa { he AC JD Rh 
our readers a simple description of the genesis of our planet DR / \) (a 
and of the major geological mechanisms that regulate its a BE NU x - 
restless churning. For though we call the land surface we live \ ? { An 
on “terra firma”, the great continental plates are in constant vd f ( C aid TE 
motion. Sometimes these plates collide, buckling at the [ \L ar 
point of impact into mighty mountain ranges; at times they AL 
are shaken by violent, shuddering earthquakes; at times the 4 ¢ 
internal furnaces spew out molten rock in awesome volcanic 
eruptions. And all the while new crust is forming on the 4 The genesis of the Earth 
  
ocean floor and old crust is being sucked down to be recycled ee 
in the banked fires of the mantle. by John Gribbin 
In terms of geological time, man is a newcomer to this 6 Vital statistics 
planet. If we imagine the 3,900 million years since the 
Earth’s crust solidified as one calendar year, then Homo 8 Inside the Earth 
sapiens only appeared on the scene on 31 December at about - 
df cight and a half minutes to midnight (100,000 years ago). 9 Our place in the Solar System 
"In the very last half second of our condensed time scale, 
man has himself become a major geological force capable of 10 Wandering continents 
  
  
deteriorating or even destroying the environment in which 12 Rocks around the clock 
he lives. The damage that human beings inflict upon the The concept of geological time 
environment is mainly due to ignorance. We still do not 
know enough, for example, about the long-term effects of 12 Shaping the land 
the widespread use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, 
how to prevent the spread of man-induced desertification, or 15 A trilogy of rocks 
how best to handle our newest energy source—nuclear — 
power. 16 Drilling into the unknown 
With its major international science programmes Unesco by Yevgeni Kozlovski 
is in the forefront of the battle to keep our planet habitable. 23 The restless Earth 
Although there may well be other Earths in the vast ex- The uncertain art of earthquake prediction 
panses of the Universe, if they exist they are well beyond our by E.M. Fournier d’Albe 
reach. We must look after planet Earth; we have nowhere 
else to go. 27 Volcanoes 
by Haroun Tazieff 
N.B. We suggest that this issue be read in conjunction with two other recent issues of the 
Unesco Courier: “The Story of the Universe” (September 1984), and “The New World 32 The evolution of life 
of the Ocean” (February 1986). 
" Several of the photographs and diagrams in this issue of the Uncsco Couricr are 33 Life from Space 
reproduced by courtesy of the Geological Museum, London, to whom we express our 
Does life on Earth have its origins in comets? grateful thanks. : 
by Chandra Wickramasinghe 
35 The hand of man 
Cover: Océane Pyrénées, 1985, acrylic on canvas (116 x 73 cm), by by Stephen Boyden and Malcolm Hadley 
Georges Servat. Galerie jean-pierre lavignes, Paris. 
38 1986: Year of Peace /7 
2 A time to live...   Editor-in-chief : Edouard Glissant MEXICO: To the rescue 
Published monthly in 32 languages English Italian Turkish Macedonian Finnish A selection in Braille is published 
by Unesco French Hindi Urdu Serbo-Croat Swedish quarterly in English, French, 
The United Nations Educational, Spanish Tamil Catalan Slovene Basque Spanish and Korean 
Scientific and Cultural Organization Russian Hebrew Malaysian Chinese Thai 
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. German Persian Korean Bulgarian ISSN 0041-5278 
Arabic Dutch Swahili Greek N°7-1986 -CPD-86-1- 435A 
Japanese Portuguese Croato-Serb Sinhala 

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### IGNORE

all. Space, time and the matter of the, 
Universe we live in were created 
together in a superdense fireball, some 
15,000 million years ago, a fireball which 
we call the “Big Bang”. As the Universe 
expanded and cooled, matter became 
spread more thinly until huge clouds of 
hydrogen gas began to clump together, 
breaking up and collapsing inwards to 
form stars and galaxies. By about 10,000 
million years ago, galaxies like our own 
Milky Way system, each containing up to 
a few thousand million stars, were estab- 
lished as the basic units of the Universe. 
Within each galaxy stars are born, live 
and die, wheeling their long orbits 
around the galaxy’s centre, while the 
galaxies themselves are carried ever 
farther apart as the Universe continues to 
expand. 
Our Sun and Solar System are typical 
products of the galactic environment, but 
our Sun was not one of the first stars to 
shine in the cosmic night. Those earliest 
stars contained only hydrogen and a little 
helium; all the other elements have been 
created by nuclear reactions inside stars 
and scattered through space when those 
first stars exploded. So when our Sun 
formed, only a little over 4,500 million 
years ago, it formed out of a cloud of 
hydrogen gas well laced with other mate- 
rials such as iron, carbon, oxygen and 
nitrogen—materials that settled out of 
the collapsing gas cloud to form the 
planets. 
The planets of the Solar System differ 
from one another chiefly because of their 
distances from the Sun. Those closest to 
the forming young Sun were subjected to 
the greatest heat, and this drove off into 
space many light materials. This is why 
Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars are 
small, rocky objects. Far out from the 
Sun’s furnace, however, even light gases 
such as methane and ammonia could be 
trapped and held by a forming planet. So 
the giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus 
and Neptune, probably contain the same 
amount of rocky material as the Earth, 
but this is buried deep beneath the vast 
layers of their gaseous atmospheres. 
They need not concern us here, but it is 
I: the beginning there was nothing at 


### 69516: The Genesis of the Earth

4 
The genesis 
interesting and informative to make some 
comparisons between our own home in 
space, Planet Earth, and our nearest 
neighbours, Venus and Mars. 
The small cloud of material that col- 
lapsed to form our planet, within the 
greater cloud that was collapsing to form 
the Solar System, was probably made up 
chiefly of silicon compounds, iron oxides 
and magnesium oxides, with just a small 
trace of all the other elements, including 
those that are so important to life. 
As the Earth formed, it grew hot. First, 
gravitational energy was turned to heat as 
particles rained down and smashed into 
the proto-planet. In addition, radioactive 
elements inside the core of the growing 
planet contributed their share of warmth 
as they decayed into stable elements—a 
process which continues at a slower rate 
today. 
- The young, iron-rich planet must have 
been largely molten in the first tens or 
hundreds of millions of years after it 
formed, and as a result molten globules of 
iron forced their way downwards to the 
core of the Earth through the lighter, 
rocky material, which was left to float on 
top and provide a solid skin as the crust 
cooled. The material of the crust on 
which we live is not typical of the material 
that makes up the bulk of the Earth—and 
the material of the atmosphere that we 
breathe is even less representative of the 
whole planet. 
The crust of the Earth contains 6 per 
cent iron, but the planet as a whole con- 
tains 35 per cent; silicon, which makes up 
only 15 per cent of the mass of the planet, 
forms 28 per cent of the crust, combined 
with oxygen to make silicate rocks. The 
lightest rocks, chiefly granite, make up 
the bulk of the continents, but the ocean 
floor consists of basalt, which is rather 
heavier. 
From the surface to the centre, the 
Earth is layered like an onion, with the 
lightest material on the outside and the 
most dense material at the core. And this 
process of segregation was more or less 
completed by 3,900 million years ago, 
just 600 million years after the planet 
formed. Geophysicists know this because 
they have been able to date the oldest 
rocks of the Earth’s crust, using measure- 
ments of their residual radioactivity; and 
they know about the layered structure of 
the planet from studies of earthquake 
waves, which are bent and distorted by 
the different layers. 
However, no more than the broad out- 
lines of the picture of the Earth’s interior 
can be determined in this way. The 
ptoneering geophysicist Sir Edward Bul- 
lard once told me that “determining the 
structure of the Earth by studying earth- 
quakes is like a blind man trying to deter- 
mine the structure of a grand piano solely 
by listening to the sound it makes when 
pushed down a flight of stairs”. And it is - 
true that scientists know more about the ~ 
composition of distant stars than about 
the Earth deep below our feet—after all, 
we can actually see the stars! 
But we do at least have the broad out- 
lines of a picture of the Earth’s interior. 
Starting from the surface, we live on a 
rocky ball with an average radius of 6,372 
kilometres, slightly flattened at the poles. 
The outer skin, or the crust, represents 
only 0.6 per cent of the volume of the 
planet. Below the crust, which varies in 
thickness from 5 to 35 kilometres, there is 
a sharp boundary called the Mohorovicic 
Discontinuity, or Moho. 
This marks the top of the mantle, a 
layer which goes down to a depth of 2,900 
kilometres and takes up 82 per cent of the 
volume of the Earth. Near the top, the 
mantle is partly molten, with a consisten- 
cy like thick porridge, or slushy, melting 
ice. This region of weakness, called the 
asthenosphere, is of great importance be- 
cause the crust above can move over it, 
leaving the continents free to wander 
around the globe (see page 10). On a 
broader scale, the mantle seems to be 
made up of three zones, the upper mantle 
being about 370 kilometres thick and 
separated by a transition zone about 600 
kilometres thick from the lower mantle, 
NF 
which is itself 1,900 kilometres in thick- > 
ness. 
Evolution of the Earth from a cloud of gas 
and dust to a rocky planet

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 69516: The Genesis of the Earth

of the Earth by John Gribbin 
  
Ph
ot
o 
Cr
ow
n 
© 
Br
it
is
h 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
Su
rv
ey
, 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### 69516: The Genesis of the Earth

p Below the mantle lies the core—an 
outer core 2,100 kilometres thick and the 
inner core itself, with a radius of just 
1,370 kilometres, at the centre of the 
Earth. The outer core is the region of 
liquid iron, where the Earth’s magnetic 
field is generated. 
Venus and Mars are rocky planets like 
the Earth and formed in much the same 
way. But our planet is covered by oceans 
of water, whereas Mars is a cold, dry 
planet with a thin atmosphere and Venus 
has a superdense atmosphere covering a 
baking hot surface. These differences 
seem to be a direct result of the differ- 
ences in the distance of the planets from 
the Sun. 
All three planets, astronomers and 
geophysicists now believe, had no atmos- 
phere immediately after they cooled. 
Any gases that were present as they 
formed were driven off by the heat of the 
Sun. Simple physics tells us the tempera- 
ture of the surface of each of the three 
rocky balls, at their different distances 
from the Sun, once the Sun had settled 
down to a steady brightness. For Venus, 
the stable temperature, where incoming 
heat from the Sun is exactly balanced by 
outgoing radiation, is 87 degrees Centi- 
grade, and for Mars the figure is -30 
degrees Centigrade. These figures, re- 
member, are for airless planets. 


### 69519: Vital statistics (of the Earth)

Vital statistics 
Source: National Geographic Society, Washington, D.C. 
  
THE EARTH 
Weight: 5,973,502,000,000,000,000,000 tonnes 
Circumference at the Equator: 40,075 km 
Area: 510,074,600 km? 
Land: 148,940,540 km? 
Water: 391,134,060 km? 
  
Xe
 
  
  
N: 
  
THE CONTINENTS 
MAJOR WATERFALLS Hl 
  
  
 
Area A Highest point \/ Lowest point Population 
(km?) (metres) (metres) 
Asia 43,998,920 1 Everest 1 Dead Sea 2,048,898,000 
8,848 -396 
Africa 29,800,540 2 Kibo 2 Lake Assal 344,000,000 
(Kilimanjaro) -156 
5,895 
North 24,320,100 3 McKinley 3 Death 314,970,000 
America 6,194 Valley 
-8 
South 17,599,050 4 Aconcagua 4 Valdés 186,013,000 
America 6,960 Peninsula 
-40 
Europe 9,699,550 5 El'bruz 5 Caspian Sea 637,943,000 
5,642 -28 
Australia 7,687,120 6 Kosciusko 6 Lake Eyre 12,200,000 
2,228 -16 
Antarctica 14,245,000 7 Vinson Not known 
Massif 
5,139 
  
Height 
(metres) 
1 Angel 979 
2 Tugela 948 
3 Yosemite 739 
4 Cuguenan 610 
5 Sutherland 580 
6 Mardalsfossen 517 
7 Ribbon 491 
8 King George VI 488 
9 Gavarnie 422 
10 Victoria 108 
11 Iguazd 72 
12 Niagara 59 
LONGEST RIVERS [} 
Length 
(kilometres) 
1 Nile 6,669 
2 Amazon 6,436 
3 Mississippi-Missouri 5,969 
4 Ob'Irtysh 5,567 
5 Yangtze 5471 
6 Huang 4,827 
7 Congo 4,373 
8 Amur 4,344 
9 lena 4,312 
10 Mackenzie-Peace 4,240 
11 Mekong 4,183 
12 Niger 4,183 
13 Parana 4,023 
14 Murray-Darling 3,717 
15 Volga 3,685

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=7) 0

### 69519: Vital statistics (of the Earth)

  
  
  
a 12 13 
@ o J 15 
a 5 
9 Xs ir o) 6 
 . OA o 0 
8 eo : 
4 vi 0 * A 
n O 
12 ® : 
0 mv » s 
be ad 2 
or Ns 
10 © 
a 
2 
ep 
LARGEST LAKES O 
Area Greatest depth 
(km?) (metres) 
1 Caspian Sea 371,795 995 
2 Superior 82,362 406 
3 Victoria 69,485 81 
4 Aral Sea 65,527 68 
5 Huron 59,570 229 
6 Michigan 58,016 282 
7 Tanganyika 32,893 1,417 
8 Great Bear 31,792 413 
9 Baikal 30,510 1,620 
10 Nyasa 29,604 678 
MAJOR SEAS @ 
Area Average depth 
(km?) (metres) 
1 South China Sea 2,974,615 1,464 
2 Caribbean Sea 2,515,926 2,575 
3 Mediterranean Sea 2,509,969 1,501 
4 Bering Sea 2,261,070 1,491 
5 Gulf of Mexico 1,507,639 1,615 
6 Sea of Okhotsk 1,392,125 973 
7 Sea of Japan 1,012,949 1,667 
8 Hudson Bay 730,121 a3 
9 Andaman Sea 564,879 1,118 
10 Black Sea 507,899 1,191 
11 Red Sea 452,991 538 
12 North Sea 427,091 308 
13 Baltic Sea 382,025 55 
 
  
9 
Od ® 
6 
- i 
A highest points 
\/ lowest points 
dhe Earth's extremes 
Ww deepest points 
N @ major seas 
! QO largest lakes 
Hl) longest rivers 
BB major waterfalls 
v0 
» 
5 
e 
THE OCEANS 
Area w Deepest Point 
(km?) (metres) 
Pacific 166,242,517 1 Mariana Trench 11,033 
Atlantic 86,557,800 2 Puerto Rico Trench 8,648 
indian 73,427,795 3 Java Trench 7,725 
Arctic 13,223,763 4 Eurasia Basin 5,450 
  
W
o
h
i
n
 
i
d
 
nN
 
=~
 
EARTH'S EXTREMES IY 
. Rainiest spot: Mount Waialeale, Hawaii: average annual rainfall: 11,680 mm. 
. Drlest spot: Atacama Desert, Chile: rainfall barely measurable. (At Calama, 
no rain has ever been recorded.) 
. Coldest spot: Vostok, Antarctica: -88°C (recorded in August 1960). 
. Hottest spot: Al'Aziziyah, Libya: 58°C (recorded in September 1922). 
. Northernmost town: Ny Alesund, Spitsbergen, Norway. 
. Southernmost town: Puerto Williams, Chile. 
. Highest town: Aucanquilcha, Chile: 5,334 m 
. Lowest town: Villages along the Dead Sea: -396 m 
. Largest gorge: Grand Canyon, Colorado River, Arizona: 349 km long, 
61021 km wide, 1.6 km deep. 
. Deepest gorge: Hells Canyon, Snake River, Idaho: 2,408 m deep. 
. Strongest surface wind: 372 km/h (recorded in 1934). 
. Greatest tides: Bay of Fundy, Nova Scotia: 16 m 
. Biggest meteor crater: New Quebec, Canada: 3 km wide. 
7

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=8) 0

### IGNORE

1. crust granite (continents) 
basalt (oceans) 
2. mantle peridotite (and denser forms) 
3. outer core iron (liquid) 
4. Inner core iron (solid) 


### 69516: The Genesis of the Earth

### 69522: Inside the Earth

‘Inside the Earth 
The Earth’s interior has a layered struc- 
ture. The outermost layer is the crust; 
beneath this is the mantle; and in the 
centre is the core. Temperatures and 
pressures inside the Earth are very 
high—at the core the temperature is 
thought to be about 3,500 degrees Cen- 
tigrade and the pressure nearly 3,750 
tonnes per square centimetre. 
The Crust: In relation to the Earth as a whole, 
the crust Is as thin as a postage stamp stuck 
on a football. it consists of a thin skin of rock 
which is less dense than the underlying man- 
tle from which it has been derived by complex 
processes over many millions of years. There 
are two kinds of crust: continental crust, 
which makes up the continents, and oceanic 
crust, which forms the ocean floors. Con- 
tinental crust Is lighter in welght and much 
thicker than oceanic crust. It Is also very 
much oider—parts of the continental crust 
are over 3,500 million years old, whereas 
oceanic crust is nowhere more than 200 mil- 
lion years oid. 
The Mohorovicic Discontinuity: The sharp 
boundary that marks the junction between 
the crust and the mantle. 
8 
The Asthenosphere: This Is a hotter, weaker, 
partly moiten section of the top of the upper 
mantie with a consistency like thick porridge. 
It Is of great Importance because it enables 
the rigld plates of the crust above to move 
about. 
The Upper Mantle: scientists believe that the 
upper mantle consists of dense, dark-coi- 
oured rocks, probably peridotite and perhaps 
also dunite and eclogite, composed of iron 
and magnesium-rich silicate minerals. Frag- 
ments of these rocks are found In volcanoes 
fed by magma (moiten rock) that originates in 
the mantie. 
The Transition Zone: In this region, where the 
upper mantle grades into the iower mantle, 
higher pressures force the minerais to 
change their structure. 
The Lower Mantle: The minerals composing 
the lower mantle are probably simple oxides 
with very compact structures produced by 
high pressures. 
The Core: Aimost twice as dense as the man- 
tle, the core Is probably composed of Iron 
with some dissolved sulphur and silicon. The 
Earth’s magnetic fieid Is generated In the 
outer core, which is molten. The Inner corels 
thought to be solid. 
D
r
a
w
i
n
g
 
©
 
G
e
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n
 
» On each planet an atmosphere began 
to form when carbon dioxide and water 
vapour were produced by volcanic activ- 
ity (it may seem surprising, but one of the 
main things that emerges from the fiery 
furnace of a volcano is water vapour). 
Although 87 degrees Centigrade is still 
below the boiling point of water, the 
temperature on Venus was already high 
enough for a great deal of water vapour 
from volcanic outgassing to stay in the 
atmosphere with carbon dioxide. 
Both water vapour and carbon dioxide 
are very efficient at trapping infra-red 
radiation—the process is called the 
“greenhouse effect”. So less heat could 
escape from the planet into space andasa 
result its temperature quickly rose above 
the boiling point of water, and then still 
higher as still more water vapour joined 
the atmosphere. From then on, all pro- 
duction of volcanic gases thickened the 
atmosphere and strengthened this green- 
house effect. On Mars the opposite hap- 
pened. Water may have flowed briefly on 
the planet, but it soon froze. Venus is a 
hot desert; Mars is a cold desert. But 
Earth is different. 
On our planet the temperature was 
high enough for liquid water to flow, but 
not so high that water vapour could cause 
a runaway greenhouse effect. Quite the 
reverse—the warm waters of the young 
oceans dissolved carbon dioxide out of 
the air, leaving a much thinner atmos- 
phere than on Venus, while white clouds 
in the sky reflected away some of the 
incoming solar heat and let the planet 
cool. It is no coincidence, astronomers 
believe, that the mass of all the carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere of Venus today 
is roughly the same as the mass of carbon 
dioxide locked up in carbonate rocks, 
such as limestone, laid down from the 
oceans around the Earth. 
If our Sun had been a little warmer, 
Earth too might have been a superhot 
desert with a thick, carbon dioxide 
atmosphere—but if that were so, then 
Mars would be warm enough for water to 
flow and life to flourish. Or suppose the 
Sun were a little cooler; our Earth might 
have ended up like Mars—but Venus 
could have become a pleasant planet of 
oceans and cloudy blue skies. If you are 
not fussy about exactly which planet you 
settle on, the implication seems to be that 
an Earth-like planet is an almost inevit- 
able counterpart of every Sun-like star. 
In the case of our Solar System, it just 
happens to have been the third planet out 
from the Sun that was, by about 3,500 
million years ago, already in possession 
of oceans of water, continents, a carbon 
dioxide atmosphere and a comfortable 
temperature. The scene was set for the 
emergence of life, and for life itself to 
begin to change the environment of the 
planet—but that is another story.

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### 69516: The Genesis of the Earth

What of the future? Our Sun has ex- 
isted in a more or less steady state for 
4,000 million years, keeping hot as it 
burns hydrogen fuel into helium in its 
interior. Eventually the supply of hyd- 
rogen will be exhausted. When it is, the 
inner part of the Sun will collapse slightly 
and become still hotter as helium is fused 
by nuclear reactions into carbon. This 
greater internal heat will cause the outer 
layers of the Sun to expand and it will 
become a red giant star, engulfing the 
inner planets and burning them to cin- 
ders. But there is no need to panic. Cur 
Sun is only halfway through its life-cycle, 
scarcely into middle-age, and “eventual- 
ly”, in this case, means not for another 
4,000 million years or more. The fate of 
mankind lies in its own hands, not in the 
stars. | 
 
JOHN GRIBBIN, British astrophys.cist and sci- 
ence writer, former member of the Science Poli- 
cy Research Unit of the University of Sussex, 
England, is physics consultant to the magazine 
New Scientist. He has written many books on 
astronomy, geophysics and climatic change, as 
well as two novels, and in 1874 he received the 
United Kingdom's premier science-writing 
award. His books on astrophysics include White 
Holes (1977), Timewarps (1979), Genesis: The 
Origins of Man and the Universe (1981), and 
Spacewarps (1983). 


### 69525: Our place in the Solar System

Our place in the Solar System 
Sun 
A nuclear furnace that converts hydrogen 
into helium, releasing an enormous amount 
of energy. Central star of the Solar System, 
making up 99 per cent of its mass. Mean 
surface temperature: 5,500 degrees Centi- 
grade. Core temperature: 17 million degrees 
Centigrade. Diameter: 1.39 million 
kilometres. Distance from Earth: 150 million 
kilometres. 
Mercury 
Dense, probably partly metallic. May have a 
thin atmosphere. Average midday temper- 
ature: 350 degrees Centigrade. Diameter: 
4,840 kilometres. Distance from Sun: 57.9 
million kilometres. 
Venus 
Similar in composition to Earth. Shrouded in 
a dense atmosphere of carbon dioxide. Sur- 
face temperature: 300 degrees Centigrade. 
Diameter: 12,104 kilometres. Distance from 
Sun: 108.2 million kilometres. 
Earth 
Silicate layers surround dense metallic core. 
Water, and an atmosphere of nitrogen and 
oxygen, support life. Surface temperature: 
Between 60 degrees Centigrade and -90 
degrees Centigrade. Diameter: 12,756 
kilometres. Distance from Sun: 150 million 
kilometres. 
Mars 
Surface has Moon-like craters but also such 
Earth-like features as canyons and volca- 
noes. Atmosphere is carbon dioxide with a 
little nitrogen and water. No evidence of life. 
Surface temperature: (?) 20 degrees Centig- 
rade at Equator. Diameter: 6,760 kilometres. 
Distance from Sun: 227.9 million kilometres. 
Asteroids 
Small bodies revolving in paths between 
Mars and Jupiter. Mostly less than one 
kilometre across. Mean distance from Sun: 
414.4 million kilometres. 
Jupiter 
Giant frozen planet enveloped in a thick 
atmosphere of hydrogen and helium. Strong 
energy source. Diameter: 142,700 kilometres. 
Distance from Sun: 778.3 million kilometres. 
Saturn 
Least dense of planets. Mainly hydrogen and 
helium. Orbited by ice-covered fragments 
(rings). Diameter: 120,800 kilometres. Dis- 
tance from Sun: 1,427 million kilometres. 
Uranus 
Probably ice with some solid ammonia, hyd- 
rogen and helium. Owes its green appear- 
ance to a methane-rich atmosphere. Di- 
ameter: 47,600 kilometres. Distance from 
Sun: 2,869 million kilometres. 
Neptune 
Probably frozen methane, water and ammo- 
nia. Diameter: 44,400 kilometres. Distance 
from Sun: 4,498 million kilometres. 
Pluto 
Most distant planet yet discovered. Composi- 
tion unknown. Diameter: (?) 3,000 kilometres. 
Distance from Sun: 5,900 million kilometres. 
The Moon 
Its composition shows small but significant 
differences from that of Earth. Analysis of 
Moon rocks reveals a far greater proportion 
of titanium, chromium and zirconium than is 
found in the Earth’s crust, suggesting that 
the Moon formed separately—probably by an 
agglomeration of pre-existing solid particles. 
The surface is marked by countless craters 
formed by falling meteorites. Bright areas 
(uplands) represent primeval crust. Dark 
areas are basins tormed 3,600 million years 
ago by impact and flooded by lava eruptions. 
Meteorites 
Stony and metallic debris, seared by heat, 
that falls to the Earth from outer space. They 
are probably fragments of colliding aster- 
oids. They range in composition from iron- 
magnesium silicate rock to nickel-iron. They 
have a maximum age about the same as that 
of the Earth. 
 
A speck in space 
The Earth and the Solar System are ex- 
tremely small in relation to distances in 
space. These are measured in light- 
years—one light-year is the distance light 
travels in one year—about 10 million mil- 
lion kilometres. 
The nearest of the 100,000 million stars in 
our Galaxy is four light-years away, and 
the Galaxy itself is 80,000 light-years 
across. Yet it is only one of millions of 
galaxies in the Universe. 
The Solar System consists of the Sun and 
the material revolving around it—planets, 
moons, asteroids, comets, meteorites, 
dust and gas. Most of this material circles 
the Sun in the same direction and in the 
same plane. 
  
Earth Sun Mercury Venus Mars Asteroids Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto 
9 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

  
Africa 
South America 
    
 
Maps © Oxford University Press, Oxford 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
200 million years ago 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
135 million years ago 


### 69526: Wandering continents

Wandering 
how snugly the coastlines of Africa and the Americas 
could be made tofittogether, if the intervening ocean were 
removed. Modern geophysics has established that all of the 
Earth's landmasses were indeed joined together in one super- 
continent, Pangaea, hundreds of millions of years ago, and that 
this supercontinent was broken apart, with the land masses 
drifting to their present positions on the globe. 
This idea took many years to become established. Specula- 
tions about the fit of the continents go back to Francis Bacon 
(1561-1626), but the acknowledged “father” of the idea of con- 
tinental drift was the German astronomer and meteorologist 
Alfred Wegener, who published the first comprehensive state- 
ment of the theory in 1912. Wegener thought that the continents 
might move through the thinner crust of the ocean floor, like 
icebergs ploughing through the sea, and he gathered a wealth of 
evidence showing how well the continents could be fitted 
together like some global jigsaw puzzle. But the idea of conti- 
nents moving through the rocks of the sea floor did not seem 
feasible, and found little favour until the 1950s, when the develop- 
ment of new geological techniques provided conclusive evidence 
that the continents do move. 
The key evidence came from magnetic studies of the ocean 
floors. These showed that the crust of the Atlantic Ocean floor is 
arranged symmetrically on either side of a great ridge of volcanic 
activity which runs roughly down the centre of the ocean bed. The 
interpretation of this discovery is that new oceanic crust is being 
created at the mid-ocean ridge, where it wells up through a crack 
in the Earth’s crust and is pushing out on either side, steadily 
widening the Atlantic. ) 
A rons who has looked at a world map must have noticed 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
In 50 million years’ time

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### 69526: Wandering continents

continents 
In other parts of the world the reverse happens. The North 
Pacific, for example, has no oceanic ridge, but there is a deep 
trench running down the west of the ocean floor, next to the 
Eurasian landmass. There the thin crust of the ocean floor is 
being pushed under the continent, back down into the mantle 
where it melts and is ultimately recycled. The net effect is that 
there is no change in the surface area of the Earth—spreading in 
the Atlantic and at other sites is balanced by contraction of the 
Pacific. A piece of the Earth’s crust that is bounded by spreading 
ridges and subduction zones is called a “plate”, which gives the 
concept of continental drift its modern name, “plate tectonics”. In 
some places, two pieces of crust—two plates—rub side by side, 
with no net creation or destruction of sea floor. This happens 
today along the notorious San Andreas fault in California. 
The whole process of break-up and re-arrangement of the 
continents may have happened several times in the Earth’s his- 
tory, and is responsible for building mountain ranges, where 
continents collide. India, moving northward into Eurasia, has 
forced up the Himalayas, which are still growing. By contrast, the 
line of the Red Sea marks a new (by geological standards) crackin 
the Earth’s crust, a spreading ridge which is splitting Africa off 
from Arabia, and which may eventually cause this narrow sea to 
expand into an ocean as large as the Atlantic is today. 
Overwhelming evidence for the reality of continental drift, or 
plate tectonics, was collected during the 1960s and 1970s. But the 
“icing on the cake” has been provided only in the past few years. 
Using laser beams bounced off artificial satellites in orbit around 
the Earth, it is now possible to measure directly the steady 
widening of the Atlantic, calculated at a couple of centimetres 
every year. | 
  
Ocean spreading ridge. Plates are separating; molten rock rises, 
adding new material to each plate. 
Ocean subduction zone. One plate underthrusts another. The 
edge of one plate is pushed down into the mantle where it melts 
and is recycled. Some of the molten rock rises to form an island 
arc. 
  
Collision zone. An underthrusting plate rams two continents 
together, forming a high mountain belt. 
Transform fauit. Two piates slide past one another with no addi- 
tion or destruction of plate material. 
llustration © The Sunday Times with the Geological Museum, London 
  
         
   
African Plate ~wA\Q 
: % ” y 
  Antarctic Plate / 
= 
Pacific Plate 
  
  
 
Antarctic Plate id get 
continental crust A AAA Subduction zone 
volcanoes _ uncertain plate boundary 
+ earthquake zone — Movement of plate 
LIL spreading ridge offset by transform faults 
collision zone   
1 
  
Ma
p 
© 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 69531: Rocks around the clock: the concept of geological time

Rocks around the clock 
The concept of geological time 
EOLOGY is the. science which 
G deals with the condition and the 
structure of the Earth and the evi- 
dence afforded of ancient forms of life. It 
includes the description of landforms, but it 
is much more concerned with the processes 
and forces responsible for the landscape we 
see today. 
These processes generally operate ex- 
tremely slowly. Huge periods of time are 
involved in the crumpling of the Earth’s 
crust into mountain ranges, in the wearing 
down of other mountains into plains, in the 
advance and retreat of sheet ice and in the 
relentless movement of vast sections of the 
crust itself. 
The concept of the enormity of geological 
time is a relatively recent one in Western 
thought. In AD 1656, James Ussher, 
Archbishop of Armagh in Northern Ire- 
land, after careful study of the genealogies 
recorded in the Bible, calculated that the 
Creation occurred at 8 pm on the 22nd of 
October of the year 4004 BC, an estimate 
Shaping the 
The land surface is shaped by erosion 
and deformation. Erosion by water, 
wind and ice wears away the rocks of 
the continental crust. Deformation 
occurs where the crust is unstable, 
rocks fracture, shear, crush, fold or flow 
plastically. 
12 
 
which was widely accepted even as late as 
the eighteenth century. 
In 1785, however, the Scottish naturalist 
James Hutton published his Theory of the 
Earth in which he suggested that the natural 
processes such as mountain building and 
erosion were so slow that the Earth must 
have been in existence for many millions of 
years. His views were generally discounted 
until the early 1830s, when another Scots- 
man, the geologist Charles Lyell, gave them 
his backing in his famous three-volume 
work The Principles of Geology, which laid 
the foundations for evolutionary biology as 
well as for an understanding of the develop- 
ment of the Earth, 
With the emergence of geology as a sci- 
ence in its own right, people at last became 
aware of the huge length of time nature 
took to achieve the changes they recognized 
as having occurred. 
The Earth is a rocky planet and its his- 
tory, virtually from its origin up to the 
present, can be elucidated from the study of 
  
| Jb prs A 
  
U-shaped valleys like this one 
in Alaska are formed by the 
gouging action of a glacier mov- 
ing down a river valley. The 
moving ice and the rocks it car- 
ries abrade and carve out the 
valley's steep sides. page 20). 
é by. 
| 
Canyons are formed when uplift of the 
land increases the speed and cutting 
power of a river flowing through a plain. 
The most spectacular example is the 
Grand Canyon of the Colorado River, in 
places over 1.5 km deep (see colour 
rocks exposed on its surface or attainable by 
drilling. 
Rocks can be grouped into three major 
categories: igneous rocks, formed from the 
molten material that rises from the Earth’s 
interior; metamorphic rocks, that have 
been transformed and crystallized by heat 
and pressure; and sedimentary rocks, which 
have a layered structure and are formed 
from fragments worn away from existing 
rocks and deposited elsewhere as sediment 
(see page 15). 
Ancient igneous and metamorphic rocks 
provide clues as to the origin and early 
history of the Earth’s crust; younger de- 
formed and igneous rock formations help us 
to understand how mountain chains were 
formed; and sedimentary rocks, deposited 
in layers or strata over millions of years, 
provide the major evidence on which the 
standard geological time-scale is based. 
Sedimentary rocks contain fossils, the re- 
mains of once-living organisms. Because 
living things are continuously changing 
Erosion Deformation 
"N 
”~ 
Bn. od i 
ae al 
3 5. Wh ’ 
<A 
  
< 
F — = en plan? 
a ad 
Rift valleys, often called 
Graben (the German for 
“trenches”), are the results 
of blocks of land sinking be- 
tween parallel faults. The 
East African Rift Valley, the 
world’s largest, is nearly 
5,000 kilometres long.

## [Page 13](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=13) 0

### 69531: Rocks around the clock: the concept of geological time

through evolution, fossils found in 
sedimentary rock provide the principal 
means of establishing the relative age of 
rocks found in different geographical areas. 
In combination, therefore, stratigraphy 
(the study of the sequences of rock strata) 
and palaeontology (the study of fossils in 
relation to the evolution of the Earth’s 
crust) might be described as the study of 
“history in layers”. 
With the development of radiometry in 
the 1950s, it became possible for scientists 
to supplement the relative age dating 
obtained from the fossil record with abso- 
lute age data (that is to say, age in years). 
The age in years of some types of rock can 
be calculated from the amounts of radio- 
active elements and their decay products in 
the minerals of which the rock is composed. 
Radioactive isotopes of uranium, potas- 
sium and rubidium decay at known rates 
into stable isotopes of lead, argon and 
strontium respectively. The decay products 
begin to accumulate in a mineral after it has 
crystallized and cooled, thus, as it were, 
setting a “radioactive clock” running. 
Just as “clock” time is divided into hours, 
minutes and seconds, so geological time 
(see table page 14) is divided into Eras, 
Periods or Systems, and Epochs or Series. 
The first era, known as the Precambrian, 
covers the span of time from the formation 
of the Earth’s crust, about 4,600 million 
years ago, until the time, about 570 million 
years ago, when, for the first time in the 
history of the Earth, evidence of varied 
forms of life preserved as fossil remains 
becomes plentiful. The Precambrian era, 
which some geologists also divide into two 
sub-divisions, the Archaeozoic and the Pro- 
terozoic, thus comprises nearly 90 per cent 
of geological time. 
Three eras span the period from the end 
  
Detachment, or décollement, is a common mechanism 
of folding in many lesser foothill ranges like the Jura 
(above). It occurs in flat sedimentary layers alongside 
rising fold-mountains, in this case, the Alps. As the 
young fold-mountains rise, they push the sedimentary 
layers sideways until they are detached from the under- 
lying rocks and are rucked up like a carpet on a slippery 
floor. The “polish” or lubrication is a soft layer of rock 
salt or clay underlying the sedimentary layers. 
of Precambrian time to the present—the 
Palaeozoic (“ancient life”) era, from 570 
million to 225 million years ago, the Meso- 
zoic (“middle life) era, from 225 million to 
65 million years ago, and the Cenozoic 
“modern life”) era, from 65 million years 
ago to the present. Broadly speaking, in- 
vertebrates and relatively simple verte- 
brates, such as fish, amphibians and primi- 
tive reptiles were in the ascendant during 
the Palaeozoic era, the Mesozoic era saw 
the rise to domination of the larger reptiles, 
such as the dinosaur, and the Cenozoic, the 
contemporary era, is the time of the domi- 
nance of mammals. 
The eras are divided into smaller units 
called periods or systems. Most of them are 
named after geographical regions where 
rocks containing fossils characteristic of 
their segments of geological time have been 
found. Thus the Cambrian period is so 
called after the ancient name for Wales and 
the Permian period is named after the 
ancient Russian kingdom of Permia. 
Some periods are named, not after their 
geographical location, but after the physical 
characteristics of their rocks. Thus the 
name of the Cretaceous period is derived 
from the Latin word for chalk, creta, while 
the Triassic period is so named because, in 
Germany, rocks of this period are divided 
into three distinct layers consisting of red 
sandstones, limestone and shales. 
In some cases, both types of nomencla- 
ture are used for the same period by geolog- 
ists in different parts of the world. Thus, 
two periods which North Americans call the 
Pennsylvanian period and the Mississippian 
period (geographical names) are grouped 
together in Europe as the Carboniferous 
period (from the coal-bearing nature of its 
strata). 
Periods are divided into epochs or series, 
Overfolds form in fold-mountains when rucked-up rock 
layers topple over. In Scotland, erosion has exposed the 
underside of such a fold, a wide belt from Aberdeen to 
Antrim that is upside down. 
which are in turn sub-divided into ages or 
stages, and at this point wide divergences 
appear in the nomenclature used by geolog- 
ists in different parts of the world. 
This is basically because the relationship 
between geological time and sequences of 
rock strata has usually been modelled on 
national or regional traditional thinking, 
and standards, terminology and classifica- 
tion differ from country to country. Neither 
the names nor the dates shown, even on a 
simplified table of geological time such as 
that published on page 14, will be accepted 
by all geologists. 
The solution of many basic geological 
problems would, therefore, be greatly 
facilitated if, through the adoption of com- 
mon standards and terminology, data from 
different areas could be made intelligible to 
geologists the world over. Achieving this 
aim is one of the major aims of the Interna- 
tional Geological Correlation Programme, a 
co-operative undertaking by the Interna- 
tional Union of Geological Sciences and 
Unesco (see page 14). 
Of particular importance are projects 
aimed at progressively refining geological 
time-scales. Geologists need accurate time- 
determination methods not only as a basis 
for research on the evolution of the Earth’s 
crust, but also for identifying and assessing 
energy and mineral resources. 
An understanding of the natural pro- 
cesses which have led to the accumulation 
of mineral deposits or fossil fuels depends 
on the geologist’s ability to understand the 
sequence of stages responsible for the 
formation of deposits and to make accurate 
correlations between sequences concerned 
with the formation of similar deposits in 
widely separated areas. To paraphrase the 
old saying: “Geological time ismoney”. MH 
Drawing © The Sunday Times, Geological Museum, London 
Nappes are masses of rock that have 
been driven over younger rocks for long 
distances until they cover them like a 
cloth. The Matterhorn (above right) was 
carved by glaciers out of a nappe of 
pre-Alpine granite driven over Switzer- 
land from the south. 
13

## [Page 14](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=14) 0

### 69531: Rocks around the clock: the concept of geological time

Geological time scale 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Era Period / System Epoch / Series Duration 
millions of years 
Quaternary Holocene 0.01 
Pleistocene 2.5 
CENOZOIC Tertiary Pliocene 45 
Miocene 19 
Oligocene 12 
Eocene 16 
Palaeocene 1 
Cretaceous 71 
MESOZOIC Jurassic 54 
Triassic Names based on 35 
] geographical 
Permian location and 55 
vary widel 
Pennsylvanian y y 45 
Carboniferous 
Mississippian 20 
PALAEOZOIC 
Devonian 50 
Silurian 35 
Ordovician 70 
Cambrian 70 
Proterozoic 
or 
Algonkian 
PRECAMBRIAN Not divided into periods 4030 
Archaeozoic 
or 
Archaean 
 
  14 
A geologist’s hammer has been adopted as the “trademark” 
of the International Geological Correlation Programme 
(IGCP), a major scientific venture, jointly undertaken by 
Unesco and the International Unlon of Geological Sciences 
(JUGS), devoted to the study of the earth’s crust and its 
mineral and energy resources. The Programme Involves 
some 4,000 geologists In more than 110 countries, working on 
about fifty research projects. It combines the advantages of 
non-governmental participation and guidance through its scl- 
entific partner, the IUGS, with the benefits of governmental 
support through Unesco. Projects undertaken by the IGCP 
range from study of geochronology to prospecting for eco- 
nomic mineral deposits and processing of geological data.

## [Page 15](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=15) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
Re
fo
t 
©
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Ph
ot
o 
Si
br
av
a,
 
Un
es
co
 


### 69532: A Trilogy of rocks

A trilogy 
of rocks 
Igneous rocks 
Igneous rocks form from molten material p 
(magma) that rises from the Earth’s ‘in- 
terior. Magma that solidifies before 
reaching the surface forms intrusive rocks 
like dolerite, gabbro and granite. Magma 
that solidifies after reaching the surface 
forms volcanic rocks like basalt (the most 
common), obsidian and pumice. As it 
cools and crystallizes, the magma’s com- 
position changes, producing hundreds of 
different types of igneous rock from re- 
latively few types of mineral. Rapid cool- 
ing may trap minerals formed at higher 
temperatures. 
 
& 
T
~
"
F
v
 
Ay TT 
ri ay HE “ py 
FIRS oly — ~ be ie 
 
Metamorphic rocks 
4 Metamorphic rocks are rocks that have 
been transformed (metamorphosed) and 
crystallized by heat and pressure. In this 
process, the minerals of the original rock 
either reform into larger crystals or react 
together to form new minerals. The rocks 
produced have a layered texture called 
foliation, familiar to us in slate. Meta- 
morphism occurs in two types of 
situation: (i) around plumes of molten rock 
that have risenin cool rock (“contact meta- 
morphism”); and (ii) in the interiors of fold- 
mountains where the heat flow is high, and 
beneath ocean trenches where there are 
high pressures (“regional metamor- 
phism”). Metamorphic rocks include slate, 
produced from clays at low temperatures 
and pressures; schist and gneiss, formed 
at higher temperatures and pressures; 
and marble, formed from sandstone. 
Sedimentary rocks 
«4 Sedimentary rocks have a layered struc- 
ture. They contain all the world’s oil and 
coal and all its fossils. The first step in their 
formation is the weathering of existing 
rock. The products are carried away as 
fragments or in solution and deposited 
elsewhere as layers of sediment. These 
layers, subjected to pressure or cemented 
together by other minerals, harden into 
sedimentary rock. There are three main 
types: (i) Fragmental. Made of pebbles 
(breccia, conglomerates), sand (grits, 
sandstones, siltstones), or mud (clays, 
mudstones, shales). (ii) Organic. Consist- 
ing mainly of the fossil remains of plants 
and animals (coal, fossil-bearing lime- 
stones). (iii) Chemically formed by pre- 
cipitation from salt water or hot springs 
(rock salt, gypsum, ironstone, some lime- 
stones and siliceous cherts). 
15 
Ph
ot
o 
De
l 
Bo
ca
 
©
 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 16](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=16) 0

### IGNORE

    
    
    
  
4 le 
- r 
aa - i» 
- - p - PE al 
i “ ' 
v May 
) . fey a oy ~ 
—  — : : R i ~ - : a hg a) or 4 re . 
: - ~ ra - _ " : \ a » hi ; oe a : : - Rn. wh yp dg JX ER < ~ ey Bl 4 w ae us ’ we : Rn 3 —— - wi . ~ y 
3d pho -_y ye PRAY) Ye » ates _ _——— Ax aE Rardin =, Te Le THERE 
hor v v Lal dana a ha Rae . . a - Be » . -5 
ry a Ee La PE 
AA : vt al a - oT Cy May =o " - a ne “ , 
Es rl SRE erm TN Le Nags > 1 A. 
RSS Nat¥ _ . . 5 
. ; A» "i a 
we a, n y 
   


### 69533: Drilling into the unknown

Drilling 
into the unknown 
    
16 
, \ Nass . 
Vo » : A > ah ' 
; / ell : 
 
long history of its evolution. By re- 
constructing this history scientists 
hope to find the key to such processes as the 
formation of the Earth’s crust, volcanism, 
and the upheavals, subsidences and foldings 
which led to the development, on the 
Earth’s surface and in its sub-stratum, of 
conditions which favoured the formation, 
accumulation and preservation of useful 
minerals. 
In the Soviet Union, study of the complex 
physical and physico-chemical processes 
which take place within the Earth’s hard 
crust and the upper layers of the mantle is 
undertaken within the framework of a vast, 
integrated programme for the exploration 
of the “basement” of the country using 
T HE structure of the Earth reflects the 
by Yevgeni Kozlovski 
y ET 
‘ev | » n women - 
~ 
- 
y ree 
- of “ 
-— 
rw * 
: ys , » 
- 0 wi hp - =. % ii a I er 08 
= R ~~ 
_ rs 
N . - LX" a 
geological, geophysical and geochemical 
methods as well as deep and very deep 
drilling. 
The particularity of this programme is 
that it focuses on the study of the Earth’s 
crust within the limits of the continental 
zone where most of the planet’s useful 
minerals are concentrated. Geophysical ex- 
plorations are being conducted along the 
system of profiles traversing the entire terri- 
tory of the USSR, and deep and very deep 
drilling is being undertaken at their points 
of intersection. 
In this way it has been possible to explore 
the Mohorovicic Discontinuity (the bound- 
ary between the Earth’s crust and the man- 
tle) and to obtain new data on the structure 
and physical properties of the upper man-

## [Page 17](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=17) 0

### 69533: Drilling into the unknown

Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
tle, to identify zones where important frac- 
tures occur in the Earth’s crust and deter- 
mine their extent, and to pinpoint the 
boundaries and structure in depth of major 
tectonic elements which may be the site of 
concentrations of mineral ores, oil or gas. 
At the heart of the programme is the 
exploration of the deep structure of the 
continental crust, on whose layers is im- 
printed, as on the pages of a book, the 
whole story of its formation. The first drill- 
ing was made in the Kola Peninsula, on the 
fringe of the Baltic Shield, which is com- 
posed of ancient crystalline rock dating 
back to Precambrian time, The Kola drill- 
ing has thrown some new light on the evolu- 
tion and structure of the early continental 
crust of the Earth as a whole, since similar 
formations are widely distributed in other 
parts of the globe—in India, North Amer- 
ica, South Africa, Western Australia, 
Antarctica and Greenland. Very deep drill- 
ing explorations being carried out in the 
USA, Canada and the Federal Republic of 
Germany are also contributing to our know- 
ledge of the deep horizons of the Earth in 
areas potentially rich in mineral raw 
materials. 
The direct observations made possible by 
these drillings have provided the founda- 
tions of the first factually-based model of 
the continental crust and have led to a 
The Kola Peninsula in the far north of 
the USSR is the site of the first very 
deep drilling made as part of an ambi- 
tious programme aimed at exploring the 
deep structure of the continental crust 
and seeking areas potentially rich in 
mineral, oil or gas deposits. Left, the 
drilling rig and the accompanying build- 
ings and workshops which house the 
industrial and technical services. The 
drilling rig is clad with corrugated iron 
sheeting to maintain a constant positive 
temperature in this bleak Arctic environ- 
ment. 
Right, the new sophisticated and fully 
automated URALMACH 15000 drilling 
plant, which incorporates the very latest 
technology, is capable of drilling down 
to a depth of 15 kilometres. The derrick 
is 86 metres high and has a hoisting 
capacity of 400 tons. 
revision of earlier notions about the evolu- 
tion and structure of the Earth’s depths. 
The Kola drillings have resulted in a 
series of unexpected and very interesting 
discoveries. 
One of our objectives was to bore 
through the so-called granitic layer (the 
upper part of the consolidated crust) to 
reach a basaltic layer whose existence had 
been deduced from geophysical data. Geo- 
physicists had observed sharp variations in 
the speed of seismic waves at great depths, 
and, since these waves travel faster through 
   
      
     & 
X Be EA 
granite than through basalt, these varia- 
tions were thought to indicate a transition in 
the Earth’s crust from a granitic to a basaltic 
layer. But this was no more than conjecture 
because, unlike the granitic layer, identified 
with the Archaean granitoid gneiss which is 
widely distributed over the surface of the 
continents, the basaltic layer does not 
emerge on the surface. 
The Kola drilling was the first ever to 
bore through the line where the seismic 
waves undergo asharp change of speed. But 
contrary to expectations, no basaltic layer pr 
  
  
             
or 
W 
  

## [Page 18](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=18) 0

### 69533: Drilling into the unknown

Pp was discovered. It became apparent that the 
variations in the speed of diffusion of the 
seismic waves was related, not to a transi- 
tion from a granitic to a basaltic layer, but to 
the decompaction of the rock which occurs 
at great depths. 
This phenomenon is due to the fact that, 
under the effect of the high pressure and 
temperatures existing at great depths, water 
is released from the crystalline network of 
minerals and, because of the enclosed 
space, exerts pressure on the rock, leading 
to fissuring and consequently decompac- 
tion. It turned out that the decompacted 
‘zone had subsisted over a long period. 
The discovery of the phenomenon of 
“hydrogenous decompaction” not only 
makes it possible to explain the geological 
character of certain boundary zones which 
reflect seismic waves at great depths, the 
nature of hydrothermal fluids, and the 
mechanism of tectonic deformations, it also 
radically alters our ideas about the hydro- 
logical cycle in continental conditions and 
of the structure of the underground hydro- 
sphere. 
The drilling provided extremely interest- 
ing information not only for geologists but 
also for biologists. It was discovered that 
.the deep horizons which had been thought 
to be “dead” since the beginning of time 
had actively participated at some stage in 
the biological processes which took place in 
the depths of the Earth. 
Isotopic carbon analysis revealed two 
sources of carbonic gas—the first connected 
with the mantle and found mainly in 
Archaean rocks, the second of biogenic 
origin and found predominantly in Protero- 
zoic rock, in which petrified remains of 
micro-organisms (micro-fossils) estimated 
to be thousands of millions of years old, 
were also found. 
This was not an isolated discovery. 
Seventeen species of micro-organisms were 
found, bearing witness to an extensive de- 
velopment of biogenic processes on our 
planet in earliest times. Thus biological life 
started on Earth much earlier than had 
previously been estimated. 
Data supplied by direct measurement of 
temperatures at great depths have obliged 
us to revise our concepts regarding present 
and geohistorical variations of temperature 
in the bowels of the Earth. It was previously 
thought that in regions of ‘slight tectonic 
activity temperature rise in relation to 
depth increase was insignificant. However, 
although it was expected during the Kola 
drilling that the temperature at a depth of 
ten kilometres would be about 100 degrees 
Centigrade, it turned out in fact to be 
almost double this estimate, at 180 degrees 
Centigrade. It was established that during 
the Proterozoic era the geothermic gradient 
(the temperature increase per 100 metres of 
depth) was five times higher than itis today. 
Study of the thermic regime in the bowels 
of the Earth also provided an answer to a 
question that has long preoccupied scien- 
“tists—what is the contribution of the mantle 
and of radioactive decay of elements in 
rocks to the overall heat flow in the interior 
of the Earth? It was established that the 
mantle was the chief source of ascending 
heat. 
18 
Finally, the existence of underground wa- 
ter inside the old crystalline massifs at prac- 
tically all the levels reached was proved for 
the first time. Inflows of highly mineralized 
water saturated with bromine, iodine and 
heavy metals were discovered, as well as 
gases circulating through the crystalline 
rocks in the zones of tectonic deformation. 
At depths of 6.5 to 9.5 kilometres, zones of 
low temperature hydrothermal mineraliza- 
tion (copper, lead, zinc, nickel, silver), pre- 
viously considered to be primarily near- 
surface formations, were discovered. 
The large number of mineral associations 
discovered in the rock strata traversed dur- 
ing the drilling confirms the possibility that 
mineral deposits may be present in indus- 
trially viable accumulations, 
We were also led to revise our ideas 
about the physical state and properties of 
rocks at great depths. It emerged that rock 
fissures do not disappear as depth increases. 
This journey towards the centre of the 
Earth—the first to such a great depth (15 
kilometres)—was made possible by the em- 
ployment of radically new types of drilling 
technology and equipment. This vast 
undertaking necessitated the creation of a 
unique type of drilling installation—the 
URALMACH 15000. 
Drilling was effected by the open-shaft 
(untubed) method. This considerably im- 
proved the quality and accuracy of geo- 
physical measurements. The reconnaiss- 
ance operations were conducted, not with 
steel tubes, but with extra-strong heat-resis- 
tant tubes made from specially-developed 
light alloys capable of withstanding temper- 
atures of 230 to 250 degrees Centigrade. 
The specially-designed, highly efficient 
rock-blasting and turbo-drills were pow- 
ered by the energy of the drilling liquid 
pumped into the well. A completely new 
type of apparatus was built to draw rock 
samples from great depths intact and pre- 
served in their original orientation. 
The programme for the study of the sub- 
terranean structure in depth provides for 
exploration throughout the territory of the 
Soviet Union. Drillings at very great depth 
are at present being conducted in the Trans- 
caucasus, the Urals, the Krivoi-Rog Basin 
and the Muruntauski region of Central 
Asia. A drilling is being set up in the Tiu- 
men district of Western Siberia. 
The data provided by them will make it 
. possible, firstly, to assess the oil, gas and 
ore-bearing potential of deep horizons and, 
secondly, to elucidate the essential ques- 
tions relating to the tectonic evolution of 
the Earth in the light of the continental drift 
hypothesis. The programme provides for 
special experimental and theoretical studies 
concerning the elaboration of a general 
theory of the evolution and structure of the 
Earth’s tectonosphere. The journey into 
the Earth’s past, undertaken by scientists to 
decipher its evolution, will continue. [| 
YEVGENI KOZLOVSKI, of the Soviet Union, is 
head of the interdepartmental council of the 
USSR State Committee of Science and Technol- 
ogy for the study of the deep layers of the Earth 
and for very deep drilling. Holder of the Lenin 
Prize, he is the chief editor of a monograph on 
deep drilling in the Kola Peninsula, and of the 
world’s first Encyclopaedia of Mining. 
COLOUR PAGES 
Opposite page 
Bale 
Top photo: (a) This pebble of volcanic ash, 
found near Isua in west Greenland, has 
been shown to have an age of 3,824 million 
{plus or minus 12 million) years and is the 
oldest known rock in the world. Other 
rocks close to this age in the same area are 
the Amitsoq Gneiss (b) and a banded iron 
formation (c), whilst the fourth rock (d) is 
an ancient Antarctic rock. 
Bottom left: A stony meteorite from Bar- 
well, England. Meteorites have been dated 
back to about 4,600 million years. 
Bottom right: A rock from the Moon. The 
oldest rocks brought back from the Moon 
have been dated at about 4,600 million 
years. 
Photos © British Museum (Natural History) Geological Museum, 
London 
Page 20 
Above: One of the geological and scenic 
wonders of the Earth, the Grand Canyon is 
an immense gorge (in places over 1.5 
kilometres deep) cut by the Colorado River 
into the high plateaux of northwest Arizo- 
na, USA. Its rocks, including granite and 
schist some 4,000 million years old, con- 
stitute a unique record of geological 
- events. Over 300 kilometres long, the 
Canyon is at some points more than 20 
kilometres wide. 
Photo Alan Keler © Sygma, Paris 
Below: Irazu, a volcano in the Cordillera 
Central, Costa Rica, erupts in an inferno of 
flame and lava. 
Photo Ernst Haas © Magnum, Paris 
Page 21 
Above: Gases, ash and incandescent, 
semi-solid lumps of lava are hurled up- 
wards during a volcanic eruption. 
Photo Ernst Haas © Magnum, Paris 
Below: The Hawaiian volcano Mauna Loa 
during an eruption in 1984. Rising to 4,169 
melres above sea level, Mauna Loa (mean- 
ing “long mountain”) has a dome 120 
kilometres long and 102 kilometres wide. It 
has averaged one eruption every three and 
a half years since 1832. 
Photo Krafft © Explorer, Paris

## [Page 19](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=19) 0

### IGNORE

 
 
 
 
 

## [Page 20](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=20) 0

### IGNORE

  
 

## [Page 21](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=21) 0

### IGNORE

 

## [Page 22](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=22) 0

### IGNORE

Eien Ea = he EE i a . i — i Ra | oT —— — a p— pr———ry pl j— 3 a pe CCT ov 
i [| [TT] l a 
 

## [Page 23](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=23) 0

### IGNORE

Colour page left 
Above: Photo taken in 1965 shows the 
boiling crater of Surtsey, a volcanic island 
formed off southern Iceland after a sub- 
marine eruption on 14 November 1963. 
(See picture story page 29.) 
Photo Ernst Haas © Magnum, Paris 
Below: Air view of the church of the village 
of San Juan and another edifice partially 
buried in lava flows from the eruption of 
Paricutin, in West Central Mexico. One of 
the Earth's youngest volcanoes, Paricutin 
began to erupt on 20 February 1943. When 
the eruption ended in 1952, the peak was 
2,800 metres high. 
Photo Kratft © Explorer, Paris 


### 69534: The Restless Earth: the uncertain art of earthquake prediction

The restless 
Earth 
The uncertain art 
of earthquake prediction 
  
by E.M. Fournier d’Albe 
understand a natural phenomenon un- 
less one can accurately predict its 
occurrence. If this is true, then the ability to 
predict earthquakes must be one of the 
principal goals of the science of seismology. 
The scientist who ventures into this field, 
however, incurs an unusual degree of per- 
sonal and social responsibility. Prediction 
of a potentially destructive earthquake may 
have serious disruptive effects on the social 
and economic life of a community, whether 
or not it eventually proves to be correct. 
Many lives were saved, for example, by the 
correct prediction of the Haicheng earth- 
quake in China in 1975, but against this 
must be set many cases of erroneous predic- 
tions which have not only damaged the 
reputations of the scientists concerned but 
have also had considerable economic and 
even political consequences. 
In the present state of knowledge it is not 
possible to determine, by observation and 
calculation, precisely where and when an 
earthquake will take place. This is because, 
in order to make a prediction with the re- 
quired pinpoint accuracy, detailed informa- 
tion is needed on the stress fields and the 
mechanical properties of the Earth’s crust 
over wide arcas and down to depths of 
several tens of kilometres. Even ifit were to 
I. is often said that one cannot claim to 
become technically possible to obtain such 
information, the cost of doing so would 
probably remain prohibitive, and might in- 
deed be greater than that of repairing the 
damage caused by the earthquake itself. 
The few successful predictions that have 
been made were based on the observation 
of precursory phenomena of various kinds 
generated by the same deep-seated process 
which leads to earthquakes yet not causally 
related to the earthquakes themselves. 
Such phenomena might include sudden 
changes in the level of minor seismic ac- 
tivity, slight deformations of the Earth's 
surface, changes in magnetic or electrical 
fields, unusual rise or fall of water levels in 
wells, changes in the gravity field or abnor- 
mal behaviour of animals. However none of 
these precursory . phenomena has yet 
proved to be a reliable indicator of a forth- 
coming earthquake. The methods so suc- pp 
Thousands of lives were saved when 
Chinese experts successfully predicted 
the Haicheng earthquake of 1975 (see 
map). Following a severe earthquake at 
Xingtai, in 1966, scientists noted that the 
epicentres of subsequent tremors and 
shocks, including that of the earthquake in 
the Bo Hai gulf in 1969, seemed to be 
moving in a north-easterly direction to- 
wards the heavily populated Liaoning Pro- 
vince. By June 1974, scientists were pre- 
dicting that there would be a major earth- 
quake to the north of Bo Hai within one or 
two years. On 1 February 1975, a series of 
minor tremors was correctly identified as 
the foreshock heralding a major shock in 
the area of the city of Haicheng, and on the 
following day more than a million people 
were evacuated to temporary outdoor 
shelter. Early in the evening of 4 February 
the main shock (magnitude 7.3) occurred. 
Although 90 per cent of the houses in the 
area were damaged or destroyed, there 
was very little loss of life. 
  
Ma
p 
©
 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 24](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=24) 0

### 69534: The Restless Earth: the uncertain art of earthquake prediction

Pp cessfully employed at Haicheng failed to 
predict the terrible Tangshan earthquake in 
the following year. 
New data are constantly being accumu- 
lated and there is hope that the accuracy of 
predictions will gradually improve, 
although they will of necessity remain prob- 
abilistic in nature. They will not state, for 
instance, that “an earthquake of magnitude 
X will take place in area Y on a certain 
date”; rather they will take the form of a 
statement on the probability of an earth- 
quake of a certain magnitude occurring in a 
given area during a specified period of time. 
So much for the scientific side of the 
problem. The next question is: What will be 
the effects of the predicted earthquake, if it 
actually occurs? How many buildings will 
be damaged or destroyed, and how many 
people will be killed, injured or rendered 
homeless? Will telephone networks con- 
tinue to function? Will streets be blocked by 
debris? 
In preparing to face an impending earth- 
quake emergency, civil defence services 
need answers to these questions. They need 
information on the expected strength of the 
seismic ground motion and on the vulner- 
ability of buildings and urban lifelines to 
this motion. They will need to prepare 
“scenarios” of the probable effects of the 
predicted earthquake. 
For this to be done, seismologists and 
geologists have first to estimate what will be 
the intensity of the ground motion caused 
by the expected earthquake and how this 
intensity will vary from one part to another 
of the area round the earthquake focus. 
This they do on the basis of previous experi- 
ence and of knowledge of the local charac- 
teristics of the soil and sub-soil. 
Then aninventory of buildings in the area 
has to be compiled and an assessment made 
of how each building is likely to react to the 
expected ground motion, according to its 
structural type and to the materials of which 
it is built. This is where the greatest difficul- 
ty lies, since it is almost impossible to pre- 
dict exactly how any individual building will 
‘behave in an earthquake. The best one can 
dois to base the assessment on information 
as to how similar buildings have behaved in 
recent earthquakes elsewhere. Hence the 
importance of carrying out detailed studies 
of the damage caused each time an earth- 
quake occurs. Already some extremely 
valuable information has come from the 
studies made in Romania and Yugoslavia of 
the damage caused in those countries by the 
earthquakes of 1977 and 1979. 
Clearly, all this work takes time and 
should preferably not be left until an earth- 
quake is impending. For this reason civil 
defence services in many earthquake-prone 
countries are already collecting such in- 
formation and preparing scenarios, so as to 
The world’s first seismometer 
  
  
be ready to deal more effectively with poss- 
ible earthquake disasters, whether or not 
they are predicted in advance. 
Earthquake scenarios are invaluable not 
only for planning the mobilization of rescue 
teams, medical and fire-fighting services, 
and the stockpiling of emergency supplies 
of food and shelter against a possible earth- 
quake, but also for planning the various 
temporary measures of protection that can 
be taken in response to a prediction. For 
instance, inflammable or toxic substances 
can be moved into safe storage, vulnerable 
systems in chemical plants can be shut down 
for a time, water levels in reservoirs can be 
lowered and schools and theatres can be 
temporarily closed. In the final stage of an 
alert, people can be evacuated from their 
homes or places of work in vulnerable 
buildings. 
Such measures are costly and disruptive 
of individual and social life. They may be 
resisted and cannot be prolonged for more 
than a few days, and they will probably be 
abandoned after one or more false alarms. 
They are therefore likely to be applied in 
response to an earthquake prediction only 
if the responsible authorities are convinced 
that the prediction satisfies certain criteria 
-of accuracy and reliability. 
As we have seen, scientific predictions 
are likely to be expressed in terms of prob- 
ability. Public authorities, on the other 
  
  
 
  
  
  
The first known instrument capable of 
sensing earth motion was invented in AD 
132 by the Chinese philosopher Chang 
Heng. It consisted of a large bronze vessel, 
some two metres In diameter, around 
which were spaced eight dragon heads 
with pivoting Jaws In which were held eight 
balls. Inside the vessel was a pendulum 
with elght arms each of which was con- 
nected to one of the dragon heads. When 
an earthquake shock caused the pendu- 
lum to vibrate, the arm connected to the 
  
   
dragon head facing the direction of the 
shock caused its jaws to open allowing the 
ball they held to fall into the open mouth of 
one of the eight toads positioned around 
the base of the vessel, The instrument was 
sensitive enough to detect an earthquake 
whose epicentre was over 600 kilometres 
away. It was not until 1856 that a seismo- 
graph capable of recording the passage of 
seismic waves and giving their amplitude, 
time of onset and direction was installed at 
the observatory at Vesuvius. Opposite 
page, a modern reconstruction of Chang 
Heng’s apparatus and, above left, its mode 
of operation. Since the founding, in the 
early 1960s, of the Worldwide Standar- 
dized Seismograph Network (WWSSN), 
seismic observatories with standard 
equipment and synchronized time-keep- 
ing have been established virtually 
throughout the world. Map above shows 
distribution of the WWSSN and associated 
observatories. 
24

## [Page 25](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=25) 0

### 69534: The Restless Earth: the uncertain art of earthquake prediction

hand, have to make decisions on a “yes or 
no” basis. It is therefore of crucial import- 
ance to develop an effective dialogue be- 
tween scientists and public authorities. The 
latter need to acquire, through discussions 
with the scientists, insight into the reason- 
ing that leads to the formulation of predic- 
tions in a particular form. For their part, 
scientists need to familiarize themselves 
with the problems faced by public author- 
ities, so that they will understand the 
responses of the latter to predictions and 
the reasons behind those responses. 
It is essential that any earthquake predic- 
tion that is communicated to the public 
should be accompanied by a verifiable esti- 
mate of the probability of occurrence of the 
predicted event within the specified limits 
of time and space, If it is to be useful in 
practice, the prediction must also meet the 
following criteria: 
(a) its lead time (the interval between the 
issue of the prediction and the expected 
occurrence of the event) should be longer 
than the time required for putting into 
effect the appropriate protective measures 
and for mobilizing the resources needed to 
deal with the emergency; 
(b) its time window (the duration of the 
period during which the event is predicted 
to occur) should be shorter than the max- 
imum acceptable duration of protective 
measures such as the evacuation of build- 
ings, the temporary closure of plants and 
the mobilization of rescue services. 
The above criteria are, of course, very 
difficult to satisfy given the present state of 
scientific knowledge, but experience has 
shown that predictions that fail to meet 
them can cause severe social and economic 
disturbance without being of any great use 
to the community concerned. Earthquake 
prediction is not only a scientific problem 
but one which concerns the community as a 
whole. 
The development of techniques of earth- 
quake-resistant design and construction 
offers the hope that in the course of time 
death and destruction in earthquakes will 
become a thing of the past. The phenomena 
accompanying some volcanic eruptions, 
however, are of such violence that there are 
no means of protection against them. The 
only hope of survival lies in flight from the 
threatened area. Accurate prediction of 
eruptions is therefore of vital importance 
for the safety of people living on or near 
active volcanoes. 
Fortunately, the problem of predicting 
eruptions is slightly less difficult than that of 
predicting earthquakes. This is because the 
possible sites of volcanic eruptions are 
usually known. It is rare for an eruption to 
occur anywhere but from an existing volca- 
nic structure, although eruptions do some- 
times occur at volcanoes that have been 
BT Er —— 
  
dormant for so long that they are thought to 
be extinct. By careful geological study it is 
possible to identify and map the areas 
around a volcano that have been affected in 
the past by one or more of the destructive 
phenomena that accompany eruptions— 
glowing avalanches, mudflows, lava flows, 
heavy ash falls, and so on. 
A census can be made of the people who 
live or work in these hazardous areas, 
together with an inventory of movable 
property and livestock. Evacuation routes 
to safe refuge zones can be identified and 
plans made for rapid evacuation in the 
event of an eruption. Arrangements can be 
planned for the emergency shelter and 
housing of evacuees in the refuge zones. If 
worked out in detail beforehand, such plans 
can be instrumental in saving many lives 
when an eruption occurs. 
As in the case of earthquakes, predic- 
tions based on the observation of precur- 
sory phenomena are necessarily expressed 
in terms of probabilities of eruption. There 
will always remain, therefore, the problem 
of making “yes or no” decisions in situations 
of uncertainty. The risk of a possible catas- 
trophe has to be weighed against the cer- 
tainty of the inconvenience, hardship and 
cost of removing people from their homes, 
perhaps for periods as long as weeks or 
months. 
Here again itis of crucial importance that pp 
  
Ph
ot
os
 
©
 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 26](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=26) 0

### 69534: The Restless Earth: the uncertain art of earthquake prediction

p> an effective dialogue be developed between 
scientists, civil authorities, the news media 
and the public before any emergency arises. 
The threat of an imminent earthquake or 
volcanic eruption is a great revealer of the 
strengths and weaknesses of any com- 
munity. 
“Success stories” in dealing with such 
threats are still few, but they do demon- 
strate that, if scientific predictions are pre- 
cise and reliable, if the civil authorities are 
prepared and have the means to take 
appropriate protective action, and if the 
public is kept fully informed of the situation 
and of the action being taken to meet it, the 
losses inflicted by these violent manifesta- 
tions of nature can be reduced and may in 
time become a thing of the past. nu 
E.M. FOURNIER D’ALBE, of the United King- 
dom, is a specialist on earthquake risk man- 
agement. Until 1979 he was head of Unesco's 
Division of Earth Sciences and was responsible 
for the initiation and development of the Organi- 
Zation’s programme related to natural disasters 
and their prevention. 
    Fault stuck after 
last movement 
Stress builds up, 
rocks bend 
like a bow 
Mechanism of earthquakes 
  
Earthquake! Rocks 
spring back 
and vibrate 
When the Earth shakes 
have been triggered by human acti- 
vities, such as underground nuc- 
lear testing and the construction of reser- 
voirs and dams, the principal cause of all 
major earthquakes and most minorones is 
the fracturing of rocks following the gra- 
dual accumuiation of stress during geolo- 
gical processes. 
The Earth's surface Is made up of a 
series of plates (see page 10) and the 
severest earthquakes tend to occur at the 
plate margins, where plates slide past 
each other as, for example, along the San 
Andreas “fault” region of California. Dia- 
gram above offers a simplified liiustration 
of the mechanism of an earthquake. Rock 
has a certain elasticity and where adjacent 
areas of rock are subjected to the push/ 
puli forces of piate movement stress gra- 
dually accumulates. When the strain be- 
A eves some minor earthquakes 
i Not felt by people. 
Il Felt by people at rest on upper floors of buildings. 
comes too great, the rock ruptures and 
tension is released as the rocks on either 
side of the fauit spring back violentiy. The 
point at which the rupture originates is 
calied the focus and the point on the 
Earth’s surface directly above the focus is 
called the epicentre. 
The energy released is emitted in waves 
which cause the ground to osciilate. It is 
these seismic waves that are picked up 
and recorded by seismographs, instru- 
ments which enable scientists to pinpoint 
the epicentre of an earthquake and to mea- 
sure Its magnitude. 
Two scales are commonly used to mea- 
sure the size of an earthquake. The magni- 
tude of an earthquake—the total amount of 
energy released or dissipated—is ex- 
pressed in terms of the Richter Scale and 
is based on seismograph recordings of 
the amplitude of seismic waves. To cover 
Modified Mercalli intensity Scaie 
the huge size range of earthquakes, the 
Richter scale of magnitude is logarithmic 
rather than arithmetic, that is to say, the 
scale is so arranged that each increase in 
magnitude of one unit represents a thirty- 
foid increase in earthquake size. Thus an 
earthquake of magnitude 8 on the Richter 
scale is 810,000 times as iarge as one of 
magnitude 4. 
The intensity of an earthquake classifies 
the degree of shaking and is based on 
inspection of damage and on information 
supplied by people involved in the earth- 
quake. The scale most commonly used is 
cailed the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale 
(see beiow). Since this scale is based pure- 
ly on observation of earthquake effects, 
the points on the scale are stated in Roman 
numerals, from i to Xii, rather than in ordin- 
ary numbers, which might be interpreted 
as indicating some kind of measurement. 
VIII Difficult to steer vehicles; fall of stucco and some masonry walls; fall of 
chimney stacks, towers, monuments; branches broken from trees; 
Ili Felt indoors; vibrations like a light truck passing outside. Hanging 
objects swing. 
IV Vibration like passing of heavy truck; windows, dishes and doors rattle. 
V Felt outdoors; sleepers wakened and liquids spilt. 
“VI Felt by all; many frightened and run outdoors; plaster and masonry 
cracked; furniture moved or overturned; windows, glassware and 
dishes broken. 
VII Difficult to stand up; noticed by drivers of moving vehicles; plaster, 
loose bricks, tiles, etc. fall; large bells ring; waves on ponds. 
26 
cracks to be seen in wet ground. 
IX General panic; frame structures cracked and underground pipes 
broken; conspicuous cracks in ground; sand craters. 
X Most masonry and frame structures and foundations destroyed; se- 
rious damage to dams and embankments; some bridges destroyed; 
large landslides. 
Xl Railway lines badly bent; underground pipes completely out of service. 
Xil Damage nearly total; lines of sight and level distorted; objects thrown 
up into the air. 
Dr
aw
in
g 
©
 
Th
e 
Su
nd
ay
 
T
i
m
e
s
 
- 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 27](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=27) 0

### IGNORE

OLCANISM plays a fundamental 
\ / role in the story of the Earth. The 
crust we live on, the water in 
oceans, rivers and lakes and most of the 
atmosphere we breathe are derived ulti- 
mately from volcanic eruptions. Without 
volcanism there would be no creation of 
new oceanic crust through sea-floor 
spreading, no subduction (the dragging 
down of older crust into the mantle where 
it is melted and recycled), no orogenesis 
(mountain-building) and therefore no 
erosion and no sedimentation. 
Without volcanism the Earth would 
lack the colossal, continual flow of sul- 
phides, oxides, halogens, hydroxides of 
all existing metals, emitted in the form of 
gases at high temperature by fumaroles 
(volcanic vents) from the thousands of 
active craters, whether dormant or in 
eruption, whether submarine or on land, 
scattered the length of the 100,000 
kilometres of the belts that mark the fron- 
tiers between the Earth’s tectonic plates 
(see page 10) and the fractures occurring 
within those plates. 
Without the contribution of submarine 
fumaroles there would be no mineral sul- 
phide deposits; without fumaroles the 
marine environment, whose chemical 
make-up made possible the emergence of 
life and conditioned its evolution, would 
not have existed; without fumaroles the 
Earth would have lacked the elements to 
form the atmosphere whose composition 
made it possible for life forms emerging 
from the ocean to colonize the land and 
then to evolve to give rise to human 
beings. 
Like everyone else at that time, 1 was 
unaware of all this when, in 1948, chance 
brought me face to face for the first time 
with the strange phenomenon of a volca- 
nic eruption. Like all my fellow geologists 
of that generation, especially my Euro- 
pean colleagues, I had received from my 
teachers, among whom were some of in- 
ternational renown, a course of instruc- 
tion in which volcanism was barely men- 
tioned, since, in their view, it represented 
no more than “a skin disease of the 
planet”. 
At all events, I knew practically no- 
thing at all about volcanism when, one 
day in March 1948, to the north of Lake 
Kivu in the Belgian Congo (now Zaire), 


### 69535: Volcanoes

Volcanoes 
the first eruption I was privileged to see 
not only opened the eyes of the naive 
geologist I then was to the magnificence 
of the spectacle but also to a phenomenon 
which, because of my lack of knowledge, 
raised more questions than it provided 
answers. 
In the forty or so years that have passed 
since then, volcanology, moribund at the 
close of the Second World War (barely 
surviving in the United States and in New 
Zealand, but extinct everywhere else), 
gradually revived and finally, in parallel 
with oceanography, came into full blos- 
som. The new knowledge these two disci- 
plines enabled us to garner soon revealed 
the fundamental role played by volcan- 
ism both in the phenomenon of sea-floor 
spreading and the genesis of life and its 
evolution over the past 3,000 million 
years. 
More than a third of a century spent in 
observing eruptions from as close as 
possible and in measuring everything 
there was to measure—among other 
things energy flows (mainly thermal) and 
the flow of matter (mainly in the form of 
gases)—has enabled me to establish that, 
rather than the liquid or lava phase, as 
most people seem implicitly or explicitly 
to imagine, it is the gaseous phase that 
plays the active role in volcanism. Lava is 
totally passive and, without its eruptive 
gases, volcanism would simply not exist. 
Furthermore, eruptions always involve 
the emission of gas, but not always of 
lava. 
These considerations led me to the 
conviction that, in order to understand 
the mechanism of eruptions, it was essen- 
tial to know the chemical composition 
and thermodynamic evolution of their 
gaseous phase, It would seem that the 
chemical composition of these gases 
varies from one kind of eruption to 
another and from one type of magma to 
another, but in our present state of know- 
ledge it has not been possible to establish 
a correlation between the chemical varia- 
tions detected and the variations in activ- 
ity observed. 
It must be admitted that, up to now, 
only an insignificant amount of data has 
been acquired on the physico-chemical 
composition of eruptive gases. By erup- 
tive gases I mean those that have not been 
by Haroun Tazieff 
subject to much cooling, oxidation by the 
air or hydration by groundwater, all of 
which processes transform the gases to a 
lesser or, more often, a greater extent. 
Obviously, to measure the chemical 
and physical properties of the eruptive 
gases before they degrade into fumarole 
gases, it is necessary to get close to the 
vents from which they are being emitted. 
This usually demands some physical 
effort and, at times, a certain amount of 
courage. What too many volcanologists 
lack is not courage but a taste for muscu- 
lar effort. Between the ages of twenty and 
thirty, some seem to possess it, but I have 
noticed that, once they have attained a 
certain academic standing, they usually 
appear to lose it. 
This would not be too serious were it 
not for the fact that, in addition to the raw 
data which will continue to be provided 
by the young and still enthusiastic volca- 
nologists, a sine qua non of progress in 
this field is experience of the actual event 
of eruption, the complexity of which is 
matched by its variability. This can only 
be acquired by direct observation of the 
phenomenon of eruption in all its succes- 
sive forms. 
The competence of the volcanologist in 
this respect, like that of a physician, de- 
pends both on proper knowledge of im- 
portant publications and on experience 
gained through the examination of a max- 
imum number of subjects—patients for 
the doctor, volcanoes in eruption for the 
volcanologist. 
My first ten years of volcanological 
research in the field were devoted exclu- 
sively to seeking an explanation of the 
various aspects of the phenomenon of 
eruption. I soon became convinced that 
the maturation of dormant magma re- 
sulted from the release of the gases 
formerly dissolved within it. The chemic- 
al properties, size and distribution of gas 
bubbles within the viscous mass, their 
growth in size either by two or more 
bubbles joining up or by expansion dur- 
ing their ascension through the magma 
and of the magma itself, all these factors 
play their part in the maturation of the 
magma before the eruption and in its 
evolution during the eruption itself. 
Whether they can be measured or 
merely observed, when correctly inter- p> 
27

## [Page 28](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=28) 0

### 69535: Volcanoes

p preted the parameters of an eruption en- 
able us more or less to understand the 
eruptive process and, consequently, 
sometimes to predict it. 
This understanding enabled me, from 
1958 on, to answer accurately questions 
put to me by the administrative or politic- 
al authorities of a number of cities, pro- 
vinces, even countries, where a volcano 
appeared to pose a threat to public safety. 
Thus I found myself gradually moving 
from fundamental research to research 
applied to the forecasting of possible 
eruptions. Since 1981, when the French 
Government decided to take an official 
stand on the mitigation of catastrophic 
events, my work in volcanology has been 
limited to this area. 
Over nearly thirty years I have found 
myself in the position of having to answer 
questions from the authorities in a dozen 
or so different countries. And if my re- 
plies have not once been mistaken, this is 
because, like a good doctor, I have based 
my diagnosis on the information avail- 
able interpreted in the light of my ex- 
perience. Out of fifteen cases which I 
recall, I was able to give nine reassuring 
replies, to confirm the threat of danger 
three times and, on three occasions, was 
obliged to admit that I did not know. 
Over this period, the questions put to 
me were seldom in the form “Is there 
going to be an eruption or not?” Usually I 
was asked whether there was or was not 
any danger from an eruption actually tak- 
ing place. While, under such circum- 
stances, the latter question is clearly the 
most important, it is also the most diffi- 
cult one to answer. 
It is, in fact, relatively easy to predict 
an eruption when the volcano in question 
is being properly watched over by 
genuine experts with adequate equip- 
ment. With the exception of eruptions 
resulting from a build-up of steam press- 
ure caused by overheating of under- 
ground water beneath a blocked vent 
hole—eruptions which emit no magma or 
lava, but only steam, some fumarole 
gases and fragments of the rock blocking 
the vent—all volcanic eruptions are the 
result of the ascent to the surface of the 
globe of a certain volume of magma. 
This ascension of magma cannot occur 
without some movement of the Earth’s 
crust in response to the pressure of the 
magma; either the crust stretches and 
becomes deformed, or it fractures. Sur- 
face deformations can be detected and 
measured by such instruments as tilt- 
meters, extensometers and geodimeters. 
The opening of fractures, through which 
magma can infiltrate into the crust and 
rise to the surface, causes tremors which 
can be recorded by seismometers. 
These geophysical observations and 
measurements, which can give warning of 
an eruption, often several months but 
sometimes only days or hours in advance 
(depending, among other things, on the 
depth at which the magma is situated 
before it begins its ascension), are sup- 
plemented by other observations which 
may help the volcanologist in making a 
forecast. These include the temperature, 
composition and pressure of fumarolic 
gases, and changes in the magnetic field 
of the Earth’s crust. All these indications 
enable experienced volcanologists to de- 
tect a coming eruption and to give a date 
for its arrival, sometimes with very great 
precision. 
Unfortunately, from the point of view 
of saving lives, such predictions are of 
little importance. Magmatic eruptions, 
whether they be explosive or effusive, 
never start in disastrous fashion. The first 
phase of an eruption is always (to my 
knowledge no exception to this rule has 
ever been observed) relatively moderate, 
allowing inhabitants time to leave the 
threatened area. 
Evacuation, the only way to protect 
people from major volcanic risk, is rarely 
necessary, since it is quite exceptional for 
an eruption, after its initial phase, to 
deteriorate into a paroxysmal phase or to 
become even slightly more dangerous. 
Out of the average hundred eruptions 
that occur year after year throughout the 
world, scarcely one will develop in this 
way and so justify special precautions. 
The major problem that faces the vol- 
canologist is to forecast the evolution of 
eruption while it is taking place—a task 
infinitely more difficult than predicting 
an imminent eruption. Once an eruption 
has begun, all the mechanical indica- 
tions—deformation or fracturing of the 
surface—eonnected with the rise of the 
magma through the Earth’s crust will 
have disappeared and the flow of magma 
will be “fluid”, that is, it will no longer 
have to fracture the rock in the depths or 
lift the flanks of the volcano to force its 
way to the surface. 
Deprived of these two indicators that 
are fundamental to the forecasting of a 
coming eruption (tremors and deforma- 
tion of the surface), the volcanologist is 
obliged to establish his diagnosis on the 
basis of his interpretation of the other 
physical and chemical indications men- 
tioned above. Correlation of the various 
factors involved and their interpretation p 
CONTINUED PAGE 31 
Waves of destruction 
At one o’clock in the afternoon of 26 August 1883 the first of 
a series of increasingly violent explosions occurred on the 
volcanic island of Krakatoa, in the Sunda Strait between Java 
and Sumatra, Indonesia. An hour later, a black cloud of ash 
rose 27 kilometres into the air above the island. 
The eruptions continued, reaching a climax with a 
tremendous explosion at ten o'clock in the morning of the 
following day which sent ash billowing 80 kilometres into the 
air and which was heard in Australia over 4,000 kilometres 
away. All but a fragment of Krakatoa, the cone of a huge 
underwater volcano, disappeared beneath the waves. 
On the neighbouring islands of Lang and Verlaten, volcanic 
ash and debris lay 60 metres deep. Vivid sunsets caused by 
fine ash particles in the air were seen as far away as Europe 
and rafts of pumice (lava filled with gas bubbles) floated on 
the surrounding ocean for many months. 
Worse was to come; the collapse of the volcano triggered a 
series of tsunamis, or seismic sea waves (often called tidal 
waves, a misnomer since they have no connection with 
tides). The biggest wave, which attained a height of some 35 
metres, devastated some 300 towns and villages on the 
shores of Java and Sumatra, taking 36,000 lives. 
Almost all tsunamis occur in the Pacific. They are caused 
by a sudden vertical movement of the sea bed resulting from 
a submarine volcanic eruption or an earthquake. Following a 
28 
disastrous tsunami in 1946, a warning system was estab- 
lished covering the entire Pacific Ocean. Tsunami detectors 
and seismic recording apparatus at seismic observatories 
around the Pacific sound the alarm whenever a likely event is 
detected. The information recorded is transmitted to the Hon- 
olulu Observatory which is responsible for assessing the risk 
and issuing warnings if this is considered necessary. 
FETE 
pas ees ER, aes A Le or EE «+ Td 
. . 
ot . n 
. 
     
Ma
p 
©
 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 29](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=29) 0

### IGNORE

  
Birth of an island 
On 14 November 1963, a fiery eruption in 
the Atlantic Ocean off the southern coast 
of Iceland heralded the birth of a new 
island. Named Surtsey, after Surtur, the 
fire god of Icelandic myth, the new island 
rose from the water in a convulsion of 
flame and steam. A week after the eruption 
Surtsey had a surface area of 70 square 
metres and within three and a half years 
had grown to its present size of two and a 
half square kilometres with elevations of 
up to 173 metres. When scientists visited 
the island after it had cooled, they were 
astonished to find that plant life had 
already established a footing. Constituting 
as it does the first “virgin” ecosystem 
known to man, Surtsey is now the site 
of a long-term ecological research pro- 
gramme. 
  
Ph
ot
os
 
P.
 
Va
ut
he
y 
© 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s

## [Page 30](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=30) 0

### IGNORE

Ph
ot
o 
C
h
r
o
m
o
s
 
©
 
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s  
Cry havoc! 
Although prediction of volcanic eruptions 
can reduce or prevent loss of life, little can 
be done to control damage to crops or 
property once an eruption is under way. 
The three major dangers arise from mud- 
flow, lava-flow and ash. 
Over the last few centuries mud-flows 
(sometimes known as lahars) have proved 
to be the most dangerous, killing more 
people and destroying more property than 
any other type of volcanic activity. Mud- 
flows often result from the rapid melting of 
ice or snow on the slope of a volcano or 
may be due to heavy rain or snow falls after 
an eruption on new volcanic ash. Mud- 
flows have been known to attain speeds of 
up to 70 kilometres an hourand to travel as

## [Page 31](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=31) 0

### 69535: Volcanoes

: . A ts 
et A "we 
“3 y a Ue. ~ 
} 
po , 
- — 
| — a 
’ 
;- 
= 
- 
Be 
—— dl 
far as 180 kilometres. Left, the town of 
Armero, Colombia, swallowed up by mud 
following the eruption of the Nevado del 
Ruiz volcano, in November 1985. 
Thin lava-flows cool fairly quickly, but 
thicker flows may take years to cool com- 
pletely. Various methods have been 
attempted to check or divert lava-flows, 
including the use of water hoses to create 
a solid wall of cooled lava and bombing the 
sides of a flow to split it into many smaller 
flows, Above left, lava-flow blocks a road 
following the eruption of La Fournaise vol- 
cano on the French island of Réunion in 
the Indian Ocean, on 18 March this year. 
Despite its name, volcanic ash is not the 
product of burning; it consists of pulver- 
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 28 
pp is extremely difficult in view of our pre- 
  
 - 
a” 
ized lava and fragments of rock thrown 
into the air by the sudden explosive 
escape of volcanic gas. The eruption of the 
Tambora volcano on the northern coast of 
the island of Sumbawa, Indonesia, in 1815, 
which killed 50,000 islanders, is estimated 
to have had an explosive force equivalent 
to 16,000 megatons. The very fine ash from 
such an eruption may travel huge dis- 
tances and affect weather patterns. Above, 
the village of Parentas, Indonesia, en- 
veloped in volcanic ash following the erup- 
tion, in 1982, of the Galunggung volcano. 
Ph
ot
o 
Kr
af
ft
 
© 
Ex
pl
or
er
, 
Pa
ri
s 
sent lack of sufficient research data and 
experience in this field. And without cor- 
relation to enable him to establish links of 
cause and effect between what he has 
been able to measure and observe, it is 
virtually impossible for the volcanologist 
to establish a serious diagnosis. 
Finally, I would like to remind readers 
of an article by me which appeared in the 
October 1967 issue of the Unesco 
Courier. In it I drew the attention both of 
politicians and of the inhabitants of the 
regions involved to the great danger of 
so-called “extinct” volcanoes. These vol- 
canoes are often, in fact, only dormant, 
which implies that they will one day be- 
come active again. This is a risk which 
should be taken seriously and construc- 
tion should be avoided within the danger 
zone surrounding such volcanoes. 
The extent of the danger zone will de- 
pend on the nature of the volcanic activity 
(whether it is effusive or explosive), the 
size and altitude of the volcano con- 
cerned, and even the climate of the re- 
gion in which it is situated. 
The importance of climate and altitude 
was demonstrated in dramatic fashion on 
13 November 1985 with the eruption of 
the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Col- 
ombia. Had it not been for the height of 
the volcano and the climate of the region, 
which made possible the formation of a 
thick icecap on its summit, the upsurge of 
lava at a temperature of 1,000 degrees 
Centigrade would not have provoked the 
melting of hundreds of thousands of cubic 
metres of ice and the formation of “la- 
hars”, those terrible torrents of volcanic 
mud which swallowed up the town of 
Armero, claiming the lives of 23,000 
victims. 
What I wrote almost twenty years ago 
about the danger represented by Vesu- 
vius (Italy) or the Campi Flegrei (the 
Phlegraean Fields, Naples, Italy), Mount 
Fuji (Japan) or Mount Rainier (USA), 
remains true today, as witness what hap- 
pened at Mount St. Helens, a close neigh- 
bour of Mount Rainier, and at Helgafell 
in Iceland. The authorities of countries 
within whose borders potentially danger- 
ous volcanoes are situated—those 
thought to be extinct as well as those 
known to be active, such as Merapi (In- 
donesia) or Etna (Italy), Sakurajima 
(Japan), Vulcano (Italy) or Pichincha 
(Ecuador), to name but a few—should 
take advantage of the “days of peace” to 
consider the problems that will arise and 
prepare” the action they will take when 
these sleeping giants reawaken. Hu 
HAROUN TAZIEFF, eminent French volcanolo- 
gist, was formerly Director of Research at the 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. 
Until recently Secretary of State for the Preven- 
tion of Major Disasters, he is the author of many 
books and studies on volcanology. He has also 
produced a number of films and documentaries 
including Les Rendez-vous du Diable (The De- 
vil's Rendezvous, 1958) which achieved world- 
wide acclaim. 
31

## [Page 32](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=32) 2

### 69538: The Evolution of life

### 69535: Volcanoes

32 
  
Quaternary. Large mammals like mastodons (A), sabre-tooth cats (B), and blue 
whales (C) are at first dominant. For the last million years, ice intermittently covers 
most of the northern hemisphere. Some animals migrate; some, like woolly 
rhinoceroses (D), adapt to the cold. Early man (E), using stone tools and making fire, 
is succeeded by modern man. 
Tertiary. Mammals evolve rapidly, producing such specialized types as the lemur 
Plesiadapis (A), ancestor of the primates, five-toed Phenacodus (B) and horned 
Titanotherium (C). Birds evolve, including giant flightless forms like Diatryma (D). 
Fish, reptiles and invertebrates now resemble those cof today; for example, the sand 
shark (E) has hardly changed. 
Cretaceous. On land, flowering plants like magnolia (A) appear. In the sea, modern 
bony fishes evolve alongside sea-urchins (B) and bivalve molluscs (C). At the end of 
the period, giant dincsaurs, like Stegosaurus (D), and large flying pterodactyls (E) 
suddenly die out. New types of small mammal, such as the shrew-like Phascolother- 
ium (F), evolve. 
Jurassic. The sea shelters brachiopods, cephalods called ammonites (A), belem- 
nites (B) and fossil oysters such as Gryphaea (C). There are bony fishes, sharks and 
two groups of marine reptiles: ichthyosaurs (D) and plesiosaurs. Great dinosaurs like 
Brontosaurus (E) share the land with small mammals. Archaeopteryx (F), the ances- 
tral bird, takes wing. 
Triassic. Such mammal-like reptiles as Cynognathus (A), ancestors of the mammals, 
are succeeded by small animals, dinosaur-ancestors like Ornothosuchus (B). Club- 
mosses, horsetaiis and seed ferns become rarer; they are replaced by cycads, 
ginkgoes (C) and conifers. In the sea, new invertebrate groups evolve. Sea-lilies (D) 
and reef-building corals are numerous. 
Permian. Mammal-like reptiles like Dimetrodon (A) rule the land. Large amphibians 
are scarce. In the sea, cephalods (B), two-valved molluscs (C) and primitive bony fish 
(D) continue to thrive; corals and sea-urchins grow scarcer, and most of the sharks die 
out. A forest of seed ferns covers the southern land mass. More varied plant life 
flourishes in the north. 
Carboniferous. The amphibians (A) become a large and important group; they 
eventually give rise to the reptiles, the first full-time land vertebrates. Conifers and tree 
ferns (B) evolve, and dragonflies (C) and other insects appear. Sharks (D) dominate 
the sea. In shallow water, brachiopods (E), corals (F), cephalopods, sponges and 
sea-lilies are common. 
Devonian. Armoured fish (A) and bony and scaly fish (B) flourish in fresh water. 
Sharks and spiny fish colonize the sea. Brachiopods (C) and molluscs called cephalo- 
pods (D) continue to evolve; trilobites grow scarce and graptolites die out. On land, 
simple vascular plants (E) are followed by clubmosses, horsetails and ferns. The first 
amphibians evolve from scaly fish. 
Silurian. The land is conquered, first by colonies of seedless vascular plants and later 
by scorpion-like arthropods. In fresh water, small fish and large eurypterids or 
water-scorpions abound. The sea is teeming with invertebrates, especially trifobites 
(A), crincids or sea-lilies (B), corals (C), horny-coated eurypterids (D), brachiopods (E) 
and graptolites (F). 
Ordovician. Shelly invertebrates flourish, especially trilobites (A), brachiopods (B), 
cephalopods (C) and gastropods or sea-snails (D). Corals, two-valved molluscs and 
branchy or mossy colonies of bryozoans appear. Graptolites (E, F), some looking like 
hard spider webs, spread. In fresh water the first fish (known only from scale 
fragments) evolve. 
Cambrian. At the dawn of this period a number of animal groups develop shells and 
hard parts of calcite and horn. These include trilobites (A, B), brachiopods (C, D), 
sponges (E) and crustaceans. The trilobites, so called from their three-lobed bodies, 
evolve into a large and varied group of crawlers and swimmers that dominates the sea 
for the next 100 million years. 
Precambrian. During this period, which goes back to the beginning of geological time, 
complex organic compounds evolve from simple inorganic chemical substances. 
Bacteria (A, B) and algae (C, D) appear early in the period. By its close, soft-bodied 
marine and freshwater animals like worms (E, F), jellyfish and sponges have evolved. 
A 
 
- 
 
  
Dr
aw
in
gs
 
©
 
Th
e 
Su
nd
ay
 
Ti
me
s 
- 
Ge
ol
og
ic
al
 
M
u
s
e
u
m
,
 
L
o
n
d
o
n

## [Page 33](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=33) 0

### 69536: Life from space; does life on Earth have its origins in comets?

Life from space 
Does life on Earth have its origins in comets? 
by Chandra Wickramasinghe 
  
Since 1962, astronomers Professor Chandra Wickrama- 
singhe and Sir Fred Hoyle have been studying the nature of 
interstellar dust and have concluded that terrestrial life had 
its origins in the gas and dust clouds of space. Life, they 
believe, in direct contradiction to Darwinian theory, was 
derived from and continues to be driven by sources outside 
the Earth (see the Unesco Courier, May 1982). Although their 
conclusions are strongly contested by other scientists, initial 
appraisal of data obtained from the study of Halley’s comet 
appears to lend support to at least some aspects of their 
viewpoint. 
the history of the Earth. Cometary 
bodies, as well as debris from them 
in the form of fine dust particles, have been 
colliding with the Earth from the very ear- 
liest days of its existence as a planet some 
4,600 million years ago. It is now clear that 
volatile materials from comets, including 
water, contributed in significant measure to 
the primordial oceans and atmosphere. 
Cometary impacts and the acquisition of 
cometary material did not, however, stop in 
distant geological time. As recently as 1908, 
a comet, or part of a comet, collided with 
the Earth in the Tunguska Valley of Siberia, 
exploding at a height of 8.5 kilometres in 
the atmosphere and devastating hundreds 
of square kilometres of taiga forest. 
The entire Solar System today is sur- 
rounded by a spherical halo of some 
thousands of millions of comets located at a 
distance of about a tenth of a light-year (a 
light-year is the distance light travels in a 
year—about 10 million million kilometres). 
Passing stars cause cometary objects from 
this halo to become deflected into orbits 
that bring them to the inner regions of the 
Solar System at the rate of about one or two 
ayear. The Earth is well and truly entwined 
within these orbits so material shed from 
these comets must be reaching us quite 
plentifully. This material becomes trapped 
in the Earth’s upper atmosphere, adding 
steadily to the store of terrestrial volatile 
materials. Fluctuations must occur in the 
rate of in-fall of cometary debris over long 
periods of geological time. It is now widely 
believed that significant increases in this 
rate would trigger the onset of episodes of 
C OMETS are inextricably linked with global glaciations (ice ages) such as are 
known to have occurred. 
A typical comet, such as Halley’s comet, 
has a mass of some 100,000 million tons and 
a direct hit from such an object would have 
dramatic consequences for our planet. For- 
tunately, such collisions are exceedingly 
rare, occurring at intervals averaging about 
300 million years, coinciding approximately 
with the time intervals between successive 
bursts in the evolution of terrestrial life. 
Smaller comets are more numerous and 
could collide more frequently. 
This much is more or less agreed upon by 
most scientists. A less popular view, advo- 
cated by the British astronomer Sir Fred 
Hoyle and myself, is that comets were also 
responsible for the importation of organic 
molecules that contributed to the origin of 
life on our planet. We have further sug- 
gested that the Earth continues to receive 
ready-formed living structures such as bac- 
teria and viruses even at the present time. 
From 1975 onwards, we have accumu- 
lated evidence to support our view that 
organic dust grains, including organic po- 
lymers (large chains of carbon-based orga- 
nic molecules), exist on a vast cosmic scale. 
These dust grains populate the clouds of gas 
that exist between stars and give rise to the 
visual effect of dark patches and striations 
(1) The adjective “organic” is often commonly used to 
mean “living”, in the sense that a plant, a tree or a human 
beingis “living”; chemists employ it in a restricted sense to 
describe compounds containing carbon combined with 
hydrogen. All living things contain carbon and hydrogen 
and thus are organic, but not all things that contain 
carbon and hydrogen are living. “Biological” means “of 
or relating to life or living things”. 
seen against the diffuse light of the Milky 
Way. In 1981, through a combination of 
laboratory studies, mathematical computa- 
tions and astronomical observation, we ar- 
rived at the conclusion that the bulk of 
cosmic dust was not merely organic but 
distinctly biological in character V. 
In a series of publications we have pre- 
sented arguments to support the theory that 
life on Earth had its origins in comets and 
that evolution is controlled by the con- 
tinuing input of cometary material. Because 
the injection of comets from the outer Solar 
System is sporadic, this input of cometary 
material is not expected to be uniform and 
regular in time, and so the effect on evolu- 
tion will also be sporadic. This sporadic 
characteristic clearly shows up in the fossil 
record which traces the evolution of terrest- 
rial life. 
A dramatic example is provided by the 
extinction of the dinosaurs 65 million years 
ago. It has recently been argued by many 
scientists that this event was caused by a 
comet which shrouded the Earth in a halo of 
fine particles. These particles acted like a 
smog that darkened the skies for decades 
and caused withering of plankton and plants 
and the demise of all large creatures that fed 
on plants. 
Sir Fred Hoyle and I believe that such a 
purely physical cause is unlikely in view of 
the fact that the extinction of the dinosaurs 
also coincided with an extinction of a large 
fraction of the genera of all plants, animals 
and micro-organisms and the emergence of 
several brand new orders of living forms. 
We identify this extinction/speciation event 
of 65 million years ago with a genetic storm 
that resulted from an exceptionally large 
new crop of comets that were injected into 
the inner regions of the Solar System. 
The first clear-cut detections of organic 
molecules—hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and 
methyl cyanide (CH;CN)—came from 
observations of comet Kohoutek, in 1973 
and 1974. But cometary theories came 
under very much closer scrutiny in March 
this year when, as the culminating point of 
the International Halley Watch, the Euro- 
pean space satellite Giotto penetrated to 
within a few hundred kilometres of the 
nucleus of Halley's comet (see the Unesco 
Courier, March 1986). 
The payload of Giotto included a variety p> 
33

## [Page 34](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=34) 0

### 69536: Life from space; does life on Earth have its origins in comets?

Ph
ot
o 
©
 
AP
N,
 
M
o
s
c
o
w
 
» of scientific experiments and a video 
camera that was intended to send back col- 
our pictures of the comet’s nucleus. Earlier 
in March, the Soviet space satellite Vega 2 
successfully accomplished a similar mission. 
Pictures of the comet’s nucleus, taken by 
Vega 2 from a distance of several thousand 
kilometres, showed tentative indications 
that it may be split into at least two frag- 
ments. Giotto might have been able to settle 
this matter but for an unfortunate hitch in 
communications that occurred seconds be- 
fore the moment of closest approach. In the 
event, the best pictures we have is of the 
nucleus surrounded by a peanut-shaped 
shroud of obscuring dust. 
What is to be learned from the first 
appraisals of the data sent back by the va- 
rious missions to comet Halley? 
Our organic theory of comets predicts 
that cometary nuclei must develop a highly 
porous mesh-like surface layer of polymeric 
particles. Evaporation of material on a 
large scale can only occur from places on the 
surface where this surface layer becomes 
abraded or broken. A consequence is that 
cometary nuclei must have exceedingly 
black, non-reflective surfaces, a property 
we predicted only weeks before the Giotto 
encounter. 
The Giotto pictures showed a few places 
where the nucleus could be seen through 
“holes” in the dust halo, and the surface 
showed up as amazingly black—Giotto in- 
vestigators described it as being “blacker 
than the blackest coal”. This was indeed a 
triumph for the organic model. 
34 
More triumphs were to follow. Giotto’s 
particle impact analyser was equipped to 
determine the chemical make-up of the 
cometary dust particles by measuring the 
distribution of the masses of atoms within 
them. J. Kissel, the principal investigator 
on this experiment, reported on 17 March 
that analysis of one per cent of the total data 
record indicated that the dust was made up. 
of the elements carbon, oxygen, nitrogen 
and hydrogen with very much smaller 
amounts of other chemical elements. Two 
logical possibilities follow from this data. 
These atoms can exist in the form of volatile 
ices such as water, carbon dioxide and 
ammonia together with simple hydrocar- 
bons such as methane, or they could occur 
in the form of highly stable organic 
polymers. Since, in other experiments, the 
temperature of these particles was mea- 
sured at 125 degrees Celsius, well above the 
boiling points of ices and simple hydrocar- 
bons, it follows that the cometary particles 
could only be made of organic polymers. 
Both Vega 2 and Giotto experiments indi- 
cated that hydrogen atoms, hydroxyl radic- 
als and water molecules were also released 
quite liberally from the comet. However, 
the amounts of these substances were not 
inconsistent with the water associated with 
living cells (60 per cent by volume of such 
cells is water). Significantly there was no 
evidence whatever for a halo of icy particles 
around the nucleus which is predicted by 
the widely accepted “dirty snowball” com- 
etary theory first propounded by US astro- 
nomer Fred Whipple. 
On the morning of 30 June 1908, a huge 
aerial explosion with an energy equivalent 
to that of 10 to 15 megatons of TNT devas- 
tated some 2,000 square kilometres of 
pine forest (left) near the Tunguska River 
in central Siberia. The explosion is 
thought to have been caused by a comet, 
or a fragment of a comet, colliding with the 
Earth. An object such as this would have 
disintegrated in the Earth’s atmosphere 
creating a fireball and a powerful blast 
wave but no crater. 
Scarcely two weeks after the Giotto ren- 
dezvous an important observation of the 
comet in the infra-red region of the spec- 
trum was made by astronomers Dayal 
Wickramasinghe and David Allen, using 
the 154-inch Anglo-Australian telescope at 
Siding Springs, New South Wales. They 
discovered remarkably strong signals due to 
emission from heated organic dust over the 
wavelength range from 2 to 4 micrometres. 
Basic structures of organic molecules in- 
volving linkages between carbon and hyd- 
rogen atoms (CH bonds) absorb and emit 
radiation at wavelengths near 3.4 mic- 
rometres; for any assembly of complex 
organic molecules such as bacterium this 
absorption band is in general very broad 
and takes on a highly distinctive profile. 
The most remarkable fact that emerged was 
that the profile of this emission from Hal- 
ley’s comet matched precisely the be- 
haviour of a dried-out bacterium as mea- 
sured in the laboratory. 
Although a full appraisal of the recent 
observations of comet Halley cannot yet be 
offered, it is already clear that a few quite 
remarkable facts have emerged. The comet 
is clearly not an inorganic dirty snowball as 
most astronomers had previously held. It is 
organic. Within a mammoth chunk of orga- 
nic matter, some 8 kilometres long and 4 
kilometres wide, a large proportion of wa- 
ter molecules and traces of other materials 
are also trapped. Whether one likes it or 
not, the organic material of the comet 
occurs predominantly in the form of parti- 
cles whose absorption properties, sizes and 
densities are identical to the predictions of a 
bacterial model. 
Interpreted in the most conservative 
possible way, the latest discoveries indicate 
at the very least that comets could have 
provided the raw materials, the organic 
building blocks from which life emerged on 
the Earth. More realistically, in my view, 
the data point in a decisive way to life in the 
form of bacteria and viruses being con- 
tained in comets and brought by them to the 
Earth. 
 
NALIN CHANDRA WICKRAMASINGHE is pro- 
fessor of applied mathematics and astronomy at 
University College, Cardiff, Wales, and Director 
of the Institute of Fundamental Studies, Sri 
Lanka. In 1962, while at Cambridge University, 
Professor Wickramasinghe, who is of Sri Lankan 
origin, was awarded the Powell Prize for English 
poetry. His views on the space origins of terrest- 
rial life are fully developed in two books, Space 
Travellers: the Bringers of Life and Evolution 
from Space, of which he is the co-author with Sir 
Fred Hoyle.

## [Page 35](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=35) 0

### 69544: The Hand of man

The hand of man 
late, in the history of our planet; but 
during man’s short time on Earth, 
his hand has wrought pervasive change—in 
air, water and soils, in other living 
creatures, in the whole tightly connected 
system of interacting parts of which the 
environment consists—and this in but the 
last instant of geological time. 
The history of man’s changing rela- 
tionship with his habitat—in terms of both 
the impact of human society on the natural 
environment and the conditions of life of 
human beings—can, at the risk of over- 
simplification, be divided into four distinct 
but overlapping ecological phases: the 
Primeval Phase, the Early Farming Phase, 
the Early Urban Phase and, finally, the 
Modern Industrial Phase. 
During the Primeval Phase—sometimes 
also called the pre-domestic or hunter- 
gatherer phase—human populations prob- 
ably differed little from those of other 
omnivorous mammals in the extent and na- 
ture of their interaction with the ecosystems 
of which they were a part. As hunter- 
gatherers they had their natural place in the 
food cycle, deriving their energy, in chemi- 
cal form, from natural foodstuffs of animal 
and plant origin. They in turn provided food 
for other predators and their remains were 
returned to the soil through the processes of 
decomposition. The amount of energy used 
by an early hominid group in its natural 
habitat would have been more or less 
equivalent to the energy value of the food- 
stuffs consumed by members of the group. 
In short, our ancestors fitted into their en- 
vironment in much the same way as any 
other animal species. 
Then, probably about half a million years 
ago, in the volcanic lands of the East Afri- 
can rift valleys, man began to use fire, 
deliberately and regularly, both for protec- 
tion and as a means of obtaining and cook- 
ing food. Fire was used to drive game out of 
the undergrowth and to attract animals to 
the fresh herbaceous growth that sprang up 
on ground cleared by fire. 
T HE human species evolved late, very 
Rock painting dating from about 2000 BC, 
from the Rusape area of Zimbabwe. The 
way of life represented is that of Late 
Stone Age hunters. Bushmen were still 
making paintings like this in the 19th cen- 
tury, but some of the surviving examples 
may have been the work of southern Bantu 
peoples. 
Ph
ot
o 
©
 
Al
ma
sy
, 
Pa
ri
s 
by Stephen Boyden and Malcolm Hadley 
This was a highly significant development 
with considerable ecological impact. Forest 
and grass fires became much more frequent 
events, bringing about important changes in 
the plant cover of certain areas of the 
Earth's surface. Suddenly, human societies 
were using considerably more energy than 
previously, since the flow of “somatic” 
energy (the energy that flows through the 
bodies of human beings for metabolism, 
physical work and growth) was now sup- 
plemented by “extra-somatic” energy 
(energy such as that derived from fuel, 
which does not flow through living orga- 
nisms). 
The use of fire thus brought about a 
qualitative change in the relationship be- 
tween the human species and its environ- 
ment. The ecological consequences were 
restricted to the destructive effects of fire 
itself, and the chemical products of the 
combustion of wood (mainly carbon diox- 
Igy = 
 
ide) were easily absorbed into the system as 
a whole with negligible repercussions. 
Nevertheless, the use of fire is an early and 
clear example of man’s potential as a modi- 
fier of the environment. Man had already 
become a significant ecological force, and 
human groups no longer fitted into their 
local ecosystems in quite the same way as 
other animals. 
In addition to fire, the most significant 
ecological effect of man on the environment 
during the primeval phase was probably the 
spread of the human species itself. Man 
appears to have roamed the open African 
savannah until about one million years ago, 
when he fanned out into a great variety of 
other habitats—arid steppes, high altitude 
grasslands (in Ethiopia) and forest grass- 
lands. Following these initial excursions, 
man ventured further out into a wide range 
of different climatic and ecological settings 
in all five continents of the world. 
) in El

## [Page 36](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=36) 0

### 69544: The Hand of man

  
    
  
» The Early Farming Phase began, in some 
regions of the world, about 12,000 years 
ago. With the domestication of animals and 
plants, for the first time in the story of the 
Earth, a living creature came, quite con- 
sciously and deliberately, to manipulate the 
biological processes of nature for his own 
purposes. 
As domestication spread and farming 
techniques advanced, the total impact of 
human society on the environment in-. 
creased significantly. The face of the Earth 
was beginning to be changed by the hand of 
man, to the extent that, in the northern 
hemisphere, vast areas of forest land dis- 
appeared, to be replaced in some instances 
by farming land and in others by less lux- 
uriant and more open vegetation. In some 
cases, man’s agricultural activities triggered 
massive erosion. In eastern Fiji, for exam- 
ple, where man arrived some 3,000 years 
ago, at least 50 centimetres of soil was lost in 
a period of 150 years, from between 1,900 
and 1,750 years ago. 
Among other important implications of 
farming practices was the introduction of 
monoculture food crops, on which many 
populations came to be almost entirely de- 
pendent for sustenance. This dévelopment 
clearly had some practical advantages, but 
it also involved serious risk, since, if the 
monoculture crop failed for any reason, 
then widespread starvation was virtually 
inevitable. 
One further consequence of mankind’s 
deliberate manipulation of biotic processes 
is worthy of mention. Selective breeding of 
animals and cultivation of plants for desir- 
able qualities relating to food production 
brought into existence a range of forms of 
life which would otherwise never have seen 
the light of day. 
Fire, of course, remained in use during 
this second ecological phase and it came to 
play an important role in the manufacture 
of metal implements. With the invention of 
such devices as watermills, windmills and 
sailing ships, extra-somatic energy came to 
be used for performing work of various 
36 
LA i —      mn = NJ - 
RL 
- : u 
= pe | i= 
kinds. Compared with what was to happen 
later, however, the ecological impact of 
these machines was relatively slight, being 
restricted mainly to the role that ships 
played in the migratory movements of the 
human species, the geographical spread of 
technologies and the re-distribution of 
some animal and plant species. 
Human groups became much less no- 
madic than in the primeval phase, although 
the length of time they remained in one 
.place depended to some extent on the kind 
of farming they practised. The new lifestyle 
had significant consequences for the inter- 
relationships between human populations 
and microbial and other parasites and 
pathogens. In some areas, for example, 
malaria and schistosomiasis became impor- 
tant causes of ill-health and death, partly 
counteracting the reduced mortality result- 
ing from the protection which the new living 
conditions gave against some of the hazards 
of life experienced in the primeval phase. 
Despite all the changes that agriculture 
produced, the early farming phase shared 
two important ecological characteristics 
with the primeval phase which are not fea- 
tures of modern societies. First, the rate of 
use of extra-somatic energy (mainly fire) 
paralleled the rate of increase in the human 
population. Second, man’s activities did not 
interfere significantly with the natural 
biogeochemical cycles of the biosphere, 
such as the carbon, nitrogen and phosphor- 
us cycles. 
The Early Urban Phase started about 
5,000 years ago, with the establishment of 
the first cities in Mesopotamia and, not long 
after, in China and India. These early cities 
ushered in the third ecological phase of 
human existence, which was marked by a 
‘series of fundamental changes affecting the 
organization of human society and the life 
experience of its members. Some, but not 
all, of these changes have persisted and 
remain features of many urban settlements 
in the modern world. 
The most obvious changes were simply 
the huge increase in the number of people 
Ph
ot
o 
C
a
u
d
o
u
e
 
© 
Ra
ph
o,
 
Pa
ri
s 
Engraving by the Swiss artist Aloys Fell- 
mann (1855-1892) depicts men atworkina 
typical 19th-century factory at a time when 
the industrial revolution was gathering 
momentum in Europe. 
gathered together in one place and the fact 
that the majority of their inhabitants were 
not directly involved in such subsistence 
activities as farming, fishing and hunting. 
The urban populations were supported by 
food surpluses produced by nearby farmers 
who lived and worked beyond the city walls. 
Because many urban populations came to 
rely for their sustenance on a single staple 
food, such as rice, maize, a cereal grain or 
potatoes, there was a narrowing of the 
range of foods consumed by individuals. 
Specific deficiency diseases, including rick- 
ets, scurvy, beri-beri and pellagra, were 
common in different parts of the world. 
There was a constant threat and repeated 
occurrence of famine, since urban popula- 
tions did not have a wide range of alterna- 
tive sources of food to turn to when one 
supply failed. 
Increased population density had a 
marked effect on the interrelations between 
human populations and potential parasitic 
or pathogenic organisms. Pestilence be- 
came one of the major facts of life. Typhus, 
cholera, typhoid, the plague, smallpox, 
malaria, infant diarrhoea and many other 
infectious diseases were a constant cause of 
fear and alarm and were among the main 
causes of death. 
One of the most significant biosocial de- 
velopments which accompanied early urba- 
nization was the advent of job specializa- 
tion. Some degree of specialization existed 
in the early farming and even in the hunter- 
gatherer societies, but, apart from the sex- 
based division of labour, most people were 
jacks-of-all-trades. It was during the early 
urban phase that specialization really came 
into its own. 
Part of the ecological importance of this 
development lies in the fact that, for the 
first time in human history, different groups 
within a single society experienced quite 
different conditions of life. Job specializa- 
tion led in turn to a reinforcement of the 
tendency of human societies to establish 
hierarchies. Instead of being relatively 
spontaneous, transient and dependent 
upon the nature of the task in hand, the 
hierarchical structure of society became 
much more rigid, more extreme and more 
permanent. It frequently came to be deter- 
mined by heredity rather than by common 
consent based on ability and personality. 
Urbanization also introduced entirely 
new concepts of ownership. In primeval 
times, an individual “owned” only those 
possessions he had made himself and no 
more than could be easily carried when he 
moved from one camp site to another. In 
the early farming phase, animals, crops and 
stored grain became the objects of own- 
ership, but, at least in the early stages, this 
was usually communal ownership. In early 
cities, individual and family ownership be-

## [Page 37](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=37) 0

### IGNORE

Highway intersection at Villefranche, near 
Lyon, France—a typical construction of 
our modern, energy-hungry, industrial 
society. 
came very important and has remained so 
ever since in many parts of the world. 
As in the preceding phases, the natural 
biogeochemical cycles were still intact, and 
the rate of energy use by society still par- 
alleled changes in population size. The bio- 
sphere as a whole and most of the eco- 
systems to which human populations be- 
longed were, despite some short-term fluc- 
tuations, still essentially in a state of dyna- 
mic equilibrium. The existence of cities did 
not, of course, mean an end to self-suffi- 
cient subsistence agricultural societies, 
which indeed continue to exist in some 
areas of the world today. 
Until very late in this period, few cities 
contained many more than 100,000 inhabi- 
tants. One notable exception was Rome, 
which, around the time of Jesus Christ, had 
a population of about one million. 
However, although cities have until very 
recently contained only a very small percen- 
tage of the total human population, they 
have had an ecological impact out of all 
proportion to the number of people living in 
them. 
The Modern Industrial or Technological 
Phase began with the so-called industrial 
revolution. This industrial transition, as we 
prefer to call it, started in Europe and in 
North America some 150 to 200 years ago 
and is still taking place in many parts of the 
world. Though it began only seven or eight 
generations ago, this phase has had an im- 
pact on the Earth and its workings quite 
disproportionate to its duration. Its ecolo- 
gical characteristics are not shared with any 
of the preceding phases of human existence. 
This is most strikingly illustrated by the 
present situation regarding population, 
energy and the biogeochemical cycles. 
While the early farming and early urban 
stages provided protection from some of the 
causes of death that characterized the 
primeval stage, they were associated with 
new causes of mortality in the form of mal- 
nutrition and pestilence. In the modern in- 
dustrial phase, greatly improved knowledge 
of the nutritional requirements of our spe- 
cies, and new practices in public health and 
medicine, including the pharmaceutical re- 
volution, have resulted in a remarkable 
change in population dynamics. As a conse- 
quence, the human population is now 
doubling at the rate of once every thirty-five 
to forty years, in contrast to the overall rate 
of once in 1,500 years during the early farm- 
ing and early urban phases. 
Another outstanding feature of the mod- 
ern industrial phase, and one which deter- 
mines many of its other characteristics, has 
been the massive introduction of machines 
and manufacturing processes powered by 
extra-somatic energy. The chief sources of 
this energy have been the fossil fuels, begin- 
ning with coal, but with petroleum products 
Ph
ot
o 
Bo
ss
u 
©
 
Sy
gm
a,
 
Pa
ri
s 
C
O
O
 
C
O
C
 
. 
  
 
and natural gas now more important. In 
some places, hydroelectric power makes a 
significant contribution and nuclear power: 
is rapidly coming to the fore. In highly 
industrialized countries like the United 
States, the amount of power used on a per 
capita basis is now thirty times greater than 
it was prior to the industrial transition. 
Thus, unlike the situation in the earlier 
phases, the rate of increase in energy use in 
the modern industrial phase no longer 
matches the rate of increase in population, 
and the ratio of extra-somatic energy used 
by society is continually increasing. Global- 
ly, the amount of energy flowing through 
human society is doubling about twice as 
fast as the population. 
In many areas the natural biogeochemic- 
al cycles are no longer intact. Interference 
with the carbon and phosphorus cycles, for 
example, may well give rise to very serious 
ecological problems in the future. In the 
case of the nitrogen cycle, vast amounts of 
nitrogenous waste products of human com- 
munities, which in previous eras were re- 
turned to the soil, are now lost to rivers and 
oceans, and industrial processes are dis- 
charging substantial quantities of nitrogen 
oxide into the atmosphere. 
A significant change of a qualitative na- 
ture has been the synthesis, often in very 
large amounts, of thousands of new chemi- 
cal compounds, many of which have potent 
effects in biotic systems. Vast quantities of 
these synthetic chemical substances are 
finding their way into the oceans, the soil 
and the atmosphere and, of course, into 
living organisms. 
Complexity and unpredictability are two 
other characteristics of the present phase of 
human existence. Modern technology and 
the economic web of interdependence of 
countries are making problems of land use 
and resource management much more com- 
plex than they were even a generation ago. 
Machines are now available, for example, 
for clearing large areas of forest in a very 
short space of time. With modern com- 
munications technology, a decision taken 
now in a financial centre in a temperate 
zone can lead to the felling, within a week, 
of a tropical forest tree 10,000 kilometres 
away which has taken one hundred years to 
grow. 
If certain widely accepted predictions 
about future increases in the level of energy 
use turn out to be correct, by the year 2050 
mankind will be using about as much energy 
as is used by all other animals and plants put 
together. One does not have to be a special- 
ist to see that this kind of growth in energy 
use, and the concomitant increase in the use 
of resources and the outpouring of wastes, 
cannot go on indefinitely. 
Opinions differ as to how much longer 
the biosphere is likely to be able to tolerate 
the ever-increasing load which human soci- 
ety is placing on it. There are some who 
believe that mankind is incapable of bring- 
ing under control the accelerating processes 
which threaten the collapse of the biosphere 
and civilization and that the collapse of the 
system will be total and will involve the 
extinction of the human species. Others are 
more optimistic, believing that man, with 
his great ingenuity, will succeed in reaching 
anew ecological equilibrium before it is too 
late. | 
 
STEPHEN BOYDEN, of Australia, is a specialist 
at the Centre for Resource and Environment 
Studies, Australian National University, Canber- 
ra, and leader of the integrative research study 
on the ecology of Hong Kong undertaken within 
the framework of Unesco’s Man and the Bio- 
sphere (MAB) Programme. The theme of this 
article is treated in greater depth in a book to be 
published later this year. 
MALCOLM HADLEY is a staff member of Un- 
esco's Division of Ecological Sciences. A zoolo- 
gist, he is responsible for the co-ordination of 
activities in the humid tropics within Unesco’s 
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme. 
37

## [Page 38](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=38) 0

### 69547: 1986: Year of Peace, 7

1986: Year of Peace / 7 
Over 400 representatives of 115 interna- 
tional non-governmental organizations 
and 71 national organizations from 36 
countries attended “Together for 
Peace”, a Conference held in Geneva 
from 20 to 24 January 1986 to mark the 
International Year of Peace. Topics dis- 
cussed at the Conference, held under 
the auspices of the Board of the Confer- 
ence of Non-Governmental Organiza- 
tions in Consultative Status with the 
Economic and Social Council of the Un- 
ited Nations, included questions of dis- 
armament, development, social prog- 
ress, justice, human rights, satisfaction 
of basic human needs, and preparation 
of societies for life in peace. At the end 
of the Conference, the following appeal 
was adopted by acclamation. 
We appeal to all people of the world tojoinin a 
common pursuit of peace. 
With just a decade and a half for this century 
to come to a close, we are convinced of the 
duty and obligation of all people to make 
concerted efforts to usher in a world of peace 
as the new century opens. We are convinced 
that it can be done, that the present danger- 
ous trends in world affairs can be stopped and 
reversed. We see signs of hope in the new 
spirit of dialogue and openness among lead- 
ers of nations and in the determination of the 
people to attain peace. 
We do not have to recount the threats to 
peace. The race towards nuclear catastrophe 
is keeping up its momentum. As if the earth 
and the oceans can no longer bear the weight 
of weapons outer space is explored for sta- 
tioning of arms. Hundreds are killed every day 
by non-nuclear weapons. Hunger takes its 
daily toll of thousands. Millions are deprived of 
basic human needs and fundamental human 
rights. Millions still groan under domination 
and exploitation. Apartheid continues, de- 
nying justice, destroying people and destabi- 
lizing nations. 
We appeal therefore to work together for a 
world of peace, not where war is merely 
absent, not where human survival is just pos- 
sible, but where justice prevails and human 
dignity is upheld. 
We reiterate that the nuclear arms race 
constitutes the greatest threat to peace and 
survival. Our appeal therefore assumes a 
special urgency in this regard. ... 
As we pledge to work together for disarma- 
ment we appeal to all to join in and support 
efforts for an immediate end to all nuclear 
weapon tests, a comprehensive test ban 
treaty, the prevention of an arms race in outer 
space, elimination of chemical weapons and 
all other weapons of mass destruction, and 
substantial reduction in conventional 
weaponry. We believe that it is possible to 
implement a systematic and credible pro- 
gramme for the elimination of nuclear 
weapons by the end of the century. 
We believe that peace is inextricably inter- 
linked with development and social progress 
and that its foundation is justice. Deprivation 
and disparity are threats to peace. We there- 
fore call for a strategic development initiative 
for a new international economic order that 
ensures just economic relations between and 
within nations. We further appeal for genuine 
respect of the rights of people to decide their 
own destiny, their rights to self-determination 
and interdependent development, non-in- 
terference intheir internal affairs, in conditions 
of security and social progress. 
We emphasize that the exercise of human 
rights and freedoms is an essential element of 
peace. Violations of them are a major cause of 
armed conflicts. The fuller the rights that every 
person enjoys in society, the more stable that 
society will be; the fuller the implementation of 
human rights globally, the more stable inter- 
national relations will be. ... 
We recognize that peace is an essential 
requirement for the satisfaction of basic hu- 
man needs such as food, shelter, health, edu- 
cation, labour and environment. As we com- 
mend recent co-operative actions across con- 
tinents to meet emergency needs for food, we 
appeal for more systematic and concerted 
attempts to prevent death by starvation and 
for the adoption of long-term policies national- 
ly and internationally to ensure food for all. 
We call for joint actions to promote substan- 
tial reduction of military expenditures with a 
view to rectifying the current distortion in the 
use of resources. We agree that every gun 
that is made, every warship launched, every 
rocket fired, signifies in the final sense a theft 
from those who hunger and are not fed, those 
who are cold and are not clothed. 
Recognizing the importance of preparation 
of societies for life in peace we call for a new 
orientation in education, science, culture, reli- 
gion and mass media towards peace-making. 
The resources available in these areas can 
be more constructively utilized for peace. ... 
Nations must seek peace together. We can 
only create a commen future if we can cope 
with the common crisis we face and build 
peace on the basis of the concept of common 
security. We appeal for a greater commitment 
to international co-operation for which the uni- 
versal instrument is the United Nations. We 
pledge our continued support to the United 
Nations and its agencies. ... 
We realize that the odds are tremendous. 
But we are confident that the determination of 
the people to achieve peace will prevail. We 
have optimism and hope because we are 
together for peace. It is in that spirit that we 
renew our commitment to peace and invite 
you all, all peoples of the world, to join in the 
challenging tasks ahead. || 
Editorial, Sales and Distribution Office : 
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. 
Subscription rates 
1 year: 78 French francs. 2 years (valid only in France): 
144 French francs. Binder for a year's issues : 56 FF 
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly. 
Individual articles and photographs nat copyrighted may be 
reprinted providing the credit line reads "Reprinted from the 
UNESCO COURIER", plus date of issue, and three voucher 
copies are sent to the editor. Signed articles reprinted must bear 
author's name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on request. 
Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned unless accompanied 
by an international reply coupon covering postage. Signed arti- 
cles express the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the opinions of UNESCO or those of the editors of the 
UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions and headlines are written 
by the Unesco Courier staff. The boundaries on maps published 
in the magazine do not imply official endorsement or acceptance 
by Unesco or the United Nations. The Unesco Courier is pro- 
duced in microform (microfilm and/or microfiche) by : Unesco, 7 
Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Pars; (2) University Microfilms 
(Xercx), Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100, U.S.A.; {30 N.C.R. Micro- 
card Edition, Indian Head, Inc., 111 West 40th Street, New York, 
U.S.A; (4) Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster, 
Ohio 44691, U.S.A. 
Editorial staff (Paris) 
Assistant Editor-in-chief : Olga Rodel 
Managing Editor : Gillian Whitcomb 
Editors : 
English : Roy Malkin 
French : Alain Lévéque 
Neda el Khazen 
Spanish : Francisco Fernandez-Santos 
Jorge Enrique Adoum 
Russian : Nikolai Kuznetsov 
Arabic : Abdelrashid Elsadek Mahmoud 
Braille : Frederick Potter 
Research : Violette Ringelstein 
ustrations : Ariane Bailey 
Layout and Design : Georges Servat, George Ducret 
Promotion ; Fernando Ainsa 
Special projects : Peggy Julien 
All correspondence should be addressed to the Editor-in- 
Chief in Paris 
Non-Headquarters editions 
German : Werner Merkli (Berne) 
Japanese : Seiichiro Kojima (Tokyo) 
Italian : Mario Guidotti (Rome) 
Hindi ; Rajmani Tiwari (Delhi) 
Tamil : M. Mchammed Mustafa (Madras) 
Hebrew : Alexander Broido (Tel Aviv) 
Persian : 
Dutch : Paul Morren (Antwerp) 
Portuguese : Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro) 
Turkish : Mefra ligazer (Istanbul) 
Urdu : Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi) 
Catalan : Joan Carreras i Mari (Barcelona) 
Malaysian : Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur) 
Korean : Paik Syeung-Gil (Seoul) 
Swahili : Domino Rutayebesibwah (Dar-es-Salam) 
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene : 
Bozidar Perkovic (Belgrade) 
Chinese : Shen Guofen (Beijing) 
Bulgarian : Goran Gotev (Sofia) 
Greek : Nicolas Papageorgiou (Athens) 
Sinhala : S.J. Sumanasekera Banda (Colombo) 
Finnish : Marjatta Oksanen (Helsinki) 
Swedish : Lina Svenzén (Stockholm) 
Basque : Gurutz Larrafiaga (San Sebastian) 
Thai : Savitri Suwansathit (Bangkok) 
8 IMPRIME EN FRANCE (Printed in France) - Dépdt légal : C1 - Juillet 1986 - ] 
3 PHOTOCOMPOSITION : Ateliers de 'UNESCO - PHOTOGRAVURE-IMPRESSION : MAURY-IMPRIMEUR S.A., Z.l. route d'Etampes, 45330 MALESHERBES.

## [Page 39](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=39) 0

### IGNORE

  
598 pages 
Where to renew your subscription 
and place your order for other Unesco publications 
Order from any bookseller or write direct to the National Distributor in your country. 
(See list below; names of distributors in countries not listed, along with subscription rates 
AUSTRALIA. Hunter Publications, 58a Gipps St., Collingwood, Victona 3066; 
Publications : Educational Supplies Pty. Ltd., P O. Box 33, Brookvale 2100, 
NSW; Periodicals : Domirug Pty. Subscriptions Dept., P.O. Box 33, Brookvale 
2100, NSW. Sub-agent : United Nations Association of Australia, P.O. Box 
175, 5th floor, Ana House, 28 Elizabeth St., Melbourne, Victona 3000. 
AUSTRIA. Buchhandlung Gerold and Co., Graben 31, A-1011, Vienna. 
BAHAMAS. Nassau Stationers Ltd., P.O. Box N-3138, Nassau. BAHRAIN. 
The Arabian Agencies and Distributing Co.. Al Mutanabi St., P.O. Box 156, 
Manama. BANGLADESH. Bangladesh Books International Ltd., Ittetaq Build- 
ing, 1, R.K. Mission Rd , Hatkhola, Dacca 3. BARBADOS. Unversity of the 
West Indies Bookshop, Cave Hill Campus, PO. Box 64, Bridgetown. 
BELGIUM. “Unesco Couner" Dutch edition only : N V. Handelmaatschappyj 
Keesing. Keesinglaan 2-18, 2100 Deurne-Antwerpen. French edition and 
general Unesco publications agent : Jean de Lannoy, 202 Ave. du Ral, 1060 
Brussels, CCP 0D0-0070823-13. BOTSWANA. Botswana Book Centre, P.O. 
Box 91, Gaborone. BURMA. Trade Corporation No. 9, 550-552 Merchant 
Street, Rangoon. CANADA. Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd., 2182 St. Catherine 
St. West, Montreal, Qué. H3H 1M7. CHINA. China National Publications 
Import and Export Corporation, P.O. Box 88, Beying. CYPRUS, "MAM", 
Archbishop  Makanos 3rd Avenue, PO. Box 1722, Nicos. 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA. S N.T.L.,, Spalena 51-113 02, Prague 1; Ve Smeckach 
30,P.0.B. 790-111-27 Prague 1 (Permanent display); Zahranicri hiteratura, 11 
Soukenicka, Prague 1. For Slovakiaonly : Alfa Verlag.-Publishers, Hurbanovo 
nam. 6,893 31 Bratislava-CSSR. DENMARK. Munksgaard Export-OG, Tids- 
skrftservice, 35 Norre Sogade, DK-1970 Kobenhavn K. EGYPT (ARAB 
REPUBLIC OF). National Centre for Unesco Publications, No. 1 Talaat Harb 
St, Caro. ETHIOPIA. National Agency for Unesco, P.O. Box 2996, Addis 
Ababa. FINLAND. Akateeminen Kirakauppa, Keskuskatu 1, SF-00100 Hel- 
sink: 10; Suomalainen Kirjakauppa Oy, Koivuvaarankuja 2, 01640 Vantaa 64. 
FRANCE. Librairte de I'Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. CCP 
12538-48 GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, Buchhaus Leipzig, Post- 
fach 140, 710 Leipzig, or from Internaticnalen Buchhandlungen in the G.D.R. 
FED. REP. OF GERMANY. For the Unesco Couner (German, English, French 
and Spanish editions) : Mr. H. Baum, Deutscher Unesco-Kurier Vertrieb, 
Basaltstrasse 57, D5300 Bonn 3. GHANA. Presbyterian Bookshop Depot Lid., 
P.O. Box 195, Accra; Ghana Book Supphers Ld., P.O. Box 7869, Accra; The 
University Bookshop of Ghana. Accra; The University Bookshop of Cape 
Coast: The Unwersity Bcokshop of Legon, P.O. Box 1, Legon. GREAT 
BRITAIN, See United Kingdom. HONG KONG. Federal Publications (HK) 
Lid., 5A Evergreen Industrial Mansion, 12 Yip Fat St., Aberdeen. Swindon 
Book Co., 13-15, Lock Rd., Kowloon, Hong Kong Govt. Information Services, 
Publication Centre, Baskerville House, 22 Ice St. HUNGARY. Kultura: 
Bushimport-ABT, P.O.B. 149-H-1389, Budapest 62. ICELAND. Snaebjorn 
Jonsson and Co., H.F. Hafnarstraeti §, Reykjavik. INDIA. Onent Longman   
in local currency, will be supplied on request.) 
Ltd., Kamaru Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay 400038; 17 Chitaranjan Ave., 
Calcutta 13; 36a, Anna Salar, Mount Road, Madras 2; 5-9-41/1 Bashir Bagh. 
Hyderabad 500001 (AP); 80/1 Mahatma Gandhi Rd., Bangalore 560001; 
3-5-820 Hyderguda, Hyderabad-500001. Sub-depots : Oxford Book and Sta- 
tonery Co., 17 Park St., Calcutta 700186; Scindia House, New Delhi; Publica- 
tion Unit, Ministry ol Education and Culture, Ex. AFOQ Hutments, Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad Rd., New Delhi, 110001. INDONESIA. Bhratara Publishers and Book- 
sellers, 29 JI. Qto Iskandardinata 111, Jakarta; Indira P.T., JI Dr. Sam 
Ratulangie 37, Jakarta Pusat. IRAN. Kharazmie Publishing and Distribution 
Co., 28 Vessal Shirazi St., Enghélab Ave., P QO. Box 314/1486, Teheran; 
Iranian Nat. Comm, for Unesco, 1188 Englab Ave , Rostam Give Building, Zip 
Code 13158, P.O. Box 11365-4498, Teheran. IRAQ. McKenzie's Bookshop, 
Al Rashid St., Baghdad. IRELAND. The Educational Company of Ireland Ltd., 
Ballymount Rd., Walkinstown, Dublin 12 ISRAEL. A.B.C. Bookstore Lid. 
P.O. Box 1283, 71 Allenby Rd, Tel Aviv 61000. ITALY. Licosa (Librena 
Commissionaria Sansoni, S p A), Via Lamarmora 45, Casella Postale 552, 
50121 Florence. JAMAICA. Sangster's Bookstores Ltd., P.O. Box 366, 101 
Water Lane, Kingston: University of the West Indies Bookshop, Mona, Kings- 
ton. JAPAN. Eastern Book Service Inc., 37-3 Hongo 3-choine Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113. KENYA. East African Publishing House, P O. Box 30571. Nairobi: 
Africa Book Services Ltd., Quran House, Mfangano St., P.O. Box 45245, 
Nairobi KOREA. Korean National Commission for Unesco, P.O. Box Central 
64, Seoul. KUWAIT. The Kuwait Bookshop Co., Lid, POB 2942, Kuwait: for the 
Unesco Couner : Farafalla Press Agency, PQ. Box SAFA 4541, Kuwal, 
LESOTHO. Mazenod Book Centre, P.O Mazenod, Lesotho, Southern Africa. 
LIBERIA. Code and Yancy Bookshops Lid., P.O. Box 286, Monrovia, 
LIECHTENSTEIN. Eurocan Trust Reg. P.0.B. 59494 Schaan. LIBYAN 
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA. Agency lor Development of Publication and Distribu- 
tion, P.O. Box 34-35, Tripoh. LUXEMBOURG. Libraine Paul Bruck, 22, 
Grande-Rue, Luxembourg MALAWI. Malawi Book Service, Head Office, P.C. 
Box 30044 Chichiri, Blantyre 3. MALAYSIA. University of Malaya Co-opera- 
tive Bookshop, Kuala Lumpur 22-11. MALTA. Sapienzas, 26 Republic St., 
Valletta. MAURITIUS, Nalanda Company Ltd , 30 Bourbon St., Port-Louss. 
MONACO. Bntish Library, 30 Bd. des Moulins, Monte Carlo. NEPAL. Saha 
Prakashan Polchowk, Kathmandu. NETHERLANDS. Keesing Boeken B.V., 
Joan Muyskenweg, 22, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam. 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES. Van Dorp-Eddine N.V., P.O. Box 200, Willem- 
stad, Curagao, NAA, NEW ZEALAND. Government Publishing P.O. Box 
14277-Kiloirmie, Wellington, 130, Oxford Terrace, P.O. Box 1721 Christ- 
church; Alma St, P.O. Box 857, Hamilton; Princes St.. P.O. Box 1104, 
Dunedin NIGERIA, The University Bookshop of Ife; The University Bookshop 
of Ibadan, P.O. 286; The Unwersity Bookshop of Nsukka: The University 
Bookshop of Lagos, The Ahmadu Belle University Bookshop of Zana 
NORWAY. Jehan Grundt Tanum, P.O B. 1177 Sentrum - Oslo 1, Narvesen   
A/S; Subscription and Trade Book Service, PO B. 6125 Etterstad, Oslo 6; 
Universitets Bakhandelen, Universitetssentret, Postboks 307 Blindern, Oslo 
3. PAKISTAN. Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah Quaid-1-azam, P.O Box No. 
729. Lahore 3; Unesco Publications Centre, Regional Office for Book De- 
velopment in Asia and the Pacific, 39 Delhi Housing Society, P.O. Box 8950, 
Karachi 29. PHILIPPINES. National Book Store, Inc., 701. Rizal Ave., Manila 
D-404. POLAND. Orpan-lmpon, Palac Kultury | Nauki, Warsaw; Ars Polona- 
Ruch, Krakowskie Przedmiescie No.7. 00-068 Warsaw. PORTUGAL. Dias & 
Andrade Ltda. Livrana Portugal, rua do Carmo 70, Lisbon. SEYCHELLES. 
National Bookshop. P.O. Box 48, Mahé. New Service Lid , Kingsgate House, 
P.O. Box 131, Maha, SIERRA LEONE. Fourah Bay, Njala University and 
Sierra Leone Diocesan Bookshops. Freetown. SINGAPORE. Federal Pub- 
Iications (S) Pte Ltd. Times Jurong, 2 Jurong Port Rd., Singapore 2261. 
SOMALI DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. Modern Bookshop and General, P.O. 
Box 951, Mogadiscio. SOUTH AFRICA. For the Unesco Courner (single 
copies) only : Central News Agency, PO. Box 1033, Johannesburg. SRI 
LANKA. Lake House Bookshop, 100 Sir Chittampalam Gardiner Mawata, 
P.O B. 244, Colombo 2. SUDAN. Al Bashir Bookshop, P.O. Box 1118, 
Khartourn, SWEDEN. All publications A/B.C.E. Fritzes Kungel, Hovbokhan- 
del, Regeringsgatan 12, Box 16356, 10327 Stockholm 16. For the Unesco 
Courier : Svenska FN Forbundet, Skolgrand 2. Box 150 50 S-104, 65 Stock- 
helm; Wennergren-Williams, Box 30004-S-104, 25 Stockholm; Esselte Tids- 
knftscentralen, Gamla Brogatan 26, Box 62 - 101 20 Stockholm. 
SWITZERLAND. All publications : Eurgpa Verlag, 5 Ramisirasse, Zunch; 
Libraine Payot, Rue Grenus 6, 1211, Geneva 11, C.CP. 12-236; Libraries 
Payot also in Lausanne, Basle, Berne. Vevey, Montreux, Neuchatel and 
Zunch, TANZANIA. Dar-es- Salaam Bookshop, P.G.B. 9030, Dar-es-Salaam. 
THAILAND. Nibondh and Co. Ltd , 40-42 Charoen Krung Road, Siyaeg Phaya 
Sn, P.O. Box 402, Bangkok: Suksapan Pant, Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Ave., 
Bangkok; Suksit Siam Company, 1715 Rama IV Road, Bangkok. TRINIDAD 
AND TOBAGO. Nationa! Comnussion for Unesco, 18 Alexandra St, St. Cla, 
Trnrudad W 1. TURKEY. Haset Kitapewi A.S., Istiklal Caddes), No 468. Posta 
Kutusu 219, Beyeglu, Istanbul UGANDA. Uganda Bookshop. P.O. Box 7145, 
Kampala UNITED KINGDOM. HM Stationery Office, HM SQ, P.O. Box 
276. London SW8 5DT, and Govt Bookshops in London, Edinburgh, Belfast, 
Manchester, Birningham, Bristol: 1or scientific maps onty - McCana Ld. 122 
King's Cross Rd., London WC1X 9DS. UNITED STATES. Uniput, 205 East 
42nd St., New York, N.Y. 10017. Orders for books and pencdicals : P.O. Box 
1222, Ann Arbor, M1 48106 USSR, V/O Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, UI. Dimitro- 
va 39, Moskva 113095. YEMEN. 14th Oclober Corporation, P.O. Box 4227, 
Aden. YUGOSLAVIA. Miadost, lica 30/11, Zagreb; Cankarjeva Zalozba, 
Zopttaneva 2, Lubliana; Nolit, Terazye 27/11, Belgrade. ZAMBIA, National 
Educational Distribution Co. of Zambia Ltd, P.O. Box 2664 Lusaka. 
ZIMBABWE. Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd., 67 Union Ave., Harare.

## [Page 40](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/069653engo.pdf#page=40) 0

### IGNORE

  
E 
pe
 
The Earth on fire | 
Glowing streams of molten lava pour from the 
Hawaiian volcano Mauna Loa during an eruption in 1984. 
~ (Seearticle page27). | a 