# [073956](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf) 4

## [Page 1](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=1) 0

### IGNORE

C 
  
  
FF — = 
  
OU D 
. :     I KE 
  
R 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
 
Yolume II.—No 3. Price: 1) Cents (U.S.), 6 Pence (U.K.), or 25 Francs 
4 
APRIL 1949. 
  
Dr. Torres Bodet confers with President Truman at the White House during a visit of the Unesco Director-General to Wash- 
: ington on April 5, Standing: Asst. Secretary of State George V. Allen. 
Unesco Can Aid UN. Plan 
For Under-Developed Areas, 
NESCO can make an. important 
nl) contributicn to the United Na- 
tions plah to give technical assis- 
tance to the under-developed areas of 
the world, Dr. Jaime ‘Torres Bodet de- 
c¢iared in Washington early this month. 
After calling on President Truman at 
the White House on April 5 to express 
appreciation for the “outstanding work” 
the United States has done for Unesco, 
Torres Bodet told newsmen in Washing- 
inn that he “warmly welcomed” the 
resolution which the Economic and 
Social Council of the U.N. had adopted 
on March 4. : 
This resolution requests Tryzve Lie, 
in consultation with the Specialized 
Agencies, to submit a plan to ECOSOC 
kefore its meeting in July, for the tech- 
n‘cal and economic development of less 
advanced countries. 
“This generous and at the same time 
realistic initiative is in full harmony with 
the mission of the United Nations and es- 
pecially of Unesco, since education is a 
necessary corollary to economic develop- 
ment,” Torres Bodet declared. 
RECALLING that “the impetus for de- 
veloping this programme came ori- 
ginally from President 
Unesco chief added: “By. focusing world 
attention on the problem of under- 
developed areas, Mr. Truman, in my 
opinion, has made a very great contri- 
bution to the cause of peace. 
assistance to the under-privileged masses 
who have been by-passed by progress in 
many parts of the world is a constructive 
goal ‘for international co-operation.” 
“The educational and scientific aspects 
Truman”, the 
Giving 
Torres Bodet 
Says 
of the programme”, 
just as important as technical assistance. 
~The latter will be largely wasted if the 
inhabitants of the regions which are being 
assisted are not educated to make the 
best possible use of the economic assis- 
tance. Furthermore, any large-scale 
programme of the kind which is con- 
templated has important cultural im- 
plications. As their technological level 
rises, backward peoples must be helped 
to adapt their cultural independence... If 
© you are going to train their hands, you 
must also teach their minds.” 
Recalling that “a strict system of 
priorities for all Unesco activities this 
vear” had been set up, Torres Bodet 
said: “We are giving top priority to pro- 
jects which directly support the United 
Nations plans for under-developed areas.” 
HE called attention to Unesco’s. educa- 
tional missions in such countries as 
Siam, the Philippines and Afghanistan, 
to the educational seminars for setting up 
campaigns to combat illiteracy in India 
and Brazil, and to the clearing-house and 
experimental work in fundamental] edu- 
cation which includes the teaching of 
elementary hygiene and scientific agri- 
culture. 
he continuad, “are 
The Director-General also stressed the 
value of Unesco’'s achievements in estab- 
lishing field science co-operation offices 
in Cairo, Delhi, Shanghai and Montevideo, 
in stimulating scientific research in the 
various problems peculiar fo under- 
developeg areas, in obtaining fellowships 
in the more advanced countries for 
- Scholars from under-developed areas, and 
“in surveying the press, film and radio 
needs in these areas. 
He pointed out, however,” that 
scope of all this work cannot but be res- 
tricted because of our lack of adequate 
resources,” since Unesco's total budget 
is fixed at $7,780.000. 
quired.” he added, 
altogether different scale.” 
‘Referring to a recen{ meeting with 
Mr. Trygve Lie, Torres Bodet reported 
that he had assured the U.N. chief that 
“Unesco will co-operate in this enterprise 
to the fullest extent.” He announced that 
four Unesco officials were participatinz 
in the preliminary drafting of the Joint 
Plan for under-developed areas. which 
will ultimately be submitted to ECOSOC. 
“We think that from this preparatory 
stage onwards,” Dr. Torres Bodet said, 
“Unesco is in a position to make a 
valuable contribution. The human ele- 
ment remains the decisive factor in all 
technical and economic progress. If 
technical assistance is to produce eco- 
nomic effects that are deep and lasting... 
it must be based on an effort in the 
sphere of education-—-not merely techni- 
cal education, but also fundamental and 
even scientific education.” 
(Continued on Page 2.) 
| ALDOUS “the 
“What is now re-. 
“is an effort on an 


### 73957: Thousands join in UNESCO rally at Cleveland

  
Thousands 
JoininUnesco 
Rally A t 
Cleveland 
A /HAT Unesco has done and what ft 
‘WW must do was dramatically pre- 
sented to over 3,000 delegates at a 
three-day conference of the U.S. National 
Commission for Unesco which began on 
March 31 at Cleveland, Ohio. 
The conference, cne of the most com- 
prehensive ever held by a Unesco Na- 
tional Commission, drew representatives 
from hundreds of national organizations, 
and leaders from all parts of the United 
~ States, as well as officials and observers 
_ from many others countries. 
On April 1, in the great main audito- 
rium of the Cleveland City Hall, which 
had been decked with 8-foot high spark- 
ling silver letters spelling out UNESCO 
Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet spoke on “Unesco 
—A Personal Faith”, and Mrs. Eleanor 
Roosevelt on the Universal Declaration of 
~ Human Rights. 
.On the stage, backed by the 46 flags 
of Unesco's Member States, sat Dr. Miiton 
S. Eisenhower, president of the U.S. Com- 
mission; Mr. George V. Allen, Assistant 
Secretary of State; Dr. George D. Stod- 
dard, president of the University of 
Illinois; M. Henri Laugier, Assistant 
Secretary General of the United Nations; 
and Sir John Maud, Permanent Under- 
Secretary to the British Ministry of Edu- 
cation. ) 
Calling for a, “great crusade” for the 
maintenance of peace through education, 
Dr. Torres Bodet said: “Peace has to be 
built in the slums and in the villages, 
That is where most people live—and liva 
under conditions which constitute a per- 
manent threat to peace. About two- 
thirds of the human race are forgotten, 
and the most forgotten thing about them 
is their minds.” 
And the Director-General added: “So 
long as there are two groups of peoples— 
the one privileged, supplied with first 
class universities, laboratories and librar- 
ies, the other backward, for whom even 
primary school is luxury, there can be no 
true international peace of a just and 
lasting character.” (For the full text of 
Dr. Torres Bodet’s address, see Page 3.) 
Speaking on the subject “Making 
Human Rights Come Alive”, Mrs. Roose- 
velt described the U.N. Declaration as 
“an educational document” ahd called on 
peoples and nations to make it a “living 
document”. 
(Continued on Page 2.) 
      
  
   
  
HUXLEY 
~ SIR JOHN 
RUSSELL 
SRIPATI 
CHANDRASEKHAR 
ON 
“ FOOD 
AND PEOPLE” 
IN THIS ISSUE 
  
  ee —————————
—
—
—
—
—
 
         
 
 
   
 

## [Page 2](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=2) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO "COURIER 
 
  
Chairman of 
Commission for 
Unesco. 
Milton S. Eisenhower, 
- U.S. National 
Under-Developed 
Areas 
! (Continued from Page 1) 
He quoted the ECOSOC resolution which 
recognizes this need: “paying due atten- 
tion to questions of a social nature which 
directly condiiion economic develop- 
ment.” 
HE pointed out to correspondents that 
Unesco’s Executive Beard, at a special 
session convened in Paris on March 24, 
had approved several concrete proposals 
on the Organization's possible contribu- 
tions to the programme for technical 
assistance. 
These proposals, he said, bear on the 
scientific study of regional problems af- 
fecting the development of backward 
areas, the technical training of personnel, 
education of entire populations and cam- 
paigns against illiteracy, as well as adult 
education in hygiene, agriculture, handi- 
crafts and industry. 
QFEAKING in detail on the plan for 
the education of whole populations, 
the Unesco chief had said: “Men are 
not robots. All human activity is the 
necessary outcome of a state of mind. 
It is quite impossible to imagine technical 
training worthy of the name, that is, 
training which is not mere mechanical 
drilling, without it being based on fun- 
damental education and accompanied by 
general education. Backward peoples can- 
not be taught working methods and the 
rules of hygiene, of private and com- 
munity life which the modern technical 
age has developed, unless they have suf- 
ficient mental training to understand the 
explanations and reasons of those prac- 
tices. Otherwise man is either unable to 
use the instruments of his emancipation 
or else he becomes an instruinent himself. 
The first essential for any technological 
‘and economic progress is therefore to 
raise the standard of education of the 
general population.” 
Other projects outlined by the Director- 
General in Washington included the use 
of media of mass ccmmunication, pro- 
motion of primary education, and the 
promotion of scientific information and 
research. 
HE Unesco Director-General stressed 
the fact that the plan to aid backward 
areas must not be impa! ‘red by “mediccre 
results’. 
“If a lack of 
“tact with individ- 


### 73957: Thousands join in UNESCO rally at Cleveland

Thousands Join In Unesco 
N ational Rally 
(Continued 
from Page 1) 
“The beginning 
can only be made”, 
she said, “if we 
make the Declara- 
tion a living docu- 
ment, something 
that is not just 
words on paper 
but... which we 
really strive to 
bring into the lives 
of all peoples.” . 
On the opening 
day of the confer- 
ence. Dr. Eisen- 
hower emphasized 
the importance 
that the people of 
the United States 
are giving to the 
work and aims of 
Unesco. “Bach of 
the organizations 
on the National 
Commission—a nd 
they have ag com- 
bined total of some 
40 million members 
—has made Unesco 
one of its major 
projects”, he ex- 
plained. 
The U.S. Assis- 
tant Secretary of 
State also stressed 
the importance of 
Unesco’s direct con- 
uals of all coun- 
tries. “Unesco”, Mr. 
Allen said, “comes 
nearer to being an 
international or- 
ganization made up 
of millions of hu- 
man beings than 
any other inter- 
governmental body 
yet created... : 
“The job of Unesco is to create a world 
community, in which private individuals 
everywhere feel that they belong not only 
to a nation but are also citizens of what 
Wendell Wilkie called ‘One World'...” 
 
first U.S, award in Human Relations for her 
contribution to the cause of harmony among men.” 
  
 ——
Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, who spoke on Human Rights at the 
Cleveland National conference on Unesco, has just received the 
“outstanding 
The fundamental purpose of the Cleve- 
land conference was to illustrate how 
organizations, institutions and communi- 
ties are reaching the “grass-roots” of 
America by utilizing all available resources 
  
 
gufficient resources 
were to confine us 
to superficial efforts 
or token activity” 
he told correspon- 
dents, “this would 
mean an intense 
dizappointment for 
the peoples of the 
underdeveloped re- 
gions.” 
In discussing his 
meeting with Pre- 
sident Truma?, 
Torres Bodet ex- 
pressed pleasure at 
discovering that the 
President was thor- 
oughly acquainted 
with the details of 
Unesco's program- 
me, It was an “ins- 
piration”, he said, 
‘0 learn that despite 
neavy responsabili- 
ties as Chief Execu- 
tive of the United 
States, President 
Truman could find 
time to keep such 
elose track of 
Unesco’s activities. 


### 73958: Care' to ship books to schools, libraries

  
‘Care’ To Ship Books 
To Schools, Librairies 
GELS of U.S. technical and scientific 
books will be sent to foreign schools 
and libraries in Europe and Asia under 
a new programme sponsored by CARE, 
the Co-operative for American Remit- 
tances to Europe, 
The programme was announced at the 
second U.S. National Conference for 
Unesco hy Mr. Murray B. Lincoln, 
President of CARE. 
Mr. Linccln declared that the book 
programme is a practical way in which 
the people of the United States can aid 
Unesco's efforts towards educational re- 
_ construction. He said that the latest and 
best U.S. books will be selected to meet 
needs in countries which suffered from 
 
The American relief agency “CARE” which has distributed 
over 7,500,000 food and clothing packages to needy countries, 
will now alse ship technical books abroad. 
the war. These needs have been deter- 
mined by CARE missions in co-operation 
with Unesco, foreign ministries, education, 
and other authoritative sources. CARE 
will be guided in its selections by a com- 
mittee headed by Luther Evans, head of 
the U.S. Library of Congress. 
Included on the committee will be 
members of the American Library Asso- 
ciation and the U.S. Book Exchange. 
“I feel there will be popular support 
for this programme, for the people of the 
United States have given CARE 75 million 
dollars in the past for food and clothing 
packages,” Lincoln said. “For the new 
book programme, the publishers have 
assured CARE of their support and co- 
operation by giving a discount on the 
books purchased.” 
Mr. Lincoln pointed cut that during 
the past two years his organization has 
distributed more than seven and a half 
million food and clothing packages 
overseas. 
Milton S. Eisenhower, Chairman of the 
U.S. National Commission for Unesco, 
heartily endorsed the new book pro- 
gramme, which is scheduled to start on 
May 15. Present plans are to send the 
books in block shipments to institutions 
designated by Unesco and other agencies. 
The general categories of books to be 
sent overseas include health and welfare, 
nursing, medicine, dentistry, agricultural 
science, veterinary science, and English 
language instruction. In the field of 
applied science there will be books on 
biology, chemistry, engineering, geology, 
mathematics, physics, physiology, psycho- 
logy, and sociology. 
Countries to which CARE will offer the 
book programme include Austria, Belgium, 
Czechoslovakia, Finland, Italy, France, 
Greece, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, 
Great Britain, the American, British and 
French zones of Germany, Berlin, Korea 
and Japan. Only unused books will be 
shipped. 
    
to further Unesco’s objectives. 
Making use of various devices, such a8 
exhibits, demonstrations, films. round- 
table and panel discussions, and radio, 
nationally known figures took leading 
roles in dramatizing six major topics: edu- 
nationally known figures took leading 
persons, the United Nations, Human 
Rights, education, and the advancement 
of world civilization through the arts and 
sciences. 
With these discussions as a basis, dele- 
gates examined specific methods of indivi 
dual participation in Unesco's work 
through the .mass media, schools and 
colleges, adult education, libraries, busi- 
ness, farm and civic organizations. 
For example, farm leaders, representing 
farm organizations from 16 states, demon- 
strated “down to earth” rural participa- 
tion in Unesco's work. They described 
their “Get to know the United Nations” 
programmes which include carefully 
planned discussion groups, county “mis- 
sionary” work by trained farm leaders 
and the screening of films on interna- 
tional matters of concern to farmers. 
One of the highlights of the conference 
was the premiere performance of the 
“Freedom Symphony”, played by the 
Cleveland Symphony Orchestra and con- 
ducted by Mr. Howard Hanson, president 
of the U.S. National Music Council. The 
music for the Symphony was. based on 
extracts from compositions by leading 
American composers. It accompanied the 
reading of statements found in history’s 
greatest freedom documents—from the 
Magna Carta to the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. 
A NEW WORD 
IS COINED- 
‘UNESCAN” 
NEW word 
A — UNES- 
CAN — 
was coined on 
March 31, on the 
opening day of 
the Second U.S 
National Confer- § 
rence on Unesco, § 
in Cleveland, 
Ohio. . 
Speaking on 
“The Achieve- 
ments and Pro- 
mise of Unesco” 
Sir John Maud, 
Permanent Se- | 
cretary of the Mi- 
nistry of Educa- 
tion of the Uni- 
ted Kingdom and 
a member of 
Unesco’s Execu- 
tive Board, used 
the word Unescan 
for the first time 
to describe a’ per- 
son who takes 
part in Unesco 
activity. 
Two days later. 
the U.S. Assis- 
tant Secretary of Sir 
State for Public 
Affairs, George V. Allen, who spoke 
on “Unesco and the United Nations”, 
laid special emphasis on Sir John 
Maud’s use of the new word. 
“Perhaps the term may eventually 
come into general use,” Mr. Allen said, 
“to describe any citizen of the world 
who is willing to acknowledge his re- 
sponsibility to humanity as a whele. 
To become a TUnescan we heed to 
broaden our concepts and to realize 
that while we are Americans, English- 
men, or Mexicans, we are at the same 
time citizens of a world community fo 
which we have responsibilities, and to 
which we recognize some common 
fealty as members of one human race, 
A North Carolinian or a Kansan ean 
be a good American, and an American 
can be a good Unescan. 
“Pr. Torres Bodet refers often to 
Unesco as an organization through 
which human beings everywhere speak 
directly with each other. His hope, I 
am confident, is that the Unesco Se- 
cretariat itself can eventually deal 
with individuals not merely as Ameri- 
cans, Frenchmen, or Brazilians, but 
also as Unescans.” 
 
John MAUD 
    

## [Page 3](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=3) 0

### 73960: UNESCO: a personal faith

April 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
 
  
  
 
ESCO A Personal      
———— 
7a 
 
On April 1, on the occasion of the 
Second National Conference of the 
United States National Comission 
for Unesco, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet 
addressed a public audience of almost 
10,000 persons on “Unesco—A Personal 
Faith”. This address, which was widely 
applauded by delegates and visitors 
attending the conference, is reproduced 
‘in full below.     
  
States National Commission and to 
the citizens of Cleveland for this 
opportunity to speak to you. This is not 
my first visit to your country. It has, 
however, a special significance for me, 
because it is my first visit as Director- 
General of Unesco. 
i am deeply grateful to the United 
  
I am happy to be with you and happy. 
to greet on this 
platform tonight 
one of your most 
distinguished citi- 
zens—Murs. Eleanor 
Roosevelt. Her work 
in furthering the 
international un- 
derstanding to 
which you are all 
committed haslong 
been remarkable. 
Most recently, 
her signal efforts 
in helping the com- 
pletion of the Uni- 
versal Declaration 
of Human Rights 
in the Assembly of 
the United Nations 
have renewed the 
world’s hope that 
mankind will use 
the victory of the 
last war to build a 
better world for all 
men to live in. This 
indeed has been an 
objective long asso- 
ciated with the il- 
lustrious name she 
bears. It is also the 
objective of Unesco. 
Unesco is an or- 
ganization, main. 
tained by forty-six 
governments, in- 
cluding your own, 
to administer cer- 
. os i 
—. Rs tain human in- y 
terests which they Pak 
all have in com- Support your 
mon. By your Gov- 
ernment’s partici- 
pation in it, you, as American citizens, 
have both rights and obligations with 
regard to this Organization. 
Through your participation in the work 
of Unesco, and in many other ways, you 
are making a major contribution to the 
cause of human progress. In you I salute: 
greatness achieved and greatness yet to 
come: the strength of a young nation. 
But what strikes me most is not the 
immense material force of your country. 
It is the fact that in your universities and 
colleges, libraries and many other na- 
tional and community voluntary organiza- 
tions. 
struggling to uphold those spiritual values 
that preserve a nation’s virtue from cor- 
ruption—the fellowship of men, respect 
for man as an individual, and respect for 
civilization as an assertion of freedom. 
‘IS THE 
APPROACH 
to birth. What were the arguments 
in favour of its creation? They are 
suinined up in the preamble to our Cons- 
titution, Let me recall to your minds one 
of th's document’s most striking clauses: 
“That a peace based exclusively upon 
the political and economic arrange- 
ments of governments would not be a 
peace which could secure the wuna- 
nimous, lasting and sincere support 
of the peoples of the world and that 
the peace must therefore be founded, 
if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual 
and moral solidarity of mankind”. 
The words I have just read to you still 
throb with the spirit that gave Unesco 
life Maybe, our post-war difficulties 
have modified a little of that “first fine 
carcless rapture.” We are daily faced, and 
faced more clearly, with the fact that 
while everyone. as an individual, yearns 
for peace, the horizon is clouded with the 
tracic menace of fresh wars. 
Does that mean that the Unesco ap- 
proach was wrong? I say emphatically— 
no. In my opinion what is wrong is that 
the. Unesco approach has not yet been 
T was thus that Unesco was brought’ 
men and women like you are 
 
a 
> 
By J. TORRES BODET 
Director-General 
man possesses nothing, if he does 
not use what he has for the well- 
being of humanity. In a country 
like yours, with its huge resources, thera 
may indeed be groups of people who are 
concerned to use the fruit of their labour 
in order to increase their own power and 
influence, But you, educators, scientists, 
artists and civic leaders, know as well as 
I do that the lust for power often deflects 
nations from their natural. destiny. 
Power is built up only to fall, unless if 
rests on the one solid basis—the basls of 
the spirit. The continual struggle to 
preserve the moral basis of a nation’s 
PRRRAR IRE Sih Fain 
“strength—through the arts. education and 
thought—is the strongest bulwark of 
national security. 
That is why, in the recent war, before 
your soldiers had come home, vou declar- 
ed yourselves in favour of a just and 
worthy peace. In the Fall of 1945, your 
delegates came to London to plead the 
cause of international co-operation through 
education, science and culture. 
As the delegate of my country, I was 
able, in the capital of Great Britain, to sce 
the efforts which your representatives 
were making. And may I tell you frankly 
that of all your victories the one that 
impressed me most was that supreme vie- 
tory over yourselves, when you decided, in 
the hour of triumph, to erect no walls of 
hatred between victors and vanquished, 
"but to clear the path to understanding. 
UNESCO 
WRONG 
seriously tried. Concerned with organizing 
their political and economic life, govern- 
ments do not always attach the same 
importance to the moral conditions which 
furnish that political and economic life 
with its strongest support in the hearts 
‘and minds of men. Thus the concept of 
interdependence often takes precedence 
over the concept of solidarity. Unhappily 
the interdependence of governments, 
without the solidarity of nations, is not 
enough to avert the dangers of war. 
Stunted Minds Breed War 
AR can always be made between 
WwW the great capitals. Peace has to 
be built in the slums and in the 
villages. That is where most people liva— 
and live under conditions which constitute 
a permanent threat to peace. About two- 
thirds of the human race are forgotten 
men—and the most forgotten thing about 
them is their minds. 
About half of the human race is totally 
illiterate. 
A very small percentage of all the adults 
in the world have had the equivalent of 
a full high-school education. A much 
smaller fraction can be considered really 
educated men and women, The fact that 
this handful of intellectuals has attained 
a level of education unprecedented in 
history does not lessen the gravity of the 
situation. On the contrary, it increases it. 
I know that you do not need to be con- 
vinced that the unequal distribution of 
food and material wealth in the world is 
a menace to peace. But, inequalities in the 
access to knowledge and to technical skills 
may be as great a menace to peace as 
those inequalities in the access to raw 
materials about which we used to hear so 
much. Stunted minds breed war. 
T is for this reason that no pro- 
gramme for raising standards of 
living, for insuring the world with 
greater prosperity is possible, or indeed 
‘A GRIM 
N any country, so long as there are, 
on the one hand, people who can 
command all the benefits of tech- 
nical progress in education and science 
and, on the other hand, vast numbers 
who are illiterate, there can be no real 
social peace. And, in the world, so long as 
there are two groups of peoples—the one 
privileged, supplied with first-class uni- 
versities, laboratories and libraries, the 
other backward, for whom even a primary 
school is a luxury, there can be no true 
ternational peace of a just and lasting 
character, 
Too few people admit or understand this 
grim reality, Perhaps that is why we 
sometimes hear Unesco ridiculed as an 
organcizaiion of dreamers and idealists. 
   
   
La 
 
wif £08 NATO wines TL Ll. J 
has any prospect of success unless it is 
accompanied by programmes of educating 
for the development of men’s minds, theis 
spirit, and their moral strength. 
In this connexion I have read with grea$ 
interest the resolution of the ECOSOG 
calling upon the United Nations and 
Specialized Agencies to submif proposals 
for the economic development of under- 
developed territories, Unesco is giv.ng 
careful study to this question to determine 
what its. best contribution may be. 
History shows that, wherever the few 
are too highly educated, and the many tao 
ignorant, there tend to arise energetie 
individuals or groups whose minds are a 
terrifying sixture of ignorance and edas 
cation, of intelligence and brutality, of 
savagery and progress, ’ 
This mixture is the most deadly social 
explosive that we know. Therefore I 
maintain that the most dangerous division 
in the world is the one between educa- 
tion and ignorance, between the cul 
turally-privileged and the culturally-undeps 
privileged, between the intellectual “haves® 
and the intellectual “have-nots”. 
REALITY’ 
activities, Unesco cannot do its joh. 
Fortunately, this does not happen in your 
country. I would like to take this occasion 
to voice my admiration for the work which 
your National Commisison is doing for 
the execution of the Unesco programme. 
Since I cannot, today, express my thanks 
toc each one of you individually, let me 
thank you through the person of your 
Chairman. 
. Dr, Eisenhower, your own tireless 
labours in the cause of Unesco are an 
inspiration to all of us. Under your 
brilliant leadership, the U.S. National 
Commission is an example of free and 
well-organized ability. As Director-General 
of Unesco, I rejoice at that and am happy 
to congratulate you most warmly upon it. 
As you know, 
Unesco was direct- 
ed by the General 
Conference at 
Beirut to give wide 
publicity to the 
Universal Declara- 
tionof Human 
Rights, and we 
have accordingly 
made Hums&n 
Rights the subject 
of one of our main 
programme activi. 
ties for the year. 
As part of this 
campaign I wrote 
to all the National 
Commissions in the 
Member States re- 
commending that 
they take active 
steps to publicize 
the Declaration. 
In his reply on 
behalf of your Na- 
tional Commission 
Dr. Eisenhower age 
sured me thafy 
apart from other 
action the Commis« 
sion is taking, this 
meeting in Cleves 
land would emphas 
size Human Rights 
: » » * . - 
wi / sdbor A mr : Shame: Bos ora as one of its major 
p ] # Jug wa wh Bae - x < themes. I am hap.
va : dy na a eB tl irs cig you : py to see how ofa 
x vA mond lend A ped brag den: hw 2 - Gk fectively this prome 
: Leas pe IRE ise has been reals 
a
 
For we are aware of the problem and 
we are trying to do something about it. 
Our means are feeble. You cannot bring 
education, science and culture to all the 
forgotten men and forgotten minds of 
the world with a budget which is less than 
eight million dollars a year. But let me 
ask you: Which is more unrealistic—to 
work at the foundations of peace with 
inadequate tools, or to start putting up 
the house before the foundation has been 
laid? 
HE problem of co-ordination of 
efforts is more difficult in our case, 
perhaps, than in the case of the 
other Specialized Agencies of the United 
Nations. Unesco’s work takes place, so to 
speak, at the third remove: questions 
submitted to us must previously have been 
considered by the National Commissions 
and by the Governments. If the National 
Commissions do not work diligently 
enough, or if the governments place 
obstacles in the way of the Commission’s 
ized and again I 
EE would like to thank 
Mrs. Roosevelt for 
the support she is 
giving our work by her presence here. 
Surely no one is better fitted in brinzing 
home to the masses the importance of ti:s 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
‘Unesco Cannot Go Ahead 
Without the Support of 
the Great Masses’ 
NESCO cannot go ahead without the 
J support of the great masses whicly 
make up public opinion. Unesco wag 
set up to promote international under= 
standing throughout the world; it mus# 
begin by making itself understood by al 
men throughout the world. Hitherto, 
despite the efforts of the Secretariat and 
of my distinguished predecessor, we have 
not made much progress along that road. 
(Continued on page 4.)

## [Page 4](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=4) 0

### 73960: UNESCO: a personal faith

4 UNESCO COURIER April 1949 
 
UNESCO A Zeesonal 7aith   
 
(Continued from Page 3) 
The National Commissions of Unesco's 
- Member States must clearly understand 
that one of their main functions is to 
bring Unesco into direct contact with the 
people. We, in our work, often need spe- 
cialists, technicians and experts: but the 
greatest fruits of our efforts must be 
enjoyed by the greatest number. The man 
in the street must not remain unaware 
that Unesco exists and is thinking of him. 
His distress, his anxieties, and his desires 
are the best reasons for our existence. 
WE NEED NATIONAL COMMISSIONS SUCH 
AS YOURS. THESE COMMISSIONS MUST MUL- 
TIPLY THEIR RELATIONSHIPS WITH TEE 
PEOPLES THEY REPRESENT. THERE SHOULD 
NOT BE A NEWSPAPER, A UNIVERSITY, A 
COLLEGE, A PRIMARY SCHOOL OR AN ADULT 
ORGANIZATION THAT DOES NOT KNOW 
WHAT UNESCO 1S. THERE ARE THOUSANDS 
C7 TEACHERS AND WRITERS AND MILLIONS 
OF MEN AND WOMEN WHO THINK AS YOU 
AND 1 DO, WHY NOT GO OUT TO THEM 
THROUGH THE BOOK OR THE SPOKEN 
WORD, THE RADIO, OR THE FILM. THE PRYFS 
OR TELEVISION? 
A Challenge to Film: 
Producers 
OU have at your hand the greatest 
instrument for swaying minds that 
man has ever created—your motion 
pictures. Why ndt try to persuade your 
studios to turn out a series of films, ex- 
plaining how ignorance imprisons man; 
how igaorance of other countries’ ways of 
life creates political tensions which might 
be avoided if all men made an honest 
attempt to understand each other? Films 
finally, to show that many peoples, poor 
and undernourished though they are, 
furnish humanity with treasures of art 
and with some of the greatest leaders of 
our time? 
During the war, the motion picture did 
a wonderful job in showing the moral 
reasons which had impelled the demo- 
cracies to take up the challenge of the 
totalitarian governments, Why should not 
film producers throw themselves today 
with equal fervour into the task of show- 
ing the moral reasons why we must not 
accept blindly, as an inevitable calamity. 
the threat of new wars? 
"Could they not, by moving and dramatic 
stories—as dramatic and as moving as the 
facts themselves—bring home to the world 
the need for educational reconstruction in 
war-devastated countries and the need to 
help education in economically backward 
countries? 
Comic-Strips As a 
Constructive Force 
HERE is another great force in your 
1] country which could be harnessed to 
constructive ends. I refer to your 
comic-strips, which are gaining such popu- 
larity throughout the world—so much, 
indeed, that, in certain c®untries, alarm 
has been expressed at the influence which 
they have upon young minds. I think 
myself that this influence is often harm- 
ful. But it need not be. It could be a 
wholesome influence. 
For example, your most talented comic- 
strip artists might more frequently weave 
into their stories characters portraying 
foreigners and members of under- privileg- 
ed minority groups within your own coun- - 
try in a sympathetic light. That would be 
a good contribution to the work of Unesco 
—and to the social health of your country. 
Comics should be uséd also to tell the 
story of what each nation has contributed 
to our civilization—especially what they 
have contributed to the development of 
human rights. This would be aiding one of 
Unesco’s main campaigns. 
Such things could not be done to order 
or by decree in a country like yours, 
which owes its astounding progress to 
initiative, free enterprise and free associa- 
tion. But much could be done by a cam- 
paign of patient and sustained persuasion. 
It is a natural pursuit of children to 
form *“‘excursion clubs” and, from their 
schools, to exchange letters. messages, 
stamps and so forth. Why not take the 
opportunity of founding clubs of young 
“Friends of Unesco”? Their members 
would practise in their comununities and 
homes the principles of social life advocat- 
ed by Unesco and so, to the experience 
they have gained of their own country, 
they would add a knowledge of the world, 
a united world. Like charity, Unesco 
begins at home,   
One of Humanity’s 
HERE are two Unesco campaigns 
which I hope you will push forward 
even more vigorously than you 
have in the past. One is the “Food and 
People” drive—the programme of mass 
education in which we are co-operating 
with the United Nations Food and Agri- 
culture Organization to make people 
throughout the world aware of one of 
humanity's gravest problems, 
Surely there are few beiter ways of 
promoting the moral and intellectual 
solidarity of mankind than to make the 
world understand that our grandchildren 
are going to starve and wars will be 
encouraged unless we co-operate in utiliz- 
ing all the possibilities of science to pre- 
serve and develop our food resources. 
Gravest Problems ris 
 
“It is a natural pursuit of children to form ‘excursion clubs’ 
and, from their schools, to exchange letters, messages, stamps 
and so forth. Why not take the opportunity of founding clubs 
of young ‘Friends of Unesco’ ? Their members would practise 
in their communities and homes the principles of social life 
advocated by Unesco and so, to theexperience they have gained 
of their own country, they would add a knowledge of the world.” 
‘IT IS THE FOUNDATIONS 
OF CIVILIZATION WE HAVE 
TO RECONSTRUCT’ 
HE other campaign which I hope 
you will intensify is the one on 
behalf of educational reconstruction 
in. war-devastated countries, Through the 
voluntary organizations and the United 
States National Commission with which 
Unesco is co-operating, the American 
. people have already contributed gener- 
ously to this cause. From the bottom .of 
my heart, I thank you. But let me plead 
with you not to relax your efforis, or 
curb your generosity. The need is as 
great as ever, and it is more than a 
humanitarian need. 
It is the foundations of civilization 
which sve have to reconstruct—founda- 
tions that were already too narrow and 
too precarious before war blasted them 
away in many lands. Remember that it 
was not merely the fruits of yesterday’s 
civilization which war destroyed, but the 
  
“For me, Unesco is not merely an insti- 
fution, It is a personal faith, If I 
believe in Unesco, it is because I 
know that peace is worth more than war, 
and education more than propaganda, 
just as truth is better than a lie, and 
light is better than darkness, Men can- 
not live without struggling, but if men 
are to struggle, it should be against 
poverty, ignorance, hatred, fear and 
disease; they should struggle to build up, 
and never to destroy.” 
tools of tomorrow’s civilization. And it 
is now—today—that the worst caltural 
losses of war are occuring—in the minds 
of millions of children who are being de- 
prived of education because the means for 
educating ‘them have been destroyed. 
These are really the irreparable losses. I 
know you will not let them go on. 
Education for Backward Areas 
suggested earlier to you that there 
is urgent need for the governments 
of advanced countries to give edu- 
calional, as well as economic assistance 
to the backward or undeveloped areas 
of the world. 
There are, however, certain limitations 
%0 the action of individual governments 
in this field. There are certain necessary 
tasks which can best performed by an 
impartial and non-political international 
agency, 
This was recognized in your country 
as early as 1914, when a bill was introduc- 
ed into your House of Representatives 
calling for an international educational 
~ fund—to be administered by an interna~- 
tional commiitee of educators—for the 
very purpose we have in mind. In one 
way we have made progress since then, 
for Unesco now exists to do this work. 
On the other hand, the bill to which 
I refer proposed that all governments 
participating in the international educa- 
tional fund should contribute to it one 
per cent of their annual military budgets. 
If this principle were applied to Unesco 
our budget would not, at it is, be less than 
eight million dollars—it would be many 
times that amount. At present, when 
Member States apply to us for advice in 
developing their educational programmes, 
we feel like a doctor prescribing costly 
remedies to a patient who has not fhe 
money to buy them. 
Cultural Uniformity: 
A Spiritual Disaster 
HEN I speak of educational and 
WwW economic assistance in raising 
the cultural level of under-privi- 
leged countries, I am not thinking of a 
specific form of culture, however fine it 
might be, In my opinion, uniformity 
would be a spiritual disaster, amounting 
to the loss of all that is mos" original 
and typical in any nation: its language, 
its art, its thought, its view of life and 
of beauty—its soul, in fact. 
Funds collected for assistance of this 
sort could, of course, be administered by 
an international body; but they would 
have to be used in accordance with the 
laws, and on behalf of the educational 
systems, of the countries which accept 
the assistance. ’ 
Then, again, when 
1 speak of the need 
to combat ignoran- 
ce in order to 
promote peace, I 
place no exaggerat- 
ed belief in what 
the schools alone 
can do for social 
reconstruction. 
NESCO has. 
been given the 
task of work- 
ing through the 
scools to promote 
the ideals of jus- 
tice toward all 
countries and res- 
pect for the dignity 
of every man. But 
if, as Director- 
General of Unesco, 
I said to you: “In 
a world whose 
thoughts are fixed 
on war, the schools 
alone will be 
enough to educate 
mankind for peace”, 
then I should be 
wrong. The schools 
are not enough; the 
writers, artists and 
poets are not enough. Schools worthy 
of the life which we desire demand a 
life worthy of the schools we seek. The 
ruler in his decisions. the statesman in 
his speeches; the scientist in the appli- 
cation of his discoveries; the journalist 
in the drafting of his articles; the woman 
in her daily household tasks, every one 
—I say every single one—is a potential 
educator for peace. 
Teacher and the 
Bull-Fight 
LL of you have heard of bull-fights. 
I used to go to them occasionally 
when I was young. I thought I 
liked them until, one day, I found I did 
not. And when I realized why, I made a 
firm resolve to go no more to entertain- 
ments of that kind, What I realized then 
was that, at bull-fights, the public feels 
brave because it is applauding the pro- 
fessional who risks his life against the 
bull. I; feels brave—but what the specta~ 
tors are doing is enjoying the rewards 
of courage by proxy. They pay for a 
professional to be brave on their behalf 
for two or three hours, and that gives 
them pleasure and makes them feel tough 
In quite a number of cases, something 
very similar takes place in education. 
People cheer on the teacher and delegate 
to him the task of being friendly, under- 
standing, fair, frank and weaceful. But 
nobody canbekindlyor courageous through 
another; he can be so only through his 
own personal effort, No one can live 
our lives for us, save ourselves. In other 
words, we must not make of the educator 
what Nietzsche would probably have 
christened “Virtue's gladiator”. Let usnot 
lounge on the benches above the arena 
while, on the sand below, the teacher 
battles against the forces of rancour and 
ignorance. Let us accept the responsibil- 
ities which the need to save peace imposes 
on us. I give you my solemn assurance 
that Unesco will not cease to bear its. 
whart of the burden. 
~~ «WHY NOT UNDERTAKE 
A GREAT CRUSADE IN PEACE 
- AS IN WAR 2’ 
\ OU wili ask whether what I am pro- 
N posing to you is a crusade. Weil, 
yes, it is just that—a great crusade, . 
And why should the nations and indivi- 
duals not undertake this crusade in peace, 
as they did, at the risk of their lives, 
.in war? 
For ne, Unesco is: not merely an insti- 
tution. It is a personal faith. If I had 
not this deep faith in it, I should not 
have left my country, that reality which 
is my counlry, to devote myself to an 
international fiction. No, if I had not that 
faith, I should not be here. I should be 
somewhere in my country, either a 
Minister, as I was when I accepted to 
assume the direction of Unesco, or else 
a simple citizen, living. hoping and suffer- 
ing with my co-equals; but I believe in 
Unesco, and that is why I am at Unesco. 
And if I believe in Unesco, it is because 
I know that peace is worth more than 
war, and education more than propa- 
ganda, just as truth is better than a 
lie, and light is better than darkness. 
Men cannot live without struggling; but’ 
if men are to struggle, it should be 
against poverty, ignorance, hatred, fear 
and disease; they should struggle to build 
up, and never to destroy. 
OR centuries, the peoples have lived 
in a world of isolated cultures 
which they regarded as mutually 
incompatible. But we now know that all 
cultures can and must harmonize. without 
excluding or distorting each other, in 
order to contribute to the emergence 
of a world civilization. 
Harmony does not imply uniformity. 
Far be it from me to advocate a uniform 
world, in which individuals and peoples 
would be as interchangeable as the mass- 
produced parts of a machine. Life means 
diversity, but diversity is not necessarily 
a source of conflict. 
In laying the foundation for a world 
civilization based upon cultural diversity 
without conflict, a special respoasibility 
rests on your shoulders. Your country is 
streng and rich. The world is entited 
ty expect from you not mere self-restraint 
and co-operation, but continuing :nspira- 
tion and initiative. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for 
your patience. Before I end, may I express 
my earnest conviction that you will not 
disappoint the hopes which are placed 
in you. I know that you are unshakably 
committed to the mission which one of 
your greatest Presidents proclaimed in 
words that have an immortal echo: 
“With malice toward none, with cha- 
rity for all, with firmness in the right... 
let us strive on to all which may 
achieve and cherish g just and lasting 
peace”. 
Lincoln's words still apply today; their 
grandeur is undiminished by the passage 
of time. They define, as well as anything 
which has ever been said since, the task 
that lies before you, and the {oal which 
Unesco seeks for all mankind.

## [Page 5](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=5) 0

### 73961: Food and people

SUPPLEMENT 
  
  
  
 
cov 
PUBLICATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION 
  
 
Yolume II.—No 3. 
APRIL 1949. 
  
  
The inevitable result of reckless destruction of foresis and uncontrolled abuse of the land's resources: good farmland is turned into barren and desolate dust-bowls (above, left). 
Seientific contour farming in dust-bowl areas, however, gradually brings the land back to fertility (above right), 
‘But som» experts have warned that there is not enough land on earth to raise the food humans need. “In the race between population and food, population is winning "the first 
president of F.A.O. has reported. Over half the people in. the world don’t get enough to eat, Over-population, insufficient farm production: these are the problems. 
  
CAN WE FEED THE MILLIONS OF EXTRA MOUTHS THAT ARE BEING ADDED TO THE 
WORLD EVERY YEAR ? ARE WE MAKING FULL USE OF ALL THE NEW RESOURCES OF AGRI- 
CULTURAL SCIENCE ? UNESCO PAMPHLETS KEYNOTE WORLD DISCUSSIONS. 
been three major alarms in regard to the world’s 
rising population and the inadequacies of food 
supplies: one by Thomas R. Malthus in 1798, a second by 
. Sir William Crookes exactly one century later, and the 
third during the last few years. The first two alarms 
proved to be false, Will today’s also prove to be a false 
alarm? 
Some experts say yes—others are less optimistic. Boh 
groups agree, however, that the world’s food resources 
are being used very unevenly and very wastefully, and 
recognize that the world cannot afford this at a time 
when population is growing at a rate which now exceeds 
20.000.000 persons a vear. The growth threatens to 
outstrip our food resources unless something is done 
soon to re-establish the balance. This is one of the com- 
. manding problems qf our times. 
Unesco has selected “Food and People” as a major 
discussion topic for this year and has issued a call to 
discussion groups throughout the world to give attention 
to this challenge. 
In crder to focus public opinion and stimulate discus- 
sion in schools, colleges, local clubs, civic organizations 
and adult education groups, Unesco asked experts in the 
- ford and population field to write a series of papers on 
the problems involved. 
| N the last one hundred and fifty years, there have 
1} HE first of this series—a “master pamphlet” form- 
ng an introduction to all the others to follow — 
has just been published in English, in. British and Amer- 
ican editions under Unesco sponsorship. 
Aldous Huxley fires the opening shot of the campaizn 
with what he terms “The Double Crisis” which the world 
is hopelessly facing today; he stresses the declining 
fertility of the soil as opposed to the increasing fertility 
of mankind. Sir John Russell fires back, almost in total 
disagreement, emphasizing particularly the incalculable 
possibilities of scientific advancement. 
As in all the forthcoming pamphlets which Unesco 
will sponsor throughout the campaign, the views 
expressed are the authors’ own, whether optimistic or 
pessimistic. 
The British and American editions of the Huxle7- 
Russell pamphlets have been published by the Bureau 
of Current Afjairs in London (1) and by “Science 
Service” in Washington (2), 
The Current Affairs booklet, which sells for 9d., con- 
tains valuable suggestions and questions to guide discus- 
sion groups for the entire series. “Why not turn your’ 
first session into a formal or informal debate?” the 
Current Affairs pamphlet writes. “Either get two men 
bers of the group to outline briefly the case, first as put 
by Huxley and then by Russell, then throw it open to the 
group. Or else, having chosen your opening speakers, let 
the rest of the group divide off into “optimists” and 
“pessimists”; and let fly in debate. A good idea would he 
to let each side study in advance -only the article that 
supports their own view—then see how they stand up 
to attack.” 
Spanish and French editions of the entire “Food and 
People” pamphlet series, sponsored by Unesco, will be 
published in the forthcoming weeks and months by 
Editorial Sud-Americana of Buenos-Aires and by a 
French publisher in Paris. 
LTHOUGH the pamphlet series is admittedly one 
AN of the important means being used to stimulate 
discussion in all parts of the world, it is not the sole 
method. Working in collaboration with the United Na~ 
tions, FAO and WHO, Unesco is organizing campaigns 
for radio discussions, film {reatment, exhibitions and 
filmstrips for community and national groups in 
different countries, 
The Unesco World Review weekly radio programme 
for example, is devoting one programme a month to an 
aspect of “Food and People”, 
In the Union of South Africa, Belgium and Iran, 
World Federation of the United Nations Asseciations 
have already launched detailed discussion on “Food and 
People” problems in their own countries, The WFUNA 
summer school, which is scheduled to open in Geneva 
in August, will devote one entire week to this question 
and will offer a training programme for discussion 
leaders from over 20 countries, Unesco will provide train- 
ing for discussion teachers to map out plans of action 
and is offering 6 bursaries for representatives from needy 
countries. 
As the American edition of the “Food and People 
pamphlet published by “Science Service” in co-operation 
with Unesco, urges readers, “make this the discussion 
topic for your fall programme.” 
On pages 6, 7 and 8, of this issue the Unesco Courier 
presents long extracts from the challenging articles by 
Aldous Huxley and Sir John Russell's reply. In addition, 
on page 9, Dr. S. Chandrasekhar presents some of (be 
complicated population problems of India. 
(1) “Current Affairs’, No 77 of 2nd April, 1949, published dy The 
Bureau of Current Affairs, Carnegie House, 117, Piccadilly, Londony 
Price 9 pence. 
(2) “Science Service”, am institution for the popularization of 
science, 1719, N. Street N.W., Washington 6, D.C. Price 10 cents:     
SEE PAGES 6 TO 9 
 

## [Page 6](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=6) 0

### IGNORE

  
  
  
  
Tos ok 
  
EE EE rr « = 0g 
™ N LB a - 4 
| 
  
  
     
CARDEE AN 
. * OTHER JANG EAST MOS 
FACS 
The two maps shown above and upper right, arc reproduced from a forthcoming “Food and People” 
_ pamphlet.—*“Are there too many of us”—prepared by the French demographer, M. Paul Vincent. 


### 73962: The Double crisis

The Double Crisis 
By Aldous Huxley 
a time of crisis, and that crisis 
exists, so to speak, on two levels— 
an upper level of political and 
economic crisis and a lower level crisis 
in population and world resources. That 
which is discussed at international con- 
ferences and in the newspapers is the 
upper level crisis—the crisis whose imme- 
diate causes are the economic breakdown 
due to the War and the struggle for 
power between groups possessing, or about 
to possess, the means of mas® extermina- 
tion. Of the low-level crisis, the crisis in 
population and world resources, hardly 
anything is heard in the press, on the 
radio or at the more important interna- 
tional conferences. 
"Yet the low-level crisis is at least as 
serious as the crisis in the political and 
economic field. Moreover, the problems 
on the upper level cannot be solved 
without reference to the problems that are 
taking shape in the cosmic and biological 
basement. If it is ignored, the low-level 
crisis is bound to sharpen the crisis on 
the political and econcmic levels. At the 
same time, a concentration of attention 
and energy on power politics and power 
economics will make a solution of the 
low-level problems not merely difficult, 
but impossible. 
In what follows I propose to discuss 
certain aspects of the low-level crisis and 
to point out how the obscure happenings 
in the basement have affected and are 
Ike’y to go on affecting the lives of pri- 
vate individuals, the policies of statesmen 
and the conduct of nations, 
I human race is passing through 
WORLD FOOD PRODUCTION SINCE THE WAR 
AN Bperes ia percentages. Trova production « 100° wm ach co. 
FRE. WAR PRODUCTION 
Sr——— I — 
we, : L) 
SS SSS SSS IN 
-, ” w 
~ 
~ 
   
    BITISM 
SOUTHERN 
DOMINIONS 
»% Most of the remainder of the total was produced by the U.S.S.K_, where 
wartime statistics on food production have not beem published. 
: (Reproduced from “Currenl Affairs?) 
LAND AREA 
| J 1 man A 
      
     
ERE AAA EEE 1943 
TORI SR EET [IER 
NAS te os I 
ab lib SSS 1943 
at UO a a AN '*> 
aE a rl vos 
+ J 
NOODCNNNIND RUHNURO RDIDORI0ND ony (EAE 
  
“Poverty In the Midst 
of Poverty” 
tT has been fashionable for some time 
past to talk about “poverty in the 
midst of plenty”. The phrase imuvplies 
that the planet possesses abundant re- 
sources to feed, clothe, house and provide 
amenities for its existing population and 
for any immediately foreseeable increase 
in that population, and that the present 
miseries of the human race are due 
entirely to faulty methods of production 
and, above all, of distribution. Given 
currency reform, socialism, communism, 
unrestricted capitalism, distribution, or - 
whatever the favourite remedy may be, 
humanity, like the prince and princess in 
- the stories, will be able to live happily 
ever after. Want and hunger will be 
transformed into abundance and the 
whole earth will become one vast Land of - 
Cockayne, 
Such are the miracles to be achieved 
by political and economic planning, But 
when we pass from these high-level 
considerations to a study of what is 
going on at the biological and ecological 
levels, our optimism is apt to seem a 
little premature, to say the least of it. 
Instead of poverty in the midst of 
plenty, we then find that there is poverty 
in the midst of poverty. World-resources 
are inadequate to world-population. And 
-meanwhile world population is rising. It 
is rising at the rate of about two hundred 
millions every ten years. 
Soil-Erosion 
Menaces 
Civilization 
 
    
   
JREOVER 
while popu- 
lation goes 
up, the fertility of 
the soil declines. 
Atomic warfare can 
a Th 
    
   
    
     cular civilization; 
soil-erosion can put 
an end to the very 
> 3319 
civilization. Favour- 
able weather has 
prevailed in North 
America for the 
1943 last eight years 
and, in conse- 
quence, we hear 
much less of ero- 
‘ion than was heard 
during that succes- 
1945 sion of dry seasons 
which called the 
Dust Bowl into 
1943 existence. 
Nevertheless, in 
spite of consider- 
able ‘improvment 
in agricultural 
practices, soil-ero- 
sion still goes on 
and is likely, as 
soon as the conti- 
nental weather ta- 
kes another turn 
for the worse, to 
assume the same 
disastrous propor- 
tions as it did in the 
   
   
  
   
 
  
  
    
possibility of any: 
destroy one parti- 
» 
- 
L 
thirties, But within the next twenty-five 
years the population of the United States 
will rise (if nothing untoward happens in 
the interval) by about thirty millions. 
Aldous Huxley 
What is happening in North America ° 
is happening also in other parts of the 
world. Erosion is rampant all over Africa, 
where a rapidly increasing native popu- 
lation clings tenaciously to its old habit 
of measuring social status in terms of 
cattle. There are more people, therefore 
more cows, therefore more over-grazing, 
therefore more erosion. 
In. Asia too, the same irreparable 
damage is being done to the very 
foundations of any possible civilization. 
Human poverty exists in the midst of a 
steadily increasing natural poverty. 
More People—Less Food 
INCE 1800, Western Europe has 
JJ trebled its population. This increase 
was made possible by the exploita- 
tion of the empty and agriculturally 
virgin territories of the New World. 
   
   
Aldous Hux 
about wor 
Paily Mail 
Aldous Huxley, novelist 
Russell, scientist and optimist, 
{inside the covers of a ninepeg 
| 2nd population prcblems issu 
Tno pamphlet, “Food and the 
] Pecple,” is sponsered py Uncsch, 
- punished by the Bureau of Current} 
nat {Affaiss and distributed by the Bri- fy 
ang Ush Mhinmisiry of Education, 1 
Secondary schools, youth ernipsS|g 
e land adult education classes are to] 
ti ~ enconraged to take part in thei, 
iraument, on 
   
  
    
     
   
    
  
commodities are limited and that, in 
many piaces, very rich and easily avai- 
lable deposits of those commodities have 
been or are in process of being, worked 
out, . 
Thus, in the United States, high-grade 
iron ore is running low; so are zinc, 
copper, lead; so is petroleum. And this 
is happening at a time when a rising 
population with steadily improving me- 
thods of production is calling for ever- 
increasing quantities of consumer goods 
—in other words, is ‘making ever heavier 
demands on the limited reserves of our 
planetary capital. 
FOOD, PEOPLE 
AND POLITICS 
N unfavourable relationship bet- 
A ‘ween population and natural 
resources creates a permanent 
menace to peace and a permanent 
menace to political and personal liberty. 
In our days, whether there is a threat 
to peace depends upon whether such an 
over-populated country possesses an in- 
dustrial plant capable of producing 
armaments. 
There can be no aggression without 
the means to aggression. Lacking these 
means, the people of an over-populated 
.country are confronted with two alterna- 
tives. They can either stop breeding, and 
so reduce the population. Or else they 
can go on breeding until famine, disease, 
political unrest and civil war combing 
to raise the death-rate to the point where 
a decreased population can re-establish 
a favourable relationship with natural 
rescurces, : 
But some over-populated countries are 
also industrialized; and for these there 
is a third alternative: to enslave or exter- 
minate their neighbours, and so acquire 
more land, food, raw materials and 
markets. 
Remembering that “God is on the side 
of the big battalions,” the military 
leaders of industrialized countries with 
high birth-rates will feel confident of 
50% 
  
   
13% of total cropped 
area is irrigated land. yet 
it feeds 25% of the world’s 
people. -            
25% 
(J) 
ARR      
  
/ R 
Today the New World has a large 
and rapidly increasing population of its 
own and soil, after more than a century 
of abuse, is losing its fertility, There 
is still a very large exportable surplus 
of food; but as numbers go up, and 
fertility goes down, there will be less 
and less to spare for the hungry in 
other parts of the world. Moreover, the 
manufactured articles which Western 
Europe exchanged for food and raw 
materials have tended to become less 
acceptable in proportion as the nations 
of the New World have developed their 
own industries. 
Food is a renewable commodity. If the 
soil is not abused, .this year’s harvest 
be succeeded by next year’s, But the 
vein of tin or copper which produced 
this year’s output of ore will not be 
renewed in years to come. When the lode 
has been worked out, the miner musi 
move on to another deposit of the mi- 
neral. And if he can find no other ce- 
posits—well, that is just too bad. 
Industrialism is the systematic exvloi- 
tation of wasting assets. The thing we call 
progress is in many cases simply accele- 
ration in the rate of that exploitation. 
And such prosperity as we have known 
up to the present is the consequence of 
rapidly spending the planet’s irreplaceable 
capital. 
How long can the accelerating dissipa- - 
tion of capital go on ? How soon will the 
wasting assets of the world be exhaust- 
ed? All we know for certain is that the 
supplies of many hitherto essential 
winning any war they care to wage 
against the countries with low birth- 
rates. And remembering that David 
killed Goliath with a stone from his 
sling, the military leaders of the coun-~ 
tries with low birth-rates will come to 
believe that their only chance of survival 
consists in uding, before it is too late, 
their technical superiority in atomic and 
biological weapons, in order to offset the 
effect of the big battalions. 
So long as it remains axiomatic that 
nations exist for the purpose of damaging 
or destroying one another, the unequal 
increase of world population is no less 
dangerous, politically speaking, than the 
over-all increase of population pressure 
on resources... : 
A Time of Gravest Danger 
SSUMING for the sake of argument, 
that, in spite of nationalism and 
militarism, a world population 
policy should be agreed upon, how easy 
would it be to get that policy implement- 
ed? The answer is that, in the countries 
where its immediate implementation 
would be most desirable, it would be 
exceedingly difficult, indeed almost im- 
possible, to do so.. [And] even if a 
substantial cut in the present high birth- 
rates of the world were to take place 
tomorrow, the number of persons in the 
reproductive age-groups is at present so 
large that, despite the reduced birth-rate. 
over-all population would continue to

## [Page 7](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=7) 2

### 73962: The Double crisis

### 73963: The Way out

ley argues, 
ld’s food 
Reporter 
nd pessimist, and Sir John 
flatly contradict each other 
iny pamphlet on world food 
4d in Londcn today. 
    
  
    
    
    
Bays Huxley =f Instead of [3 
soverty in the midst of plenty, we 
find that there is poverty a the 
midst of poverty. World resources 
are inadequate to world popiiiztion. 
» At the present time our plane’ 
wupports a little less than two and 
a quarter thousand millions © 
  
increase until at least the end of the 
present century. 
In the most favourable circumstances, 
~ we can reasonably imagine, world popu- 
lation is bound to rise to at least three 
- billions before it starts to decline. This 
- means that, whatever happens, the next 
half-century will be a time of the gravest 
. political and economic danger. 
© If a world population policy should be 
agreed upon and implemented ‘in the 
. near future, this danger may be expected 
-. to grow less acute after about the year 
2.000. If no such policy is adopted the 
- crisis is likely, unless something startlingly 
good or something startlingly bad should 
happen in the interval, to persist for 
many years thereafter... 
The problem requires simultaneous 
attack on several fronts—the ideological 
~ front, the organizational front and the 
-scientific-technological front. On the 
ideological front the formidable enemy 
to peace is nationalism; for it is in the 
eontext of nationalistic thinking that 
- over-population becomes most dangerous. 
The depth and sincerity of religious 
belief are measured by the sacrifices 
~ whieh the believer is prepared to make 
for it. At the present time there are 
probably a thousand men and women 
prepared to undergo martyrdom for the 
local national idol, to everyone who 
would willingly die for his or her belief 
in God. Of all the motives for mass 
action, nationalism is, at present, by far 
the most potent... 
A World Food Policy? 
HE world’s supply of food can be 
increased in the following ways: 
by improving existing methods of 
“production, conservation and distribu- 
tion; by opening up hitherto unexplo:ted 
areas of land and sea; and by developing 
techniques for transforming easily avai- 
lable materials into nourishment, either 
directly for man or indirectly for tis 
domesticated animals, insects and fuugi. 
The international Food and Agriculture 
- Organization of the United Nations exists 
for the purpose of considering, and mak- 
- ing recommendations about, these ways 
of increasing the world’s food supply. The 
  
 
   
organization possesses no authority, and 
one of its ambitious schemes—the Orr 
Plan for a World Food Board empowered 
to buy and distribute surpluses, to stabilize 
prices and preserve an ‘‘ever-normal gia- 
nary’—has been rejected by a majority 
of the governments concerned. 
But there are other ways of getting 
results: the delegates to the F.A.O. are 
extremely competent, and we can cer- 
tainly count on them, in the years ahead, 
to do as good a job as the various na- 
tional governments, to which they are 
responsible, will permit... 
world... shaded according to the 
density of population, one sees 
that large areas are almost uninhabited. 
Most are uninhabited because, under 
present conditions, they are uninhabit- 
able. In some places the expenditure of 
more or less considerable quantities of 
human labour and capital might change 
the conditicns and make the lang pro- 
ductive, 
As world population rises and the 
, demand for food yet further outstrips 
© the supply, it will become increasingly 
worth while to spend time, work and 
money on tasks which, in present cir- 
cumstances, are economically unjustifia- 
ble. And if atomic power can be harness- 
ed without too much danger, and made 
available at a very cheap rate, many 
Projects at present quite unjustifiable 
would become matters of practical poiicy.- 
(Continued on Page 8) - 
\ HEN one looks at a map of the   
  
—   
  
 
  
re 
POPULATION 
SCALE 
is] 16 mithen mrad 
  
  Sir John Russell 
R. HUXLEY’'S thesis is extreme- 
\Y \ ly ingenious and well argued. 
NN 1 disagree completely with most 
of his conclusions, through there are 
some with which I fully concur, in par- 
ticular, the necessity for more food pro- 
auction... 
The way of mankind has always been 
and in all probability will always be 
kard.. (and) only by strenuous and 
weli-directed work can our problems 
ever be solved; but I am convinced that 
man can conquer his difficulties as they 
arise... 
I must emphasize the impossibility of 
setting any limit to the world’s resour- 
ces Estimates made fortv years ago are 
in most cases far below those that would 
be made now... 
Tt is equally impossible to forecast the . 
world's population over any long period. 
Judging from the past, it seems safe to 
assume that where standards of living 
r.ce, birthrates tend to fall and the pro- 
portion of older people tends to increase; 
on the other hand, among peasant popu- 
lations where children are an economic 
asset the birth-rate is high. 
I shall deal mainly with world food 
resources: these depend on the amount 
of land available, the use to which it is 
put, and the size of the population that 
has to be fed. The world population is 
estimated at about 2,200 millions and’ 
the present rate of increase at about 
20 millions per annum. 1 shall assume 
that this rate continues... 
The total land area of the world is 
shout 36,000 million acres, but oniy a 
fraction of this can be cultivated. 
The food problem is most serious in 
Great Britain, North-West Europe (ex- 
cepting Denmark) and India. The pos- 
sibility of trouble’ was foreseen by 
Malthus in 1798, but the fears were 
allayed by the opening up of North 
America... Fears of impending shortage 
have been recently revived by Sir John 
Orr, first director of the Food and Agri- 
culture Organization; Sir John has 
raised a new problem: the need for rec- 
tifying the under-nutrition from which 
a large part of the world suffers. 
More Land to Grow 
Food 
Expanding 
Into the Dry Regions 
HE customary methods of farming 
break down when the annual 
rainfall is less than about 18 inches. 
The North American pioneers who 
pushed westwards beyond. the 18-inch 
1egion met the difficulty by developing 
methods of soil management which con- 
served moisture, and by modernizing the 
ancient art of irrigation; these methods 
were all empirical but they worked... 
The most effective way of overcoming 
dry conditions is by irrigation. Two 
general methods: are adopted: from 
carals and from wells. 
Canal irrigation is largely concentrated 
  
OUT 2 
ty Sir Joon Rusa 
around the Himalayan rivers flowing 
southwards in India, Pakistan and 
Burma and eastwards into China. ‘The 
greatest of these schemes is the Lloyd 
Barrage in Sind, which waters five 
million acres of crops. the various Punjab . 
schemes water nearly 18 million acres; 
it is known that the Tigris-Euphrates 
system has great possibilities for the 
future. 
River valley developments, on the 
pattern of the Tennessee Valley Author- 
ity, are under way in many parts of 
the world. In such projects as Brazil's 
San Francisco Valley Authority, French 
West Africa’s Niger River Authority, 
. and Mexico's Papaloapan River Commis- 
sion, irrigation is but one factor in a 
irified system of power, flood control 
and soil rehabilitation. 
The other method, irrigation from 
wells, also very ancient, has been greatly 
improved by the tube wells first de- 
veloped in California and much used by 
Sir William Stampe in India... (Stampe 
has urged that the possibilities in Africa, 
. Arabia and the Middle East should be 
investigated.) 
Cne of the most serious troubles fol- 
lowing on the so-called “conquest of the 
drought” has been soil erosion; for long 
it was hardly perceptible... By 1935, 
however, it had become so serious that 
a Soil Conservation Service was set up 
in the United States; similar services 
‘have been established throughout the 
British Commonwealth. Methods of pre- 
vention and rehabilitation have now been 
devised and are being continuously im- 
  
proved... Soil erosion is no longer the 
“menace it was—though constant watch 
by experts is needed. 
Widening The Temperature ~ 
Range 
ANADA led the way in pushing the 
wheat belt further north into the re- 
gions where the summer, though hot 
enough for the growth of wheat, did 
riot last long enough to allow of ripen- 
ing... The possibilities of the regions’ 
still further north are being studied by 
the United States in Alaska and by the 
USSR. While no surplus could ever be 
expected, there is the hope of producing 
more and better for those who live there. 
At the other extreme, cultivation is 
keing pushed into the hotter regions in 
Queensland... The most ambitious sche- 
mes are in Africa. : 
‘Science And Wheat 
...... Production 
"HE beneficent results of applying 
wT science to agriculture are well seen 
in wheat production. This is really 
& dry region enterprise... 
The United States greatly increased its 
production of wheat during the war, 
and from being only a small exporter, . 
ol even an importer, has during the war 
years produced an additional 300 million 
bushels, much of which was exported. 
There seems every justification there- 
fore for expecting that the great wheat- 
supplying countries can expand their 
production considerably if the need 
arises... 
Maize, Rice. And Millets 
chief are maize, rice and the 
riillets. Maize is very fully studied in 
the United States, its chief producer, and 
the remarkable results obtained in recent 
years with the new hybrids give hopeful 
promise for the future. 
The millets have not yet been ade- 
guately studied. Their tolerance of hot, 
gry and poor conditions make them 
extremely important as food in the semi- 
arid hot regions of India and Africa... 
They are almost a virgin field for the 
geneticist and plant breeder, but the 
pioneering investigations promise no 
‘easy or spectacular successes. 
OF the other food grains, the three 
Rice is more important because rice 
eaters probably outnumber the wheat 
‘eaters. It has been much studied in India 
in recent years and alreadye the yields 
on the experimental farms are nob 
uncommonly double those obtained by 
the neighbouring peasants. 
The Overcrowded 
Lands 
A. Great Britain 
And N.W. Europe 
IELDS per acre and output per 
man (in Great Britain) are among 
the highest in Europe and are 
three or four times greater than in 
Eastern Europe and the USSR; they are 
still rising. No British expert believes the 
limit is yet reached... 
Rut our cultivated area is still shrink- 
ing, and as the -population rises, more 
imports will become necessary; not 
hewever beyond the visible possibilities 
of the exporting countries to supply. The 
inexorable condition is, of course, that 
they must be paid for bv harder work. 
Without this the standards of life must 
inevitably fall. 
(Continued on Page §)

## [Page 8](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=8) 2

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 
 
  
(Continued from precceding Page) 
The countries of North Western Eu- 
rope, including Western Germany, ars 
in a similar position, needing to import 
focd; they were, however, taken as a 
group, self-sufficient in meat and dairy 
produce before the war. There was then 
s¢ much movement of grain from the 
D2nubian countries and Poland to the 
West that the net Euronean deficit of 
wheat and rye amounted only to about 
5 per cent of the total consumption... If 
tho former east-west movement of grain 
is testored, Europe's bread supplies will 
be secure, but unpredictable political 
factors come into play. There is no phys- 
jcal reason why North Western Europe 
should suffer food shortage as long as 
there is peace. 
B. The Indian Problem 
F all the food problems of the 
world, India’s and Pakistan's are 
probably the most difficult. The 
population has grown rapidly, from 
30¢ millions in 1921 to 338 millions in 
1231 and 389 millions in 1941: increases 
of 10 and 15 per cent respectively... 
Population increases at the present 
rate would, unless yields rose, require an 
additional 3 or 4 million acres of food 
 
  
  
The success of dry 
farming methods is 
illustrated by the 
Indian millet crop, 
shown on the left. 
For the adjoining 
land (on right) dry 
farming was not 
employed. 
Photos by permission 
of Sir John Russell 
F.R.S. 
 


### 73963: The Way out

THE WAY OUT ? 
crops each year. There still remains 
uncultivated land equal in area to about 
70 0/0 of the cultivhted land, some of 
which can be utilized. But the greatest 
hope is by increasing the ryots yields. 
More irrigation, more fertilizer, better 
cultivation and better seed are all being 
acveloped. 
India’s rainfall, however, is always 
uncertain, and importation of rice is 
always necessary. There are abundant po- 
tential supplies in Burma. Siam and Indo- 
China.. It seems impossible, however, 
for India’s food problems to be solved if 
the population goes on increasing at its 
present rate. 
C. The Double Task 
NCREASING output per man, and 
[| output per acre, in the old occupied 
lands, is really the crux of the 
world food problem; for it is estimated 
that some 90 0/0 of the world’s food is 
consumed in or near the land of its pro- 
duction and only about 10 0/0 is put on 
to the world market; further, that about 


### 73962: The Double crisis

THE DOUBLE CRISIS 
(Continued from precceding Page) 
Meanwhile, it has been reported tinat 
the Russians have succeeded in thawing 
out the Siberian tundra and converting 
it into fields of rye and wheat. Much 
hitherto barren land in sub-Arctic Asia 
and America might become productive if 
“this can be done... 
To break the politically dangerous 
monoplies in fertile territories and in 
access to the sea, chemists and biologists 
should be enlisted to collaborate on a 
series of Manhattan Projects, not of des- 
truction, but of creation, Thus, the Ger- 
mans are said to have used a method 
for converting organic waste products, 
such as sawdust, into a sugar solution 
for the culture of edible ycasts. 
Such a technique, if suitably developed, 
might provide much-needed proteins for 
those millions who, at present, have to 
subsist on an unbalanced diet of cereals. 
And the goal of another of these projects 
would be the synthesis of chlorophyll, 
the substance which permits the growing 
plant to use the sun's energy to convert 
air and water into carbohydrates. 
Up to the present the rulers of the 
world have been ready to lavish time, 
energy, money and brains upon the de- 
velopment of atomic and biological 
weapons; it might be a good thing to 
use the resources of applied science for 
th2 relief of the world’s hunger and the 
removal of one of the principal causes 
of war. 
Natural monoplies in raw materials are 
even more politically dangerous than 
natural monoplies in food. When located 
in the territory of a strong nation, 
deposits of minerals necessary” to ine 
dustry are a standing temptation to 
the abuse of military and economic power; 
when located in that of a weak nation, 
they are a standing temptation to 
aggression from abroad. 
Research should be deliberately orga- 
nized for the purpose of discovering uni- 
versally available substitutes for these 
relatively rare and most unevenly distri~ 
buted minerals. If successful, such re- 
search would have two beneficial results: 
it would break the natural monoplies 
which are so politically dangerous; and 
it would help our industrial civilization 
to shift from its precarious basis in the 
exploitation of rapidly wasting assets to 
a more secure, @ more nearly permanent, 
foundation. 
NDUSTRIAL civilization is based 
upon the exploitation of wasting 
assets by means of man-power and 
the power generated by coal, oil, gas and 
falling water, If successfully harnessed, 
atomic energy will increase the availabl2 
power to an enormous extent. From this, 
two results may be anticipated, one 
unfavourable, the other favourable. 
To begin with 
we may expect £ AN WE INCREASE WORLD WHEAT SIPPLIEST 
that increased 
power will lead to 
the more effective 
  
70 0/0 of the world’s population are food 
producers or their direct dependents. 
It is this 70 0/0 who determine the 
fete of the remaining 30. Presumably 
‘they would be the last to feel the pinch 
of hunger, should it come. Most of them 
are peasants, their chief produce is 
grain, and much of their farming is 
very inefficient, with no great possibility 
of improvement as it stands. 
There no longer are peasants in Great 
Britain but there were up to the 18th 
century, and their systems and output 
were on a level with those of the present 
day peasants of Eastern Europe. Great 
Britain then changed its system... Denmark 
effected the change later; the farms had 
“to be smaller, but a system of co-opera- 
tion has been developed which has led 
to high efficiency of production and a 
standard of living that is the envy of 
most of Europe and far above anything 
in Eastern Europe and beyond. 
The fundamental difference between 
the peasant and the Western farmer is 
that the peasant is a self-sufficing unit, 
producing mainly for himself and his 
family, selling only his surpluses, while 
the Western farmer is producing for the 
market... oo 
One farm worker in Eastern Europe 
ard the USSR produces food equivalent 
to the needs of some four or five persons, 
including himself, but in Great Britain 
and Denmark the production per man 
is about four times as high, one man 
feeding perhaps 10 or 20 persons, who 
ths become available for other occupa- 
[1018S. 
D. New Methods of Farming 
N entirely different system, collec- 
tive farming, has been adopted in 
Soviet Russia. This requires large 
zreas of land..; it is perhaps better 
suited for grain production than for 
Livestock. 
Average giclids 
pry wre lowe) 
1935.9 | 1916 
exploitation and   
  
consequently to 
the more rapid ' - 
exhaustion of the USS.R. — 
more easily avai- (estimate) i 
lable supplies of 104 
  
PERE maa 
8 an fF |= 
64 . 56 
such indispensa-   
  
    
  
  
te wie 5 IC) | Free 
iron, tin, copper, : | 
zinc and the like. USA. : Kl RRR 
Atomic energy 57 67 #1 
will permit us to 741 92 
enjoy the prospe- 
rity of the spend- 
thrift who lives i BEER mas 
gloriously for a CANADA 254 EE RRR 
few years on in- (17 mbes ) 
herited capital. If 1891) 65 9-2 
this were all that 
could be expect- 
ed, the discovery 
of atomic energy 
would be wholly 
ARGENTINE i151 3
s
 
i
s
 
i
e
 
oad
 2 
> 
““
BE
3E
 
BE
IE
RS
 
    
       
disastrous. But 75 81 
fortunately this 
is not the whole 
story. ¥ (4 & 4 SRN AUSTRALIA 13 124 b-4 
~ Given an inde- (35 mony = ° 
finite amount of 1891) 69 50 
cheap power, it LL x 
will become eco- 
nomically possi- | l | ER ER aan 
ble to exploit de- i" 2 FEFE RRR 
posits whose low - {Eee | 
concentration of U.K. chia BREN 2x32 
desirable minerals Bl sywbel «10 mellem wires FREER = n aR 
render them, un- 
der present con- K = ) gymiel = | cm EE azz     
ditions, practical- ' 
186 ~ 1909 196 
ly worthless, 
  
The first 3 countries produced 2/3 of the world's wheat in 1946, They are 
also large exporters. Many ethers, especially China, India, Italy and France, 
(Continued also produce large amounts of wheat, but consume it all at home, Probably 
45 million acres in Canada, 5 1/2 million acres in Australia, and large 
on Page 9) areas in the Argentine, could still be cultivated, 
  
Peasant farming can undoubtedly be 
transiormed into more highly productive 
systems capable of producing more food 
of higher nutritive value and of raising 
output both per man and per acre. 
Meanwhile, the steady advance of 
science and the practice of agriculture 
in the more advanced countries can be 
applied elsewhere when conditions per- 
mit. Drainage, better use of fertilizers, 
better seeds, better control of disease, 
have increased the already high rate of 
output in Great Britain... The average 
yield of milk is 600 gallons per cow, but 
the good farmer expects 1,000 or more. 
There are still possibilities of improve- 
ment even in the most advanced 
countries. Losses due to insect pests and 
diseases are still high; the current esti- 
mate (which is little more than a guess) 
put: them at 10 per cent in Great Bri- 
tain, while livestock diseases are estimat- 
ed to lose us about 6 million full year's 
rations of meat, 200 million gallons of 
milk and 1,500 million eggs. 
The Food and Agriculture Organiza- 
tior has estimated that mites, pests and 
rodents destroy some 65 million tons of 
the world’s grain per annum—more than 
the entire wheat and rve supply for all 
Europe before the war... 
E. Prospects for the Future 
WO sets of problems are involved 
] in world supplies: the rehabilita- 
tion of European agriculture, and 
the expansion of our present agriculture 
to supply a world population increasing 
at its present rate. 
The first of these should fairly soon 
he accomplished; first grain supplies, 
ilten, more slowly, dairy produce and 
meat should come back to pre-war level... 
The permanent expansion of food pro- 
cuction can be achieved by increasing 
the area under cultivation, by increasing 
cutput per are, and by reducing waste 
and losses. 
Only about 5 to 10 per cent of the 
world’s land area is yet used for food 
production to any extent and there 
remain considerable regions in the tropics 
that can be utilized with the help of 
syrthetic insecticides and modern im- 
rlements. In all countries there still 
remain areas that could be cultivated. 
The average output per acre is every- 
where considerably less than is obtained 
by the best of the farmers, and much 
levelling up is possible by education and 
cc-operation; agricultural science and 
ergineering are continuously advancing 
and even in the most advanced countries 
yields are increasing. The causes of the 
wastes and losses are gradually being 
better understood and brought under 
control. As.the need arises, expansion 
of food production can continue and it 
is impossible to forecast how far it can 
go... 
F. The Hard Way 
HE change that would most increase 
fcod production would be to trans. 
form the present predominantly 
peasant type of rural economy to a 
mixed farm type as adopted in the more 
advanced countries. 
While increases in food production can 
ve confidently expected, they will cer- 
tainly involve considerable work and 
much scientific study. There is no pros- 
pect of easy living: the lot of mankind 
will always be hard. Each nation must 
either produce its own food or produce 
- goods and services that will induce other 
countries to produce it for them. 
It is impossible to estimate the rate 
of agricultural progress and therefore 
impossible to suggest a safe rate of 
increase of human population. At pre- 
sent rates there is no need to fear 
shortage in our time, except in India 
and parts of Africa. The possibilities of 
scientific advancement are incalculable. 
What is needed is to put these advances 
inte practice, and to treat the problems 
mternationally. The key to the problem 
of FOOD AND PEOPLE is international 
cc-operation,

## [Page 9](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=9) 0

### IGNORE

April 1949 UNESCO COURIER 
- 9 


### 73964: Population problems of India and Pakistan

  
of India and Pakistan 
by Dr. Sripati Chandrasekhar 
primarily out of an extremely high 
fertility accompanied by high 
mortality which is only slowly declining 
The resulting increase, which amounted 
to more than four million a year in an 
undivided India, need. not constitute a 
problem if the Indian level of living were 
high enough to absorb the additional 
population without reducing the level of 
living, gnd if a majority of the population 
enjoyed the irreducible minimum require- 
ments of decent human existence in 
terms of food, health, clothing, shelter, 
employment and leisure for recreation. 
But India's level of living is so low that 
any further addition to the number of 
poor families may well be disastrous. 
i NDIA'S populats ion problem arises 
Growth of Population 
HE population of the combined do- 
minions of India and Pakistan 
today is nearly 450 millions or about 
one fifth of the total world population. 
The rate of increase of the Indian popu-- 
lation, though high, has not been ab- 
normal. The problem in India is not 
however the rate of increase but the 
net addition to the existing population 
every decade. 
Because of the large number of India’s 
existing population, even a modest rate 
of increase of 10 or 15 per cent yields a 
net gain of some 50 millions, in itself 
larger than the population of any Euro- 
pean country except Germany or Russia, 
or any Latin American country. And it 
is this large net addition that constitutes 
the problem because it nullifies all efforts 
to improve the admittedly very low 
standard of living .of the Indian people. 
All efforts to increase the production of 
food, other commodities and services to 
give a ‘better per capita share to the 
existing population are largely frustrated 
by this increasing addition to the popu- 
lation. 
Fertility 
MONG all demographic factors, the 
rate of fertility is the most im- 
portant, for international lack of 
“balance in fertility constitutes the crux 
of the world population problem. 
The significant fact about the Indian 
birth rate is not that it is one of the 
highést in the world but that it has shown 
no signs of decline during the last fifty 
years. In Western and industrialized 
countries, the decline in fertility began 
in urban areas, and the rural areas tended 
to follow the downward trend after a 
time lag. This has been so because in- 
dustrialization has been accompanied by 
the widespread adoption of the planned 
family habit. 
Though India may conform to this 
experience eventually, it has not been the 
case till now. The lower fertility in Indian 
urban areas must be explained in terms . 
of adverse sex ratio where the relative 
paucity of females and the absence of 
wives constitute a remarkable feature, 
which will be discussed later. 
Mortality 
NDIA’S population growth during the 
last century has been conditioned 
mainly by the high but fluctuating 
death rate. Famines, epidemics, the gene- 
ral unsanitary environment and wars 
have contributed to the death rate. During 
“normal” years the death rate has been 
consistently high because of the striking 
lack of public sanitation and hygiene, 
and widespread mal—and under—nutri- 
tion of the population. It can be said with 
some truth that famine and epidemics 
alone have controlled the growth of 
India’s population during the last hun- 
dred years. 
The Indian death rate is high—30 per 
thousand. The recorded death rate for 
— —— 
A rapidly rising population and lew level of 
1931 was 24 per thousand and 22 for 1840, 
but these are under-estimates because of 
incomplete = returns. This means that 
more than 10 million people die every 
year in India. 
The most disquieting factor of the 
Indian death rate is the high incidence of 
mortality among first year infants, 
women in child-birth and women of the 
reproductive age group. Nearly one-fourth 
of the babies born die during their first 
year. About half the deaths among infants 
occur in the first month and, of these, 
nearly sixty per cent in the first week. 
Mortality remains high throughout early 
childhood. About forty-nine per cent of 
the total mortality in any given year is 
among those below ten years of age, 
while the corresponding figure for Eng- 
land is only twelve per cent. 
As for maternal mortality, at least 
200,000 women die every year during 
child-birth or 100 out of every thousand! 
Health Conditions 
HUS, out of every hundred born, one 
quarter die by the time they reach 
their first birthday. When the fifth 
birthday arrives, forty per cent have 
disappeared through death, and when the 
twentieth birthday is at hand only fifty 
per cent are left. By the sixtieth birthday 
only fiftcen per cent survive, 
But despite the pres- 
ent mortality rates, the 
average annual addition 
to the population of 
both the Dominions was 
five million. During the 
last two decades there 
has been, however, a 
steady fall in the gen- 
eral mortality-rate. A 
further fall is bound to 
occur if the large-scale * 
programmes for improv- 
ing the health of the 
country by various 
planning committees are * 
effectively put into 
operation. 
It has been calculated 
that even a slight im- 
provement in the pres- will 
ent health conditions 
food. 
total 
infant lives. When this 
is done, India’s popula- square mile. 
  
DID YOU KNOW ? 
% More than half of all the ‘people 
live in Asia and 
that more than half the rest are. 
crowded inte Europe, 
Only eight per 
world’s land surface—abou¢ four 
billion acres— is used te prodnce: 
in the world 
Rats and insects rob the world 
of 33 million tons of stored zrain 
each year—enough to provide the 
basic diet of 150 million reeplie. 
% If India’s population continues 
to increase at its present rate it 
about 800 million 
within 50 years, 
can save three million % In many parts of China there 
are more than 2,000 people per 
religious tradition and sanction behind 
them, exist and condition the lives of an 
overwhelming majority of the people, the 
demographic problem has become what it 
is today. 
ARLY marriage. and universality of 
marriage are dominant features of 
the Indian social scene. While child 
marriage as such has largely disappeared, 
a majority of girls between 15 and 20 are 
married. The girls in rural areas marry 
as soon as they reach puberty, and begin 
bearing children early. 
HE second factor is the universality 
oT of the married state. Every-one in 
India, sooner or later, gets married. 
It is a quasi-religious duty. For a repre- 
sentative census year like 1931, we find 
that 467 males and 492 females out of 
every thousand were married. This means, 
that taking into consideration all widows, 
some widowers, ascetics and mendicants, 
almost everyone of marriageable age was 
actually married. 
Scarcity of Females 
THIRD striking characteristic of 
the Indian social situation is the 
scarcity of females. There has 
been a deficiency of women in the Indian 
population within the knowledge of the 
country’s regular census 
history. 
Several explanations 
have been offered for 
this phenomenon of 
deficiency of females. 
Some explain it as the 
result of relative under- 
“enumeration of women. 
Some argue that the 
excessive masculinity is 
cent of the an. index of “racial” 
decadence. 
Some others have offer- 
ed a biogolical explana- 
tion: “The Indian caste 
system with its exoga- 
mous gotra (sept) and 
endogamous caste is a 
perfect method of pre- 
serving what is called 
in genetics “pure line... 
This explanation is at 
best plausible but we 
have very little know- 
ledge about the presence 
tion will increase b ; - . . hy 5 A ; or % All that remains to-day of the of a genetic factor, if 
not live ul elg 1b “impenetrable forests’” in the any, in the Hindu caste 
million a year. And it Lebanon, mentioned by a eon- ’ 
is possible that the 83 
million increase that 
took place between 1921 
and 1941 may take place Khodid. 
between 1941 and 1951. % Fighting 
A planned and purpose- 
ful control of mortality 
without a corresponding ese 
control of the birth rate 
can only have disas- 
trous consequences for 
India. 
Today, however, the death rate is the 
decisive factor in Indian demography. 
No comment is necessary on this inordi- 
nate and tragic loss of human lives. Nor 
is this all. There are many who do not 
die but who cannot be counted among the 
truly living, healthy, active and gainfully 
employed because of the shocking nature 
of Indian morbidity. 
rinderpest 
Social Factors 
IE demographic situation of any 
IP region is largely the product of 
its peculiar social characteristics 
affecting in their turn births, deaths and 
migration. The population problem in 
India can conceivably be very different 
if the social institutions of early marriage, 
universality of marriage, the ban on 
widow re-marriage and the joint Hindu 
family and other institutions and atti- 
tudes resulting in an adverse sex ratio, 
among others, did not exist. 
But as these institutions, with a socio- 
temporary of Ramses II, 
} tiny wood belt on a mountain 
side in the region of Djebel el 
against the 
cattle 
F.A.0. has immunized two Chin- 
provinces 
300.000" animals, 
system. While there may 
be some truth in this 
explanation in the sense 
that excessive inbreeding 
is generally harmful, it 
does not, explain the sex 
ratio at birth. 
The available statistics 
tell a different story. 
Actually, between the 
ages of 1-5,. India has an 
excess of girls and only 
at the next age group the sex ratio is re- 
versed in favour of males. A more rational 
explanation for the paucity of females is 
that... Hindu parents put greater premium 
on male children and are apt to treat 
female children with relative neglect, es- 
pecially when they are assailed by infantile 
ailments. This, coupled with early marriage 
and a high birth rate, results in greater 
and early death among women. 
deadly 
disease, the 
by vaccinating 
Ban on Widow 
Re-marriage 
HE social ban on widow re-marriage 
is yet another reactionary feature of 
Indian demography. The Indian de- 
mographic situation is closely interwoven 
with social problems. Since most widowers 
remarry and since they cannot marry 
widows, they have to seek wives among 
girls much their juniors. This unequal 
combination from the point of view of age 
itself leads to an increasing number of 
~ 
living are the menacing twin evils of India. 
Population Problems 
  
widows, for the old husband passes away, 
leaving behind his young wife a widow, 
And, of course, she cannot remarry. 
The disproportionate sex ratio and the 
resulting deficiency of women keeps up the 
custom of early marriage for girls. As 
bachelors and widowers have to take brides 
of any age they can get, the disparity 
between partners is increased. This differ- 
ence in age increases widowhood. Since 
widows cannot remarry, widowhood in- 
creases the already existing shortage of 
eligible brides, which means of course the 
paucity of women. Thus the vicious wheel 
whirls on. 
The two significant facts about the 
wasteful balance between births and 
deaths in India are the large decennial 
increases in the population and the tre- 
mendous human cost at which this ine 
crease is being maintained in India. 
The problem of population has to be 
considered in relation to the means of 
sustenance, mainly food supply. Nearly 70 
per cent of the population is dependent on 
agriculture for a livelihood. As the mouths 
to be fed every year increase, the area of 
productive land diminishes. 
What is the way out? 
[To Be Continued) 
(In our May issue, Dr. Chandrasekhar wil 
examine some of the possible answers tc the 
Indian population problem in terms of improved 
agriculture, industrialization, migration and birth 
control and will sum up his latest findings on 
the food and population situation in India). 


### 73962: The Double crisis

  
THE DOUBLE 
CRISIS 
In other words, the harnessing of atomie 
power is likely to accelerate the dissipa- 
tion of what may be called our high- 
grade capital. but it should postpone the 
final onset of bankruptcy by making 
available to industry the low-grade capital 
which it now costs us too much to spend... 
Applied science can.. be used in the 
fight for liberty no less effectively than in 
the fight for peace. Let us assume, for 
example, that a means will be discovered 
for substantially increasing the supply of 
food. This would have the same kind of 
result as the discovery of a second New 
World. It would make life easier. for the 
 
inhabitants of over-crowded countries 
and, by doing so, it would remove the ne- 
cessity for some of the centralized and 
peremptory social controls which must 
always be imposed when the pressure of 
population upon resources becomes ex- 
cessive. 
Meanwhile, every day brings its quota 
of some fifty-five thousand new human 
beings to a planet which, in the same 
period of time, has lost through erosion 
almost the same number of acres of pro- 
ductive land and goodness knows how 
many tons of irreplaceable minerals. 
Whatever may be happening to the sue 
perficial crisis, to the crisis on the poll. 
tical, or industrial or financial levels, 
that which underlies it persists and 
deepens. 
The current almost explosive growth 
in world population began about two 
centuries ago and will continue, in all 
probability, for at least another hundred 
years. So far as we know, nothing quite 
like it has ever happened before. We are 
faced by a problem that has no earlier 
precedent, To discover and, having diss 
covered, to apply the remedial measures 
is going to be exceedingly difficult. And 
the longer we delay, the greater the 
difficulty will be,

## [Page 10](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=10) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER April 1949 
 
and culture. 
subscribers. 
outside of France). 
Belgique — Librairie 
Bruxelles IV. 
Tower Lane -— Belfast: 
Low Countries: N.V. 
Uruguay. — 
Montevideo. 
U.S.A. — International   - 
Are You A <«Courier’ 
SUBSCRIBER ? 
The Unesco Courier is an 
devoted to the work of Unesco and to activities and 
developments throughout the world in education, science 
Until now some of our readers have been receiving free 
copies of our periodical. In order to permit us to supply 
the many thousands of new readers in almost every coun- 
try in the world, we are undertaking a special drive for 
A full year’s subscription (12 issues) costs only $1.00 
U.S. or 5/- or 250 French Francs (300 French Francs 
SUBSCRIBE NOW! Tell your friends about the Unesco 
Courier and get them to subscribe too. 
Write to our agent in your country listed below, or directly to 
Unesco House, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris, 16¢, France. 
N. B. — The photo-offset American edition is available only 
through our agent, Columbia University Press. 
Argentina: Editorial Sudamericana S.A. Alsins 500, Buenos-Aires 
Austraiia: H. A. Goddard Ltd. 255a, George St. Sydney. 
encyclopédique. 7, 
Canada : The Ryerson Press, 199 Queen St. West, Toroato. 
Cuba: La Casa Belgas, R. de Smedis O’'Rellly, Habana. 
Czechoslovakia : Librairie F Topic. 11 Narodni, Prague. 
Denmark : Einar Murksgaard, 6 Norregade, Copenhagen. 
Great Britain: HM Stationery Office: Londen: York House, Kings- 
way (Retail Counter Service} . P.O. Box 589, London, S.El. (Post 
orders). — Manchester 2: 39/41 King Street — Edinburgh 2: 
Castle Street -— Cardiff: 1 St Andrew's Crescent. — Bristol 1: 
80 Chichester Street . 
France: Editions A. Pedone, 13 Rue Soutflot. Paris. Se. 
Greece : Eleftheroudakis, Librairie internationale. Athens, 
India: Oxford Book and Stationery Oo., Scindia House, New Delht, 
Iraq: Mackenzie and Mackenzie. Booksellers, The Bookshop, Baghdad. 
Lebanon and Syria: Librairie universelle. Av. des Francais, Beirut, 
Martinus 
9 Lange Voorhout. The Hague 
Sweden: Ab. 0. E Fritzes. Predsgatan 2. Stockholm. 
Switzerland: Librairie Pavot, Lausanne. 
Libreria Internacional 
3 Documents Service, 
Press. 2960 Broadway, New York 27 N.Y. 
international periodical 
rue du Luxembourg, 
13a 
Nijhoff. Afd.. Fondsaministratle 
S.R.L., Calle Uruguay 1331, 
P
i
 
i
i
.
 
f
i
l
e
 
a
i
e
.
 
i
f
.
 
i
i
.
 
a
l
e
.
 
f
i
e
 
f
i
e
 
i
l
e
 
F
R
 
T
N
 
N
N
 
N
N
 
N
W
 
N
N
;
 
w
v
 
=
>
”
 
Columbia University   


### 73966: Siam making all-out drive to improve school system

Siam Making All-Out Drive 
To Improve School System 
country. 
Unesco’s educational mission 
   
TAM (or Thailand), which is 
shaped like a kite with a 
coastline stretching over 
1,300 miles, is a country with one 
of the lowest population densities 
in Asia and the Far East—30 per 
square kilometre. = 
Although 90 0/0 of its people are 
engaged in farming, only 100/0 
of its arable land is being ex- 
ploited. Recently the Government 
embarked on an ambitious pro- 
gramme of industrialization and 
hopes to introduce mechanized 
farming into parts of the coun- 
try in the near future. Large 
factories are being planned and 
existing industries are being 
modernized. 
Economic and technical de- 
velopment on a large scale, 
therefore, is one of the big goals 
of modern-day Siam. Indeed, ac- 
cording to certain authorities, if 
Early in February of this year, at the request of the Siamese 
Government, Unesco sent a consultative educational mission to 
undertake a brief study of tRe educational system of the 
The mission has now completed its work and Sir John Sar- 
gent, former educational adviser to the Indian Government, who 
headed the mission, and Dr. Pedro T. Orata, who has worked 
with American Indians in South Dakota and helped organize 
preparing a full report on their findings. This report will shortly 
be submitted to the Siamese Government, 
For the benefit of Courier readers, Dr. Orata reports, in the 
following article, on the Mission to Siam: 


### 73965: Hamlet's castle prepares for adult education meeting

<Hamlet’s Castle’ Prepares 
For Adult Education M eeling 
EXT June 16th, approxi- 
mately 150 educational 
NN workers from many na- 
tions will gather in the 
Great Knight's Hall of the ancient 
sHamlet's Castle” of Krongsoorg 
at Elsinore, Denmark, for the 
opening of the first international 
post-war conference on adult =du- 
cation. 
From places as far apart as 
Norway and Australia, Iceland 
and New Zealand they will meet 
for ten days to talk over their 
problems and to lay the founda- 
‘tions of a permanent internation- 
‘al adult education. movement, 
one of whose aims will be to 
develop a better understanding 
between peoples. : 
For the scope and significance 
of adult education has changed 
considerably since it began to 
be developed towards the end of 
the 19th century. 
In North America, Great Bri- 
tain and the Scandinavian count- 
ries, where the movement made 
the greatest initial progress, it 
usually meant “the three R's” for 
grown-ups or apprenticeship train- 
ing for a trade. 
HERE are still many coun; 
i tries where the term “adult 
education” is used to de- 
scribe the fight against illiteracy. 
But. for practical purposes, the 
teaching of literacy is now ge- 
nerally considered as a special 
field and Unesco, for example, has 
given it the name of “fundamen- 
tal” education. 
In the countries which have 
largely solved their illiteracy 
problems, adult education, in its 
proadest sense, means helping 
individuals to be equal to the 
responsibilities which the growth 
of democracy has brought to 
ordinary men and women. In 
other words, adult education 
today seeks to develop a spirit 
of understanding and appreciation 
of other people’s cultures and 
customs, by improving the indi- 
vidual’s general education and 
arousing interest in current world 
questions. 
DULT education today takes 
on different forms accord- 
ing to the country where it 
is being applied. It is to be found 
in the study circles of Sweden, 
the public libraries of Denmark, 
the extension work of American 
universities, the radio forums of 
Canada and the working-men’s 
colleges of England. 
Adult education 
"ook learning”, 
just 
Iis 
is not 
however. 
 
  
 
activities: range from 
Ne 
  
Drawing by Hans Knieper 
evening 
courses to music and dramatic 
performances and include do- 
mestic and technical training, 
while at the same time embracing 
arts and crafts and folk dancing 
hobbies. 
The extent of the movement in 
some parts of the world, for 
example in Great 
Britain, the Unit- 
ed States and 
the Scandinavian 
countries, is out 
of all proportion 
to the slow pro- 
gress made in 
others. Moreover, 
these more ad- 
vanced countries 
were cut off from 
one another by 
the war, and 
some of 
methods now fail 
to meet the ra- 
pidly changing 
needs of life. 
So there is a 
great need fof 
the pre-war con- 
tacts to be re- 
established and for others to be 
developed, so that each nation 
can become acquainted with the 
achievements — and shortcomings 
—of adult education experiments 
attempted by others. 
p-— 
aati 
8 
HIS is why Unesco, as part 
of its adult education pro- 
~ gramme, is seeking Ww 
bridge the ten-year gap caused 
by the war, by calling on adult 
education workers and leaders 
from every country in the world 
—whether a member of Unesco 
or not—to meet and exchange 
their experiences and ideas. In 
this way, it hopes to re-establish 
international contacts among 
adult education workers and to 
find out what new forms this 
branch of education might take 
to meet the demands of both 
J “ 
their mere, + 4 4d 
~~ 3-7 - 
today and tomorrow. 
Among the questions to be 
studied at the Unesco conference 
in Denmark are the extent to 
which traditional adult education 
methods can be improved by the 
use of new materials and techni- 
ques such as film, radio and the 
press, records, posters and graphs, 
discussion groups, the dramatiza- 
tion of current events, and the 
study of foreign languages. 
i) cially opened in the Krongs- 
borg Castle, after which 
the delegates will hold ther 
meetings in the International 
People’s College at Elsinore, one 
of the most famous adult edu- 
cation centres in the world 
HE conference will be offi- 
whose foundation was inspired by 
the Danish Folk High Schools, 
first set up in 1844 by Bishop 
Grundtvig. The International 
      - Ae ty | 
- | 4 > IN t+ 
SEE i ae an a 
Great Knight's Hall Krongsborg Castle in Denmark where 
adult education conference will open in june. 
“People’s College” was establisned 
in 1921, in a small manor house 
at Elsinore which was adapted 
as a college. Its first students— 
clerks, university men, farmers 
and city workers from seven 
countries—helped to put the 
buildings and garden into shape 
as they began their studies. - 
Since then, over 4.600 students. 
representing over 40 countries. 
have attended its regular summer 
and winter courses, and over 8.000 
its vacation courses. 
The example of this interna- 
tional co-operation in education 
will probably not be lost to the 
delegates to the Unesco confer- 
ence, whe will be living and 
working in the same rooms and 
lecture halls previously occupied 
by thousands of students of all 
‘nationalities. 
  
to the Philippines, are now 
   PRE 
current plans materialize it is 
possible that within the foresee- 
able future there may arise in 
Siam an industrial centre that 
will hold its own with modern 
Japan. 
Illiteracy Problem 
OWEVER, in a country like 
Siam, where 700/0 of the 
inhabitants are illiterate, 
lack of education constitutes a 
formidable im- 
pediment to 
technical deve- 
* lopment. As Dr. 
Dr. Pedro T. ORATA 
and paid teachers, an inadequate 
education budget, indifference of 
adults to available educational 
opportunities, and irregular child 
and youth attendance in schools, 
Most Siamese teachers them- 
selves have not completed their 
high-school education. - The six- 
day school week offers little time 
for recreational or other activities; 
over-emphasis is given to “book 
work” and examinations; and the 
curriculum is apparently geared 
along college preparatory lines 
—this in spite of the fact that 
only ons sut of 2,000 pupils who 
enter the first grade ever reaches 
college. ‘ 
This may explain why, af Siam’s 
4,000,000 children of compulsory 
school age, over 1,250,000 or 33 0/0 
do not attend classes. Of the re- 
maining two and a half million, 
less than one third reach the 
fourth grade. 
As a result of its observations 
and the exchange of views with 
education officials, teachers, stud- 
ents and local authorities, the 
Mission felt 
that a number 
of suggestions 
appeared to be 
  
  
Torres Bodel re- 
cently declared: “The first essen- 
tial for any technological and 
economic progress is to raise the 
standard of education of the gen- 
eral population.” 
Fully aware of this need, the 
Government of Siam has been 
making a strong effort in recent 
years to improve and extend its 
educational system. 
In 1948, Siam asked Unesco’s co- 
operation in a campaign against 
illiteracy which the Government 
had undertaken. For this work, 
the services were secured of a 
well-known literary expert from 
the United States, Dr. Frank Lau- 
bach. 
In February of this year a 
Unesco Consultative Educational 
Mission, composed of Sir John 
Sargent of the British Council 
and the preseny writer, arrived mn 
Bangkok to study and offer sug- 
gestions on some of the educa- 
tional problems of Siam. While 
‘the Mission was at work, Dr. Lau- 
bach was conducting his literacy 
campaign in the province of 
Nakon Rajsima, some two hun- 
dred miles north-east of Bangkok, 
The Mission conferred with 
Government education leaders in 
a preliminary examination of the 
country’s schooling problems and 
then left the capital for a study 
of rural schools of all types. It 
compared educational resources 
and opportunities in vocational 
and technica) schools, in elemen- 
tary schools and in teacher train- 
ing and adult education centres. 
The Mission also 
- visited rural com- 
munities - noted 
for outstanding 
home industry 
projects such as 
silk weaving and 
pottery-making, in 
order to deter- 
mine how these 
could be adapted 
to fundamental 
and general .edu- 
cation. 
Siam is con- 
fronted with 
many of the edu- 
cation problems 
~ which face other 
countries of the 
world today: ina- 
dequately trained 
A 
~r 
. pertinent for 
Siam at the present time. 
First, the school curriculum 
should be improved in the light 
of modern living requirements— 
and to this end an educational 
commission should be formed to 
undertake a complete study, in 
liaison with Unesco, of the entire 
educational system of Siam, The 
Government has agreed that the 
commission will be formed this 
year. 
Schooling For 
Citizenship 
Second, at least seven years of 
schooling should be made com- 
pulsory to insure permanent li- 
teracy and adequate citizenship 
training. 
- Third, teacher training facili- 
ties should be extended, salaries 
increased and educational re- 
quirements raised to two years of 
college study for elementary 
school teachers, and the equivalen, 
of the bachelor’s degree for se- 
condary school teachers 
Fourth, sufficient decentraliza- 
tion of the education system 
should be permitted to enable 
teachers to adapt programmes to 
local needs and stimulate local 
initiative. 
In planning new school curri- 
cula, the determining tactor 
should be the extent to which they 
are related to the problems of 
present living in the different 
regions of the country. A curri- 
culum that fits one country and 
people well does not necessarily 
fit another; similarly, enough va- 
riation should exist to allow 
for regional differences in curri- 
culum content and in the choice 
of vocational subjects, 
Thus in Central Siam, where 
fisning and farming predominate, 
these subjects should be em- 
phasized and the pupils started in 
their work toward participating 
in the intelligent pursuance of 
these occupations. 
The Siamese Government have 
shown full appreciation of 
Unesco’s efforts to help re- 
construct their educational sys- 
tem, and are extremely eager for 
continued assistance so that the 
suggestions made may be carried 
out as speedily and as effectively 
as possible. 
In your country listed above.) 
+ Dear Sirs, 
@& Please send me a bill 
    
SUBSCRIPTION FORM 
(Cut out this subscription form and send it today lo the agent 
Kindly enter my name as a subscriber to the “Unesco Courier”. 
I wish the subscription to date from: 
@ The last issue published @ from Volume II. No I (Feb, 1049), 
... to cover annual subscription. 
for amount due, 
TT LL LE EEE EL 
Fe LL ER EET EE A 
LEER EE 
  
LLL LEE Ln 
of the “Unesco Courier”, Please encircle desired service. 

## [Page 11](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=11) 0

### IGNORE

UNESCO COURIER 11 
April 1949 —_— 


### 73968: Health experts set up World Medical Council

### 73967: UNESCO sponsors history of science publications

Health Experts Set Up Unesco Sponsors 
History of Science 
Publications 
NE of the earliest official 
OO documents published by 
Unesco says that an In- 
ternational Institute of the His- 
tory of Science might have the 
aim not only of establishing 
clearly the manner in which all 
the peoples of the earih have 
contributed to the progress of our 
knowledge of nature, but also of 
examining the interactions be- 
tween different past cultures. 
One group of specialists eould 
concentrate on Chinese-European 
relations, another on Arab-Euro- 
pean relations... Not a few schol- 
ars are available, but their work 
is crippled for lack of facilities. 
No subject deserves help more. 
1). 
In a world increasingly depen- 
dent upon science and conscious 
of this modern trend, the impor- 
tance assigned to the history of 
science and scientific thought, 
especially in the university and 
secondary school education of 
many countries, is taking on 
added significance. Scientific as- 
sociations such as the Swedish 
Society for the History of Science 
and the Chinese Society for the 
History of Medicine have been 
formed. ' 
O encourage this rather new 
subject of the history of 
science and scientific 
thought, which might be regarded 
as the instrument of the scientific 
humanism of tomorrow, Unesco 
sponsored the establishment of 
an International Union for the 
History of Science. It was offi- 
cially created at the Fifth Inter- 
RE ass 
 
Science Teachers’ 
Booklet on Sale 
Unesco has published a second 
edition of the booklet, “Sugges- 
tions for Science Teachers in 
Devastated Countries” for sale in 
all countries. The first edition was 
distributed free, by Unesco, to 
schools in devastated areas. 
Prepared by J.P. Stephenson, 
science master at City of London 
School, this 88-page, fully illus- 
trated booklet shows how teachers 
lacking elementary scientific 
equipment can make apparatus 
from simple, everyday materials 
and at little cost. Copies may be 
obtained from Unesco House, Pa- 
ris; His Majesty's Stationery 
Office, London; or from Unesco 
sales agents. The price is $ 1.00 or 
five. shillings sterling or 265 
French francs. 
The current edition, like the 
previous one, is in English. In 
June Unesco will publish other 
editions in Spanish, Arabic and 
Chinese for sale at the same 
price. 
Human Right Essays 
To Appear this Month 
Before the Universal Decla- 
ration of Human Rights was 
approved by the United Nations 
General Assembly last December, 
Uncseo had already consulted 
eminent philosophers, jurists, 
writers and educators in many 
countries on the philosophical 
foundations that could be given to 
such a declaration, 
Their replies have been used to 
compile a Volume of Essays on 
the philosophical principles of 
human rights which will be pu- 
blished in French this month.   
By 
Jean PELSENEER, 
of the Académie Internatio 
nale d'Histoire des Sciences; 
jormer Professor at the 
University of Brussels. 
  
  
    
national Congress of the History 
of Science in October 1947. 
The purpose of this Union, 
which is the tenth .of the inter-| 
national scientific unions affiliat- 
ed with the International Coun- 
cil of Scientific Unions, is to 
contribute directly to the work of 
Unesco and of the International 
Council in the field of the his- 
tory of science. 
Today the Union comprises five 
scientific commissions. The Com- 
mission on the History of the 
Social Relations of Science is 
under the chairmanship of M. 
Léon Rosenfeld, of the University 
of Manchester. The Commission 
on the Teaching of the History 
of Science is engaged in the 
publication of a survey of the 
teaching of the history of science 
throughout the world. The three 
other commissions of the Union 
deal with Bibliography. Publica- 
tions and the Middie East. 
INCE its creation, seventeen 
 ) national History of Science 
groups, with a total of 
several thousand members, have 
become part of the Union and 
other national groups are about 
to be constituted. The Internatio- 
nal Society of the History of 
Medicine has also become 
> a member. In 1950 the 
. Union, with the help of 
Unesco, will organize the 
Sixth International Con- 
gress of the History of 
Science and also the first 
International Congress 
on the History of Medi- 
cine to meet since 1938. 
In addition, at the sugges- 
tion of Unesco, History 
committees, sections or 
commissions have been or 
| are being set up in several 
of the nine international 
| Union of the History of 
© Science. 
A The TUnions’s publica- 
tions include two volumes 
subsidized by Unesco 
which have appeared in 
the Collection de Travaux 
de PAcadémie Internationale 
d'Histoire des Sciences. Other 
volumes are in the press, among 
them an edition of Lavoisier's 
correspondence. 
ARTICULAR reference, 
| however, should be made 
to the Archives Interna- 
tionales d’Histoire des Sciences 
(Hermann & Cie, publishers, 6, 
rue de la Sorbonne, Paris, 5°), 
published with the help of a grant 
from Unesco. Six numbers of this 
quarterly have so far appeared; 
the latest issues contain nearly 
300 pages, and the contributors to 
the review ‘include such disting- 
uished scientists as M. Louis de 
Brogiie, as well as most of the 
historians of science all over the 
world. 
The Archives, which publishes 
articles in French, English, 
Spanish, Italian or German, is 
probably the first truly inter- 
national review on the history of 
science and, in the spirit of 
Unesco, attempts to show the 
contribution of zll cultures and 
all ages to the development of 
science and the solidarity of the 
nations in their attitude towards 
scientific progress. The valuable 
assistance in the editing of the 
review given by the members of 
Unesco’s four Field Science Co- 
operation Offices at Cairo, New 
Delhi, Shanghai and Montevideo 
should be mentioned. In the 
April 1949 issue, first place is 
given to a lecture by Dr. Joseph 
Needham, F.R.S., to the Third 
Session of the General Conference 
of Unesco at Beirut, entitled: 
“Asia’s Contribution to the Unity 
of Science.” Cie 
  
(1) “Science and Unesco”? Interna- 
tional Scientific Co-operation, London, 
page 47. Published by the Unesco 
Preparatory Commission. 
@ec F there is one field in 
| which humanity should 
affirm its solidarity. it 
is surely in the campaign against 
disease”, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, 
Director-General of Unesco, de- 
clared on Februa- 
ry 21, 1949 at the 
inauguration of 
the Belgian Na- 
tional Commis- 
sion for Unesco 
in Brussels. 
Two months 
“jater, in the same 
city, an important 
step was taken 
towards the ac- 
complishment of 
the aim defined 
by the Director- 
General through 
the ‘creation of 
a Council which, 
for the first time 
in history, will 
co-ordinate the 
work of medical 
science congresses 
on a world-wide 
basis. 
The establish- 
ment of the 
Council came as 
a result of the 
discussions of an 
international con- 
ference, jointly 
spohsored by 
Unesco and the 
world Health Or- 
ganization, which 
held its one week 
session in the Pa- 
lais des Académies 
of Brussels and 
which was attend- 
ed by representa- 
tives of move than 
40 medical non- 
governmental or- 
ganizations, with 
membership cov- 
ering five conti- 
nents and practically all countries 
of the world. 
“Why do we need another Orga- 
nization?” “How will the work of 
the Council contribute to the 
betterment of health?” “How does 
its aim fit in with the general 
purposes of Unesco and of WHO?” 
These and similar questions were 
raised several times during the 
conference in Brussels. 
ESPITE the rather complicated 
and academic sounding title 
of the new Organization, the 
answers to those questions are 
relatively simple. . 
In order to fight the age-old 
scourg?s which have brought and 
  
Entrance to “Palais des Académies” 
“are still bringing untold miseries 
to mankind, the mokilization of 
all resources created by modern 
science and medicine is a condition 
sine qua nen. Such mobilization 
could take place only if a free 
and constant exchange of medical 
and scientific know-how is ensured 
between scholars and physicians 
of all countries. 
One of the best media of such 
an - exchange of ideas and of 
knowledge is the institution of 
medical congresses. To promote 
the work of those gatherings is 
therefore to perfect the very 
weapons with which we can defeaf 
tuberculosis, venereal diseases, 
malaria, cancer, to name only a 
few of the most terrible enemies 
of man. 
I the present complex state of 
* scientific development, the 
classical system of holding medical   congresses appears obsolete. For 
In the richly 
Dr. Walter H.C. 
welcomes delegates to the recent medical conference. 
 By 
Joseph HANDLER 
Chief, Public Information Of- 
fice World Health Organization   
decorated 
Laves, Unesco’'s Deputy 
one thing, it calls for too much 
specialization; for another, it 
involves often unnecessary loss of 
time and money for those who 
wish to attend the congresses. 
. To give only one example, if 
an important congress on rheu- 
matism is being held in Paris, 
such a gathering would be of 
interest not only to the specialists 
in that discipline but also to those 
devoting their work to pediatric 
surgery, ete. But scholars, working 
in those related branches, are 
often unable to go to the congress 
on rheumatism because they have 
their own meelings at the same 
time, or at places too far removed 
from the site of the congress. 
Ard then again it happens all 
too often that doctors would have 
to take a long road from their 
couniry to attend one week of 
conference and that therefore 
they decide in advance against 
coming just for one single session. 
Thus by suggesting appropriate 
dates and places for medical 
science congresses, the Council 
established in Brussels will see 
to it that exaggerated specializa- 
tion in these meetings is avoided 
and that maximum opportunity is 
given to scientists of all countries 
to attend meetings of interest to 
them at the minimum cost with 
the minimum loss of time, 
UT the Council will do more 
than just co-ordinate. It will 
21S0 help congresses to ensure a 
high level of work in lending them 
the necessary services in the 
fields of translation, interpreta- 
tion, publication of proceedings, 
ete, } 
This may stem unimportant to 
the man in the street, but all 
those who have followed a number 
of international conferences closely 
know only too well how much of 
their success depends on the 
efficient working of services such 
as ones cited above, : 
This brings us to another major 
aim of the Council, related to 
the general question of techniques 
of conferences. The holding of 
conferences is indeed a complicat- 
“Palais des Académies” in Brussels, 
Director-General, 
World Medical Council 
ed business today. The last few 
years have witnessed the emerg- 
ing of many new techniques, still 
unknown to the world at large. 
Again, to use only one example, 
the Mental Health Congresses 
which took place 
last year in Lons 
don applied a 
procedure which 
might be usefully 
followed by other 
conferences in the 
future, For over a 
year two hundred 
working groups 
studied in various 
countries the pro 
blems with which 
the congresses 
were going to deal 
and brought their 
findings to Lon 
don. 
The new Couneil 
will undertake a 
study of such new 
techniques with 
the ultimate pur 
pose of putting al 
available and 
until now largely 
dispersed infor 
mation at the dis. 
posal of every« 
body. 
F I mention 
that the Coun~ 
cil also intends to 
grant subsidies to 
scientists wishing 
to attend con- 
gresses, and that 
it will help to 
overcome difficul« 
ties raised by 
travel, transfer of 
funds, etc, the 
reader will—I 
think—-have a 
pretty good idea 
of the triple 
functions of eo- 
ordination, infor- 
mation, and direct aid through 
which the Council just created 
under the sponsorship of Unesco 
and WHO will advance progress 
in the medical sciences—an e€s- 
sential factor to promote the 
physical and mental well-being 
of Man. ~ 
It is this very same purpose 
which explains why the two U.N. 
Specialized Agencies encouraged 
the idea of a co-ordinating 
Council, why they actively supe 
pcried the non-governmental orga= 
nizations in its creation, and why, 
they are determined to contribute 
to the success of the young insti= 
fution. 
NESCO, which is here to foster 
international understanding 
in the field of sciences, is indeed 
directly interested in organizations 
which, like the Council, will make 
for closer co-operation between 
scientists from wherever they may 
come and to whatever political, 
economic or social system they 
may belong. 
As to the WHO, it welcomes of 
course every effort aiming at the 
use for medical resources for the 
creation of a healthier and theres 
fore happier worid. 
Contacts .between physicians 
such as those which took place 
in Brussels in the first week of 
April and the many others to be 
established thanks to the co= 
ordinating Council, are by no 
means of a spectacular nature. 
They seldom make the headlines 
and are hardly to be found ia the 
papers. They are however at the 
foundation of the international 
society which we must build. 
‘It is in this sense that the 
Belgian Minister for Health could 
affirm at the inaugural meeting 
of the Brussels conference that 
the Council will contribute to 
making the words of Pasteur a. 
reality when the great scientist 
proclaimed “I hold the unconque= 
rable belief that Science and 
Peace will triumph over ignorance 
and war, that nations will come 
together not to destroy but $e 
construct.” 
Editorial Offices : Unesco, 19, Avenue Kiéber, Paris (16e). 
Editor : S.M. KOFFLER, Director : H. KAPLAN, 
All Reproductions Authorized 
IMPRIMERIE DU “NEW YORK HERALD TRIBUNE”, 21, Rue de Berri, Paris Se];

## [Page 12](https://demo.humlab.umu.se/courier/073956engo.pdf#page=12) 0

### 73969: Masaccio: a portfolio of high quality colour reproductions

12 UNESCO COURIER | oo April 1949 
  
Head Detail of “Adam and Eve”. 
A Postfelic of High 
Masaccio as seen by  CQuality Colour Rep reductions 
another artist. 
quality colour reproductions, devoted to the 
Florentine Master Masaccio, has just heen 
produced by the Italian Publisher Amilcare Pizzi, 
oi Milan, 
This portfolio, which is only the first of a whole 
series including various great artists and periods 
in the history of world art, will be placed on sale 
to the general public within the next few weeks. 
Published in three editions with English, French 
and Italian texts, the Unesco-sponsored publica- 
tion offers 28 reproductions in full colour of 
Masaccio’s frescos in the Brancacci Chapel of the 
Church of Santa Maria del Carmine, located in 
Florence. This is the first time that these master- < :. ..- Co 
pieces of 15th century fresco painting have ever - ~~ - Two Carwelite monks. 
been: renrarreed SO completely and so faithfully. : 
The Brancacci frescos are undoubtediy the most 
important achievement of Masaccio, who _died be- 
fore his 28th birthday. No more than a dozen iso- 
lated examples of his work exist outside Italy, so 
the Pizzi-Unesco portfolio will undoubtedly take on 
unusual significance for students and art lovers in 
all countries of the world. : 
The 28 plates include reproductions from the 
frescos “Expulsion from Paradise”, “The Tribute 
Money”, “Peter and John healing the sick”, “Peter 
Baptising” and “Raising the King’s Son.” All the 
prints are removeable and can easily be framed 
or used by groups of students. 
Other portfolios dealing with the great Masters 
of Italian art are scheduled for publication at 
regular intervals. It is planned that all the im- 
portant phases of Italian art from the 13th century 
on will be covered in this unique series, To appear 
| E first Unesco-sponsored art portfolio of high 
  
 adam and Eve drive the Garden Another detail . of Masaccio’s shortly are portfolios devoted to the Sistine Chapel 
of Fden Tribute Money”: Custom of fi- and the 15th century frescos in the Vatican. 
: cial and Apostle. Working in collaboration with Unesco, other 
publishers will produce similar portfolios on the 
great art, both ancient and modern, of other 
countries, 
Each of the 28 prints in the Masaccio portfolio 
is mounted on a solid backing 13!" by 173”, suitable 
for framing in the schoolroom or in the howe. 
The portfolio is sold at a retail price of 6,000 
Italian lire, or its equivalent. 
Wholesale and retail orders can be placed by 
writing direct to Amilcare Pizzi, 14 Viale Piave, 
Milan. Further information may be obtained {rom 
the Arts and Letters Division, Unesco. 
     
 
 
An apostle, Reproduced from “The Tribute Money”, in the Pizzi- “Raising the King’s Son”, a detail reproduced St-Peter—detail of “The Tribuie Money” 
Unesco portfolio. from a larger plate in the portfolio. reproduced in Masaccio portfolio.